# The Abdication of Technology and the Elevation of the Crafts

THE POLITICAL PROJECT of republican consolidation during the 189os would facilitate official sponsorship of a craft modern style. But the problem of the French economy and its relation to the world market between 1889 and 1896 propelled the crafts into the center of government concern. This chapter will discuss two economic factors that helped to redirect the republican elite from technological monumentality to artisanal work of high quality as the source of French modernity: intensified international competition in the heavy industrial sector and the advent of protectionism. It will go on to examine how the craft sector itself was beset by external challenges and internal crises in the 189os, thus suggesting the defensiveness that underlay the republican celebration of French craft preeminence and the selectivity of official policy.

Although the heavy industrial sector expanded and consolidated in the 189os, France was unable to compete successfully in an international market suddenly transformed by the meteoric rise of German and American industrial power. If the concentration of the socialist menace in the advanced sectors of metallurgy, mining, and chemicals turned some among the republican elite against technological modernism, the possibility of French industrial stagnation shattered the illusion that heavy industry and technology would provide the basis for French national ascendancy and economic vitality as the twentieth century beckoned.

The “tendency toward industrial stagnation" crystallized between 1889 and 1896.' By 1896, France had descended from the 1885 rank of the second most powerful industrial producer to that of the fourth.² Developments in mining failed to offset the chronic shortage of raw materials; in 1894 France still produced less than onethird of the coal it consumed and was the only industrial country that had to import coal regularly to meet national demand.3 The traditional impoverishment in natural resources, however, was easier to accept than the unexpected explosion in productivity of France's economic rivals. Between 1885 and 1895, heavy industrial production quadrupled in the United States and tripled in Germany while France's output increased by only one-fourth. At the same time, industrial production in Britain continued to outpace that in France by a multiple of four.4 One result of this rapid new expansion of international heavy industry was that French exports diminished.

In 1895 France alone among the major European nations had fewer industrial exports than in 1875 and 1883.5

The French government's response to this decline in industrial compctitiveness was protectionism. Méline's tariff of 1892 imposed duties on foreign imports; its aim was to temper industrial expansion and to favor the existing agricultural and artisanal sectors. Believing that "French taste conflicted with mass production," Méline sought in protectionism a means through which France could remain a country of‘a multitude of small workshops, best suited to making varied and individual goods."

If France had to acknowledge other nations as the champions of heavy industrial output and if French exports were burdened with tariffs, how was France to maintain its position as a healthy competitor in the world market? Some members of the republican elite responded: by countering industrial rivalry with traditions of quality. Affirming the goals of Méline's protectionist policies, political officials celebrated the artisan d’art as the new source of French supremacy in an altered international economy. With its national resources of elegance and its reputation as the mecca of taste, fashion, and luxury, France would compensate for industrial deceleration with civilizing graces. In a decade of protectionist contractions, the objet bien fait would assure for France an exclusive and profitable corner of the competitive world market.

The republican deputy Georges Berger identified artisans as indispensable in the protectionist period. Prior to 1892, Berger had been one of the most irrepressible supporters of advanced technology and heavy industry. An engineer by training, he participated in planning the Paris Exhibitions of 1867 and 1878 and served as deputy commissioner of the Paris Exhibition of 1889. Berger edited the official reports of the exhibition of 1889, lending his voice to a chorus of politicians praising a nascent technological universe and the monumental iron architecture appropriate to it.7

After 1889, Berger was forced to temper his enthusiasm for technology and to take into account, like his colleagues, the rapid ascendancy of German and American industrial power. Berger reconsidered the capacity of France to realize the massive industrialization prefigured at the exhibition of 1889 and turned elsewhere for the forms of a distinctively French response to modernity. With the advent of protectionism, Berger definitively altered his position and claimed that the quality of French artisans'work, not industrial technology, would provide the basis for French economic invincibility. In a speech of 1892, Berger explaincd how French luxury articles could triumph in the international market, despitc high duties. Before the superior artistry and unparalleled grace of French crafts, the walls of protectionism erected by other nations would tumble:

The recent revision of international tariff policy has altered the economic situation of the entire world. Many European nations . . . now boast that they can be self-sufficient and will no longer need to import foreign products. . . . It is possible, even certain, that many nations continue to dominate us from a purely industrial point of view. . . . But none is likely to give its consumer goods and its luxury articles-fashion, clothing, ornaments, furniture, and interior decoration—that French-styled imprint that no civilized country has ever ceased to favor. The authentic French trademark is a passport that opens all borders and overturns all tariff barriers, when it is stamped on those thousands of products in which form and decor play the leading role, in which they are essential qualities.8

As members of the political elite turned toward the artisanal sector in the 189os, they discovered that the reputation of the "French trademark" was seriously undermined by new realities. Indeed, the crafts, the supposed reservoir of inimitable French grace and exceptional quality, were beleaguered as much as the industrial sector by intensified international rivalry. By the 189os France was no longer the incontestable champion of elegant and artistic consumer goods. Other countries, no longer willing to yield automatically to superior renderings of the goût français, attempted through extensive educational programs to compensate for their lack of hereditary French taste.

After 187o France's competitiveness in craft production began to decline. Exports of French jewelry, ceramics, and furniture, which increased rapidly between 1867 and 1873, began to contract sharply after 1873.9 At the Paris Exhibition of 1878, official reports indicated for the first time the powerful potential of international rivalry in craft production.1º Between 1873 and 1889, exports of furniture from France as a whole dropped by one-third, those from Paris by two-thirds.1 Imports of furniture, in contrast, increased sharply. Between 1873 and 1889, the volume of European furniture entering the French market as a whole increased fivefold, from one to five million pieces.12 The Gallic regime of international consumer elegance was threatened.

The Paris Exhibition of 1889 culminated a decade of French anxiety over European competition in craft production. Official reports were no longer marked by absolute confidence that France would keep its monopoly of "le bon goût" and "l'originalité."13 America, the country without a history, and Germany, the leviathan of blood and iron, particularly alarmed French officials by demonstrating unanticipated agility in creating useful objects tastefully and elegantly embelished.14 In 1889 a chorus of voices rose in unison for the first time to complain of French beleaguerment and to urge the defense of Gallic artisanal exceptionalism.

A series of articles published in French periodicals in 1889 explored the various contributions in tapestry, porcelain, bronze, jewelry, goldsmithery, glasswork, and bookbinding. The articles developed a common theme: the work of French artisans had lost its vitality and was superseded by foreign artisans' work. One writer, Henri Béraldi, claimed that “among all of us there is a mounting horror of the sterility of French imitation and copying."15 In 1892 Georges Berger qualified his statement that French grace would automatically dissolve the barriers of tariff duties. He argued, alarmingly, that France needed a movement of "national defense" to combat the menace of international rivalry and the loss of its own vitality in craft production. "We must fortify and reinvigorate our national reputation for craft excellence,"

he insisted, lamenting that foreign governments were taking more initiative than the French to foster craft production of high quality.16

One result of the 1889 exhibition was the proliferation of official delegations to study the artistic institutions and the artisanal reforms of France's new rivals. French delegates were sent to Russia, Portugal, Austria, England, Belgium, Italy, and Germany. In 1895 Siegfried Bing, a merchant-importer of Oriental arts, was asked to report on the state of the arts in America. His report, presented to the director of beaux-arts, Henri Roujon, in November 1895, was published in 1896 under the title La Culture artistique en Amérique. Marius Vachon, however, compiled the most extensive official report on the applied arts institutions of France's rivals. Vachon traveled around Europe, chronicling non-French cxperiments in design education and the opening of various industrial arts museums. His vast study, Les Musées et les écoles d'art industrielle en Europe, which appeared in 189o, received heightened public attention after the revelations of the 1889 exhibition.17 After 189o, through the personal sponsorship of Jules Méline, Vachon continued his surveys and recommendations to revitalize the crafts, and in 1898 he presented to the protectionist and solidarist government a program for sustaining French artisanal supremacy, elaborated in a work entitled Pour la défense de nos industries d’art.18

The German menace was a continual source of alarm to Vachon. France must prepare to wage an "industrial war," he argued, transposing the arena of confrontation from the military battlefield to the consumer market.19 Vachon was particularly concerned about the proliferation of decorative arts museums throughout the new German state, and lamented that French-trained skilled artisans had emigrated to Germany after the annexations of 187o.20 The remarks of Prince Wilhelm upon the establishment of the Berlin museum in 1881, quoted by Vachon, set the tone for French apprehension during the 189os: "War, but an industrial war, is what the imperial prince of Germany declared to us in 1881 when he inaugurated a museum of industrial art in Berlin and spoke these words: 'We defeated France on the battlefields in 187o. Now we want to defeat her in commerce and industry.""21

Besides identifying Germany as a powerful rival to French craft production, Vachon developed a second, more general, theme: the unanticipated consequences of protectionism for French artisanal supremacy. With other commentators in the 189os, Vachon recognized that the economic vitality of the French luxury sector was conditioned by the deference of an international clite to France as the center of fashion, taste, and manners.2 Protectionism undermined this deference by expressing and intensifying national differences and traditions. A cosmopolitan transnational community dominated by Gallic clegance was destroyed by the qucst for national distinctiveness and the new focus on native production. Although Georges Berger was confident that protective barriers would yield to the power of French refinements, Vachon's evidence suggested more formidable obstacles: aggressive nationalisms.

Every country in Europe wants to . . . break out of a boring uniformity, a collective flatness. This is no longer the fusion economists and philosophers predicted, the fusion toward which our trains and steamships would have pushed us. No, particularism triumphs instead, and the most inveterate nationalism is expressed through art. . .. It seems that each country can now fight only via the special character of its productions, its indigenous art, and its particular oh-so-original industry.23

The republicans who confronted the problem of international rivalry in craft production were presented with a second problem in the 189os: the internal crisis of the artisanate. This crisis had both technological and commercial sources. It derived to a limited extent from the elimination of traditional skills by mechanization and to a large extent from the protracted subversion of traditional skills by new market pressures. By the 189os the traditional conditions in which artisans operated were altered irrevocably by department stores, which transformed the market. Behind the facade of the unchanging atelier, artisans worked under new constraints; from glove makers to jewelers and from furniture makers to porcelain painters, artisans were mobilized into an army to supply the department stores. Although the tools and the methods of production largely continued preindustrial patterns, the context in which they were enacted absorbed them into an uncompromisingly modern "sweating system."24

Pierre Du Maroussem, a professor of law at the University of Paris, documented with extraordinary richness and sophistication the work structure and family relations among Parisian carpenters, cabinetmakers of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, the food suppliers of Les Halles, and the toy makers of the Palais-Royal in a series of monographs between 1891 and 1894. It was he who characterized the artisans' conditions of work as a "sweating system" and vividly described how the finest artisans were shackled to supply the needs of the department stores.25

Du Maroussem was a devoted follower of Le Play and approached his workingclass subjects with the tools of the social scientist.26 From Le Play, Du Maroussem derived the method of the family monograph, melding an extensive description of the daily work process of specific trades with a detailed rendering of the laborers' activities, budgets, and interests outside the workplace. Du Maroussem's “objective" social science was tempered, however, by moral fervor and ideological allegiance. A vehement antisocialist, he celebrated the corporate and familial traditions of Parisian artisans, attributing their dissolution and the emergence of labor radicalism to the greed and corruption of merchant elites. His analysis was stamped by a particularly French strain of conservative thought, from Balzac to Drumont, that focused on the corrosive pathology of money and diagnosed its carrier as the Jew. In one passage, for example, Du Maroussem characterized the rapacious merchant representative of the grands magasins as the "Israelite tradesman" and suggested that Drumont include this type in his portrait of La France juive.27

Despite its manifest biases, Du Maroussem's work remains indispensable to the historian. Although he filtered his descriptions through ideological prisms, the data

Du Maroussem amassed in the second volume of his survey, Les Ebénistes du Faubourg Saint-Antoine: Grands magasins, "Sweating system" (1892), are extremely valuable. He provides one of the only sources that documents the specific structure of the furniture trade in the very decade of the officially sponsored arts and crafts movement.28

The Faubourg Saint-Antoine persisted in the 189os as the "furniture city," where wood craftsmen had been concentrated since the eighteenth century. The creation of individual pieces for Parisian Old Regime clients gave way in the nincteenth century to the new demands of mass consumption and large-scale retail marketing. The end of corporate regulation and the expanded urban market powerfully altered the structure of the Parisian furniture sector.

By the late nineteenth century, the Faubourg Saint-Antoine replicated in one artisanal trade the hierarchy of aristocratic, bourgeois, and working-class elements that marked Paris as a whole. This vertical stratification was complicated by a horizontal form of division in the faubourg: national differences. Concentrated in the lower two tiers were the craftsmen from Italy, Belgium, Germany, and Luxembourg who had flooded the faubourg after 187o, transforming it into an “almost alien city."29

By the 189os the three tiers of the furniture trade had become spatially distinct, inhabiting three concentric geographical circles. The outermost was the zone of the proletarians among the furniture trade, called the trôleurs. Because of the misery and deprivation he observed there, Du Maroussem designated it as"Dante's third circle of hell in Paris."30 Of the almost twenty thousand ébénistes in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine in 1892, nine thousand were producers of meubles de trôle.³1 Most of them were Italian, from the Piedmont region.32 These trôleurs (from the verb trôler, "to stroll") were furniture hawkers; they carried their wares strapped to their backs or in crude rolling wagons, walking the streets in search of a buyer.33Usually specialists in a particular genre of furniture, the trôleurs were the only ébénistes who worked alone and fashioned the entire product. The trôleur, without a workshop, apprentices, and family support, was an important part of the vast putting-out system organized by the grands magasins in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. The department stores did not order his merchandise directly; instead, the trôleur usually found customers in the weekly furniture fairs in the outlying zone of the faubourg, which were attended by the merchant representatives of the various commercial emporia. These middlemen would bid at the lowest possible price, and the trôleur, desperate, would have no choice but to take it, often accepting for a table or chest of drawers less than what it cost to make. The shoddy, lightweight meubles de trôle were then shellacked or varnished and put up for sale in the display rooms of the grands magasins, retailing at prices much higher than those the trôleur could command. Thus were the nomadic trôleurs enslaved.35

In the second ring of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine were the artisans of the meubles courants, the furniture trade. There were seven thousand of them; one-half were foreign, largely from Belgium, Luxembourg, and Germany." This sector's cabinetmakers were organized into small workshops, each with a petit patron, who usually owned his tools; between one and three journeymen under the master's supervision; and an apprentice, boarding with the family. Until the Second Empire, these small ateliers of the meubles courants sector supplied solid and comfortable furniture for the burgeoning middle classes of the city. With the consolidation of the grands magasins between 1865 and 189o, the petit patron kept his atelier but lost his independence, and his relations with his fellow workers changed irrevocably. For it was the scattered ranks of the petits patrons that the department store coordinated into an army of suppliers.

Du Maroussem isolated three crucial changes in the period between 1865 and 189o that altered the position of the middle ranks of the ébénistes. First, the petit patron gradually lost his individual clients and no longer had personal relations with his customers. The small showroom that had been an essential part of the workshop disappeared, and few items were sold to individual buyers who came to the faubourg to order furniture for their homes. Rather than a producer-merchandiser, the petit patron became exclusively a producer, who contracted on a monthly basis to furnish a vast supply of objects for a single anonymous client, the grand magasin.37

Accompanying this change to an impersonal single client was a system of extensive specialization. The department store would order a large number of a particular type of furniture from each individual workshop, forcing on the petit patron extreme specialization and repetitive work patterns. Some petits patrons would be responsible for the “small English dressing table," others for entire rooms in a single genre: "old oak or old walnut dining room, walnut or mahogany bedroom, etc."38

The new volume of orders and the intense specialization demanded by the department stores contributed to yet another change in the traditional organization of the petit patron workshop. The speeded-up pace of work and the longer hours necessary to complete the monthly deadlines turned the atelier of the independent artisan into a sweatshop, and leveled the relations between master craftsmen and journeymen and between journeymen and apprentices so that all workers became “human machines."39 Divested of responsibility for the showroom and clients, the head of the workshop was relegated to the ranks of his employees, entrapped in the service of the department store. All faced a threat: if monthly orders were not adequately filled and the petit patron lost his supplier contract, he and his artisans would sink to the degradation of the trôleur, consigned to a nomadic quest for customers at a miserable price.4)

The erosion of corporate solidarity wrought by unprecedented commercial pressures took its greatest toll, according to Du Maroussem, on the most junior member of the small workshop, the apprentice. When the hierarchy of relations between the patron and his employees had been intact, it was the apprentice who had epitomized the union of practical skill and moral fiber sustaining the corporate structure. The dual role of the apprentice as technical novice and moral fledgling was expressed by his membership in the family of the patron who trained him. This integration of family relations and work patterns created the reciprocal obligations binding the apprentice and his master and made the small atelier a place of both shared values and the transmission of skills.

By 189o the technical, moral, and familial continuum embodied in the institution of apprenticeship was severed. The middle ranks of the tripartite community of artisans in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine were no longer characterized by the small workshop whose patron accommodated his apprentice as a member of his own family. Unable to afford to clothe and house a surrogate son, the patron paid his apprentice a low hourly wage; the position of the apprentice came to resemble that of a menial day laborer rather than that of the recipient of technical and moral education.41 The teaching of the craft no longer went on inside the workshop but unfolded in large institutions, some municipal, some private, where young trainees were concentrated, schooled, and hired out to individual workshops. The traditional functions of the patron were wrested from him and assigned to large organizations, disrupting the family unit that had hitherto been the essential counterpart to the craft production process.⁴2

If the multiple strains on the producers of the meubles courantsthe inhabitants of the middle circle of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine—threatened them with the fate of the disinherited trôleurs, there was little chance that they could ever gain entry to the exclusive world in the center of the furniture district. The innermost core of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine belonged to the aristocracy of the furniture trade, the sector of haut luxe production.43 Insulated from both foreign labor and commercial denigration, the haut luxe sector was marked by national purity and aristocratic traditions. According to Du Maroussem, there were still four thousand members of this elite corps in 1892; their distinctively French character had been ensured by the generational continuity of the craft since the eighteenth century.4

Unlike the degraded trôleur and the sweatshops of the small producers, the artisans of the haut luxe sector maintained relations with individual clients, who customordered their objects, giving explicit instructions. Further, the haut luxe sector of furniture making was organized into a few large groups of artisans, who assembled under a single roof to collaborate in creating complicated and extensively finished objects. The workshops of haut luxe usually contained between sixty and three hundred individuals, each of whom performed a specialized task on a single item.4⁵

The specialization operative in the haut luxe atelier was qualitatively different from that of the small workshop of the meubles courants. The department stores had forced their petit patron suppliers to produce repeatedly a single type of furniture. Artisans in the haut luxe sector, varying their creation according to the wishes of the customer, were distinguished by their extrcme versatility,4 which was organized in a sophisticated and extensive division of labor. Du Maroussem clarified the French craft tradition, which associated the increased division of labor with an increase in the quality of the product. This direct proportion, which inverts Ruskin's, Morris's, and Van de Velde's pejorative conception of the division of labor in craft production, may be seen in Diderot's Encyclopédie, where each artisanal trade was presented in a series of pages unfolding the divided labor that was joined in the final product.47 Du

Maroussem reconstructed the many intricate phases necessary for the creation of a single piece of haut luxe furniture. His taxonomy reads like a list of the diverse artisans participating in the manufacture of royal furniture under Charles Lebrun; the contributions of the haut luxe artisans in the late nincteenth century remained essentially the same as in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.48 Among the many hands collaborating in progression were the découpeurs, who cut the wood; the tourneurs, who shaped the cut wood on a lathe; the ébéniste proper, who assembled and carved the piece of furniture; and a proliferation of finishers, varying according to the item: the marqueteurs, who inlaid surface designs; the ciseleur-doreurs, sculptors of wood and gilded embellishments; appliers of veneers; and sculpteurs sur bois, sculptors of wood adornments.49

Not only was a complex division of labor intrinsic to producing the finest furniture, but the second enemy of radical craft reformers in England and Belgium, the machine, was an integral and distinctive feature of the French haut luxe sector. Du Maroussem explained that mechanization, rather than signaling the death knell of the crafts, made possible the continuity of the aristocratic traditions ofluxury cabinetmaking. As early as the 186os the haut luxe workshops incorporated new technology as labor-saving devices for the most rudimentary, repetitive, and time-consuming part of the production process—the initial cutting of large frames of wood into smaller blocks. Steam-powered mechanical saws were indeed able to cut the wood more precisely than human hands, in half the time. This use of mechanization, rather than undermine traditional skills, strengthened the haut luxe corps of producers.50 Technological advancement and artisanal creation not only were compatible but were the distinguishing features of the only purely French and most refined aristocratic core of the Parisian furniture trade. The misery of the "human machines" in the petit patron "sweatshops" was due to the patrons' inability to afford mechanized labor-saving tools.51 Pressed by the supply orders for the department stores, the petit patron was forced to ceaselessly repeat arduous tasks, some of which did not require the superior skill or attentiveness of a trained craftsman. It was the luxury sector which successfully assimilated modern forms of technology to the craft process, domesticating new machines and pressing them into the service of sustaining aristocratic traditions of artisanal refinement.

The haut luxe sector, despite its continued vitality in the late nineteenth century, felt beleaguered, surrounded as it was by the other sectors. The perceived threat led to two forms of self-protection: first, the reconstitution of corporate solidarity, pursued by patronal syndical chambers and, second, the direct appeal to the state to help renew the aristocratic tradition of the unity of art and craft.52 The state was asked to provide the impetus and opportunity for this efflorescence. If the Republic had replaced the Old Regime in political structure, it should affirm and reassert its continuing cultural role as the Maecenas in whose service all the arts would again converge. Directors of luxury furniture houses, growing fearful, wanted help from above. They appealed to the republican state in the image of the Old Regime: they sought the restoration of the Colbert corporation. And with this restorative image,

they dream of a state that guides public taste, a state that commissions art works, a state that would evoke again the splendors of Louis XIV in the innumerable palaces that have been bequeathed to us by the old French monarchy and would restore to our mansions and palaces the luxury of the court. A difficult task, especially in a society that rarely translates the instinct for equality into the pursuit of such memories.53

The luxury furniture patrons' demand for an official mobilization of the applied arts and the progressiste elite's quest for a republican modern style would converge in the special circumstances of the 189os. The economic performance of European rivals, in both the industrial and craft sectors, motivated republican politicians to link the French modern style with the production of luxury crafts. The government coalition would focus its efforts on the institutional clevation of the applied arts, on restoring furniture making and other crafts to their Old Regime noble positions alongside the other beaux-arts. Du Maroussem's analysis of the furniture trade as a three-tiered hierarchy exposed the exclusivity of the official craft movement, whose nationalist and aristocratic celebration was appropriate only to the highest of the three strata of craftsmen in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. By 189o the haut luxe sector of ébénisterie was a small bastion of traditional skills in a trade teeming with foreign craftsmen and reeling under the stress of market specialization. The concentration on securing a place for fine crafts in the museum and the Salon was, in the case of furniture, an urgent operation, which rescued a French artisanal elite from the pressures of foreign invasion and commercial déclassement.

Du Maroussem's detailed description of the division of labor intrinsic to haut luxe production also offers a guide crucial to understanding the specific meaning of the division of labor in the French arts and craft movement and isolates a fundamental set of differences between it and its counterparts in England and Belgiun. If we approach the French arts and crafts movement with the conceptual categories elaborated by Ruskin and Morris, we find it peculiarly lacking in a critique of the division of labor. For Ruskin and Morris, the division of labor meant the division of man, and their ideal artisan was a creator of the whole product. Du Maroussem's evidence partly hclps to explain why the division of labor was not the enemy of craft reformers in France. As he indicated, in the luxury trades that flourished in eighteenthcentury Paris, the division of labor was extended, and the value and refinement of individual objects was increased by the complex adornment and finishing procedures. Indeed, the division of labor was the determining feature of luxury production, and the nineteenth century continued to correlate the sumptuousness of the item with the number of both steps and artisans required to produce it. This French tradition shaped the assumptions of the clite sponsors of craft regeneration and suggests why the English and Belgian social vision of "one man-one product" had so little resonance in the French context. Not the division of labor per se but commercial pressures were the target of official reformers, who criticized these pressures precisely because they simplified the claborate division of labor required for precious objects, lowering public taste through the rapid execution and homogeneity of consumer items. Falsity, the great moral violation that Ruskin and Morris exposed in the opulent syncretisms of bourgeois style, would be treated in France as an issue of bad taste; the faux luxe would be replaced by the haut luxe and would effect, one modernist bureaucrat predicted, "the elevation of public taste for the good of all."4

Elevating taste by presenting objects of superior craftsmanship in the institutions of high art—this was to be the goal of the officially sponsored movement for the unity of the arts. In the temple of art in the 189os, furniture, jewelry, ceramics, and glasswork would recover the position beside painting and sculpture that they had enjoyed in the Old Regime, embodying a new patrimony in an era of urgently needed national solidarity.