## CONTENTS Preface Acknowledgments 1 Beyond Radical Design? 2 A Map of Unreality 3 Design as Critique 4 Consuming Monsters: Big, Perfect, Infectious 5 A Methodological Playground: Fictional Worlds and Thought Experiments 6 Physical Fictions: Invitations to Make-Believe 7 Aesthetics of Unreality 8 Between Reality and the Impossible 9 Speculative Everything Notes Bibliography Index ## PREFACE Speculative Everything began as a list we created a few years ago called A/8, a sort of manifesto. In it, we juxtaposed design as it is usually understood with the kind of design we found ourselves doing. B was not intended to replace A but to simply add another dimension, something to compare it to and facilitate discussion. Ideally, C, D, E, and many others would follow. This book unpacks the B bit of the list, making connections between usually disparate ideas, locating them within an expanded notion of contemporary design practice, and establishing some historical links. It is not a straightforward survey, anthology of essays, or monograph but offers a very specific view of design based on several years of experimentation, teaching, and reflection. We use examples from our own practice, student and graduate work from the Royal College of Art, and other projects from fine art, design, architecture, cinema, and photography. In researching this book we also surveyed literature from futurology, cinematic and literary fiction, political theory, and the philosophy of technology. The ideas in this book move from a general setting out of what conceptual design is, through its use as a critical medium for exploring the implications of new developments in science and technology, to the aesthetics of crafting speculative designs. It ends by zooming out to explore the idea of "speculative everything" and design as a catalyst for social dreaming. S peculative Everything is an intentionally eclectic and idiosyncratic journey through an emerging cultural landscape of ideas, ideals, and approaches. We hope designers interested in doing more than making technology easy to use, sexy, and consumable will find this book enjoyable, stimulating and inspiring. ## A Affirmative Problem solving Provides answers Design for production Design as solution In the service of industry Fictional functions For how the world is Change the world to suit us Science fiction Futures The "real" real Narratives of production Applications Fun Innovation Concept design Consumer Makes us buy Ergonomics User-friendliness Process A/8, Dunne & Raby. B   
Critical Problem finding Asks questions Design for debate Design as medium In the service of society Functional fictions For how the world could be Change us to suit the world Social fiction Parallel worlds The "unreal" real Narratives of consumption