As we rapidly move toward a monoculture that makes imagining genuine alternatives almost impossible, we need to experiment with ways of developing new and distinctive worldviews that include different beliefs, values, ideals, hopes, and fears from today's. If our belief systems and ideas don't change, then reality won't change either. It is our hope that speculating through design will allow us to develop alternative social imaginaries that open new perspectives on the challenges facing us. The idea of the "proposal" is at the heart of this approach to design: to propose, to suggest, to offer something. This is what design is good at. It can sketch out possibilities. Although these proposals draw from rigorous analysis and thorough research, it's important they do not lose their imaginative, improbable, and provocative qualities. They are closer to literature than social science, emphasize imagination over practicality, and ask questions rather than provide answers. The project's value is not what it achieves or does but what it is and how it makes people feel, especially if it encourages people to question, in an imaginative, troubling, and thoughtful way, everydayness and how things could be different. To be effective, the work needs to contain contradictions and cognitive glitches. Rather than offering an easy way forward, it highlights dilemmas and trade-offs between imperfect alternatives. Not a solution, not a "better" way, just another way. Viewers can make up their own minds. This is where we believe speculative design can flourish-providing complicated pleasure, enriching our mental lives, and broadening our minds in ways that complement other media and disciplines. It's about meaning and culture, about adding to what life could be, challenging what it is, and providing alternatives that loosen the ties reality has on our ability to dream. Ultimately, it is a catalyst for social dreaming. ## NOTES ## CHAPTER 1 I.Stephen Duncombe, Dream: Re-imaging Progressive Politics in an Age of Fantasy (New York: The New Press, 2007), 182. 2. For example, see Barbara Adam, "Towards a New Sociology of the Future" (Draft). Available at http://www.cf.ac.uk/socsi/futures/ newsociologyofthefuture.pdf. Accessed December 24, 2012. 3. For more on this, see Joseph Voros, "A Primer on Futures Studies, Foresight and the Use of Scenarios," Prospect, the Foresight Bulletin, no. 6 (December 2001). Available at http://thinkingfutures.net/wp-content/ uploads/2010/10/A\_Primer\_on\_Futures\_Studiesl.pdf. Accessed December 21, 2012. 4. Michio Kaku, Physics of the Impossible (London: Penguin Books, 2008). 5. David Kirby, Lab Coats in Hollywood: Science, Scientists, and Cinema (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011), 145-168. 6. Richard Barbrook, Imaginary Futures: From Thinking Machines to the Global Village (London: Pluto Press, 2007). 7. This history is very well documented; for example, see Neil Spiller, Visionary Architecture: Blue prints of the Modern Imagination (London: Thames & Hudson, 2006) ; Felicity D.Scott, Architecture or Techno-utopia: Politics after Modernism (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007) ; Robert Klanten et al., eds., Beyond Architecture: Imaginative Buildings and Fictional Cities (Berlin: Die Gestalten Verlag, 2009) ; and Geoff Manaugh, The BLDG BLDG Book (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2009) ; see also http://bldgblog.blogspot.co. uk. Accessed December 24, 2012. 8. Zygmunt Bauman, Liquid Modernity (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press 2000). ## CHAPTER 2 1. For an in depth discussion of the how of speculative design, see James Auger, "Why Robot? Speculative Design, Domestication of Technology and the Considered Future," PhD diss. (London: Royal College of Art, 2012), 153-164. 2. For more on critical design, see our earlier books, Anthony Dunne, Hertzian Tales (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005); and Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, Design Noir (Basel: Birkhauser, 2001). 3. See Julian Bleecker, Design Fiction: A Short Essay on Design, Science, Fact and Fiction (2009). Available at http://nearfuturelaboratory. com/2009/03/17/design-fiction-a-short-essay-on-design-science-factandfiction/. Accessed December 23, 2012. For examples, see Bruce Sterling's Beyond the Beyond blog at http://www.wired.com/beyond\_the\_beyond. Accessed December 24, 2012. 4. Stuart Candy's The Sceptical Futuryst blog is a wonderful repository of ideas and projects on design and futures. Available at http: //futuryst. blogspot.co.uk. Accessed December 20, 2012. 5. Krzysztof Wodiczko's Interrogative Design Group has as its goal "to combine art and technology into design while infusing it with emerging cultural issues that play critical roles in our society yet are given the least design attention." Available at http://www. interrogative.org/about. Accessed December 24, 2012. 6. Carl DiSalvo, Adversarial Design (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010), explores ways this kind of design can engage with the political. 7. For more on this, see Bruce M.Tharp and Stephanie M.Tharp, The 4 Fields of Industrial Design: (No, Not Furniture, Trans, Consumer Electronics & Toys), Core77 blog, January 5, 2009. Available at http://www.core77.com/ blog/featured\_items/the\_4\_fields\_of\_industrial\_design\_no\_not\_furniture\_ trans\_consumer\_electronics\_toys\_by\_bruce\_m\_tharp\_and\_stephanie\_m\_ tharp\_12232.asp. Accessed December 23, 2012. 8. See Anab Jain et al., "Design Futurescaping," in Blowup: The Era of Objects, ed. Michelle Kaprzak (Amsterdam: V2, 2011), 6-14. Available at http://www.v2.nl/files/2011/events/blowup-readers/the-era-of-objectspdf. Accessed December 23, 2012. 9. Tim Black, interview with Susan Neiman, Spiked Online. Available at http:// www.spiked-online.com/index.php/site/reviewofbooks\_article/7214. Accessed December 24, 2012. 10. Hans Vaihinger, The Philosophy of "As If" (Eastford, CT: Martino Publishing, 2009 [19251), 48. 11. In Vailinger, The Philosophy of "As If," 268, Vailinger makes a helpful distinction between hypothesis and fiction: "Whereas every hypothesis seeks to be an adequate expression of some reality still unknown and to mirror this objective reality correctly, the fiction is advanced with the consciousness that it is an inadequate, subjective and pictorial manner of conception, whose coincidence with reality is, from the start, excluded and which cannot, therefore, be afterwards verified, as we hope to be able verify an hypothesis." 12. Sol LeWitt, "Sentences on Conceptual Art," Art-Language: The Journal of Conceptual Art, 1 (1) (May 1969): 11-13, in Peter Osborne, Conceptual Art (London: Phaidon, 2005 [20021), 222. 13. Ibid. 14. This was first suggested to us in a conversation with Deyan Sudjic in 2011. 15. Will Bradley and Charles Esche, eds., Art and Social Change: A Critical Reader (London: Tate Publishing, 2007), 13. 16. For example, see Robert Klanten et al., eds., Furnish: Furniture and Interior Design for the 21 st Century (Berlin: Die Gestalten Verlag, 2007); and Gareth Williams, Telling Tales: Fantasy and Fear in Contemporary Design (London: V&A Publishing, 2009). 17. See Suzanne Frank, Peter Eisenman's House VI: The Client's Response (New York: Watson-Guptil Publications, 1994). 18. For a detailed discussion of device art see Machiko Kusahara, "Device Art: A New Approach in Understanding Japanese Contemporary Media Art," in Media Art Histories, ed. Oliver Grau (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007), 277307. 19. For more examples and discussion of work like this, see Conny Freyer et al., eds., Digital by Design (London: Thames and Hudson, 2008). ## CHAPTER 3 1. Tim Black, interview with Susan Neiman, S piked Online. Available at http:// www.spiked-online.com/index.php/site/reviewofbooks\_article/7214. Accessed December 24, 2012. 2. Andrew Feenberg, Transforming Technology, A Critical Theory Revisited (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002 [19911), 19. 3. See for example Ramia Maze and Johan Redstrom, "Difficult Forms: Critical Practices of Design and Research," Research Design Journal 1, no. 1 (2009): 28-39. 4. See for example, the introduction to the Museum of Modern Art's Talk to Me exhibition in 2011. Available at http://www.moma.org/interactives/ exhibitions/2011/talktome/home.html. Accessed December 24, 2012. 5. See for example Edwin Heathcote, "Critical Points," Financial Times (April 1, 2010). Available at http://www.ft.com/ cros/s/2/24150a88-3c4elldf-b316-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2FulAF35b. Accessed December 24, 2012. 6. Most interestingly for us, it has become entangled with several related terms-adversarial design, discursive design, conce ptu al design, speculative design, and design fiction-that together are setting out a broader role for design firmly located in a cultural, social, and political context rather than a purely business one. 7. A good example of this is the tax protests and boycotts organized by UK Uncut against corporate tax avoidance by multinational corporations on profits made in the United Kingdom. 8. Erik Olin Wright, Envisioning Real Utopias (London: Verso, 2010), 67- 68. 9. Ibid., 68. 10. For a detailed discussion of observational comedy and speculative design, see James Auger, "Why Robot? Speculative Design, Domestication of Technology and the Considered Future," PhD diss. (London: Royal College of Art, 2012), 164-168. 11. Wright, Envisioning Real Utopias, 25-26. ## CHAPTER 4 1. Andrew Feenberg, Transforming Technology, A Critical Theory Revisited (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002 [1991]), vi. 2. For an in depth exploration of this weird and wonderful world, see Koert Van Mensvoort, Next Nature: Nature Changes Along with Us (Barcelona: Actar, 2011). 3. In 2002 Nexia Biotechnologies produced a genetically modified goat whose milk contained super strong spider silk protein. 4. With synthetic biology we may have reached a point at which entirely new life forms can be engineered to order. In 2010 Craig Venter and his team created "Synthia," arguably the first artificial life form or, more accurately, the most synthetic organism ever made. Using an existing cell and DNA synthesizer (a "printing" machine with four bottles containing ATCG, the four chemicals that make up our DNA chain), they created a genome that they put into another cell that had its DNA removed; it then reproduced the synthetic DNA. At the press conference Venter claimed its "parent was a computer" rather than an organic organism. 5. For more on this, see Stephen Wilson, Art + Science: How Scientific Research and Technological Innovation Are Becoming Key to 21st-century Aesthetics (London Thames & Hudson, 2010) ; and Ingeborg Reichle, Art in the Age of Technoscience: Genetic Engineering, Robotics, Artificial Life in Contemporary Life (Vienna: Springer-Verlag, 2009). 6. For example, see James Wilsdon and Rebecca Willis, See-through Science (London: Demos Pamphlet, 2004). Available at http://www.demos.co.uk/ publ ications/paddl ingupstream. 7. The designer was aware this was very unlikely to be an authentic hair. ## CHAPTER 5 I.Lubom r Dolezel, Heterocosmica: Fiction and Possible Worlds (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1998), ix. 2. Keith OatIey, Such Stuff as Dreams: The Psychology of Fiction (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011), 30. 3. Dole2el, Heterocosmica, 13. 4. See Mauricio Suarez, ed., Fictions in Science: Philosophical Essays on Modeling and Idealization (London: Routledge, 2009). 5. For more on this see Richard Mark Sainsbury, Fiction and Fictionalism (London: Routledge, 2009). Kindle edition. 6. See Nancy Spector, Matthew Barney: The Cremaster Cycle (New York: Guggenheim Museum, 2002). 7. For more on this, see Mary Flanagan, Critical Play: Radical Game Design (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009). 8. Lyman Tower Sargent, Utopianism: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 5. 9. Eric Olin Wright, Envisioning RealUtopias (London: Verso, 2010), 5. 10. In Sargent, Utopianism, 114. 11. For example, see Raffaella Baccolini and Tom Moylan, eds., Dark Horizons: Science Fiction and the Dystopian I m agination (New York: Routledge, 2003); and Carl Freedman, Critical Theory and Science Fiction (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2000). 12. Francis Spufford, Red Plenty (London: Faber and Faber, 2010), 3. Kindle edition. 13. Available at http://www.justinmcguirk.com/home/the-postspectaculareconomy.html. 14. Interview available at http://bldgblog.blogspot.co.uk/2011/03/ unsolving-city-interview-with-china. htmI. Accessed December 20, 2012. 15. For an extensive list of classic thought experiments from disciplines including philosophy, biology, and economics, see http://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Thought\_experiment. Accessed December 20, 2012. 16. For an in-depth discussion of different kinds of thought experiments, see Julian Baggini, The Pig That Wants to Be E aten: And Ninety - Nine Other Thought Experiments (London: Granta, 2005). 17. Stephen R.L.Clark, Philosophical Futures (Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 2011), 17. 18. "The World in 2036: Design Takes Over, Says Paola Antonelli," Economist Online, November 22, 2010. Available at http://www.economist.com/ node/17509367. Accessed December 24, 2012. 19. Milan Kundera, The Art of the Novel (New York: Grove Press, 1988). ## CHAPTER 6 1. "Icon Minds: Tony Dunne/Fiona Raby/Bruce Sterling on Design Fiction." A public conversation organized by Icon Magazine, London, October 14, 2009. Notes from the conversation are available at http://magicalnihilism. com/2009/10/14/icon-minds-tony-dunne-fiona-rabybruce-sterling-ondesign-fiction. Accessed December 24, 2012. 2. Piers D.Britton, "Design for Screen SF," in The Routledge Companion to Science Fiction, eds. Mark Bould et al. (London: Routledge, 2009), 341- 349. 3. In Stuart Candy, "In Praise of Children of Men" (The Sceptical Futuryst blog, April 12, 2008). Available at http://futuryst.blogspot.com/2008/04/ in - praise-of - children - of - men.html. Accessed December 23, 2012. 4. Linda Michael and Patricia Piccinini, We Are Family (Surry Hills: Australia Council, 2003). 5. Kendall L.Walton, Mimesis as Make-Believe: On the Foundations of the Representational Arts (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990). 6. "Briefly, a fictional truth consists in of there being a prescription or mandate in some context to imagine something. Fictional propositions are propositions that are to be imagined-whether or not they are in fact imagined." In Walton, Mimesis as Make - Believe, 39. 7. Keith Oatley, Such Stuff as Dreams: The Psychology of Fiction (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011), 130. 8. Charles Avery, The I slanders: An Introduction (London: Parasol Unit/Koenig Books, 2010). 9. See for example, "Hawaii 2050," by Stuart Candy, Jon Dator, and Jake Dunagan. Available at http://www.futures.hawaii.edu/publications/hawaii/ FourFuturesHawaii205O-2006.pdf. Accessed December 24, 2012. A writeup of the experimental part of the project by Stuart Candy is available at http:// futuryst.blogspot.co.uk/2006/08/hawaii-2050-kicks-off.html. Accessed December 24, 2012. 10. For more discussion on this, see http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/ Main/WillingSuspensionOfDisbelief. Accessed December 24, 2012. 11. James Wood, How Fiction Works (London: Jonathan Cape, 2008), 179. 12. Wood, How Fiction Works, 28-29. 13. David Kirby writes of diegetic prototypes: "[They]... demonstrate to large public audiences a technology's utility, harmlessness, and viability. Diegetic prototypes have a major rhetorical advantage even over true prototypes: in the fictional world-what film scholars refer to as the diegesisthese technologies exist as \`real' objects that function properly and that people actually use." David A.Kirby, Lab Coats in Hollywood: Science, Scientists, and Cinema (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011), 195. 14. Torie Bosch, "Sci-Fi Writer Bruce Sterling Explains the Intriguing New Concept of Design Fiction," Slate blog, March 2, 2012. Available at http:// www. slate.com/blogs/future-tense/2012/03/02/bruce-sterling-ondesignfictions-.html. Accessed December 24, 2012. 15. See Brian David Johnson, Science Fiction for Prototyping: Designing the Future with Science Fiction (San Francisco: Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2011). ## CHAPTER 7 1. Keith Oatley, Such Stuff as Dreams: The Psychology of Fiction (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011), 37. 2. For more on this, see Langdon Winner, The Whale and the Reactor: A Search for Limits in an Age of High Technology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986). 3. See Branko Lukic, Nonobject (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011). 4. Terence Riley, ed., The Changing of the Avant-Garde: Visionary Architectural Drawings from the Howard Gilman Collection (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2002). Available at http://www.moma.org/collection/ object.php?object\_id=922. Accessed April 4, 2013. 5. "A term attributed to Hitchcock, the MacGuffin is a cinematic plot device, usually an object, that serves to set and keep the story in motion despite lacking intrinsic importance. Famous examples include the statue from The Maltese Falcon, the glowing suitcase from Kiss Me Deadly, the bottle of uranium in Notorious, and the letters of transit in Ca sa blanca." Available at http:// noamtoran. com/NT2009/projects/the-macguffin - library. Accessed December 20, 2012. 6. ATOPOS cvc and Vassilis Zidianakis, Not a Toy: Fashioning Radical Characters (Berlin: Pictoplasma Publishing, 2011). 7. Lars Tunbjork, Office (Stockholm: Journal, 2001). 8. See Ann Thomas, The Photography of Lynne Cohen (London: Thames & Hudson, 2001). 9. See Taryn Simon, An American Index of the Modern and Unfamiliar (Gottingen: Steidl, 2007). 10. See Richard Ross, Architecture of Authority (New York:Aperture Foundation, 2007). 11. See Lucinda Devlin, The Omega Suites (Gottingen: Steidl, 2000). 12. See Mike Mandel and Larry Sultan, Evidence (New York: D.A.P./Distributed Art Publishers, 1977). ## CHAPTER 8 1. The video is available at http://www.youtube.com/watch? v=gnbrdGbm6s&feature=relmfu. Accessed December 20, 2012. 2. The results were exhibited at the RCA, March 15-21, 2010. The project was commissioned by EPSRC and partly supported by Nesta. 3. The ideas stage of this project was commissioned by Design Indaba as part of Protofarm 2050 for the 2009 ICSID World Design Congress in Singapore. 4. Giles Oldroyd, a plant scientist at the John Innes Research Centre, is using transgenic plants to replace oil-based fertilizer. Pea plants have nitrogen - producing abilities: they have nodes in their roots that are nitrogen factories. If pea plants are spliced with wheat there is no need for nitrogen fertilizer. Nitrogen fertilizer increases yields by 50 percent; however, nitrogen fertilizer is oil-based and if absorbed can poison other plants and animals, particularly fish when it gets into water. He argues using transgenic plants is a more "natural" process based on biological principles. The more scientists understand how biology works, the more they can design within biological principles. For more information, see http://www.foodsecurity. ac.uk/blog/index.php/2010/03/getting-to-the-rootof-food-security. 5. At the MoMA/SEED Design and the Elastic Mind Symposium on April 4, 2008, Drew Endy from the bioengineering department at Stanford told the audience, "there are 250,000 plant species in the world and only a tiny number are edible. Synthetic biology can be used to modify plants to make them more digestible and nutritious." See also http://openwetware.org/wiki/Endy\_Lab. 6. John Gray, Endgames: Questions in Late Modern Political Thought (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 1997), 186. 7. Interview with Jan Boelen. Available at http://www.arterritory.com/en/ texts/interviews/ 538-between-art-and-designwithout-borders/2. Accessed December 24, 2012. ## CHAPTER 9 1. From Nico Macdonald's seminar "Designerly Thinking and Beyond" for design interactions MA students at the RCA (January 25, 2006). Available at http:// www.spy.co.uk/Communication/Talks/Colleges/RCA\_ID/2006. Accessed December 24, 2012. 2. See Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and Happiness (London: Penguin, 2009). 3. For more on this, see B.J.Fogg, Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Thin k and Do (Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003). 4. Available at http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/behavioural-insights-team. Accessed December 23, 2012. 5. Eric Olin Wright, E nvisioning Real Utopias (London: Verso, 2010), 23. 6. Ibid. 7. Keith Oatley, Such Stuff as Dreams: The Psychology of Fiction (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011), 118. 8. Philip K.Dick, How to Build a Universe That Doesn't Fall Apart Two Days Later (speech given in 1978). Available at http://deoxy.org/pkd\_how2build. htm. Accessed December 24, 2012. 9. Timothy Archibald, Sex Machines (Los Angeles: Process, 2005). 10. For example, see Nicolas Bourriaud, Relational Aesthetics (Paris: Les Presse Du Reel, 1998) ; and Christian Gether et al., eds., Utopia & Contemporary Art (Ishoj: ARKEN Museum of Modern Art, 2012). 11. For example, the Delphi technique in the 1950s. A group of experts are asked for their views on a specific subject then told what others thought so creating a feedback loop that eventually either produces a consensus or narrows down the possibilities. 12. The word ideology was coined by French thinker Antoine Destutt de Tracy in the 1790s. He was interested in developing a science of ideas. That didn't happen but the word did develop other meanings. We are aware the word ideology has negative associations. For many, ideology masks true reality to protect the interests of a ruling class but its original purpose was simply to examine political ideas and theory. For us, ideology is a way of thinking about worldviews and the narrative glue that joins values, beliefs, priorities, hopes, and fears together. Despite its negative associations, we think it is a useful term. 13. Available at http://www.instapaper.com/go/205770677/text. Accessed December 23, 2012. 14. For more, see http://www.slate.com/articles /health\_and\_science/new\_ scientist/2012/09 /floating\_cities\_seasteaders\_want\_to\_build\_their\_own\_ islands\_. html. Accessed December 24, 2012. 15. Available at http://www.massivechange.com. Accessed December 24, 2012. 16. Available at http://www. design geopolitics.org/about. Accessed December 24, 2012. 17. William Morris, News from Nowhere (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009). 18. See Metahaven and Marina Vishmidt, eds., Uncorporate Identity (Baden: Lars Muller Publishers, 2010). 19. Andrea Hyde, Metahaven's Facestate Social Media and the State: An Interview with Metahaven. Available at http://www.walkerart.org/ magazine/2011/metahavens-facestate. Accessed December 23, 2012. 20. The project was commissioned by the Design Museum in London and exhibited there as "The United Micro Kingdoms: A Design Fiction" between May 1 and August 25, 2012. 21. James Dobbins et al., The Beginner's Guide to Nation - Building (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2007). Available at http://www.rand.org/pubs/ monographs/MG557.html. Accessed December 24, 2012. 22. Torie Bosch, "Sci-Fi Writer Bruce Sterling Explains the Intriguing New Concept of Design Fiction," Slate blog, March 2, 2012. Available at http:// www.slate.com/blogs/future\_tense/2012/03/02/bruce\_sterling\_on\_design\_ fictions\_.html. Accessed December 24, 2012. 23. This title is from a document Cynthia Weber, a professor of international relations, produced for a student project we ran related to this theme. It set out areas we would need to think about if we were to design a state: who are we? (population); where are we? (territory); who governs us? (authority) ; do other states think we are a state? (recognition). 24. See for example, The Nolan Chart and The Political Compass, available at http://www.politicalcompass.org. Accessed June 30, 2013. 25. For other fictional Englands, see Rupert Thomson, Divided Kingdom (London: Bloomsbury, 2006); and Julian Barnes, England England (London: Picador, 2005 [19881). 26. Timothy Mitchell, "Hydrocarbon Utopia," in Utopia/Dystopia: Conditions of Historical Possibility, ed. Michael D.Gordin, Helen Tilley, and Gyan Prakish (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010), 118. 27. For more about how the design of cars can change to due to robocars, see Brad Templeton, "New Design Factors for Robot Cars." Available at http:// www.templetons.com/brad/robocars/design-change.html. Accessed December 23, 2012. 28. Each micro-kingdom represents a different combination of technology and political ideology. For example, if biotechnology were part of the digitarian world, it would be shaped by market mechanisms and lead to a