"bio-tarian" culture. Likewise, if the bioliberals embraced digital technology, it would result in a "digi-liberal" culture. But which comes first, technology or ideology? 29. A technology currently being developed at the Auckland Bioengineering Institute in New Zealand for motors used in robots. See more about this technology at http://www.popsci.com/technology /article/2011-03/video- jelly-artificial-muscles-create-rotary-motion-couldmake-robots- moreflexible. Accessed December 24, 2012. 30. For other fictional train worlds, see Christopher Priest, Inverted World (London: SF Gateway, 2010 [19741). Kindle edition; China Mieville, Railsea (London: Macmillan, 2012). Kindle edition. 31. Ken Arnold, "Designing Connections: Medicine, Life and Art," Bicentenary Medal Lecture (London: Royal Society of the Arts, November 2, 2011). ## BIBLIOGRAPHY Abbott, Edwin A.Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008 [18671. Albero, Alexander, and Sabeth Buchmann, eds. Art after Conceptual Art. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006. Ambasz, Emilio, ed. The New Domestic Landscape: Achievements and Problems of Italian Design. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1972. Antonelli, Paola. Design and the ElasticMind. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2008. Archibald, Timothy. Sex Machines. Los Angeles: Process, 2005. Ashley, Mike. Out of This World: Science Fiction but Not as You Know It. London: The British Library, 2011. ATOPOS CVC and Vassilis Zidianakis. Not a Toy: Fashioning Radical Characters. Berlin: Pictoplasma Publishing, 2011. Atwood, Margaret. Oryx and Crake. London: Bloomsbury, 2003. Auger, James. Why Robot? Speculative Design, Domestication of Technology and the Considered Future, PhD diss. (London: Royal College of Art, 2012). Avery, Charles. The Islanders: An Introduction. London: Parasol Unit/Koenig Books, 2010. Azuma, Hiroki. Otaku: Japan's Database Animals. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2009 [20011. Baccolini, Raffaella, and Tom Moylan, eds. Dark Horizons: Science Fiction and the Dystopian Imagination. New York: Routledge, 2003. Baggini, Julian. The Pig That Wants to Be Eaten: And Ninety - Nine Other Thought Experiments. London: Granta, 2005. Ballard, J.G.Super-Cannes. London: Flamingo, 2000. Ballard, J.G.Millennium People. London: Flamingo, 2004. Barbrook, Richard. Imaginary Futures: From Thinking Machines to the Global Village. London: Pluto Press, 2007. Bateman, Chris. Imaginary Games. London: Zero Books, 2011. Bauman, Zygmunt. Liquid Modernity. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2000. Beaver, Jacob, Tobie Kerridge, and Sarah Pennington, eds. Material Beliefs. London: Goldsmiths, University of London, 2009. Bel Geddes, Norman. Magic Motorways. Milton Keynes, UK: Lightning Sources, 2010. [c19401 Bell, Wendell. Foundations of Futures Studies. London: Transaction Publishers, 2007 [19971. Bingham, Neil, Clare Carolin, Rob Wilson, and Peter Cook, eds. Fantasy Architecture, 7500 - 2036. London: Hayward Gallery, 2004. Bleecker, Julian. Design Fiction: A Short Essay on Design, Science, Fact and Fiction. 2009. Available at http://nearfuturelaboratory. com/2009/03/17/design-fiction-a-short-essay - on - design - science-fact - and-fiction. Accessed December 23, 2012. Boese, Alex. Elephants on Acid: And Other Bizarre Experiments. London: Boxtree, 2008. Bould, Mark, Andrew M.Butler, Adam Roberts, and Sherryl Vint, eds. The Routledge Companion to Science Fiction. London: Routledge, 2009. Bourriaud, Nicolas. Altermodern. London: Tate Publishing, 2009. Bradley, Will, and Charles Esche, eds. Art and Social Change: A Critical Reader. London: Tate Publishing, 2007. Breitwiesser, Sabine, ed. Designs for the Real World. Vienna: Generali Foundation, 2002. Brockman, John, ed. What Is Your Dangerous Idea? London: Simon & Schuster, 2006. Burrett, Alex. My Goat Ate Its Own Legs. London: Burning House Books, 2008. Cardinal, Roger, Jon Thompson, Whitechapel Art Gallery (London), Fund aci6n "La Caixa" (Madrid) and Irish Museum of Modern Art (Dublin) Inner Worlds Outside. London: Whitechapel Gallery, 2006. Carey, John, ed. The Faber Book of Utopias. London: Faber and Faber, 1999. Christopher, John. The Death of Grass. London: Penguin Books, 2009 [19561. Clark, Stephen R.L.Philosophical Futures. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 2011. Coleman, Nathaniel. Utopias and Architecture. London: Routledge, 2005. Cooper, Richard N., and Richard Layard, eds. What the Future Holds: Insights from Social Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003. da Costa, Beatrice, and Philip Kavita, eds. Tactical Bio politics: Art, Activism, and Technoscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008. Crowley, David, and Jane Pavitt, eds. Cold War Modern: Design 1945- 1970. London: V&A Publishing, 2008. Devlin, Lucinda. The Omega Suites. Gottingen: Steidl, 2000. Dickson, Paul. Think Tanks. New York: Atheneum, 1971. DiSalvo, Carl. Adversarial Design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010. Dixon, Dougal. After Man: A Zoology of the Future. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1981. Dolezel, LubomIr. Heterocosmica: Fiction and Possible Worlds. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998. Duncombe, Stephen. Dream: Re-imagining Progressive Politics in an Age of Fantasy. New York: The New Press, 2007. Elton, Ben. Blind Faith. 2008. London: Transworld Publishers. Ericson, Magnus, and Maze Ramia, eds. Design Act: Socially and Politically Engaged Design Tod ay-Critical Roles and Emerging Tactics. Berlin: laspis/ Sternberg, 2011. Feenberg, Andrew. Transforming Technology: A Critical Theory Revisited. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002 [1991]. Feenberg, Andrew. Questioning Technology. New York: Routledge, 1999. Fisher, Mark. Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative. Winchester: 0 Books, 2009. Flanagan, Mary. Critical Play: Radical Game Design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009. Fogg, B.J.Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. Fortin, David T.Architecture and Science - Fiction Film: Philip K.Dic k and the Spectacle of the Home. Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2011. Freeden, Michael. Ideology: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. Freedman, Carl. Critical Theory and Science Fiction. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2000. Freyer, Conny, Sebastien Noel, and Eva Rucki, eds. Digital by Design. London: Thames and Hudson, 2008. Friesen, John W., and Virginia Lyons Friesen. The Palgrave Companion to North American Utopias. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2004. Fry, Tony. Design as Politics. Oxford: Berg, 2011. Fuller, Steve. The Intellectual. Cambridge, UK: Icon Books, 2005. Geuss, Raymond. The Idea of a Critical Theory: Habermas & the Frankfurt School. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1981. Ghamari-Tabrizi, Sharon. The Worlds of Herman Kahn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005. Goodman, Nelson. Ways of Worldmaking. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1978. Gray, John. Endgames: Questions in Late Modern Political Thought. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 1997. Gray, John. False Dawn: The Delusions of Global Capitalism. London: Granta, 2002 [19981. Gray, John. Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Human and Other Animals. London: Granta, 2003. Gray, John. Heresies: Against Progress and Other Illusions. London: Granta, 2004. Gun, James, and Matthew Candelaria, eds. Speculations on Speculation. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2005. Halligan, Fionnuala. Production Design. Lewes, UK: ILEX, 2012. Hanson, Matt. The Science behind the Fiction: Building Sci - Fi Moviescapes. Sussex, UK: Rotovision, 2005. Hauser, Jens, ed. Sk-interfaces: Exploding Borders-Creating Membranes in Art, Technology and Society. Liverpool: Fact/Liverpool University Press, 2008. Hughes, Rian, and Imogene Foss. Hardware: The Definitive Works of Chris Foss. London: Titan Books, 2011. lhde, Don. Postphenomenology and Technoscience. Albany: State University of New York, 2009. Iser, Wolfgang. The Fictive and the Imaginary: Charting Literary Anthropology. Baltimore: John Hopkins University, 1993. Jacoby, Russell. Picture Imperfect: Utopian Thought for an Anti-Utopian Age. New York: Columbia University Press, 2005. Jameson, Frederic. Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fiction s. London: Verso, 2005. Joern, Julia, and Cameron Shaw, eds. Marcel Dzama: Even the Ghost of the Past. New York: Steidl and David Zwirner, 2008. Johnson, Brian David. Science Fiction for Prototyping: Designing the Future with Science Fiction. San Francisco: Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2011. Jones, Caroline A., ed. Sensorium: Embodied Experience Technology, and Contemporary Art. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006. Kaku, Michio. Physics of the Impossible. London: Penguin Books, 2008. Kalliala, Martti, Jenna Sutela, and Tuomas Toivonen. Solution 239-246: Finland:TheWelfare Game. Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2011. Keasler, Misty. Love Hotels: The Hidden Fantasy Rooms of Japan. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2006. Keiller, Patrick. The Possibility of Life's Survivalon the Planet. London: Tate Publishing, 2012. Kelly, Marjorie. The Divine Right of Capital: Dethroning the Corporate Aristocracy. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2001. Kipnis, Jeffrey. Perfect Acts of Architecture. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2001. Kirby, David A.Lab Coats in Hollywood: Science, Scientists, and Cinema. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011. Kirkham, Pat. Charles and Ray Eames: Designers of the Twentieth Centu ry. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995. Klanten, Robert and Lukas Feireiss, eds. Beyond Architecture: Imaginative Buildings and Fictional Cities. Berlin: Die Gestalten Verlag, 2009. Klanten, Robert, Sophie Lovell, and Birga Meyer, eds. Furnish: Furniture and Interior Design for the 21 st Century. Berlin: Die Gestalten Verlag, 2007. Kullmann, Isabella, and Liz Jobey, eds. Hannah Starkey Photographs 19972007. Gottingen: Steidl, 2007. Lang, Peter, and William Menking. Superstudio: Life without Objects. Milan: Skira, 2003. Latour, Bruno, and Peter Weibel, eds. Making Things Public: Atmospheres of Democracy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005. Lehanneur, Mathieu, and David Edwards, eds. Bel - air: News about a Second Atmosphere. Paris: Edition Le Laboratoire, 2007. Lindemann Nelson, Hilde, ed. Stories and Their Limits: Narrative Approaches to Bioethics. New York: Routledge, 1997. Luckhurst, Roger. Science Fiction. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2005. Lukic, Branko. Nonobject. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011. MacMinn, Strother. Steel Couture-Syd Mead-Futurist. Henrik-Ido-Ambacht: Dragon's Dream, 1979. Manacorda, Francesco, and Ariella Yedgar, eds. Radical Nature: Art and Architecture for a Changing Planet 1969 - 2009. London: Koenig Books, 2009. Manaugh, Geoff. The BLDG Blog Book. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2009. Mandel, Mike, and Larry Sultan. Evidence. New York: Distributed Art Publishers, 1977. Manguel, Alberto, and Gianni Guadalupi. The Dictionary of Imaginary Places. San Diego: Harcourt, 2000 [1980]. Marcoci, Roxana. Thomas Demand. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2005. Martin, James. The Meaning of the 21 st Century: A Vital Blue print for Ensuring Our Future. London: Transworld Publishers, 2006. Mass Observation. Britain. London: Faber Finds, 2009 [1939]. Mead, Syd. Oblagon: Concepts of Syd Mead. Pasadena: Oblagon, 1996 [1985]. Metahaven, and Marina Vishmidt, eds. Uncorporate Identity. Baden: Lars Muller Publishers, 2010. Miah, Andy, ed. Human Future: Art in an Age of Uncertainty. Liverpool: Fact/ Liverpool University Press, 2008. Michael, Linda, ed. Patricia Piccinini: We Are Family. Surry Hills, Australia: Australia Council, 2003. Midal, Alexandra. Design and Science Fiction: A Future without a Future. In Space Oddity: Design /Fiction, ed. Marie Pok, 17-21. Brussels: Grand Hornu, 2012. Mieville, China. Railsea. London: Macmillan, 2012. Kindle edition. Mieville, China. The City and the City. London: Macmillan, 2009. Mitchell, Timothy. Hydrocarbon Utopia. In Utopia/Dystopia: Conditions of Historical Possibility, ed. Michael D.Gordin, Helen Tilley, and Gyan Prakish, 117-147. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010. Momus. Solution 11-167: The Book of Scotlands: Every Lie Creates a Parallel World. The World in Which It Is True. Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2009. Momus. Solution 214 - 238: The Book of Japans: T hing s Are Conspicuous in Their Absence. Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2011. More, Thomas. Utopia. Trans. Paul Turner. London: Penguin Books, 2009 [1516]. Morris, William. News from Nowhere. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009. Morrow, James, and Kathryn Morrow, eds. The SFWA European Hall of Fame. New York: Tom Doherty Associates, 2007. Moylan, Tom. Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination. New York: Methuen, 1986. Museum Folkwang. Atelier Van Lieshout: SlaveCity. Koln: DuMont Buchveriag, 2008. Nicholson, Ben. The World, Who Wants It? London: Black Dog Publishing, 2004. Niermann, Ingo. Solution 1-10: Umbauland. Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2009. Noble, Richard. Utopias. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009. Noble, Richard. The Politics of Utopia in Contemporary Art. In Utopia & Contemporary Art, ed. Christian Gether, Stine Heholt, and Marie Laurberg, 49-57. Ishoj: ARKEN Museum of Modern Art, 2012. Oatley, Keith. Such Stuff as Dreams: The Psychology of Fiction. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011. Office Federal de la Culture, ed. Philippe Rahm and Jean Gilles Decosterd: Physiological Architecture. Basel: Birkhauser, 2002. Ogden, C.K.Bentham's Theory of Fictions. Paterson, NJ: Littlefield, Adams & Co., 1959. Osborne, Peter. Conceptual Art. London: Phaidon, 2005 [20021. Parsons, Tim. Thinking: Objects-Contemporary Approaches to Product Design. Lausanne: AVA Publishing, 2009. Pavel, Thomas G.Fictional Worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986. Philips Design. Microbial Home: A Philips Design Probe. Eindhoven: Philips Design, 2011. Pohl, Frederik, and Cyril Kornbluth. The Space Merchants. London: Gollancz, 2003 [19521. Priest, Christopher. Inverted World. London: SF Gateway, 2010 [19741. Kindle edition. Ranciere, Jacques. The Emancipated Spectator. London: Verso, 2009. Reichle, Ingeborg. Art in the Age of Technoscience: Genetic Engineering, Robotics, Artificial Life in Contemporary Life. Vienna: Springer-Verlag, 2009. Ross, Richard. Architecture of Authority. New York: Aperture Foundation, 2007. Sadler, Simon. Archigram: Architecture without Architecture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005. Sainsbury, Richard Mark. Fiction and Fictionalism. London: Routledge, 2009. Kindle edition. Sargent, Lyman Tower. Utopianism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. Saunders, George. Pastoralia. London: Bloomsbury, 2000. Schwartzman, Madeline. See Y ourself Sensing: Redefining Human Perception. London: Black Dog Publishing, 2011. Scott, Felicity D. Architecture or Techno-utopia: Politics after Modernism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007a. Scott, Felicity D.Living Archive 7: Ant Farm: Allegorical Time Warp: The Media Fallout of July 21, 1969. Barcelona: Actar, 2007b. Self, Will. The Book of Dave. London: Bloomsbury, 2006. Serafini, Luigi. CodexSeraphinianus. Milan: Rizzoli, 2008 [1983]. Shteyngart, Gary. Super Sad True Love Story. London: Granta, 2010. Kindle edition. Sim, Stuart, and Borin Van Loon. Introducing Critical Theory. Royston, UK: Icon Books, 2004. Simon, Taryn. An American Index of the Modern and Unfamiliar. Gottingen: Steidl, 2007. Skinner, B. F. Walden Two. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1976 [19481. Spector, Nancy. Mathew Barney: The Cremaster Cycle. New York: Guggenheim Museum, 2002. Spiller, Neil. Visionary Architecture: Blue prints of the Modern Imagination. London: Thames & Hudson, 2006. Spufford, Francis. Red Plenty. London: Faber and Faber, 2010. Kindle edition. Strand, Clare. Monograph. Gottingen: Steidl, 2009. Suarez, Mauricio, ed. Fictions in Science: Philosophical Essays on Modeling and Idealization. London: Routledge, 2009. Talshir, Gayil, Mathew Humphrey, and Michael Freeden, eds. Taking Ideology Seriously: 21st Century Reconfigurations. London: Routledge, 2006. Thaler, Richard, and Cass Sunstein. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and Happiness. London: Penguin, 2009. Thomas, Ann. The Photography of Lynne Cohen. London: Thames & Hudson, 2001. Thomson, Rupert. Divided Kingdom. London: Bloomsbury, 2006. Tsuzuki, Kyoichi. Image Club. Osaka: Amus Arts Press, 2003. Tunbjork, Lars. Office. Stockholm: Journal, 2001. Turney, Jon. The Rough Guide to the Future. London: Rough Guides, 2010. Utting, David, ed. Contemporary Social Evils. Bristol: The Policy Press/Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 2009. Vaihinger, Hans. The Philosophy of "As if": Mansfield Centre. Eastford, CT: Martino Publishing, 2009 [19251. Van Mensvoort, Koert. Next Nature: Nature Changes Along with Us. Barcelona: Actar, 2011. Van Schaik, Martin, and Otakar Ma el, eds. Exit Utopia: Architectural Provocations 1956-76. Munich: Prestel Verlag, 2005. Wallach, Wendell, and Colin Allen. Moral Machines: Teaching Robots Right from Wrong. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009. Walton, Kendall L.Mimesis as Make - Believe: On the Foundations of the Representational Arts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990. Winner, Langdon. The Whale and the Reactor: A Search for Limits in an Age of High Technology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986. Williams, Gareth. Telling Tales: Fantasy and Fear in Contemporary Design. New York: Harry N.Abrams, 2009. Wilson, Stephen. Art + Science: How Scientific Research and Technological Innovation Are Becoming Key to 21st-century Aesthetics. London: Thames & Hudson, 2010. Wood, James. How Fiction Works. London: Jonathan Cape, 2008. Wright, Erik Olin. E nvisioning Real Utopias. London: Verso, 2010. Wyndham, John. The Chrysalids. London: Penguin, 2008 [19551. Yokoyama, Yuichi. New Engineering. Tokyo: East Press, 2007.