# A Survey of the Work of Peter Behrens Peter Behrens was born in Hamburg on 14 April 1868. After attending the Realgymnasium in Altona, he began his painting studies in 1886 at the Kunstakademie in Karlsruhe. From there he moved to Düsseldorf, where he studied with Ferdinand Bütt. In December 1889, Behrens married Lilli Krä- mer, and in the following year the couple moved to Munich, where he continued his studies with Kotschenreiter. He became a founding member of the Munich Secession in 1893 and, shortly afterwards, a founding member of the more progressive Freie Vereinigung Münchener Künstler— together with Otto Eckmann, Max Slevogt, Wilhelm Trübner, and Lovis Corinth. He also made contacts with literary Munich and joined the circle associated with the magazine Pan, which included Otto Julius Bierbaum, Julius Meier-Graefe, Otto Julius Bierbaum, Franz Blei, Richard Dehmel, and Otto Eckmann. Although Behrens exhibited regularly in the 1890s, his paintings and woodcuts from the period explain his decision at the end of the decade to abandon painting in favor of the applied arts. His first graphic works and designs for glass, porcelain, jewelry, and furniture appeared in 1898 and 1899, and his monogram for the Insel Verlag (1899) is still in use today in a modified form. In 1899 he exhibited his craft designs at the Keller and Reiner Gallery in Berlin, at the Glaspalast in Munich, and at the Kunstverein in Darmstadt. The success of these exhibitions led to his appointment, also in 1899, to the Künstler-Kolonie in Darmstadt by Ernst Ludwig, Grand Duke of Hesse. Together with Josef Maria Olbrich, Behrens was a dominant artistic influence in the Darmstadt colony, where he became particularly involved in plans for a new theater. In July 1900 work was begun on his own house, for which he had designed everything from the structure down to the furniture, carpets, and glasses. During the Darmstadt period Behrens was strongly influenced by the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche, and this influence can be seen in his own house and in the Hamburg Vestibule at the 1902 Turin International Exhibition, dubbed the Tomb of the Unknown Superman. (At Turin he also exhibited a much more restrained design for the study of the Darmstadt publisher Alexander Koch.) In January 1903, Behrens was appointed director of the Kunstgewerbeschule in Düsseldorf. He tried unsuccessfully to persuade the architects Hendrik Berlage and Josef Hoffmann and the young painter Vasili Kandinsky to take up teaching posts at Düsseldorf. His interest in the work of Berlage and Hoffmann, representing the latest developments in Holland and Vienna respectively, and his own designs of this time mark his development away from the lingering Jugendstil of his Darmstadt period and toward more abstract geometrical forms based on cubes, cylinders, and framed rectangular planes. These elements all appear in his reading room for the library at Düsseldorf (1904), the cover design for a catalog for the 1904 St. Louis World's Fair, the dining room furniture exhibited at Dresden in 1904, the Haus Schede at Wetter an der Ruhr (1904–05), the restaurant at Düsseldorf (1904), and particularly the exhibition pavilion at Oldenburg (1905). The cubistic building elements Behrens used in the design of the Obenauer house near Saarbrücken (1905-06) invite comparison with contemporary experiments in painting and sculpture, and particularly with Hoffmann's reliefs of 1902. This approach to three-dimensianal design was further developed in the project for the Tietz store in Düsseldorf (1905-06), the Klein carpet shop in Hagen (1906-07), and the Catholic Gesellenhaus in Neuss (1908-1910). Behrens gained a number of commissions through the intercession of the banker and patron Karl Ernst Osthaus. These included the Tonhaus at the Cologne Exhibition of 1906, the crematorium in Hagen (1906-07), and an unexecuted project for a Protestant church, also in Hagen. In the last two schemes, the Dutch and Viennese stimuli toward geometric abstraction were joined by strong references to the Florentine proto-Renaissance. A notable feature in Behrens's pre-Berlin work was the development of a pioneering style of exhibition design. Typical examples were the Kunsthalle at the 1905 Oldenburg exhibition and the pavilion for the Anker Linoleum Company at the 1906 Deutsche Kunstgewerbeausstellung at Dresden. Behrens was assisted on these projects by the young Adolf Meyer, who was later to collaborate with another Behrens pupil, Walter Gropius, on the celebrated Fagus factory. In 1907, Behrens was called to Berlin as artistic adviser to the AEG, and from this time on his work shows the marked influence of Prussian Classicism. It appears, for example, in the Villa Cuno (1909), one of the large houses Behrens built around Hagen. Gropius worked with Behrens on this project, and its lasting influence can be seen in Gropius's design for the Otte house in Zehlendarf (1921). A more Schinkelesque version of Classicism emerged in 1910–1912, the period of the Villa Wiegand in Dahlem, the alterations to the Mertens house in Potsdam, and the Kröller-Müller house in The Hague. The example of Schinkel's planning, as adapted by Behrens, was ta exercise a lasting influence on one of the assistants an the Kröller-Müller praject, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. The turn of the year 1910-11 marked the most fruitful and creative period in Behrens's life. In addition to several major schemes for the AEG, he found time to work on an almost unbelievable number of complicated projects, including the German embassy at St. Petersburg, the administration building of the Mannesmannröhren-Werke in Düsseldorf, and the Continentale-Gummi-Werke in Hanover. Perhaps the most striking was the embassy, with its vigorous references ta Schinkel in the magnificent vestibule with walls clad in honey-colared marble and black porphyry columns. Mies worked here as project architect, and throughout his life he looked back proudly on the embassy building as his Gesellenstück—the piece of work that qualifies an apprentice as a journeyman. The latent Classicism of these works became even more manifest in the schemes Behrens designed immediately before the outbreak of World War I, notably the Festhalle at the 1914 Werkbund Exhibition at Cologne, the grandiose design for a hotel in San Remo (whose construction was to have begun in July 1914), and the office building for Frank and Lehmann (which still stands in Cologne). With these designs, Behrens distanced himself from the functional, cubic, geometric style that he had used so effectively for the gasworks at Frankfurt (191 1), the AEG factories, and the railway shed at the 1910 Brussels World Exhibition. After the war, Behrens completely reassessed his architectural language and abandoned the stereometric rationality and the Classicist traits of his prewar work. The l.G.-Farben building at Hächst (1920–1924) was the most impressive product of Behrens's Expressionist phase. In its use of color, its clock tower, its belfry, and its cathedral-like memorial hall, the I.G.-Farben complex was entirely in harmony with the self-canscious medievalism that dominated radical architectural theory in Germany in the immediate postwar years and was advocated by such leading figures as Hans Paelzig, Bruno Taut, and Walter Grapius. The contemporary desire to reform architectural design and educatian on the model of the lodges of the medieval masons led in 1919 to Gropius's program for the Weimar Bauhaus, and in 1922 to Behrens's Dombauhütte at the Kunstgewerbe schau at Munich. Further examples af a lingering antigeametric tendency are New Ways (the house in Narthamptan, England, which Behrens designed in 1925), the much admired pavilian at the Internatianal Exhibitian of Industrial Art held in Paris in 1925, and the bizarre design for the pavilion of the Deutsche Spiegelglasfabrikanten at the Cologne exhibitian of the same year. In 1922, Behrens was appointed director of the architecture schaol at the Vienna Academy. A move away from mystic asymmetry back to the cubic forms of Neue Sachlichkeit was announced in the apartment blocks that were built in Vienna between 1925 and 1929 and confirmed in his hause at the Weissenhofsiedlung in Stuttgart (1927). In his major projects from the late 1920s——the competition scheme for the Centrosojuz building in Moscow (1928) and the successful praject far the rebuilding of Alexanderplatz in Berlin (1928)—Behrens reverted to the regular articulation, banded fenestration, and stereometric forms of his AEG factories. Further buildings in the International Style followed, including the Villa Levin at Berlin-Schlachtensee (1929), an apartment house at Berlin-Westend (1930), and the Villa Gans at Kronberg, near Frankfurt (1931). In 1936, Behrens was appointed director of the architecture department at the Preussische Akademie der Künste, and in the same year he designed a factory far the Austrian state tabacca administration in Linz, still in the International Style. His 1939 design far an AEG administration building on Albert Speer's North-South Axis in Berlin employed the compositional techniques af his earlier AEG buildings, but ta less distinguished effect. Behrens died in Berlin in 1940. INDUSTRIEKULTUR