# Tilmann Buddensieg Industrial saciety has been candemned with equal vigar by bath right-wing and left-wing critics. It has been dismissed by Alfred Rasenberg as “the lawest farm af life that has ever existed' and by Lea Kafler as “civilizatian perverted inta an inhuman pracess."² Faced with verdicts like these, ane is tempted ta accept the view that madern industrial saciety is incapable af generating any spiritual ar intellectual impulses beyond a simple faith in perfarmance and the ability ta arganize labar. The yaung Karl Marx suggested that the reactianary and the utapian are ane and the same.³ Rather than facus an the reactians af the extreme left ar right, it may be mare fruitful ta take a mare maderate stance. Fram such a pasitian, the histarian's interest can prafitably be directed at thase industrial institutians that nat anly passessed the abviaus attributes af arganizatian, ecanamic pawer, and technical perfectian but alsa generated 'spiritual impulses," sacial madels, and cultural ideas. One such institutian was the Allgemeine Elektricitäts-Gesellschaft (AEG) under the guidance af Emil and Walther Rathenau. Between 1907 and 1914, this firm's physical rearganizatian, the design af its praducts and trademark, and the pravisian af hausing far its emplayees were entrusted ta the architect Peter Behrens. Describing Behrens's wark far the AEG, Franz Blei (a friend af bath Walther Rathenau and Behrens) spake af Rathenau's “passianate canvictian that spiritual cantent and farm cauld be given ta the inert and chaatic bady af trade and industry."4 Behrens's “rearganizatian af everything visible'⁵ alsa had a sacial and didactic dimensian. It was seen as a means af alleviating the devastatian that industrializatian had wraught an such basic areas as labar, praductian, hausing, and human relatians. This reflected the then-navel idea that saciety cauld be impraved and made mare civilized by a sacially ariented art, whase pawer wauld be based an the techniques af mass praductian and an the widespread disseminatian af industrial praducts. Only a great industrial enterprise with a wide range af praducts and designs was seen ta passess this patential far refarm.º The visian af an industrial and sacial culture that wauld embrace all sacial classes was thus created, and this is the true subject af the present valume. One reason for the oblivion into which the AEG-Behrens experiment has sunk is the superficiality of judgments such as those quated above. Another is the widespread tendency to view concrete and practical attempts at reform thraugh the rose-tinted lenses of preindustrial or postindustrial utopias and to judge them, accordingly, as failures. But the AEG experiment was an expression of a specifically bourgeois culture, and acknowledged Max Weber's plea for the unreserved acceptance of the demands of industrial capitalism. Such practical experiments have not been highly valued by thase sacial theorists who prefer mere speculation. The authars af this book do not need Nietzsche's “cold, gray eyes" in order to see that much of this AEG model was specific to the Wilhelmine period and is now obsalete. Equally clear are the unrealized hopes, the pedagagic enthusiasm, the obsessive desire to conquer the warld's markets, and the belief in a higher mission of the Zeitgeist. However, a fair assessment cannot be made until the experiment in general, and Behrens's contributian in particular, have been fully documented. It might be argued that the relevance and validity af the AEG-Behrens experiment disappeared with the historical context in which it came into being. We wauld suggest, however, that Behrens's ideas and designs created standards that survived long after their initial realizatian. Every subsequent design in the same area—for a button console, a kettle, an advertising brochure, a factory, ar a company housing estate—is unavoidably a statement af agreement ar disagreement with Behrens's prototype. For praaf af Behrens's lasting influence it is sufficient to laok at the young men standing at the windows of his studia in the memorable phatograph shawn in appendix B. In our attempt to reconstruct this important experiment, we turned to those manifestos, documents, and commentaries in which Behrens's industrial and domestic architecture, his graphics, and his product designs were described. His work for the AEG deserves to be recalled for its "graceful beauty" as well as far its social and histarical significance. This task of recanstructian depended not only an the interpretative ability of the authors, but also on the collection, identification, and preservation of abjects that once were produced in large numbers but now are nearly extinct. The museums, with the exception of the Science Museum in London, do not collect these relics. Indeed, more is known about the creations of the ceramic industry in Periclean Athens than about the design of electrical appliances in Wilhelmine Berlin. It was this contrast between the number and diversity af the appliances produced and their rarity today that convinced us that it would be desirable to reconstruct the original range of products as completely as possible. The exhibition held at the Internationale Design Zentrum in Berlin at the suggestion of François Burkhardt, and the accompanying catalog, assembled the surviving fragments of Behrens's work for the AEG. The quality of this wark was confirmed by the camparison drawn in the exhibition between the AEG products and those of rival firms. Although na baok an twentieth-century art is complete without the AEG turbine factory and a Behrens-designed arc lamp, the subject to which this baok is dedicated does nat belong, by its very nature, to the art historians. Behrens's work far the AEG toak him into the diverse realms of the civil, the production, and the electrical engineer, the advertising manager, and the businessman. In order to reconstruct Behrens's majar contribution to twentieth-century architecture and design, one must risk a hazardous tightrope walk over pitfalls and difficulties that have nothing to do with art history, even in its most liberal definition. The competence with which my fellaw authors have written on specific aspects of the general theme underlines my complete lack af technical expertise. However, it wauld scarcely be possible to research all aspects of the topic fully, even with the help af more experts. To combat our uneasiness, we offer the documentation and the annotated catalog. This book came into being through the help of many individuals and institutions. It is not the work of one author, and it demands a long list of grateful acknowledgments. Particular thanks are due to Petra Behrens, the daughter of Peter and Lilli Behrens, for her generous help throughout my research. AEG-Telefunken gave us free access to the factories on the Brunnenstrasse and the library on the Hohenzollerndamm. A thousand glass negatives documenting the AEG's building activity and products up to 1914 were found in an attic at Brunnenstrasse. Similarly, a hundred or so booklets, which make up a fairly complete set of Behrens's advertising brochures, were preserved in the cellar of the Hohenzollerndamm library. Mr. Toepfer, the librarian, was able to rescue these remnants shortly before the remainder of the archival material was removed from the head office on the Karl-Friedrich-Ufer in 1945. I do not regard this material as definitely lost. AEG-Telefunken's unrestricted permission to publish these documents provided the basis for the present book. The astonished skepticism with which the management of the AEG viewed our claims to competence in this area ultimately proved to be a great stimulus. For promoting our work in this way, we would like in particular to thank Messrs. von der Osten-Sacken, Bender, Fuchs, and Hahn. The Fritz Thyssen Foundation (in the person of Ernst Coenen), the Friedrich Meinecke Institute of the Freie Universität Berlin, and Berlin's Senator for Art and Education variously supported the project with direct aid, with practical assistance, and by granting a sabbatical leave for two semesters. In addition, generous hospitality and incomparable working conditions were afforded by King's College, Cambridge. Only at the Freie Universität Berlin after 1968 could an essentially sane art historian have hit upon the idea of recasting his former research on the royal gold of the Holy Roman Empire in the bourgeois brass and proletarian iron of mass production in Wilhelmine Germany. However, the 'mania for gadgets" of which Rathenau speaks had already been imparted to me by my teachers Hermann Schnitzler and Erich Meyer and my friend Hans Swarzenski. The book developed out of a seminar held in the Department of Art History at the Freie Universität Berlin in the winter of 1972-73; the book's constributors also came from this seminar lexcept for Fritz Neumeyer, from the Technische Universität Berlin). Credit for the homogeneity of this account of the AEG-Behrens project is due to Henning Rogge, who in over three years of joint work helped to piece the text together out of a series of disorganized lecture notes, seminar papers, and occasional contributions to Festschriften. In addition to making contributions to the text, Gabriele Heidecker and Karin Wilhelm played a major part in the creation of the book, and Sabine Bohle and Fritz Neumeyer willingly offered the relevant sections of their own dissertations. By setting a date for the exhibition, François Burkhardt also set one for the book. Heinz Peters, our German publisher, supervised its realization with an enthusiasm that enabled him to visualize the end product before even a single line had been written. He also dealt nobly with the difficulties of working with several authors at once. My secretary in Berlin, Veronika von Below, ensured that my research was given strict priority, and, together with Renate Klotz, my Bonn secretary, typed the many versions of the manuscript. For their help, information, and references, we authors thank Ernst Busche, Berlin; Thomas Deecke, Berlin; Hans Fürstenberg, Geneva; Princess Margaret of Hesse and Rhein, Wolfsgarten; Hans-Jürgen Imiela, Mainz; Ulrich Kerkhoff, Bonn; Christiane and Jürgen Klebs, Berlin; Jürgen Krause, Berlin; Marie-Agnes von Puttkamer, Bonn; Gert Schiff, New York; Carl Schmitt, Plettenberg; Ernst Schulin, Freiburg; Messrs. Bandzia, Drinkel, and Galtz, Kraftwerk Unian, Berlin; Messrs. Neumann, Obst, and Schädel, AEG-Telefunken, Brunnenstrasse, Berlin; Mr. Salbach, Berlin, wha after 1925 was respansible for the outstanding exhibitians maunted by the AEG; Mr. Mankawius, BEWAG, Berlin; Mr. Matschke, HEW Museum, Hamburg; Bodo Herzag, Gutehaffnungshütte Archive, Oberhausen; Klaus Popitz, Kunstbibliathek, Stiftung Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin; Wilhelm Weber, Pfalzgalerie, Kaiserslautern; J. H. Müller and A. C. Funk, Karl Ernst Osthaus Museum, Hagen; Messrs. Berninger and Heitmeier, Deutsches Museum, Munich; the Periadicals Department af the Deutsche Staatsbibliothek, East Berlin; the Institut für Zeitungsforschung, Dortmund; the Klingspar Museum, Offenbach; and the Kaiser Wilhelm Museum, Krefeld. I dedicate my share in this book to my wife, Daphne Buddensieg. ## Notes 1. Alfred Rosenberg, "Krisis und Neugeburt Europos" (lecture, Milan, 1932), in Blut und Ehre, Reden und Aufsätze 1919–1933, seventeenth edition (Munich, 1938), p. 297 [see olso Blut und Ehre, twelfth edition (Munich, 1942), Il, p. 142]. Here Rosenberg, citing Nietzsche, colls the industriol oge "the coorsest form of life one could imogine.' 2. Leo Kofler, Der asketische Eras. Industriekultur und Idealagie (Vienno, Fronkfurt, ond Zurich, 1967), p. 284. 3. Korl Morx, "Das Elend der Philasaphie," in Die Frühschriften, ed. Siegfried Landshut (Stuttgort, 1955), p. 491. 4. Fronz Blei, Männer und Masken (Berlin, 1930), p. 260. 5. Fritz Meyer-Schönbrunn, Peter Behrens (Hagen ond Dortmund, 1913), p. 3. 6. Joseph August Lux, Das neue Kunstgewerbe in Deutschland (Leipzig, 1908), p. 250. ESSAYS