# Early Stirrings Reasoning, says Schopenhauer, is of feminine nature: it can give only after it has received. Without information on what is going on in time and space the brain cannot work. However. if the purely sensory reflections of the things and events of the outer world occupied the mindin their raw state the information would be of little help. The endless spectacle of ever new particulars might stimulate but would not instruct us. Nothing we can learn about an individual thing is of use unless we find generality in the particular. Evidently then the mind. in order to cope with the world. must fulfill two functions. It must gather information and it must process it. The two functions are neatly separate in theory, but are they in practice? Do they divide the sequence of the process into mutually exclusive domains as do the functions of the woodcutter, the lumber yard. and the cabinetmaker, or those of the silkworm, the weaver. and the tailor? Such a sensible division of labor would make the workings of the mind easy to understand. Or so it seems. Actually, as I shall have occasion to show. the collaboration of perceiving and thinking in cognition would be incomprehensible if such a division existed. 1 shall suggest that only because perception gathers types of things, that is, concepts. can perceptual material be used for thought; and inversely, that unless the stuff of the senses remains present the mind has nothing to think with. ## Perception torn from thinking Nevertheless we find ourselves saddled with a popular philosophy that insists on the division. Not that anybody denies the need of sensory raw material. The Sensualist philosophers have reminded us forcefully that nothing is in the intellect which was not previously in the senses. However, even they considered the gathering of perceptual data to be unskilled labor, indispensable but inferior. The business of creating concepts, accumulating knowledge, connecting. separating, and inferring was reserved to the "higher" cognitive functions of the mind. which could do their work only by withdrawing from all perceivable particulars. From medieval philosophers, suchas Duns Scotus, the rationalists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries derived the notion that the messages of the senses are confused and indistinct and that it takes reasoning to clarify them. Ironically enough. Alexander Baumgarten, who gave the new discipline of aesthetics its name by asserting that perception. just as reasoning, could attain a state of perfection. continued nevertheless the tradition of describing perception as the inferior of the two cognitive powers because it supposedly lacked the distinctness that comes only from the superior faculty of reasoning. This view was not limited to the theory of psychology. It had application and support in the traditional exclusion of the fine arts from the Liberal Arts. The Liberal Arts, so named because they were the only ones worthy of being practiced by a free man, dealt with language and mathematics. Specifically. Grammar. Dialectic. and Rhetoric were the arts of words; Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and Music were based on mathematics. Painting and sculpture were among the Mechanical Arts, which required labor and craftsmanship. The high esteem of music and the disdain of the fine arts derived, of course. from Plato, who in his Republic had recommended music for the education of heroes because it made human beings partake in the mathematical order and harmony of the cosmos, located beyond the reach of the senses; whereas the arts, and particularly painting. were to be treated with caution because they strengthened man's dependence onillusory images. Today, the prejudicial discrimination between perception and thinking is still with us. We shall find it in examples from philosophy and psychology. Our entire educational system continues to be based on the study of words and numbers. In kindergarten, to be sure, our youngsters learn by seeing and handling handsome shapes, and invent their own shapes on paper or in clay by thinking through perceiving. But with the first grade of elementary school the senses begin to lose educational status. More and more the arts are considered as a training in agreeable skills, as entertainment and mental release. As the ruling disciplines stress more rigorously the study of words and numbers, their kinship with the arts is increasingly obscured, and the arts are reduced to a desirable supplement; fewer and fewer hours of the week can be spared from the study of the subjects that, in everybody's opinion, truly matter. By the time the competition for college placement becomes acute, it is a rare high school that insists on reserving for the arts the time needed to make their practice at all fruitful. Rarer still is the institution at which a concern with the arts is consciously justified by the realization that they contribute indispensably to the development of a reasoning and imaginative human being. This educational blackout persists in college, where the art student is considered as pursuing separate and intellectually inferior skills, although any "major" in one of the more reputable academic areas is encouraged to find "healthy recreation" in the studio during some of his spare hours. The arts for which the bachelor and the master are certified do not yet include the creative exercise of the eyes and hands as an acknowledged component of higher education. The arts are neglected because they are based on perception, and perception is disdained because it is not assumed to involve thought. In fact, educators and administrators cannot justify giving the arts an important position in the curriculum unless they understand that the arts are the most powerful means of strengthening the perceptual component without which productive thinking is impossible in any field of endeavor. The neglect of the arts is only the most tangible symptom of the widespread unemployment of the senses in every field of academic study. What is most needed is not more aesthetics or more esoteric manuals of art education but a convincing case made for visual thinking quite in general. Once we understand in theory, we might try to heal in practice the unwholesome split which cripples the training of reasoning power. Historians can tell us how this curious distinction originated and how it persisted through the ages. On the Hebrew side of our tradition, the story of a long hostility against graven images begins with the destruction of a piece of sculpture, that golden calf which Moses burnt in the fire, and ground to powder. and strewed upon the water. and made the children of Israel drink of it. To trace the whole story in this book would mean to rewrite a major part of the history of European philosophy. I shall limit myself to a few examples of how the problem was reflected in the writings of some Greek thinkers. ## The senses mistrusted At early stages of refinement, the human mind tends to take psychological phenomena for physical things or events. Thus the split 1 am talking about was located by the early thinkers not in the mind but in the outside world. The Pythagoreans believed that there was a difference in principle between the realm of the heavens and existence onearth. The course of the stars was permanent, predictable in the lawful recurrence of the Same. Simply shaped bodies rotated along geometrically perfect paths. It was a world governed by basic numerical ratios. However, the sublunar world, in which the mortals dwelt, was the disorderly setting of unpredictable changes. Was it the purity of the shapes and the reliability of the events observed in astronomy and mathematics that made the Pythagoreans conceive of a dichotomy between the heavenly and the terrestrial worlds? Were they still under the influence of the notion, found in primitive thinking everywhere, that the happenings in nature and human existence are governed by individual causes rather than by general laws? But the Greek philosophers of the sixth century were not primitives, and they did possess the concept of lawful order in their astronomy. Nor can it be said that the world of the senses presents itself inevitably as a spectacle of disorder and irrationality. For example, the Chinese thinkers of the taoistic and the yin-yang schools at roughly the same time and perhaps at a similar stage of their culture saw the world of the senses pervaded throughout by the interplay of cosmic forces, which ruled the stars and the seasons as well as the smallest thing and action on earth. Faulty conduct could produce discord and strife, but the infant was born nearest to the Tao, and underlying human fumbling there was the law of All. Thus, Arthur Waley writes in his book on the Tao Te King: The wheelwright. the carpenter. the butcher. the bowman. the swimmer, achieve their skill not by accumulating facts concerning their art, nor by the energetic use either of muscles or outward senses. but through utilizing the fundamental kinship which. underneath apparent distinctions and diversities, unites their own Primal Stuff to the Primal Stuff of the medium in which they work. Even in the West, however, the separation of the physical world into two qualitatively different realms did not prevail. Eventually, the visible difference between the calculable order of the heavens and the endless variety of earthly shapes and events was imputed to the instruments of observation, namely, to the human senses, which provided the information. Perhaps what the eyes reported was not true. After all, Parmenides, the Eleatic philosopher, had insisted that there was no change or movement in the world although everybody saw the opposite. This meant that sensory experience was a deceptive illusion. Parmenides called for a definite distinction between perceiving and reasoning, for it was to reasoning that one had to look for the correction of the senses and the establishment of the truth: For never shall this be proved, that things that are not are; but do thou hold back thy thought from this way of enquiry, nor let custom, born of much experience, force thee to let wander along this road thy aimless eye, thy echoing ear or thy tongue; but do thou judge by reason the strife-encompassed proof that 1 have spoken. Examples were easily found to show that perception could be misleading. A stick dipped into water lookedbroken, a distant object looked small; a person ill with jaundice saw things yellow. Democritus had taught that since honey tasted bitter to some, sweet to others, there were no such things as bitter and sweet in themselves. The sensations of warm and cold or of color existed only by convention whereas in reality there was nothing but atoms and the void. Emphasis on the unreliability of the senses served the Sophists to support their philosophical skepticism. But it surely helped at the same time to establish the notion of an undivided physical world, united by natural law and order. The chaotic variety of the terrestrial world could now be attributed to a subjective misreading. Undoubtedly,Western civilization has greatly profited from the distinction between the objectively existing world and the perception of it. It is a distinction that established the difference between the physical and the mental. It was the beginning of psychology. Psychology, as it came to be practiced, has cautioned us not to identify innocently the world we perceive with the world that "really" is; but it has done so at the risk of undermining our trustful familiarity with the reality in which we are at home. The first great psychologists of the West, after all, were the Sophists. The Greek thinkers were subtle enough not to simply condemn sensory experience but to distinguish between the wise and the unwise use of it. The criterion for how to evaluate perception was supposed to come from reasoning. Heraclitus had warned that "barbarian souls"cannot correctly interpret the senses: "Evil witnesses are eyes and ears for men, if they have souls that do not understand their language." Thus, the split overcome in the conception of the physical world was now introduced into that of the mind. Just as the realm of order and truth had been beyond the range of life on earth, so it was now beyond the realm of the senses in the geography of the inner world. Sensory perception and reasoning were established as antagonists, in need of each other but different from each other in principle. By no means, however, were the Greek philosophers unaware of the problem this distinction created. They were unwilling to exalt reason dogmatically at the price of deprecating the senses. Democritus seems to have faced the dilemma most directly. He distinguished the "dark" cognition of the senses from the "bright" or genuine cognition by reasoning but had the senses address reason scornfully as follows: "Wretched mind, do you, who get your evidence from us, yet try to overthrow us? Our overthrow will be your downfall." ## Plato of two minds In Plato's dialogues, an ambiguous attitude expresses itself in two quite different approaches which coexist uneasily. According to one of them, the stable entities of objective existence are approached by what we would call logical operations. The wise man surveys and connects widely scattered forms (ideas) of things and discerns intuitively the generic character they have in common. Once he has collected these forms he also distinguishes them from each other by defining the particular nature of each. We note that, according to Plato, this procedure calls for more than the skill of manipulating concepts. The common character is not found by induction. that is. by mechanically tracking down elements shared by all species and by subsequently compounding these elements to a new whole. Rather, in order to find it one must discern the totality of that generic form in each particular idea, as one makes out a figure in an unclear image. Furthermore, this operation refers to generic forms only, not to the particularinstances perceived by the senses. There remains the question of how these forms come to be known since sensory experiences can deceive us. Plato's attempt to arrive at stable generalities through logical thought operations is complemented and perhaps contradicted by his deep belief in the wisdom of direct vision. Here, then, we have a second approach, which is expressed in the parable of the underground den. The prisoners, formerly limited to the sight of the passing shadows, are "released and disabused of their error." They are made to look at the objects of true reality and they are dazzled by them as though by a strong light. Gradually they become accustomed to facing and accepting them. When Plato tells this story of initiation he is not merely speaking figuratively. The grasp of reality by direct vision is concretely acknowledged in the doctrine of anamnesis. In the Meno, Socrates demonstrates that "all enquiry and all learning are but recollection." The soul, being immortal and having been born many times and having seen all things that exist, whether in this world or in the world below. has knowledge of them all; and it is no wonder that she should be able to call to remembrance all that she ever knew about virtue, and about everything; for as all nature is akin, and the soul has learned all things, there is no difficulty in her eliciting, or as men say learning, out of a single recollection all the rest. . . Plato is not speaking here of what he usually means by "knowing from experience." He speaks of "gazing upon truth," that is, "the very being with which true knowledge is concerned: the colorless, formless, intangible essence, visible only to mind, the pilot of the soul." This is purified perception of purified objects–but it is perception nevertheless. In the Phaido, Socrates speaks characteristically of blindness, of "losing the eye of his mind" when he warns against the danger of trusting the senses. It is a case of renouncing one kind of perception in order to save another. One hardly furthers one's understanding of Plato's position if one tries to eliminate the "contradiction" between his two approaches. The modern reader can soften his uneasiness by assuming that the dilemma derives from the difference between the views of Plato himself and those of Socrates, his protagonist; or that Plato's convictions shifted in the course of his life; or that he spoke of direct vision not literally but only metaphorically. Such attempts to adapt the Greek philosopher to the tidy alternatives of modern thinking can only obscure our understanding of this complex figure—a man impressed by a first glimpse of the power of logical manipulations and affected by the suspicion against the senses while at the same time close enough to the primary experience of knowing by seeing. It is not necessary for our purpose to decide to what extent the split in Plato's view of the world was still Pythagorean, that is, ontological and to what extent it was already psychological in the manner of Protagoras, the Sophist. Did Plato hold that the individual objects accessible to the senses are in themselves "imperfect," that is, inconstant, unreliable, and therefore responsible for the inferiority of the images received through the senses? Or did he believe that the stability of the objectively existing archetypes reaches all the way down to those particular entities from which the senses derive their information and that the deplorable distortion of reality occurs only in the process of perception? Whichever the answer, what matters is that the mistrust of ordinary perception marks Plato's philosophy profoundly. He went so far as to exclude the sensory images entirely from the hierarchy that leads from the broadest generalities to the tangible particulars. The tree of logical differentiations ended, for him, at the level of the species. The sensory images were dim reflections outside of the system of reality. In order to profit from what the senses offer one had to follow the example of the mathematicians, who make use of the visible shapes and reason about them although "they are thinking not of these but of the ideas which they resemble." True vision is described in a passage in which it is referred to as an illustration of how the soul should behave toward the Supreme Good: And the soul is like the eye: when resting upon that on which truth and being shine, the soul perceives and understands and is radiant with intelligence: but when turned towards the twilight of becoming andperishing. then she has opinion only. and goes blinking about. and is first of one opinion and then of another, and seems to have no intelligence. ## Aristotle from below and from above A similarly complex attitude towards sensory experience is found in Aristotle's thinking. On the one hand it is he who introduces the notion of induction-in the modern sense of knowledge gained through the collection of individual instances. There are animals. he says, who can remember what their senses have perceived. and among these animals there are some species endowed with the "power of systematizing" sensory experiences as they recur frequently. This systematizing, he says, operates like the stopping of a rout during a battle: first one man makes a stand and then another, until the original formation has been restored. Through induction. then, which "proceeds through an enumeration of all the cases." we arrive at the conception of the higher genera by means of abstraction. Abstraction removes the more particular attributes of the more specific instances and thereby arrives at the higher concepts, which are poorer in content but broader in range. This sounds familiar and modern enough. It introduces the notion of abstraction as involving an increasing distance from immediate experience. It supplies the emptied generalizations which have made modern science possible. These generalizations limit themselves to what all instances of a family of cases have in common and ignore everything else. They are the very opposite of the Platonic genera, which become fuller and richer the higher they are located in the hierarchy of "ideas." Yet to see in Aristotle nothing but the progenitor of modern scientific abstraction would be most misleading. His curious example of the battle rout is significant enough. It describes induction as the restoration of an "original formation," that is, as a way of attaining access to a pre-existing entity, to which the individual cases relate as do the parts to a whole. It is true that Aristotle was the first thinker to recognize that substance is nowhere but in individual objects. He thereby furnished the basis for our knowledge that nothing exists beyond individual existences. However, the individual case was by no means abandoned to its particular uniqueness, from which only generalizing thought could redeem it. Immediately after describing the procedure of induction Aristotle writes the remarkable sentence: When one of a number of logically indiscriminable particulars has made a stand. the earliest universal is present in the soul: for though the act of sense-perception is of the particular. its content is universal-is man, for example. not the man Callias. In other words, there is no such thing as the perception of the individual object in the modern sense. "Perception as a faculty." Aristotle says elsewhere, "is of 'the such' and not merely of a 'this somewhat.'"i.e., we always perceive, in the particulars, kinds of thing, general qualities, rather than uniqueness. Therefore, although under certain conditions events can be understood only when their repeated experience leads to generalization by induction, there are alsoinstances in which one act of vision suffices to terminate our enquiry because we have "elicited the universal from seeing." We see the reason of what we are trying to understand "at the same time in each instance and intuit that it must be so in all instances."This is the wisdom of the universale in re, as it was to be called later, the universal given within the particular object itself-a wisdom which our own theorizing is struggling to recover in its concern with Wesensschau, i.e., the direct perception of essences. Aristotle is rightly credited with having impressed the need for empirical research upon the occidental mind. But this demand is correctly understood only if one remembers at the same time that he saw this approach "from below" as only one side of the task, to be complemented symmetrically by the opposite approach "from above." Abstraction must be complemented with definition. which is the determination of a concept by deriving it deductively from the higher genus and pinpointing it through its distinguishing attribute (differentia). In fact, when Aristotle talked about thinking he referred to the syllogism, that is, to the art of making a statement on a particular case by consulting a higher generality. This again was deduction. Characteristically enough, in the nineteenth century the syllogism was accused of begging the question by presenting as a new piece of knowledge what was already contained in the major premise. This accusation presupposed that the generality of the major premise had come about through induction, that is, the diligent collection of all individual instances, of which indeed the case of the minor premise would have been one. We can be confident that Aristotle's acute mind would have spotted such a flaw himself. If the difficulty did not arise it is probably because for him the universal (that which is of such a nature as to be predicated of many subjects") was not necessarily derived from those many subjects by collection. For instance, using a physician to illustrate his point. Aristotle states that if he "has the theory without the experience, and recognizes the universal but does not know the individual included in this, he will often fail to cure."With all due respect for induction, the universal was "what is always and everywhere." and the term cath'holour (catholic). which Aristotle used. was based on a root signifying “whole" and carried no connotation of a sum of particulars. This was still thoroughly Platonic, of course; but Aristotle went beyond Plato in demanding a more active relation between ideas and sensible things, between universals and particulars. In Plato's version of this relation, the immutable entities and sensory appearance had coexisted rather statically. Aristotle asserted that in order for any perceivable object to come about a universal had to impress itself upon the medium or substance, which in itself was shapeless and inert, except for its desire to be thus impressed. This generative process by which the possible form acquired actual existence was called by Aristotle entelechy. a word which implied the bringing about of a state of perfection. It was a thought that gave a new vitality to the ontological status of the universals. They became creators. The world of substantial objects was generated as a sculptor imposes shape upon inert matter, and the perceivable things contained the universals not only through the intuition of the observer but embodied them actually, through the nobility of their birth. This is not to say that Aristotle simply returned to the senses a dignity which Plato had taken away from them. The "static coexistence" of the transcendental ideas and sensory appearance in Plato's doctrine was after all a relation between prototype and image, imperfect though the image was considered to be. This relation was, to some extent, replaced by the genetic connection which Aristotle postulated between universals and particulars-a connection which did not deny the image function of sensory appearance but made it less exclusive. The son is the product of the father, not merely his effigy. Aristotle not only established the universal as the indispensable condition of the individual thing's existence and as the very character of the perceivable object; in doing so he also rejected and avoided the arbitrary choice of the attributes that can serve as the basis of a generalization when induction is intended in its strict, mechanical sense. Strictly, any common attribute, relevant or not, could be used for this purpose if the generalization depended simply on similarities which someone happened to discover and single out. Instead, the generality within the particular case was to Aristotle an objectively determined fact. The qualities an object shared with others of its kind were not an incidental similarity but the very essence of the object. What was general in an individual was the form impressed upon it by its genus. Therefore, this generality was not defined as what the individual shared with others but as what "mattered" about it. The double meaning of our word "matter" is significantlypresent in Aristotle's thought: matter is that which matters. Or, to use another term often resorted to by the translators, "substance" is that which is "the substance of" a thing, its essence. Being, then, was not defined-the way we are taught to do it-as a property of just anything endowed with material substantiality. An object existed only to the extent of its essence since the being of the object was nothing but what had been impressed upon the amorphous raw material by its form-giving genus. The object's accidental properties were mere impurities, the inevitable contribution of the raw material. The form lost some of its purity by embodying itself; but the resulting impurities did not belong to the being of the object. They did not matter. This noble conception is not usable for us in its metaphysical formulation. But most relevant is the basic experience and conviction which it expresses. Aristotle asserts that an object is real to us through its true and lasting nature, not through its accidental, changeable properties. Its universal character is directly perceived in it as its essence rather than indirectly collected through the search of common elements in the various specimens of a species or genus. And when a perceptual generalization is to be made, it can only be done by recognizing the common essence of the specimens. Shared accidentals cannot serve as the basis for a genus. Although the Greek philosophers conceived the dichotomy of perceiving and reasoning, it cannot be said that they applied this notion with the rigidity the doctrine assumed in recent centuries of Western thought. The Greeks learned to distrust the senses, but they never forgot that direct vision is the first and final source of wisdom. They refined the techniques of reasoning, but they also believed that, in the words of Aristotle, "the soul never thinks without an image."