3. ## The Intelligence of Visual Perception [ii] Visual perception, I tried to show, is not a passive recording of stimulus material but an active concern of the mind. The sense of sight operates selectively. The perception of shape consists in the application of form categories, which can be called visual concepts because of their simplicity and generality. Perception involves problem solving. Next I shall discuss a somewhat more subtle perceptual operation. The size of a retinal projection varies, as I noted earlier, with the distance of the physical stimulus object from the observer. Therefore, as far as the object by itself is concerned, the distance dimension distorts the information. For example, an object actually maintaining its size may be reported to the eye as changing it during movement. The same is true for shape. The retinal projection of an object varies depending on itslocation relative to the observer. There are other such perceptual modifications. The brightness and the color of an object depend in part on the brightness and color of the source illuminating it and on the spatial location of the object relative to light source and observer. ## Subtracting the context The mind meets here, at an elementary level, a first instance of the general cognitive problem that arises because everything in this world presents itself in context and is modulated by that context. When the image of an object changes, the observer must know whether the change is due to the object itself or to the context or to both, otherwise he understands neither the object nor its surroundings. Intertwined' though the two appear, one can attempt to tease them apart, especially by watching the same object in different contexts and the same context acting on different objects. The object under observation must. then, be abstracted from its context. This can be done in two fundamentally different ways. The observer may wish to peel off the context in order to obtain the object as it is and as it behaves by itself, as though it existed in complete isolation. This may seem to be the only possible way of performing an abstraction. However, the observer may also wish to find out about the object by observing all the changes it undergoes and induces because of its place and function in its setting. Here the abstraction. while singling out the object, does not relinquish the effects of the context but relies on them for an indispensable part of the information. The two procedures serve different purposes, but for both of them it is necessary to tell object and context apart. In the psychology of perception the generally accepted view is that the mind aims at, and achieves, abstraction in the first of these two meanings. It wishes to peel off all the influences of the context, and it succeeds in doing so. In spite of retinal variations and environmental influences, the mind's image of the object is constant, at least approximately so: the object has and maintains its ownand only-size, shape, brightness, color. There seems to be widespread agreement on this, although there is some controversy on how the feat is accomplished. Nevertheless this view is quite restricted and one-sided. Granted, it is of the greatest practical importance that constant things should be seen as constant and that change should be attributed to them only when they themselves do the changing. This is evidently true for the size of objects. Since biological orientation requires a stable world in which objects preserve their identity, the organism profits greatly from abstracting a true or constant size from the bewildering variety of projected sizes. There is, however, more than one way of fulfilling this need. Most of the psychological discussions have started from the notion of what 1, too. just called "the bewildering variety of projected sizes." This, however, is a piecemeal approach, according to which any one physical object appears in the visual world as a multiplicity of separate and static images, each of a different size. If perception is assumed to start with this medley of particulars, how is "constant size" abstracted from it? Does the mind perhaps average all the projections statistically and settle for a median size? Surely not, because in that case a pad of writing paper would be seen roughly the size of a building since on the average the projections of both kinds of object occupy a similar amount of space in the visual field. In fact, all objects would converge toward one average size because, as I mentioned earlier, one tries to look at any thing from the distance at which it offers an image of convenient size, not too large and not too small. Perceived size is related rather to perceived distance. No matter how large or small the physical projection on the retina, an object will be perceived as relatively large when it is seen far away in visual space, and small when it is seen close by. However, when one scrutinizes objects in their surroundings one is not aware of performing any such adjustment of projective size to distance, and therefore the processes that establish the so-called constancy of size must be inferred. Helmholtz maintained that the effect was brought about by what he called "unconscious judgment." The primary percept, he assumed, contains all the distortions of projection, but judgment intervenes and corrects them. The theory has been attacked on three grounds. First, Helmholtz assumed that these corrections are based mainly on knowledge previously acquired and imported into the perceptual situation by the observer. This assumption seems to me untenable, but there is no need to argue the point here. Second, Helmholtz has been blamed for postulating the existence of "primary" percepts which nobody has ever experienced. This argument has lost its force since we have come to realize how much perception takes place below the level of awareness. The kind of reactive computation and correction, needed to straighten out the retinal distortions, is well within the capacity of the nervous system and rather similar to many other mechanisms that keep the organism going without conscious awareness or intervention. Third, Helmholtz's recourse to "judgment" seemed objectionable. Was it permissible to assume that the highest mental processes are involved in elementary perception? Actually, Helmholtz had no intention of intellectualizing perception. Instead he believed, very much in keeping with what 1 am trying to demonstrate here, that the kind of process observed in logical thinking occurs at the perceptual level also. “There appears to me to be in reality only a superficial difference between the 'conclusions' of logicians and those inductive conclusions of which we recognize the result in the conceptions we gain of the outer world through our sensations." ## Brightness and shape as such Most noteworthy is the awesome complexity of the cognitive processes that must be performed in order to make adequate perception possible. The properties of any part of the visual field must be seen in constant relation to corresponding properties of the field as a whole. The perceived brightness of, say, a piece of paper is derived from its place on the scale of brightness that reaches from the brightest to the darkest value visible in the field. What is being received is not an absolute but a relative value. I must repeat here what I said in discussing the perception of shape: it does not seem to me to make much difference how much of this complex feat of organization can be performed spontaneously and early in life on the basis of innate mechanisms. Quite likely it takes time to learn to see things in relation. What matters is that the cognitive process which produces the so-called constancies is of a very high order of intelligence since it must evaluate any particular entity in relation to an intricate context, and that this feat is performed as an integral part of ongoing perception. The accomplishment is spectacular enough when a given range of brightness holds good for the total field and determines the appearance of any object, regardless of where in the field it is located. Quite often, however, this range varies along a spatial gradient so that the same amount of reflected light is perceived as a relatively bright object in a dark setting in one corner of the field and a relatively dark object in a bright setting in another corner. This sort of situation is brought about by uneven illumination, for example, in a room brightly lit by a window or lamp on one side and increasingly darker at a distance from the source. Perception has to cope here, one might say, with relativity to the second degree. Perceived size, too, depends on its place on a scale, in this case a distance scale. The farther away an object is seen, the more its size counts. At the same time, the range of the distance gradient as a whole will determine the size value of each location. This range does not necessarily equal the objective and physical one; it has been shown, for example, that observers judge sizes as though the horizon were only from fifty to three hundred feet away. But whether or not the outcome is correct is a question that does not touch the intelligence of the perceptual performance. Notice here also that as distance determines size, so size determines distance. Distance in depth has no direct equivalent in the two-dimensional projection of the retinal image. The image registers only a gradient of diminishing sizes, and size is one of the factors determining depth perception. Such observation by indirection is an ingenious device, also used more consciously in order to measure the inaccessible through some correlated variable, for example, in physics, when temperature is measured by the length of a mercury column. In the retinal projection, then, the image of an object derives from the contributions of the physical object itself as well as from those of the object's environment, an important part of which is the observer. The two components, united in the image, can be separated in perception because, and to the extent to which, context as well as object are organized wholes rather than mere conglomerations of pieces. Only because the brightness or color values of a given context are perceived as an organized scale can the brightness or color of an object be assigned a place in it, and the same is true for the spatial gradients. Similarly, only because an object has a graspable shape in itself can this shape be distinguished from the deformations that an equally well organized system of perspective imposes upon it. The less clearly organized are the context and the object in themselves, the less clearly can they be separated perceptually. In other words, perception can abstract objects from their context only because it grasps shape as organized structure, rather than recording it as a mosaic of elements. I said earlier that there are two different ways of describing the outcome of a perceptual abstraction. So far I have treated the socalled constancies as though perception stripped the object of the "contaminations" to which it is subjected by its surroundings, and showed it in isolation. According to such a description, the object is reduced to its invariants, the context and its effects drop out of sight, and constancy means invariability of appearance. The great variety of shapes, sizes, brightness and color values and so on, displayed by the image in the retinal projection is supposed to be replaced by a frozen, immutable thing. To be sure, any theory must admit that originally the organism receives full information on the contextual variations of the stimulus since what is not received cannot be processed; but according to textbooks of psychology, this rich information is overruled and ignored in conscious experience as thoroughly as possible, in the interest of a stable world populated by stable objects. I suggest that such stability is compatible with a much richer perceptual experience than that envisaged by rigid "constancy."For the moment I shall use size as an example of what is also true for the other aspects of perception. First of all, the variety of object sizes is not a lawless assortment of separate items, scattered at random through space and time. On the contrary, as object and observer move around in space, the retinal projection goes through a gradual, perfectly organized modification of size, and the continuity of this process preserves the identity of the object in spite of the change of size. James J. Gibson has strongly emphasized this fact, and William H. Ittelson, following a lead of Koffka's, has pointed out that in actual experience "continuity is the rule, and constancy, as traditionally investigated, merely represents a sample picked out for study from the more general experienced continuity." In other words, the primary physical facts, from which the sense of sight takes off, are not a bewildering spread of random samples but highly consistent processes of change. What is more, the size variations of each object are not only organized within themselves but also related in an orderly fashion to other similar variations going on elsewhere in the field at the same time. For example, when the observer moves through an environment, the projective sizes of all of its constituents change in accord. The setting as a whole is subjected to a unified and consistent modification ofsize. Identity, then, does not have to be extrapolated from a random scattering of appearances. Instead, the permanent character of an object can be established when and because the setting is pervaded by orderly perceptual gradients, to which the object conforms. Now it is quite true that under ordinary living conditions the contextual modifications of the object remain largely unobserved: its size. shape, color are constant. This typical lack of awareness. however. should not be considered a universal trait inherent in the nature of perception. Instead it is, I believe, a special instance of a broader rule of cognition, according to which the generality of concepts is not differentiated beyond necessity. i.e., concepts remain as generic as their application permits. To perceive an object as immutable is to abstract it at the highest level of generality, and that level is appropriate for all those many situations in which vision is used for the purpose of handling objects physically. In the physical world the contextual modifications observed in perception either do not exist or do not matter. But a person who needs the awareness of size differences-a painter, for example-will readily leave the level of maximum generality and proceed to the necessary refinement of perception. ## Three attitudes Experimental findings on the “constancies" have not been as clearcut as the usual psychological treatment of the subject would demand. The average result for a large number of observers will indeed indicate a fairly high degree of constancy, but individual reactions vary all the way from complete, or more than complete, constancy to hardly any at all. Also, when a person is asked to change his attitude toward what he sees he tends to produce quite different results. There appear to be three attitudes. One kind of observer perceives the contribution of the context as an attribute of the object itself. He sees, more or less, what a photographic camera records, either because he stares restrictively and unintelligently at a particular target or because he makes a deliberate effort to ignore the context and to concentrate on the local effect. An example is the training needed for realistic painting. It requires that the student learn to practice "reduction," that is, to see a given color value as it would look through a narrow peephole, or the size and shape of an object as though it were flattened out on a two-dimensional plane. The difficulties met in such training show how unnatural it is to see out of context. However, if such a reductive attitude is attained, it shows a given object as changing its character when the context changes. The Impressionists tried to replace local with context-born color, so that one and the same object, e.g., the Cathedral of Reims, looked quite different depending on the direction, strength, and color of the sunlight. Under certain conditions, such reduction to appearance can make identification difficult. If I may use an example from a very different field of cognition: an observer watching an individual in various social situations may be unable to grasp the character of the person as such because of his constantly changing behavior. He cannot abstract the "local color" of the person from the influences exercised upon that person. This incapacity or unwillingness to view the character of the particular object as the product of two separate contributions must be distinguished from two other attitudes, both of which do acknowledge the separation. One of them, already mentioned, seeks to peel off the influence of the context in order to obtain the local object in its pure, unimpaired state. The resultant object is constant, except for whatever changes it initiates by itself. The observer perceives the spatial location, illumination and so on, of the object and uses this information to subtract the effect of the context from the character of the object as such. This is the "practical" attitude of everyday life. The only reason for the housewife's interest in the green light that enlivens a display of vegetables is because she needs to know that the lettuces and cabbages “as such" look rather discolored. The scientist also seeks to establish the nature of any phenomenon in itself in order to distinguish it in each practical case from the conditions surrounding it. Notice. by the way, that in these instances the abstraction of the object "as such" cannot be represented by any one practical realization. No object can show its local color without being illuminated by some light source, which has a color of its own. Physically, the weight of an object as such never exists without the presence of some gravitational condition. Only within a man-made world of fiction, conceived in such a way as to eliminate interaction-for example, in a textbook illustration, formula, or descriptive text- can the scientist show the forces emanating from the setting as separated from those inherent in the object. And in a child's drawing the trees can be a splendid green, quite independent of any influence by the yellow sun shining forth somewhere else in the picture. A view of consummated constancy created by the absence of interaction is characteristic for certain styles of art, some early, some late, whose interest is in the invariable object as such. It is characteristic also for the absolutistic approach to science. Interaction is represented as a meeting of separate. unimpaired entities. But there is another way of acknowledging the distinction between context and object, which does not aim at eliminating the effect of the setting upon the object. On the contrary, this third approach fully appreciates and enjoys the infinite and often profound and puzzling changes the object undergoes as it moves from situation to situation. In perception, the best example is found in the aesthetic attitude. The changing appearance of a landscape or building in the morning, the evening, under electric light, with different weather and in different seasons offers two advantages. It presents an extraordinary richness of sight, and it tests the nature of the object by exposing it to varying conditions. A person perceived as the dominant figure in his home, surrounded by subordinate furniture, offers an aspect of the human kind quite different from the small creatures crawling at the bottom of a city street. In a film, one may see a car or a group of persons running a gauntlet of changing lights, illuminated brightly in one moment and plunged into darkness a second later. The enlightenment one gains from such varying exposure goes beyond aesthetics. Just as the mountains of the moon can be seen only when the sunlight falls from the side and casts shadows, so the scientist is constantly on the lookout for novel situations, not because there is virtue in the collection of instances as such, but because they may reveal fresh information. What distinguishes this third attitude from the one described first? The first view has the effects of the environment hide the identity of the object in a merry chase of transformations; the third sees the object unfold its identity in a multitude of appearances. The permanence of the object, its inviolate identity, is realized by the observer of the third type with no less certainty than by the one of the second, but his approach creates concepts quite different from those envisaged in traditional logic. A concept from which everything is subtracted but its invariants leaves us with an untouched figment of high generality. Such a concept is most useful because it facilitates definition, classification, learning, and the use of learning. The object looks the same, every time it is met. Ironically, however, this eminently practical attitude leaves the person without the support of any one tangible experience since the "true" size, shape, color he perceives are never strictly supported by what his eyes show him. Also the rigidity of such constancy may make the observer blind to revelations offered by a particular context and prevent him from reacting in a manner appropriate to the particular occasion. A most common form of unintelligent behavior consists precisely in the misuse of constancy, that is, in the assumption that what was true before must be true this time. ## Keeping the context The kind of concept created by the third attitude is best suited to productive thinking. Such a concept does not suppress the differences between the various species over which it presides as a genus but keeps them present in all-embracing comprehension. Quite apart from the enjoyable richness such a conception gives to life, it also assures the artist as well as the scientist of a continuing contact with the concrete manifestations of the phenomena in which they are interested. A perceiver and thinker whose concepts are limited to the kind foreseen by traditional logic is in danger of performing in a world of paralyzed constructs. To be sure, it would be impossible to keep a great variety of manifestations under one heading unless they were held together by some sort of order. Here it should be remembered that in perception, as I said earlier, the various appearances of an object do not constitute a "bewildering variety," but come in continuous sequences. They come as gradual transformations rather than as a wildly scattered multitude of different instances. We have here a good model of the kind of order that organizes the variety of possible manifestations in concepts typical of any field of productive thinking. To use an illustration from literature: Shakespeare's Antony exhibits the contradictory behavior of a disciplined warrior and a surrendered lover. However, the contradiction exists only at the surface, as long as context and "object" are not separated. Shakespeare offers the continuous presence of a figure whose identity is not impaired but unfolded by an orderly sequence of circumstances. As Antony is observed moving among the powers that are embodied in Caesar and Cleopatra he discloses himself gradually through his reactions. so that the moment of his death is also the moment of his completed revelation. Yet, at no time do we see Antony "as such." In painting, Impressionism offers, as I said before, an extreme example of abandoned constancy. It shows local color and local brightness modulated by the influences of the color and brightness factors dominant in the situation. However, this does not mean that the painter adopts the attitude, mentioned first, of ignoring the context and forcing the mind to nail down each spot in its isolated color value. A painter could not possibly produce a meaningful image by adopting the mechanical procedure of color photography. True, the Impressionists had to free themselves from the constancy effect of "practical" vision, but not in order to reproduce the color of each spot with mechanical faithfulness. Instead, this freedom enabled a painter like Cézanne to present the identity of a mountain or tree as a lawful, even though rich modulation of color values resulting from the interaction between the object and its world. Such a presentation is as remote from overlooking the effect of the context as it is from eliminating it in favor of a uniform and perhaps stereotyped image. The difference I have in mind is illustrated by the art historian, Kurt Badt, who confronts the naturalism of the Impressionists with the realism of Symbolists, such as Gauguin or Maurice Denis: ## The abstraction of shape In more than one way, perceptual abstraction can differ from the kind described in traditional logic. Typically, it is not a matter of extracting common properties from a number of particularinstances. Neither the "true" size nor the "true" brightness or color of a perceived object is found in any one of its actual appearances. Perception points to a different notion of abstraction, a much more sophisticated cognitive operation. The perception of shape in threedimensional space illustrates this even more strikingly. As long as nothing but the distance of an object from an observer is altered, the change affects only the size of the object: it shrinks or grows but remains the same otherwise. Not so when the angle changes at which the object is perceived. In that case, shape is affected by transformations, which are generally more complex than those provided by Euclidean geometry, that is, mere translation, rotation, or reflection in space. Change of angle gets us into projective geometry. It affects the size of the angles of the object and the ratios of length; it alters all proportions. The resulting distortion is ruthless enough when the object is two-dimensional, like a flat picture on the wall. It is much worse when the changing projections of a three-dimensional object, say, a regular cube, display a varying number of side faces. The flat picture on the wall preserves at least its quadrilaterality as an invariant throughout the projective transformations. In the case of the cube, a three-dimensional object of eight corners is represented on the retina as a two-dimensional one of four or six corners. In spite of this transformation, a solid of constant shape is perceived in many of its individual projections and also when the cube turns in space or the observer moves about it. Here then is an even more radical example of an abstraction in which the abstracted components are not contained in the particular objects from which they are drawn. No one projection of the cube is the cube or contains it as a part of its properties. (The projections of the cube preserve at least the straightness of its edges as an invariant element; in less simple solids even the shape of the edges changes.) How abstraction is possible under such conditions is. at first, hard to imagine. But the difficulty is lessened when one remembers that here again the various projections of the solid are not dispersed randomly in space and time but appear as lawful sequences of gradual change. Gurwitsch has maintained that the "harmony and concordance" of the various aspects within the sequence suffice to account for the perceived constancy of shape. He enlists the gestalt principle of "good continuation," by which elements are fused in a unified whole. He goes further and makes the important observation that a particular aspect of an object contains renvois. that is, references, which point beyond the given aspect to adjoining, subsequent ones. This amounts to saying that incompleteness is an inherent characteristic of any particular aspect or appearance of an object-an assertion that holds true, in fact, for some aspects but not for others. A three-quarters profile does point to the continuation of shape beyond its visible borders, but a straight profile or front-face does it much less. Certain styles of sculpture rely heavily on renvois to emphasize continuous roundness; see, e.g., Michelangelo's remark that a figure should always be serpentlike, that is, spirally twisted. But other styles, especially archaic ones, insist on composing the figure of independent views, each complete in itself. A similar difference exists in painting, say, between an Egyptian mural, limited to straight profile and frontal views, and the gyrations of a Tintoretto. However, such perspective references are limited to making the appearance of an object more dynamic by pressing for continuation beyond the given view. They promote a coherent sequence of views, but they are not sufficient to extract from this sequence the invariant three-dimensional shape of the physical object. The views that follow each other in the sequence are fused in such a way as to appear as states of one and the same persisting thing, but the percept does not necessarily maintain its invariant shape, nor need it correspond to the shape of the physical object. This can be seen in experiments by Wallach and O'Connell on the so-called kinetic depth-effect. The shadow of a rotating object projected upon a screen is perceived in some cases "correctly" as the image of a rigid object in motion. But when, for example, a rectangular block is rotated about an axis parallel to a pair of its edges, subjects see on the screen a dark, flat, rectangular figure which expands and contracts periodically. Here the lawful sequence of aspects preserves the identity of the percept, which. however, undergoes protean transformations. There is no constancy, since the shape of the projected physical object is not preserved. Constancy of shape does result when the various aspects of an object can be seen as deviations from, or distortions of a simpler shape. The various two-dimensional projections of a cube are seen as a cube because that three-dimensionalsolid is the simplest, symmetrical. rectangular shape to which they can all be referred. The effect is made more compelling by the time sequence, which displays a gradual variation of the underlying invariant form. To speak of the variation of the invariant involves no paradox here. The form subjected to the distortion remains invariably perceivable even though the distortion may vary. How then is it possible to perform an abstraction without extracting common elements, identically contained in all the particular instances? It can be done when certain aspects of the particulars are perceived as deviations from, or deformations of, an underlying structure that is visible within them. In space perception, not every projection by itself fulfills this condition. The square one sees when looking head-on at a cube is not perceived as a deformation of the cube; it contains no renvois, However, when such a view is embedded within a sequence of other views, it will acquire the character of a deformation by the context and by its relations to its neighbors in the sequence. In the same way, the behavior of a person in a particular situation may not appear, in itself. as the deformation of a simpler. underlying structure; here again the context of other situations may be needed to bring out the character of the particular one. Needless to say, this type of abstraction is a cognitive performance of high complexity. It requires a mind that, in perceiving a thing. is not limited to the view it receives at a given moment but is able to see the momentary as an integral part of a larger whole, which unfolds in a sequence. William Hogarth has observed that "in the common way of taking the view of an opaque object, that part of its surface which fronts the eye is apt to occupy the mind alone, and the opposite, nay even every other part of it whatever, is left unthought of at a time: and the least motion we make to reconnoitre any other side of the object, confounds our first idea, for want of the connection of the two ideas, which the complete knowledge of the whole would naturally have given us, if we had considered it in the -other way before." Actually, this handicap is found not so much in the "common way" but in painters mistrained to restrict their attention to what their eyes see from one particular point of view. But although the feat of realizing that a thing has many sides to it and of perceiving each partial aspect as an appearance of the whole is quite common, one must not fail to notice how much true intelligence it involves-an intelligence often left unequalled at higher levels of mental functioning. The persistence of shape. just as that of size, color, etc., may be perceived in either of the two ways described above. A table top is seen as a rectangle, but the average person is not aware of the perspective deviations from which he abstracts. This is so because the initial generality of a visual concept will be differentiated only to the extent to which the purposes of the observer demand it. In the practice of daily life it is useful to see the table as an independent entity and to use the perspective aspects of the image only as indicators of the object's location relative to the observer. This practice is reflected in early stages of art, which reproduce the objective. permanent shape of objects as closely as the medium permits; a cube may be drawn as a square or with the oblique but parallel edges of isometric perspective. A richer perception observes and enjoys the enchanting and enlightening variety of projectively changing shape. The visual concept of the cube embraces the multiplicity of its appearances, the foreshortenings, the slants, the symmetries and asymmetries, the partial concealments and the deployments, the head-on flatness and the pronounced volumes. This more complex experience is reflected also in art, be it in rather faithful renderings of perspective effects or in the freer interpretations of the shape of tables, chairs, or buildings in Cubist painting. Here the portrayal of the object serves to depict such aspects of human experience as the variations of character revealed by context, the charms of the fugitive moment, the distortions under pressure. ## Distortion calls for abstraction Two further observations may help to illustrate some characteristics of abstraction in more general ways. First, the projective distortions not only permit the discovery of the prototype inherent within them; they call for it actively. Projection produces not a static deviation but a dynamic distortion, which is perceived as animated by a tension directed towards the simpler form from which it deviates. The projection looks "pulled out of shape." More generally this means that an abstraction is not simply drawn from a perhaps recalcitrant object but "found" in the object, which calls for the abstraction. A diamond-shaped parallelogram is seen as a leaning rectangle. To abstract the rectangle from it means to comply with the request of the object, which wishes to be straightened out; to leave the rectangle under its precarious pressure may satisfy. however, a need of tension, distortion, drama. Second, the distorting features are perceived not only negatively as an impurity, which interferes with the true form of the invariant object; they are also seen positively as the effect of a condition that overlays the true shape of the object. The effect is understood as the logical consequence of the object's position in space relative to the observer. The perspective distortion of the cube is seen as a geometrically simple slanting or convergence of its invariant shape, and the lawfulness of this imposed modification makes it possible for the mind to distinguish between what belongs to the object's shape per se and what is due to the projective distortion. Similarly, distortions inherent in a physical object itself are sometimes perceived as meaningful. The deviation from symmetry in the shape of a tree may not be seen simply as a random imperfection but as an understandable effect of the tree's environment. The stunting of the symmetry is read visually as the work of a foreign, invading force, and the evident lawfulness of the imposition facilitates its separation from the equally lawful symmetry, which is perceived as the potential, "intended" shape of the tree. Similarly, a depraved person may appear to be inhuman. To understand such a person requires. first of all, the ability to see him not as an alien monster but as a distortion of human nature. The abstraction involved in detecting human nature in this disguise is facilitated. and understanding is enhanced. when the distortion is seen positively as the effect of definable interferences, such as social forces of deprivation and humiliation. In such cases also, to abstract does not mean simply to detect and isolate, in the depraved specimen, the invariable entity. "human nature." All aspects of that nature-love, pity, hope. devotion-may have been perverted. They cannot simply be extricated. Instead. the person's behavior must become perceivable as a distortion of the standard called "normal human behavior." And here again the perception of the distortion is not static. The call for rectification, that is. the demand to do something about the situation. is an intrinsic component of the distortion's very appearance. ## Permanence and change I hope I have sueceeded in showing that to distinguish an object from the afflictions of its appearances is an awe-inspiring cognitive accomplishment. And yet, the examples I gave are only of the very simplest kind. The more complex the shape of the object, the harder the perceptual task of extricating it, and the same is true when the influences of the environmental factors are less simple than those to which I have referred. One most powerful complication needs at least to be mentioned. The objects of perception are not necessarily rigid; they move, bend, twist, turn. swell, shrink, light up. or change their color. Here the task of perception is broadened in more than one way. It is often necessary, first of all. to see the physical changes of the object as deviations from a norm shape, e.g., when the various motions of the human hand and its mobile fingers are understood perceptually as variations of that star-shaped organ known to the eyes as the hand. It may be equally necessary to see an object as a coherent happening or process, for example, when the growth of a plant is watched in an accelerated-motion film or when a bubble grows and explodes. Naturally, these objective, inherent changes of size, shape, and so on, enormously complicate the task of visually distinguishing them from the changes due to the location of the observer and other effects of context. Although performed with such ease in everyday practice, the perceptual abstractions needed for these tasks reveal a bewildering intricacy when their components are analyzed. The labors of vision create the view of a world in which persistence and change act as eternal antagonists. Changes are perceived as mere accidentals of underlying persistent identity: but perception also reveals constancy as the shortsighted look of change. Windelband, in his introduction to a discussion of Greek thought, says: "The observation that the things of experience change into each other spurred the earliest philosophical considerations." Visual perception supplied philosophers looking for permanence with evidence of the arche, the world substance beneath the variability of material things, "which suffers these changes and is the origin from which all particular things spring and into which they retransform themselves." Perception likewise offered visible proof that all things are in a flux of constant modification. Neither of these views could have arisen if sense were not intelligent enough to extricate the lasting from the changing and to perceive the immobile as a phase of mobility.