# What Abstraction Is Not We need and want to rebuild the bridge between perception and thinking. I have tried to show that perception consists in the grasping of relevant generic features of the object. Inversely, thinking, in order to have something to think about, must be based on images of the world in which we live. The thought elements in perception and the perceptual elements in thought are complementary. They make human cognition a unitary process, which leads without break from the elementary acquisition of sensory information to the most generic theoretical ideas. The essential trait of this unitary cognitive process is that at every level it involves abstraction. Therefore the nature and meaning of abstraction must be examined with care. Our thesis is simple enough. But there is little hope that its positive aspects will be understood and accepted unless a number of misleading conceptions of abstraction are described and refuted. In its literal sense, the word abstraction is negative. It speaks of removal since the verb abstrahere means actively to draw something away from somewhere and passively to be drawn away from something. The Oxford Dictionary quotes seventeenth century usage: "The more abstract we are from the body . . . the more fit we shall be to behold divine light." An absent-minded man is "abstracted," and a person having "no idea of poverty, but in the abstract" is understood to be somebody who does not really know. Similarly, to abstract something means to take it away from somewhere, as in this example dating from 1387: "... the names of the authors of whom this present chronicle is abstract." ## A harmful dichotomy This sense of removal and detachment places an inauspicious burden on the name of this mental operation. In psychological theory, the term abstraction has frequently been taken to refer to a process that is based on sensory data but leaves them behind and abandons them totally. John Locke said that in order to abstract we take the particular ideas received from particular objects and separate them "from all other existences and the circumstances of real existence, as time, place, or any other concomitant ideas." And further: Such precise, naked appearances in the mind, without considering how, whence, or with what others they came there, the understanding lays up (with names commonly annexed to them) as the standards to rank real existence into sorts, as they agree with these patterns, and to denominate them accordingly. Even in our own time we still meet the belief that a conception, in order to be truly abstract, must be free from any perceptual collateral, which would be viewed as an impurity. For example, René Pellet, in a book intended to describe the development from the "perception of the concrete" to the "conception of the abstract," states: "We shall understand the word abstraction' in its most elevated sense when the mind is capable of conceiving outside of the concrete representations, that is, of creating without any support based on what is perceptually given or remembered." Abstraction, he says, is an organization of the mind that passes beyond the concrete and has freed itself from it. Instead of relying on sensory experience, abstract thinking was supposed to take place in words. It was believed, for example. that a creature deprived of speech could not abstract. In the passage just quoted, Locke said of animals that "the power of abstracting is not at all in them, and that the having of general ideas is that which puts a perfect distinction betwixt man and brutes." And Pellet states: "Since the deaf and dumb are limited to their gesture language, which is descriptive and chronological and applies only to concrete facts or acts they never attain the process of abstraction or generalization." The misleading dichotomy between perceiving and thinking is reflected in the practice of distinguishing "abstract" from "concrete" things as though they belonged to two mutually exclusive sets; that is, as though an abstract thing could not be concrete at the same time, and vice versa. The state of affairs is nicely illustrated by the anecdote of a child who asks his father: "What is abstract?" The father answers after some hesitation: "Abstract is what cannot be touched." Whereupon the child: "Oh, I know: like God and poison ivy!" The crudest misuse of the two terms, then, is that of saying “concrete" when "perceivable" is intended, and “abstract" to describe what is not accessible to the senses. It is equally misleading to call concrete that which is physical and abstract that which is mental. Compare the usual opening of the game Twenty Questions: "Is it concrete or abstract?" A table is concrete, but liberty is supposed to be abstract. My friend is concrete but friendship is not. This apparently simple distinction involves, first of all, an ontological muddle since table can either be a material object or an object perceived, remembered, or thought about. If the distinction intended is that of things in the physical world beyond the senses as against the contents of the mind, there is no excuse for replacing clear terms with misleading ones. If, however, the assumption is that a person knows only what is in his mind, the distinction is between extracerebral percepts, which are due to objects or events located outside of the brain (table, solar eclipse, stomach ache) and intracerebral percepts, caused by processes within the brain itself (memory images, thoughts, concepts, sentiments). In this case, it is necessary to realize that the latter are as concrete as the former. The experience of seeing a table or sensing a pain somewhere in one's body is no more or no less concrete than that of having an image or idea of something. Any of these experiences may be precise or imprecise, sharp or vague, but they are all invariably concrete. All mental contents are particular, unique items, even if they are also "universals." that is, even if they are concepts standing for a kind of object or idea. This observation was made most clearly by Berkeley and was hailed by Hume as "one of the greatest and most valuable discoveries that has been made of late years in the republic of letters." Berkeley realized that "an idea, which considered in itself is particular, becomes general by being made to represent or stand for all other particular ideas of the same sort"; and further on: signified or represented by it: by virtue whereof it is that things, names, or notions, being in their own nature particular, are rendered universal. In other words, the concept table is just as concrete and individual a mental content as the memory image of a table or the percept of a physical table standing in front of the observer. Friendship is as concrete as any particular friend. God and the notion of God are as concrete as the concept of poison ivy or any specimen of that plant. But any object, event, or idea becomes a universal when it is treated as standing for a population of instances. It becomes an abstraction when it is treated as a distillate drawn from some more complex entity or kind of entity. In no way can the terms “concrete" and “abstract" serve to sort the items of experience in two containers. Neither are they antonyms nor do they refer to mutually exclusive populations. Concreteness is a property of all things, physical or mental, and many of these same things can also serve as abstractions. How necessary it is to clear up the confusion becomes evident when, in a well-known and typical introduction to logic, one comes across the sentence: "Let us, therefore, admit, as we all can, that abstractions are not real if the real is defined as that which is concrete and not abstract." Here our two adjectives are treated as disjunctives, as though a thing could not be abstract and concrete at the same time; and concreteness is equated with material existence. A bit later, the same book admonishes us to realize "that the abstract objects of thought, such as numbers, law, or perfectly straight lines, are real parts of nature (even though theyexist not as particular things but as the relations or transformations of such particulars).. ."This statement confuses what a thing is with what is may stand for and asserts that an entity can exist without being a particular. Any phenomenon experienced by the mind can acquire abstractness if it is seen as a distillate of something more complex. Such a phenomenon can be a highly rarified pattern of forces or it can be an event or object in which the relevant properties of a kind of event or object are strikingly embodied. Using a term introduced in the preceding chapter, we may say that a phenomenon is an abstraction when it serves as a picture. It may fulfill this function for one person but not for another, for the adherents of one culture but not for those of another; and it may suddenly acquire this property of pointing beyond itself for a person who had not looked on it that way before. ## Abstraction based on generalization? An abstraction is defined traditionally as the sum of the properties which a number of particular instances have in common. Locke tells us that "the senses at first let in particular ideas and furnish the yet empty cabinet." He explains that the natural tendency of the mind is towards knowledge; but the mind finds that, if it should proceed by, and dwell upon, only particular things its progress would be very slow and the work endless. Therefore, to shorten its way to knowledge and make each perception more comprehensive, the first thing it does is "to bind them into bundles and rank them into sorts so that what knowledge it gets of any of them it may thereby with assurance extend to all of that sort." Traditionally, then, all abstraction is supposed to be based on generalization. So accustomed are we to this belief and so convincing does it sound that we no longer realize how much it is at variance with what actually happens and what difficulty it presents even in theory. To be sure, generalization exists, and I shall suggest later in what way it serves abstraction. But it is hard to see how it could be the first step to knowledge, as had been claimed ever since Locke. In his Principles of Psychology William James proposed what he called "the law of dissociation by varying concomitants." This law stated: "What is associated now with one thing and now with another tends to become dissociated from either, and to grow into an object of abstract contemplation by the mind." He was quick to add: "Why the repetition of the character in combination with different wholes will cause it thus to break up its adhesion with any one of them, and roll out, as it were, alone upon the table of consciousness, is a little of a mystery." It is a mystery indeed, but the problem is not so much in the why as in the how. Why it is convenient for the mind to generalize has been shown quite lucidly by Locke. But how that mind could proceed to generalities if faced by nothing but particulars is hard to imagine. Presumably there are no two things in this world that have nothing in common, and most things have a great deal in common. Suppose now that every community of traits would induce us to group the corresponding things under a concept. Obviously, the result would be an incalculable number of groupings. Each individual thing would be explicitly assigned to as many groups as there are possible combinations of its attributes. A cat would be made to hold membership in the associations of material things, organic things, animals, mammals, felines, and so forth, all the way up to that exclusive club for which only this one cat would qualify. Not only this, but our cat would also belong among the black things, the furry things, the pets, the subjects of art and poetry, the Egyptian divinities, the customers of the meat and canning industries, the dream symbols, the consumers of oxygen, and so on forever. In the universe of theoretical logic all these memberships are in fact constantly present when the concept cat comes up; but the actual consummation of all of this infinity of groupings based on different traits, different groups of traits, and differing in the number of their members would not contribute to sensible orientation. It would rather produce a catastrophic onslaught of information. This being the dismal prospect, one would need, first of all, some criterion of selection. If abstraction were in fact a device of economizing by reducing the many to the few, thelogical procedure might be to start with properties or groups of properties found in the largest number of individual cases and work one's way gradually to those representing fewer and fewer. Is this what we actually do? A glance at a child's concepts shows that it cannot be so. There may be only one dog in the child's world but from the beginning that dog will constitute a distinct category although the category contains only one member, whereas trees or houses or clouds, numerous though they are, may have much less priority in the child's world order. Grouping seems to be quite unrelated to how many members each group comprises. Perhaps we do not go by size of population but by number of traits, grouping those individual instances which have the most traits in common. This indeed reminds us of something we do. We match man with man. bird with bird. matchbox with matchbox. Whether we do so by counting traits is a question to be kept in abeyance. In the meantime, we notice that such a procedure would suffer from diminishing returns. The larger the number of common traits. the smaller the number of individuals comprised in the group tends to be. even in an age of mass production. and therefore the more limited is its use for practical classification. In the extreme. we are left with as many classes as there are individuals. We are back to where we started and have no classification at all. Add to this the fact that quite frequently we make groupings on the basis of one distinguishing trait alone. Flammable or non-flammable-nothing else may matter. The conclusion seems to be that while at times we classify according to the number of specimens covered by a concept or the number of traits it contains, counting does not give the criterion needed here. It seems more promising to say that people group things according to their particular interests. For example, cases can be cited in which human beings are classified by size, weight, income, skin color, number of gold teeth, or their ideas about the supernatural-no criterion of selection seems ineligible, each may be justified by the proper occasion, and what serves one purpose or direction of interest may be absurd for another. Anthropologists and psychologists have shown that even with regard to very basic conceptions the criteria of classification vary widely, but that they derive sensibly from the purpose in each case. However, interest, although providing a criterion for selection, does not solve the basic cognitive problem. Let us consider an example. According to Freud, the human mind groups, at the level at which dreams are made, sticks, umbrellas, knives, steeples, watering cans, serpents, fishes, nail files, hammers, zeppelins and the number three. Another group of dream items comprises pits, hollows, caves, bottles, boxes, chests, pockets, ships, gates, and mouths. This grouping is made because of a vital concern with the organs of reproduction. More specifically, the grouping is not based on just any attribute objects happen to have in common with the genitals but on those crucial to the sexual interest, namely, pointedness and the capacity to rise and pour versus concavity, receptivity, etc. If this is so, are we not implying that in order for the grouping to occur an abstraction had to take place beforehand? The crucial attributes just mentioned had to be distilled from the particular shape and functioning of the sexual organs. Without this prior abstraction there could be no selection of the objects serving as dream images. This means that an abstract concept, supposed to be the fruit of generalization, turns out to be its necessary prerequisite. We find ourselves entangled in what Piaget and Inhelder have described as "a vicious circle which can only be resolved by a genetic analysis." On the one hand, they explain, we cannot determine what properties are common to a set of elements, i.e., the "intension" of the class, by studying individual members in succession because we could not be sure of abstracting correctly until we had examined all members of the group, which is most often impractical or impossible. On the other hand, we cannot pick the particulars to be examined in the first place without establishing some common property by which to choose them. "In other words, extension presupposes intension, and vice versa." Henri Bergson clearly diagnosed the "circle" in 1896: “In order to generalize one must first abstract, but in order to abstract usefully one must already know how to generalize." He also suggested that the trouble was due to the assumption that perception is limited to the recording of individual cases. This was a most helpful observation. Bergson took another decisive step forward by pointing to what he called the utilitarian origin of sense perception. Perception, one might say in elaboration of his thought, is an instrument of the organism, developed during phylogenetic evolution as a means of discovering the presence of what is needed for survival and for being alerted to danger. These needs, argues Bergson, refer to kinds of thing, to qualities rather than to particular individuals. What attracts the herbivorous animal is herbage in general, "the color and the odor of herbage, sensed and submitted to as forces ...."The precise distinction of individual objects, he says, is "un luxe de la perception"-a luxury of perception. This observation is most relevant. However, we cannot follow Bergson when he denies that such perceptual selectivity in animals is an early form of abstraction. He bases his contention on comparisons with other processes in nature that are not abstractions. If hydrochloric acid discovers carbonate of lime in its various embodiments and acts on them always in the same way, whether they be marble or chalk, or if a plant draws invariably the same substances from the soil, are we going to say they perform abstractions? Probably not, for the reason that they do not select some properties from a given context. By their very nature they can respond only in these particular ways. The rest of the environment does not impinge upon them, and therefore there is no need of abstraction, or opportunity for it. Similarly, a blind man cannot be said to abstract the sounds he hears from their natural context of sights, since those sights were not given to him from the outset. Nor does the sense of sight "abstract," from the range of electromagnetic waves, that narrow band of wave lengths between sixteen and thirty-two millionths of an inch to which it is responsive. A filter does not abstract. nor does a coin-sorting machine. However, the mind of a human being or animal is, for the most, not in this situation when it gathers the primary generalities from the world of visual experience. Bergson holds that no abstraction takes place in perception. As percepts, he maintains, all the particular instances met in experience are different from each other; but some of them are reacted to in the same way and yield the same useful results; e.g., they all indicate things good to eat. In consequence, "something they have in common will detach itself from them." To argue in this way is to turn the facts upside down. Percepts are reacted to in a similar way because similarities have been discovered in them. The mechanism of this discovery of similarity needs to be explained. The absurdity of Bergson's suggestion should be evident, but the idea is nevertheless attractive to theorists reluctant to admit abstraction in perception. For instance, Jean Laporte has asserted that abstractions are drawn from perceptual material by means of imitative gestures, which have already been elaborated on other similar objects and are now applied again. A circular tracing movement, for example, will be the response to something round, and in this way the object is fitted to "quelque schème préexistant," such as circularity or right-angularity. Laporte uses the abstractness of descriptive gestures, which I discussed earlier, without acknowledging that it presupposes the prior perception of abstract shape. There is no way of getting around the fact that an abstractive grasp of structural features is the very basis of perception and the beginning of all cognition. The grouping of instances, allegedly the necessary preparation for abstraction, must be preceded by abstraction, because from where else would the criteria for selection come? Before one can generalize one must single out characteristics that will serve to determine which things are to belong under one heading. This is to say: generalization presupposes abstraction. Susanne K. Langer describes primary abstraction as “the principle of automatically abstractive seeing and hearing." She writes: The value of this beautiful statement is largely undone. however. when Mrs. Langer asserts that such "presentational abstraction" is specific to the arts and to be distinguished from "generalizing abstraction." which she considers the method of science: "In scientific thinking. concepts are abstracted from concretely described facts by a sequence of widening generalization; progressive generalization systematically pursued can yield all the powerful and rarefied abstractions of physies, mathematics, and logic." This is an unfortunate, misleading limitation. In the sciences and elsewhere, there are instances in which a set of items is searched for common properties. but they are not typical of the way in which abstraction takes place. On the basis of some common characteristic a scientist may indeed search a group of cases for other properties they may share - such as a particular virus in the blood of individuals suffering from cancerbut he will resort to such mechanical scanning only because for the time being he is without the data needed for a better procedure. Also, here again. before he began his search, the group of cases to be examined was selected by an abstraction. Nobody analyses random samples of cases without determining by some criterion the population from which the samples are to be drawn. The mind is always steered by purpose. The relation between abstraction and generalization is reflected in the age-old discussion concerning the nature and value of induction. Induction. commonly defined as "the process of discovering principles by the observation and combination of particular instances." consists in drawing general conclusions from what has been observed in a number of cases. By now, most theorists would agree that, in the words of Morris R. Cohen. "science never draws any inference from any sense-data except when the latter are viewed as already embodying or illustrating certain universals." That is, science makes full use of the "presentational abstraction" which Mrs. Langer considers a privilege of the arts. In an illuminating radio talk, entitled "Is the Scientific Paper A Fraud?"the British scientist P. B. Medawar complained, however. that even now the usual presentation of scientific findings tends to sustain the fiction that the facts were gathered without any previous assumption as to what they might tell. "You have to pretend that your mind is, so to speak. a virgin receptacle, an empty vessel, for information which floods into it from the external world for no reason which you yourself have revealed." The accepted style of writing, he explains, derives from a clinging to the traditional notion of induction as the only purely factual scientific procedure, not contaminated by preconceived opinion: The conception underlying this style of scientific writing is that scientific discovery is an inductive process. What induction implies in its cruder form is roughly speaking this: scientific discovery, or the formulation of scientific theory, starts with the unvarnished and unembroidered evidence of the senses. It starts with simple observation-simple, unbiased, unprejudiced, naive, or innocent observation-and out of this sensory evidence, embodied in the form of simple propositions or declarations of fact, generalizations will grow up and take shape, almost as if some process of crystallization or condensation were taking place. Out of a disorderly array of facts, an orderly theory, an orderly general statement, will somehow emerge. This conception of scientific discovery in which the initiative comes from the unembroidered evidence of the senses was mainly the work of a great and wise, but in this context, I think, very mistaken man-John Stuart Mill. Before induction can be practiced, the population to which it is to be applied must be selected. Since the very notion of induction implies that the cases to be investigated are not all identical, this selection requires a criterion, that is, the prior abstraction of certain properties which must be present in the individuals to be chosen. For example, all these individuals may have to have a high school diploma or high blood pressure. Also any sensible enquiry limits beforehand the sort of property to look for. The cancer specialist may not spend time on finding out with which letter of the alphabet the names of his subjects start but he may conceivably be interested in where they were born. Thus induction presupposes abstraction. Generalization presupposes generality. ## Generality comes first A superficial look at the origins of knowledge may seem to contradict this contention. Take the behavior of Pavlov's dogs in his experiments on conditioning. When Pavlov started his work, he found to his displeasure that the animals responded not only to the particular stimuli on which the training was based but to any change whatsoever in the laboratory. The slightest movement of the experimenter -a blinking of the eyelids or movement of the eyes, posture, respiration-provoked the conditioned reaction. Nor was it sufficient to banish the experimenter from the room. Footfalls of a passer-by, chance conversations in neighboring rooms, slamming of a door or vibration from a passing van. street-cries. even shadows cast through the windows into the room, any of these casual uncontrolled stimuli falling upon the receptors of the dog set up a disturbance in the cerebral hemispheres and vitiate the experiments. Does not this behavior suggest that the dogs were totally unable to abstract, to pick the relevant features from the environment? Pavlov suggested this much when he explained that the cerebral cortex of the brain is “a signalizing apparatus of tremendous complexity and of most exquisite sensitivity. through which the animal is influenced by countless stimuli from the outside world. Every one of these stimuli produces a certain effect upon the animal, and all of them taken together may clash and interfere with, or else reinforce, one another." We get the picture of a passive victim. helplessly exposed to whatever impinges upon it and reacting automatically to all of it. Pavlov saw only two ways of remedying this situation. He could make abstraction unnecessary by eliminating all happenings in the environment, except the particular metronome sound or electric shock for which the animal was to be trained. In fact, he found a "keen and public-spirited Moscow businessman," willing to pay for the construction of a soundproof and lightproof laboratory, in which the experiments could be performed by remote control. Pavlov thought of another method. An animal could be prevented by inhibition from reacting to the stimuli to which it had responded initially and automatically. This could be done by leaving all reactions to the undesirable stimuli unrewarded or by punishing the animal for these reactions. Thereby a gradual differentiation could be obtained between events to react to and others not to react to. This was a useful principle, which pointed to an important psychological mechanism. But the principle should not be taken to prove that every stimulus is reacted to automatically until the reaction is stopped by somesecondary influence. Note. first of all. that in experimental conditioning the initial response to any change in the environment is found not only in animals but also in human adults. Lashley has reported that with human subjects, conditioned to the soundof a bell, he obtained "the conditioned reaction without further training from the sound of a buzzer. of breaking glass, of clapping hands, from a flash of light. from pressure or prick on arm or face. The only dimension' common to such stimuli is that all produce a sudden change in the environment. Such tests show that the conditioned reaction is initially undifferentiated .."If one looks around for instances in which animals or humans seem to respond indiscriminately, one discovers that this happens only when the various stimuli responded to are in fact equivalent for the reacting organism and its particular purpose. Think of a cat's, and indeed your own, immediate reaction to every sudden change. This change may be inconsequential; but it may also be vitally important. Whether an event matters or not can be found out only by paying attention to it. The quick shifting of the glance towards any spot at which a change occurs serves as a screening process for which all changes whatsoever are important and must be attended to. In other words, what we have here is not the automatic and indiscriminate response by a creature helplessly at the mercy of every individual stimulus, but on the contrary a highly appropriate reaction, whose great generality is required by the large variety of stimuli relevant to the purpose. They are all pertinent because they are all changes. They are all reacted to, not because the creature is incapable of abstraction but because the criterion for the abstraction appropriate to the situation is so generic and comprehensive that every happening at all belongs in its purview. The broad reaction is not a failure to discriminate but an asset. A response may be inappropriate objectively and yet sensible in terms of the situation as the person or animal experiences it. In a newborn infant, sucking may occur in response to light, sounds, or smells. Piaget cites a study by Rubinow and Frankl according to which any solid object approaching the face makes the infant respond with sucking although one month later only pointed objects produce this result. These reactions take place in a world dominated by a few strong needs and penetrated by external stimuli that may or may not be relevant to those needs but about which the infant knows nothing or little. The pressure of any need tends to broaden the range of stimuli to which the individual responds, but the lack of knowledge about these events justifies the extension. Here again the response is at the appropriate level of abstractness. The situation of the dog in the Moscow laboratory is very similar. A strappeddown, anxious, hungry animal, which is learning that some strange and senseless signal is always the herald of food, will naturally and rightly put all the other senseless events in the category of foodannouncers until he comes to know better. We cannot tell what the newborn child or the experimental dog perceives: we have to rely on their observable responses. But adult human beings can cite countless examples to show that in an unfamiliar realm of experience the common properties of its constituents will predominate to such an extent as to make the differences invisible. The members of a strange race of human beings look all alike until one learns to tell them apart. A farmer, a shepherd, a zoo keeper perceives each animal as a distinct individual. To the outsider, sheep are sheep, and monkeys are monkeys. Soldiers in their uniforms or nuns in their garb may seem to show no individuality. The waiter, the salesgirl. the barber may be differentiated by the customer only to the level of their profession, but within that profession there is no observed differentia. The extent of differentiation will depend on how interested the particular person or cultural group is in the refinement of the initial abstraction. To the casual museum-goer all Italian art of the Quattrocento or all Egyptian sculpture may look alike. The naturalist Edwin Way Teale tells of his wife's trouble with automobile models: It was in this section of the trip that Nellie began concentrating on the 'fieldmarks' of automobiles. It was a mystery to me, 1 had pointed out. how anyone able to note slight plumage differences in sparrows and warblers and shore birds had difficulty telling a Ford from a Rambler or a Chrysler from a Buick. Her explanation. not without logic, had been: The trouble is. automobiles keep changing their plumages." Change or not, the average ten-year-old boy. interested in cars, has no such trouble. The varying degree of perceptual differentiation is reflected to some extent in the principles of classification found in languages. The anthropologist Franz Boas has shown that any language, from the point of view of another, may seem arbitrary in its classifications. "What appears as a single simple idea in one language may be characterized by a series of distinct phonetic groups in another." The first mental operations in new situations are not acts of generalization, for generalization must always be preceded by the distinction of individually perceived cases. Instead. high generality is a quality of perception from the very start. It is a generality brought about by primary abstraction, in the sense that the differences which it hides are well above the threshold of the sense of sight. Details accessible to the eyes are not yet differentiated by the mind. Let me return for a moment to the early, undifferentiated state of infant experience. William James' brash remark about the baby viewing the sensory world as “one great blooming, buzzing confusion" has been quoted to death by those who delight in believing that the senses provide an amorphous chaos, which has to be waited upon by the order-producing "higher" faculties of the mind. But confusion is not a normal reaction of the organism at any level of development. Confusion results from special conditions, such as pathology. fatigue, passivity, or an onrush of excessive stimuli attacking a receptive sensorium. It occurs when the input is too strong or the processing power too weak. James himself describes confusion as the lapse into the indiscriminating state, the opposite of focused attention, "a sort of solemn sense of surrender to the empty passing of time." Actually, James' remark about the baby occurs in a discussion of discrimination and comparison, in which he makes the important point that any number of impressions, from any number of sensory sources, falling simultaneously on a mind which has not yet experienced them separately, will fuse, for that mind, into a single undivided object: "The law is that all things fuse that can fuse, and nothing separates except what must." Now fusion is not confusion. The texture of à homogeneous field is a state of low-level order, well suited to serve as a background for prominent stimuli. Most likely this, and not confusion, is the primary experience provided by the undeveloped senses of the baby. The meticulous observer of children, Arnold Gesell, objecting to James' famous aperçu, suggests that "much more probably the young baby senses the visible world at first in fugitive and fluctuating blotches against a neutral background."Gesell could no more look into the infant's mind than could James, but observations of external behavior bear him out. The eyes of a newborn baby are apt to rove around both in the presence and absence of a stimulus. After several days or even hours, the baby is able to immobilize the eyeballs for brief periods. Later, he stares at surroundings for long periods. When he is four weeks old we may dangle a ring . . . in the line of his near vision: he regards it. We move the ring slowly across his field of vision: he "follows" it with his eyes through an arc of about 90°. The organized response of fixation can be assumed to correspond to an equally orderly organization of the perceived field of vision, a simple distinction of a neutral ground and prominent "figure." It is a highly abstract primary experience. The field is reduced to "noise,"i.e., the undifferentiated foil from which the positive message is set off. The message, a light, a sound, a moving shape, is likely to be also quite generic. It is a positive “something" in an as yet ungraspableworld. A person who wishes to insist that perception is only the recording of individual items can argue that elementary generalities are not due to abstraction at all but rather to imprecise observation. He can point out that if observers catch nothing but a few crude overall qualities of any one thing, they will fail to notice the differences distinguishing similar things from one another. Evidently, for example, the blur of nearsighted vision is not a product of abstraction. No choice is involved. The badly focused eye merely catches all it can grasp. This seems to be the model for what Jean Piaget has in mind when he adopts the term "syncretistic perception."The following quotation tells the story: Children therefore not only perceive by means of general schemas. but these actually supplant the perception of detail. Thus they correspond to a sort of confused perception, different from and prior to that which in us is the perception of complexity or of form. To this childish form of perception M. Claparède has given the name of syncretístic perceptions, using the name chosen by Renan to denote that first "wide and comprehensive but obscure and inaccurate" activity of the spirit where "nodistinction is made and things are heaped one upon the other" (Renan). Syncretistic perception therefore excludes analysis, but differs from our general schemas in that it is richer and more confused than they are. To be sure, obscure and inaccurate percepts do exist. They can come about when one looks at something under unfavorable conditions. for example, when one is inattentive or hasty or slow to catch on, or when the stimulus pattern is disorganized or excessively complex. In general, however. even when the stimulus is blurred, the mind tends to articulate it into some simple, regular and precise shape. And there is certainly no reason to assume a condition of blurred stimulation when the observer's eyes are physiologically capable of correct focusing and when his mind is reasonably alert and attentive. Perceptual abstraction cannot be dismissed as an inability. It is a positive accomplishment, typically of great precision because of the relative simplicity of the form patterns drawn from the stimulus material. Medieval philosophers knew that the perception of particular specimens is. in the strictest sense, impossible. Mens nostra singulare directe cognoscere non potest, asserts Thomas Aquinas, i.e.. our mind cannot cognize singularly and directly. All form is universal. Only by acknowledging abstraction in perception is it possible to overcome the theoretical dilemma which René Bouissou describes eloquently: "Nous sommes contraints de choisir entre l'abstrait vide et le singulier impensable."(We are being forced to choose between empty abstraction and particulars inaccessible to thought.) More explicitly, Bouissou says: In fact, if it is true that a concept is brought about by emptying a state of consciousness of any element of, or relation to, the concrete, the bridges between the perceivable and the intelligible are definitively destroyed and the unity and continuity of knowledge become illusory. ## Sampling versus abstraction Samuel Johnson defined the outcome of an abstraction as "a smaller quantity containing the virtue or power of a greater." The definition seems to hint at a richer, more adequate view of abstraction than the one offered us by traditional logicians, without, however, contradicting the latter explicitly. If abstraction takes a smaller quantity from a larger one, what is the nature of that quantity? Perhaps, since an abstract concept often covers a number of instances, one specimen of that population could serve as a concept to represent the whole. George Berkeley suggested that a particular triangle can be used to stand for all possible triangles; and so it can. However, a triangle is just a specimen of its population, and although an abstraction can be performed upon it, not every specimen is suited to serve by itself as an abstraction of its population or entity. A specimen is first of all a mere sample. A sample of fabric is not an abstraction of it. Nor is a sample performance an abstraction of a person's capacities. If all men were strictly equal, no man could serve as an abstraction of mankind. He would be only a sample. However, given the wide variety of human beings, mankind can be abstracted through the presentation of particular persons, who embody the nature of many or all people in important respects. Although they are individuals of flesh and blood, such persons can serve, like the players in Hamlet, as the abstracts and brief chronicles of the time. Similarly, the members of the Congress of the United States are not meant to be a sample of the American people but an abstraction of it. They are considered, and must consider themselves, as possessing the capacities which enable the American people to make their own laws; and those capacities alone are referred to when the members of the Congress act as representatives-as an abstraction of the people. Abstraction, then, is not simply a sample of a population. It is not just a sample of traits either. For example, an attribute, or group of attributes, may distinguish a kind of object from others and yet not be a suitable abstraction of the object. If the colors blue and yellow distinguish the airplanes of one company from those of any other, the two colors serve as a sign or signal for that airline but do not necessarily depict its character or nature in any sense. Similarly, a mere sign or cue is not an abstraction. A few hairs. picked up by a detective, are not an abstraction of the criminal. However, Joseph's stained coat of many colors is more than circumstantial evidence and proof of disaster. For the reader of the Bible as well as for Joseph's father and brothers, the precious coat, the gift of the father, stands for Jacob's partiality, and the blood stains depict the assault upon the favorite. The choice of the telltale sign is not accidental. It is a powerful visual abstraction of the family drama. A lost wrist watch is not an abstraction of its owner, who left it behind. But the display of old-fashioned. mangled clocks and watches in the small museum at Nagasaki, on the hill over which the atomic bomb exploded. serves as an abstraction that arrests the heartbeat of the visitor. All the clocks stopped at 11:02, and this sudden concerted end of time, the death of innocent daily action, conveys an immediacy of experience, which is almost more powerful than that of the photographed horrors shown in the same museum. An essential aspect of the event evokes the event itself. It would be pleasantly simple to understand the nature of abstraction if it involved only the removal of one or several elements from some entity. This approach, however, runs into at least three difficulties. First, strictly speaking the same element cannot be found in more than one specimen. Second, an arbitrary selection of traits does not lead to a meaningful abstraction. Third, even when such a selection picks essential traits, a mere adding-up of traits does not create an integrated concept. I will briefly illustrate these points. One can conceivably extirpate elements from one particular specimen-the outlines of a face, the color of the eyes. the shape of the nose, to produce a rudimentary portrait. Such a procedure, although difficult, would be quite mechanical. But a whole family of specimens, let us say, twenty faces, will hardly contain exactly the same color or shape, unless they are machine-made. Therefore. in order to pick an element common to them all one must possess, in most cases, the more sophisticated ability to discover sufficiently similar shapes of a particular quality. This task, although not mechanical, is quite easy. The uniqueness of every particular, actual specimen presents the mechanistic theory of abstraction with a puzzle, which one of the early nominalist philosophers. Boethius, has put in the following way. He teaches that nothing shared by a multiplicity of things can be an entity in itself because every thing exists only by virtue of being one thing. When one thing is shared by many proprietors, each of them owns only a piece of it: or they use it in succession, as happens. for example. with a well or a horse. Otherwise, they share it without really possessing it, as. for example. when a number of spectators share a performance. It is useful to look at the matter so palpably because we see at once that in order to extract a common element one must clean it of the individual differences adherent to it in the various specimens, and of the different connotations it assumes under the influence of different contexts. The yellow of Van Gogh is not for all purposes the yellow of Vermeer. The second difficulty I mentioned is that an arbitrary selection of common traits is not often useful. A sorting machine can be instructed to gather the common properties of any assortment of items. It could tell us that the number of a dog's teeth equals the number of counties in a certain state of the country. While this finding would qualify as an abstraction logically. it would not necessarily serve the purposes of productive thinking. Third, a mere enumeration of traits. relevant though they may be. does not create an integrated concept. For example. when a psychologist wishes to describe an individual's "personality" he may resort to the traditional technique of establishing a personality profile by assessing the standing of the individual with regard to a number of traits, of which one such test uses the following list: intelligence. verbal fluency, dominance. self-insight. tolerance. emotional expressiveness, conventionality. social extroversion. The degree to which the person possesses each of these traits might or might not constitute a relevant abstraction of the person himself, but the sum of all scores certainly does not. The psychologist creates the semblance of a profile by connecting the eight points of the diagram, but this profile consists only of lines on paper. In order to obtain a portrait of the person's mind he would have to combine the eight data in an organized whole. Another example may make this point more explicitly. Some years ago an essayist, John A. Kouwenhoven, wrote a book on "what is American about America" by asking himself what such symptoms as the following had in common: the Manhattan skyline, the gridiron town plan, the skyscraper, the model-T Ford, jazz, theConstitution, Mark Twain's writing, Whitman's Leaves of Grass, comic strips, soap operas, assembly-line production, chewing gum. In this personality profile of our country, each symptom may be a legitimate abstraction ("the land of Mark Twain," "the land of skyscrapers"). but together they are a jumble of information until they are welded into unity. In the present case, this was accomplished by a further abstraction, which brought forth a trait common to all twelve symptoms, namely "a concern with process rather than product." If this diagnosis is valid, the abstraction has yielded an enlightening concept by revealing something essential of the thing abstracted.