# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Our primary thanks go to the authors whose work is represented here and to the students and teachers of design history, past, present and future: this book is for you all and without you there would be no Design History Reader. Thanks to the publishers, museums, archives and collectors who have shared their texts and images with us; they are named throughout the book. We are very grateful to Jessica McTague, Tara Quell and Brooke Stover for their help with the complex task of obtaining permission to reproduce the texts and images that make up The Design History Reader. We appreciate the input of Tristan Palmer, our editor, who has been unfailingly encouraging and prompt in his responses to our questions, in the years that extended between the conception and publication of this book. Grace Lees-Maffei registers an important note of chanks to the executive committee of the Design History Sociery, for supporting the project through the Society's Research Award, and to the University of Hertfordshire's erstwhile Faculty for the Creative and Cultural Industries for its Faculty Research Award. Grace thanks her teachers, especially Tim Putnam, Penny Sparke, Jeremy Aynsley, John Styles, Chris Breward, Gillian Naylor, Clive Wainwright, Helen Clifford, and her students at che University of Hertfordshire, especially Marina Emmanouil and Barbara Brownie. Grace's biggest debt of gratitude is to Nic: husband, father, design historian. Rebecca Houze would especially like to thank the School of Arc, College of Visual and Performing Arts, and Division of Research and Graduate Studies at the Graduate School of Northern Illinois University for their generous financial support for this project. In addition she thanks the staff, students and colleagues at Northern Illinois University, as well as the community of editors, designers, artists, art, architecture, and design historians who through their collective energy and collaborative spirit over the years have inspired and sustained her own interest in the history of design and design history. She is very grateful to Connie Rhoton for all of her work in helping to prepare the manuscript. Most of all, she would like to thank her family for their tireless and unending support.