# GENERAL INTRODUCTION What is design history and what should it be? These are questions that every conscientious design historian should constantly pose, and many will acknowiedge that the answers to each are not the same. To some extent, each text in this Reader can be seen as answer, and a sample of the debates surrounding such questions is provided in section 7. The Design History Reader employs inclusive definitions of design and of design history, which as a discipline is interested in all aspects of designed objects and images. To study design and its histories is to study processes of thinking. problem solving. drawing, talking, consulting and responding to a range of practical and aesthetic constraints to create - ideally - the most appropriate solution(s) under the given circumstances. Design history seeks to understand design in historical context, as conditioned by, and bearing evidence of, the time and place in which it was undertaken and produced. This approach is common to design histories thar focus on objects from the distant and near past, as well those design histories that focus on contemporary design practices and are similarly contextualized. The Design History Reader encompasses the history of design, the development of design history and contemporary issues in design history, relevant to design practice. While there are anthologies that address discrete aspects of design history such as interior design, or industrial design, and anthologies drawn from one stable, such as the various Design Issues readers and the BLOCK reader (see the Guide to Further Reading in section 7), The Design History Reader is distinguished by a concern for all fields of design history and a holistic approach to common debates. The authors brought together here are not all design historians, and by including them we do not propose to convert them to design historians. Rather, the range of authors shows how design history is multidisciplinary in its interests, methods and sources. In fact, it is impossible to represent the discipline of design history without including texts from adjacent disciplines. While a number of the texts selected for this Reader derive from ocher disciplines and fields, all of them have been chosen for their core contribution to, or use within, design history. Is design history a discipline or a field? This issue is further explored in section 7, Foundations, Debates, Historiography, 1980–95'. We can turn to Clive Dilnot, who in 1984 thought it too early to claim disciplinary status for design history because it had not yet developed its own methodologies. In 1989, John A. Walker argued that design history was a discipline, as a way of beginning the textbook that elaborated his point. Walker lucidly distinguishes between design history, as an academic discipline, and the field of study, which is the history of design. Although the relationship between design history and design studies has been much debated, with some arguing thar the former should be subsumed within the latter, the rwo felds have progressed side by side over several decades and inform one another in a positive uanner. The frst organization for design history was formed in 1977, when a group of sympathetic scholars came together at the annual conference of the British Association of Art Historians to form what became the Design History Society. However, it is not accurate to view design history as a field of art history, because it has developed in contradistinction from art history. Recent conceptions of visual culture as a feld are inadequate for the understanding of design, which is not merely visual but also material, tactile, temporal, experiential, appealing to more of our senses than sight alone. Design history might be seen as a field of cultural history, but design history is not only composed of those characteristics affiliated with cultural history. In addition to art history and cultural history, design history shares interests, methods and sources and literatures with business history, economic history, cultural studies, history of technology, material cutture studies and so on. It is through its distinctive blend of interests, methods and sources that design history warrants disciplinary status, rather than being seen as a field of some larger discipline, as none of the potential contenders present themselves as an adequate catch-all into which an holistically conceived design history might be placed. The status of design history as a discipline is further supported by the health and growth of its various fields, including fashion history, craft history and interior design history. Design history is now more than thirty years old and any notion of pursuing a history of styles has been replaced by a more contextualized understanding of the role of design and designed objects within social and cultural history. The Reader demonstrates the importance of three concurrent concerns within the discipline: a concern for studies of designers and their production, a concern – informed by literary theory, cultural studies, gender studies, and economic and business history – for issues of consumption and a concern for processes of mediation. Much recent work examines the ways in which design is mediated to consumers by producers, marketers, advertisers, the media, taste experts and so on, reflecting the need for a reconsideration of the object as the defining unit of design historical analysis. In the UK, design history has much of the infrastructure of a distinct discipline, such as validated degrees, a research culture and research degree students, and a scholarly society with an annual conference. The maturity of the discipline is indicated by the fact that design history has recently celebrated several big anniversaries: the UK's Design History Society was thirty years old in 2007. The fournal of Design History reached its twenty-first volume in 2008, just as The Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts, Design, and Culture in New York turned fifteen. The Scandinavian Journal of Design History was launched in 1991, and vol. 15 appeared in 2005. Both the North American journal Design Issues, and the History of Design programme run by the Victoria and Albert Museum and Royal College of Art in London, celebrated their twenty-fifth anniversary in 2009. Just as significant, however, if not more so, are the smaller anniversaries thar the discipline has been celebrating: the frst of an annual series of meetings of the Design History Workshop Japan was held in 2002. In 2008, the sixth International Conference for Design History and Design Studies took place in Osaka. The US-based Design Studies Forum launched its journal, Design and Culture in 2009. The Design History Reader reflects both the maturity of the discipline and emergent currents of scholarship indicated by these activities. The Design History Reader encompasses almost three-and-a-half centuries of the history of design. It begins with an account of a basket dating from 1676, and the earliest text in the book is Adam Smith's 'Of the Division of Labour' of 1775. Both appear in section 1, which explores the long eighteenth century as a point at which design and manufacture separated. Much of the material in the Reader has been published only recently and informs current issues for contemporary designers and design historians, such as gender, sustainable design and globalization. The Design History Reader not only documents what has been written within design history and adjacent felds; it aims to contribute to the further development of the discipline of design history. This Reader reflects what design history bas been, not what it should have been, both in terms of what has been published and where the audiences are. Design history has been dominated, until recently, by a relatively narrow definition of design. As a result, work in the discipline has dwelt on the period of industrialization, and the industrialized West. Consequently, one of the most pressing issues facing design history today is the need to globalize the discipline. This situarion is reflected in the Reader, which bears evidence of the places where design history has been taught most extcnsively and strikes a balance berween including the most infuential texts and some of those that are needed to redress various imbalances in the discipline's coverage. Therefore, while the core texts reproduced here largely concern the UK, the US and Western Europe, the Reader closes by heralding future work in design history with its dedicated section 'Local/Regional/National/Global', on issues of globalizing design history. Section 12 also provides suggestions for further reading and points out the range of material in other sections of this book which extends beyond the UK/US focus. We would welcome the publication of another reader, on global design history. There is certainly enough material to fill such a book, but this is not that book. Design history has only recently woken up to the global imperative, and The Design History Reader reflects that fact. ## DESIGN HISTORY IN TEXT Design as a process is variously documented in letters, sketches and notes, plans, briefs, company records and writings by designers as well as – crucially – in the objects and images that result from this process. These form the objects of study for the design historian. The Design History Reader presents a wide variety of texts, including selections from book-length studies, scholarly research articles, exhibition catalogues and magazines, plus a selection of images. In this way, a variety of sources for reliable information about design history and exemplary instances of design historical work are referenced. 'The New Citroën' by Roland Barthes was one a series of pieces in which he demonstrated for the readers of literary magazine Les Lettres Nouvelles, that mass culture was worthy of analysis (1954–7). Examples of design journalism in the Reader include Reyner Banham's 'All that Glitters is not Stainless' and Steven Heller's 'Advertising, Mother of Graphic Design'. The Green Consumer Supermarket Guide is consumer guidance, instructional literature with a campaigning zeal, which intends to inform and persuade. Thomas Hine's Populuxe is a popular history of popular culture. The remainder of the texts in the Reader fall into two main groups: primary – such as the writings of designers and design reformers – and secondary, in the form of key works of design history and associated disciplines. Primary sources are sometimes defined as unpublished, archival sources, but in fact The Desig» History Reader contains no previously unpublished sources. Here, the important distinction is made between sources that seek to understand the present and those that seek to understand the past. For example, Adam Smith's 1776 text was intended by its author to explain the present situation in which he and his readers found themselves. Since Smith's text was published, it has been used as a historical source but Smith did not have the benefit of hindsight and therefore his writing sets up different expectations from those relating to secondary material. Primary sources are of the past, and as such they are extremely useful in understanding the past, which helps to explain their prevalence in Part I of this Reader. Other examples of primary sources in The Design History Reader include the texts by Sernper, Ruskin, Morris, Wright, Loos, Muthesius and van de Velde, Banharm, Venturi, Scott-Brown and Izenour, Baudrillard, Buckmninster Fuller, Packard, Papanek, Marx, Veblen, Barthes and Benjamin. Some secondary sources achieve the status of primary sources in that they gather their own histories, which must be negotiated by current readers. An example is Pevsner's Pioneers ofModern Design (1936, revised 1949, 1975). It is crucial to recognize that different texts have different histories, function differently and must be read with an awareness of their different status. Finally, there is another distinction to be made between the texts as they are included here and their original forms. The majority of the texts presented here were previously published in longer versions. Material cut from the texts is indicated with an ellipsis [...]. In a very limited number of instances, where only a word or two has been cut from the original, the ellipsis has been omitted in order to avoid impairing the clarity of the reading experience. ## THE BOOK'S STRUCTURE AND ALTERNATIVE READING ROUTÉS The Design History Reader accepts John A. Walker's distinction between the history of design (what happened in the past, the subject of study) and design history (the discipline within which study takes place) and is structured into two parts accordingly. Part I is loosely chronological, and provides texts chat chart histories of Western design over the last 300 years. Part II adopts a thematic approach to work in design history during the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. This arrangement renders the Reader suitable both for historical survey courses and methods courses. The extracts are generally reproduced in chronological order within the sections. However, we do not intend that the parts of the book should be definitive or isolated; rather we hope thar themes will be traced across the parts and constituent sections. The Design History Reader employs a range of strategies for learning about design history without simply reproducing a linear understanding of the development of the subject. In addition to the two parts, which provide both chronological and thematic arrangements, we have selected texts that concribute to knowledge and understanding of the past and to the methods and practice of design history. Each part and each section has an introduction to explain thematic connections, juxtapositions and debates among and between the extracts. It offers a modulated reading experience through the use of both primary and secondary sources. Finally there is an index for cross-referencing. We have not included sections grouped by medium, such as graphic design history, fashion history and so on, although each of these fields is represented in the Reader. Treatments of graphic design history in the Reader include: Morris's 'The Ideal Book'; 'Deconstruction and Graphic Design' by Lupton and Miller; Benjamin's 'The Work of Arc in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction'; Baudrillard's 'The Ecstasy of Communication'; Heller's 'Advercising, Mother of Graphic Design'; ""From Baby's First Bath:" Kaō Soap and Modern Japanese Commercial Design', by Weisenfeld and 'Swoosh Identity: Recontextualizations in Haiti and Romania' by Bick and Chiper. The latter could equally inform an examination of fashion, alongside Linthicum's 'Integrative Practice: Oral History, Dress and Disability Studies', Bakare-Yusuf's ‘Fabricating Identities: Survival and the Imagination in Jamaican Dancehall Culture', Breward's The Hidden Consumer: Masculinities, Fashion and City Life 1860–1914 (1999) and Gregson and Crewe's 'Redefning Rubbish: Commodity Disposal and Sourcing' from their book Second-Hand Cultures. The significance of furnicure is examined in a variety of ways in the Reader, as shown by a comparison of Denney's 'Utilicy Furniture and the Myth of Utility, 1943–1948'; Hine's Populuxe, 'The Most Cherished Objects in the Home' by Csikszentmihaly and Rochberg-Halton; Faith, Form and Finish: Shaker Furniture in Context' by Burks; Kirkham's 'Humanizing Modernism: the Crafts, "Functioning Decoration," and the Eameses', Crowley's 'Finding Poland in the Margins: the Case of the Zakopane Style' and Avery's 'Furniture Design and Colonialism: Negotiating Relationships between Britain and Australia, 1880–1901'. While the crafts merit their own reader (Glenn Adamson, The Craft Reader, Oxford: Berg, 2009). this book contains several instructive examples of craft analysis: the whole of section 1 is of interest in terms of its examination of production methods and the watershed of induscrialization in the long eighteenth century, and especially Laurel Thatcher Uirich's analysis of 'An Indian Basket, Providence, Rhode Island, 1676' and Darron Dean's similarly focussed account of 'A Slipware Dish by Samuel Malkin: an Analysis of Vernacular Design,' which contrasts with another study of ceramics in that section, Mary Guyatt's study of the Wedgwood Slave Medallion. The writings of John Ruskin and William Morris are, of course, central to understanding the aims of the Arts and Crafts Movement, while also informing broader discussions about the meaning and role of crafts in industrial society. Both authors are represented here in section 2. 'Design Reform 1820–1910'. Interesting comparisons related to the gender of automotive cultures are raised by the juxtaposition of Dick Hebdige's 'Object as Image: the Italian Scooter Cycle' (1981), Bengry-Howell and Griffin's 'Self-Made Motormen: The Material Construction of Working-Class Masculine Identities through Car Modification' (2007) and van Eeden's 'Land Rover and Colonial-Style Adventure' (2006), while each sits in contrast to Barthes's ‘The New Citroën' (1957) and Packard's concerns expressed in 'How to Outmode a \$4,000 Vehicle in Two Years' (1960) Alternative pathways through the book are found in the section introductions and guides to further reading: the introduction to Part II outlines texts on domesticity in the Reader, and the guide to further reading for section 12 suggests a route around the Reader exploring Western Europe. ## WHO IS THÉ DESIGN HISTORYREADER FOR The range of texts and the editorial matter in this book is designed for students coming to design history for the first time - that is first and second year students of design history and design practice. It is intended to be a core resource for courses that survey the history of design, which students of art, design and media disciplines encounter in their contextual studies, just as much as students of design history and histories of art encompassing a design historical interest. It is also intended as a resource in the teaching of design historiography, the history of design history and research methods training for design historians at both undergraduate and postgraduate levels. It therefore engages students of cultural studies, the sociology of culture, material culture studies and art history, in addition to design history. The book has further uses for teachers and scholars, in terms of the way it considers the definition, practice, historiography and methodology of design history. This book will contextualize design and its histories for students of all subjects. This is for you. ## PART I ## HISTORIES