# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING Landmark texts in the development of postcolonialism that have influenced design historical thinking include Edward Said's Orientalism (1978), Homi Bhabha's The Location of Culture (1994) and Fernando Ortiz's Cuban Counterpoint: Tobacco and Sugar (1940, trans. 1947). The influence of postcolonialism within design history is seen in Jeremy Aynsley's Nationalism and Internationalism: Design in the Twentieth Century (1993), John MacKenzie's 'Orientalism in Design' in Orientalism: History, Theory and the Arts (1995) and Tim Barringer and Tom Flynn (eds), Colonialism and the Object: Empire, Material Culture and the Museum (1998). Also from 1998, see 'Race and Ethnicity in American Material Life', a special issue of the Winterthur Portfolio, including Theodore C. Landsmark's 'Comments on African American Contributions to American Material Life'. Ortiz, particularly, has informed Anna Calvera (2005), and Rose Cooper and Darcy White (2005) have provided a useful account of doing design history informed by Ortiz's concept of transculturation. The work in cultural studies of Paul Gilroy (1993) is also influential within design history. The Journal of Design History has sought to globalize its contents, as discussed in a special issue in 2005. There, Jonathan Woodham's article 'Local, National and Global: Redrawing the Design Historical Map' employed a bibliometric approach to stating the problem of a Western bias in design history organizations and publications. It also included Victor Margolin's influential 'A World History of Design and the History of the World'. The following issue featured Anna Calvera's article 'Local, Regional, National, Global and Feedback: Several Issues to Be Faced with Constructing Regional Narratives' (2005), from which chis section takes its title. David Crowley's National Style and Nation-State: design in Poland from the vernacular revival to the International Style (1992) continues the story of Polish design to examine the impact of modernism on the popularity of the Zakopane Style. See also Crowley's article 'Building the World Anew: Design in Stalinist and Post-Stalinist Poland' (1994) and Andrzej Szczerski's 'Sources of Modernity: The Interprerations of Vernacular Crafts in Polish Design around1900' (2008). Crowley refers to the influential Nations and Nationalism since 1780 (1990) by E. J. Hobsbawm. Tracey Avery's article extracted here is informed by a body of Australian design history which includes Tony Fry's Design History Australia (1988). European and American debates occurring during the same period as the one Avery analyses are reviewed in section 2 of this Reader. Further reading on Japan's national aesthetic includes Penny Sparke's 'From Pre-Modern to Modern: Japanese Industry, Society and Design after 1945' (1987), Lise Skov's Fashion Trends, Japonisme and Postmodernism, Or "What is so Japanese about Comme des Garçons?" (1996), Brian Moeran's ‘The Orient Strikes Back: Advertising and Imagining Japan' (1996) and Brian J. McVeigh, 'How Hello Kitty Cormmodifies the Cute, Cool and Camp' (2000) Van Eeden's 'The Colonial Gaze: Imperialism, Myths, and South African Popular Culture' appears in a special issue on South African design produced by Design Issues in 2004. An influential study of the representation of Africa as a continent for British consumprion is Annie E. Coombes's Reinventing Africa: Museums, Material Culture and Popular Imagination in Late Victorian and Edwardian England (1994). See also Timothy Mitchell's 'Orientalism and the Exhibitionary Order' (1992). Daniel J. Sherman's 'Post-Colonial Chic: Fantasies of the French Interior, 1957-62' (2004) provides a case study analysis of the commodification of African arts as primitivism in interior design in post-colonial France. While most of the material in the Reader derives from, or concerns, British and US design history, there is much to inform understanding of wider European design. German material in the Reader includes Gottfried Semper's view of the Great Exhibition, Hermann Muthesius and Henry van de Velde's 'Werkbund Thesis and Antithesis', Nikolaus Pevsner on Peter Behrens, Gillian Naylor on the Bauhaus, Gert Selle on kitsch, Karl Marx on commodity fetishism and Walter Benjamin on 'The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction'. Texts concerning French design history include Debora Silverman's analysis of 'The 1900 Paris Exposition', Nancy Troy on Le Corbusier, Peter Lloyd and Dirk Snelders on Philippe Starck, writings by French theorists Jean Baudrillard and Roland Barthes and sociologist Pierre Bourdieu. Europe beyond France and Germany is represented in the Reader by David Crowley's study of Poland's Zakopane style, the discussion of Romania in Paul Bick and Sorina Chiper's analysis of Nike, the contribution by Adolf Loos informs understanding of the development of Austrian design and Susan Reid's account of the Khrushchev kitchen examines a country split berween Europe and Asia. A further case study is found in the attempts to bring together global and national design traditions in Newell and Sorrel's ill-fated corporate redesign of British Airway's tailfins in 1997. It attracted criticism both for tokenism and for failing to 'Ay the Alag'. See Mary Jo Hatch and Majken Schultz's 'Bringing the Corporation into Corporate Branding' (2003) and Crispin Thurlow and Giorgia Aiello's 'National Pride, Global Capital: A Social Semiotic Analysis of Transnational Visual Branding in the Airline Industry' (2007). A recent analysis of relevant branding is Daniel J. Huppatz's 'Globalizing Corporate Identity in Hong Kong: Rebranding Two Banks' (2005).