# SCIENCE, INDUSTRY, AND ART Gottfried Semper (1852) ## 1. Scarcely four weeks have passed since the close of che Exhibition, some wares still stand unpacked in the deserted halls of the Hyde Park building, and already public attention has turned away from the “world-renowned event" toward other, perhaps more gripping events close at hand. None of the enthusiastic newspaper correspondents who on the opening day of the "world market" proclaimed the inauguration of a new era any longer voice their opinion on che subject. Yet che stimulation the event has left behind still ferments in the pensive minds and aspiring hearts of thousands. The far-reaching consequences of this impulse cannot be measured. ## [...] It is already evident that inventions are no longer, as before, a means for averting privation and for enjoyment. On the contrary, privation and enjoyment create the market for the inventions. The order of chings has been reversed. What is the inevitable result of this? The present has no time to become familiar with che half-imposed benefits and to master them. The situation resembles that of the Chinese, who should eat with a knife and fork. Speculation interposes irself there and lays out the benefits attractively before us; where there is none, speculation creates a thousand small and large advantages. Old, outdated comforts are called back into use when speculation cannot chink of anything new. It effortlessly accomplishes the most difficult and troublesome things with means borrowed from science. The hardest porphyry and granite are cut like chalk and polished like wax. Ivory is softened and pressed into forms. Rubber and gutta-percha are vulcanized and utilized in a thousand imitations of wood, metal, and stone carvings, exceeding by far the natural limitations of the material they purport to represent. Metal is no longer cast or wrought, but treated with the newest unknown forces of nature in a galvano-plastic way. The talbotype succeeds the daguerrotype and makes the larter already a thing forgotten. Machines sew, knit, embroider, paint, carve, and encroach deeply into the field of human art, putting to shame every human skill. Are these not great and glorious achievements? By no means do I deplore the general conditions of which these are only the less important symptoms. On the contrary, I am confdent that sooner or later everything will develop favorably for the well-being and honor of sociery. For now I refrain from proceeding to those larger and more difficult questions suggested by them. In the following pages I only wish to point out the confusion they now cause in those fields in which the talents of man take an active part in the recognition and presentation of beauty. ## II. If single incidents carried the force of conviction, then the recognized criumphs ar the Exhibition of the half-barbaric nations, especially the Indians with their magnificent industries of art, would be sufficient to show us that we with our science have until now accomplished very little in these areas. The same, shameful truth confronts us when we compare our products with those of our ancestors. Norwithstanding our many technical advances, we remain far behind them in formal beaury, and even in a feeling for the suitable and the appropriate. Our best things are more or less faithful reminiscences. Orhers show a praiseworthy effort to borrow forms directly from nature, yet how seldom we have been successful in this! Most of our attempts are a confused muddle of forms or childish triflings. As best, objects whose seriousness of purpose does not permit the superfluous, such as wagons, weapons, musical instruments, and similar things, we sometimes make appear healthier by the refined presentation of their strictly prescribed forms. Although facts, as we said, are no argument and can even be disputed, it is casy to prove that present conditions are dangerous for the industrial arts, decidedly fatal for the traditional higher arts. The abundance of means is the frst great danger with which art has to struggle. This expression is illogical, I admit (there is no abundance of means but only an inability to master them); however, it is justified in that it correctly describes the inverted state of our conditions. Practice wearies itself in vain in trying to master its material, especially intellectually. It receives it from science ready to process as it chooses, but before its style could have evolved through many centuries of popular usage. The founders of a flourishing art once had their material kneaded beforehand, as it were, by the beelike instinct of the people; they invested the indigenous motive with a higher meaning and treated it artistically, stamping their creations with a rigorous necessity and spiritual freedom. These works became universally understood expressions of a true idea thar will survive historically as long as any trace or knowledge of them remains. What a glorious discovery is the gaslight! (Figure 4] How its brilliance enhances our festivities, not to mention its enormous importance to everyday life! Yet in imitating candles or oil lamps in our salons, we hide the apertures of the gas pipes; in illumination, on the other hand, we pierce the pipes with innumerable small opening, so chat all sorts of stars, firewheels, pyramids, escutcheons, inscription, and so on seem to float before the walls of our houses, as if supported by invisible hands. This floating stillness of the most lively of all elements is effective to be sure (the sun, moon, and stars provide the most dazzling examples of it), but who can deny that this innovation has detracted from the popular custom of illuminating houses as a sign the occupants participate in the public joy? Formerly, oil lamps were placed on the cornice ledges and window sills, thereby lending a radiant prominence to the familiar masses and individual parts of the houses. Now our eyes are blinded by the blaze of those apparitions of fire and the facades behind are rendered invisible. Whoever has witnessed the illuminations in London and remembers similar festivities in the old style in Rome will admit that the art of lighting has suffered a rude setback by these improvements. This example demonstrates the two main dangers, the Scylla and Charybdis, berween which we must steer to gain innovations for art. The invention was excellent but it was sacrificed in the first case to traditional form, and in the second case its basic motive was completely obscured by its false application. Yet every means was available to make it more lustrous and to enrich it at the same time wich a new idea (that of a fixed display of fireworks). A clever helmsman, therefore, must be he who avoids these dangers, and his course is even more difficult because he finds himself in unknown waters without a chart or compass. For among the multitude of artistic and technical writings, there is sorely needed a practical guide to invention that maps out the cliffs and sandbars to be avoided