# ALL THAT GLITTERS IS NOT STAINLESS Reyner Banham (1966) Two of the most important resources of modern design are about a hundred and twenty years old now; one is the plastics industry, the other is the tradition of worry about the state of the art. As far as plastics are concerned, celluloid molding dates from the work of my countryman, Alexander Parkes, in the middle 1850s, and the vulcanizing of rubber dates from the work of the brilliant American, Charles Goodyear, a decade earlier. In the divided culture in which we live and work, we have to remind ourselves who founded plastics, but I don't have to remind you that design worry was founded by old John Ruskin and young William Morris, not to mention stylish Gottfried Semper in Germany and functional Horatio Greenough in the United States, in those same middle years of the last century. Yet, if you cast eyes on the visible scene or lay hands on the tangible environment, you will know that the effect of che plastics industry has been vast and all-pervasive. But what has the tradition of worry about the stare of the art done for design that can be compared to the avalanche of new materials and products that the plastics industry has emptied over the face of the earth? One thing it has done is to worry about new materials like plastics, new materials that drive out old familiar ones because their performance can be more accurately specified chan any ancient craftsman could select wood. Such materials can be more accurately specified by che designer, but remain totally inscrutable to the ultimate consumer. So, John Q. Public, the well-known car buff, looks at the badge on the front of the 1967 GT Supreno Saddlestitched Hodad Fastback and can't tell by looking whether it is an exquisite specimen of the goldsmith's art sealed under crystal glass or just crafty vapor gilding on the back of one-shot styrene molding – chough he has his suspicions! Or another instance: The red minicar in which the Banhar family used to thread its way deftly through the wild, swinging, miniskirted London scene was protected all around its lower perimeter by a strip of what was implied to be stainless steel but proved to be metal foil sealed under clear plastic. It glittered like stainless, but it wasn't. What is more, it did a better job than stainless could have done by not introducing certain risks of snagging, tearing and spearing that make steel dangerous in an accident. Yet the classic tradition of design worry would insist on genuine stainless and denounce the plastic trim as a cheap substitute or a trick. To satisfy the conscience of design (a monster on which I shall have much more to say), we have to be impaled by genuine stainless steel. Fortunately, design worry offers other precepts to guide us: For instance, the plastic trim would be OK if it didn't pretend to be something it isn't. Bur that would deprive us of some things we all clearly love: Glitter, high finish, and shine. These are visual qualities that plastics have democratized, so thar the average parking lot or appliance showroom bounces back the light in a way previous ages probably saw only on the serf-polished armor at aristocratic jousts and tourneys And chis love of glitter is nor just a vulgar dream of the silly and underprivileged. The greatest generation of design theorists, who flourished from 1910 to 1930, all loved glitter and taught us to love it too. Frank Lloyd Wright rejoiced in the lights of Chicago by night; Marinetti saw the new age reflected in the light bouncing back from control-consoles and electrical plants; Gropius called for buildings like crystal symbols, and Mies van der Rohe built them; Fernand Leger was struck by the magic of light on metal on a field gun; Le Corbusier and Marcel Breuer put that magic into production on furniture; Sir Herbert Read invited us to admire instruments and vessels of stainless steel. Industrial design rides upon che back of an industrial complex that exists primarily to satisfy such desires of man as universal glitter. But why does the heart of man desire it? Why did the great masters of modern design teach us to echo, in life, Goethe's dying demand, "Mehr Licht"? What is the source of this modern desire that plastics above all can supply? Philosophers, semanticists, psychologists, historians (and theres a bundle of resources every progressive design office and school increasingly employ) can all shed some light on this. The hypnotic effect of glitter and brightness caught up even Saint Thomas Aquinas, perhaps because "shining" is a word that rings with virtue chroughour Holy Writ; the face of Moses shone, and the house of a latterday patriarch was called "Taliesin" – Shining Brow. That old magic still works today for copywriters pushing toothpaste and for poets pushing the millennium, asking the Almighty to "look shining at new styles of architecture, a change of heart!" And that stunning phrase from W. H. Auden sums up exactly what modern design has done for the ancient magic of glitter. The great sóurce of our preoccupation with the shininess of modern design is that it symbolizes the fresh start, the clean new way of life that was, and is, to replace the miseries of those dark satanic mills in which industry and its arts of design were born. The generation of great gray eminences who presided over the birth of modern design as a responsible profession grew up in the grubby, coarse-textured world of late-Victorian industry. They saw that industry's main product – soot – irremediably caking the unpolished and unwashable surfaces of its main structural materials, brick and cast iron, and they complained, in the words of a great visionary of light, Paul Scheerbart: "Backstein-Kultur tut uns nur Leid (brick brings us only hurt)." No wonder that Adolf Loos wanted the walls of the heavenly city to be Alush and smooth from top to bottom and that his generation saw the task of design in Augean terms; a total, global cleanup. And not just a physical cleanup. In the writings of Le Corbusier, for instance, words like "health" and "morality" frequently turn up in adjacent phrases of the same sentence as twin attributes of modern design. One of the great intellectual resources of our times, the concept of moral improvement through design, is also one of its most powerful sources of intellectual confusion. I suppose it goes back to that lovable Victorian nut, A. W. N. Pugin, and his implied proposition that the revival of truly Christian, or pointed architecture would bring back the Age of Faith he supposed to have been in full swing when pointed, or Gothic, architecture appeared for the first time round. Ever since, the design theorists and worriers over the state of the art have insisted that style betrays the moral intention of the designers: Art Nouveau equals decadence; Expressionism equals selfishness; white walls and flat roof equal care for functional performance; redwood and roof overhangs equal care for human values; glass boxes equal inhuman disregard for people; chromium brightwork equals commercial swindle; and so forth. Not one of these propositions is demonstrably true, yet each has been (and many still are) passionately believed in or persists as unrevised prejudice. Yet we know that many flat-roofed and white-walled modern buildings were indifferently designed for functional performance. Or again, when General Motors came up with the neat, sweet, almost chrome-free body shell of the first Corvair, moralizing design critics congratulated Detroit on mending its wicked ways. Yet this is the model that Ralph Nader and all the litigants assert is a deathtrap sold by General Motors with full knowledge of its instability. It seems that the glitter of a morally sound style does not guarantee a stainless reputation to the product in use. Yet the moral reassurance seems to be remarkably necessary in all branches of design, and professional designers go to camp meetings in the mountains to be told what's right and what's wrong. No other profession, not even those bound by massive oaths of probity like the Hippocratic oath of the medicals, has this rage to keep itself morally pure by public self-examination. A man sitting next to me at a particularly bitter session of an architectural conference in England some time ago said incredulously, "Do dentists have meetings like this?" This moral preoccupation is one of the principal driving forces of modern design and could be a great guarantee to the general public were it not so self-regarding. That line of W. H. Auden I quoted earlier reminded me of something contemporary from Louis MacNeice: Our freedom as free-lances Advances towards its end; The earth compels, upon it Sonnets and Birds descend; And soon, my friend, We shall have no time for dances The concept of the freedom of free-lances coming to an end is sure to strike a familiar note, if only because it has been said so often at places like Aspen. Year after year, men have stood at the microphone and preached hellfire, the population explosion, and the sands of time running out. We love it, gladly agree that our time for dancing has come to an end, and resolve to go out and do better by taking the situation more seriously Better? What's so good about a world where the designers have salved their consciences by taking everything so seriously that poetry falls flat, the birds are all grounded, and nobody dances. One of humanity's main motives for surviving the bomb, the baby boom, and the final solidification of the freeway system into a coast-to-coast parking lot will be to get the birds and the poets back into orbit, revive the watusi and the pavane, and clip on the optional equipment generally. Humanity is nor going to survive just so designers can work up a high polish on their consciences, nor will it thank them for being less autarchic and more systematic in their thinking if the products don't get any better. Any person in his right mind will know that conscience divorced from function helps nobody, yet the design profession at large is chronically prone to elevate the demands of private conscience. Why? The answer again lies in the source from which modern design has sprung: the concept of the designer as some kind of artist. On the one hand, this idea descends from the traditional view of the architect as one who imposes cultural values on the mere construction of buildings; on the other hand, from the William Morris fiction of che designer-crafsman as an arcist in the sense in which the nineteenth century understood the artist, that is, as a free spirit answerable only to himself. If the public didn't understand che artist's work, so much the worse for the public, especially as they still owed him a living. Morris himself took a more socially responsible view than this, but my reading of many of his professed followers is that chey believed the only good product was one that brought pleasure to its producer. You will hear this proposition usually in che guarded and inverted form that mass production is evil because it brings no pleasure to the worker, but which ever way you phrase it, the whole conception is antisocial and perverse. No more in design than in dentistry can society accept that the first responsibility of its servants is to please themselves. And so to the big crossup: The public conscience of the design profession tells it that it cannot give absolute allegiance to the promptings of its private conscience. The designer as a social being confronts the designer as a creative individual in an unresolvable dilemma, and he is glad to have any hellfire demographer or revivalist cybernetician come and hand him a ready-made answer to this problem or any of the others. For the conscience problem is no more than typical, in its inner contradictions, of the situation that modern design has inherited from its historical sources. Whereas most of its physical resources have unequivocal value – new materials, new production methods, etc. – many of its psychological sources bear signs of the confusions and misdirections that have resulted from trying to keep up with the physical resources and failing. Take the concept of the basic design course, the Vorkurs, or what have you. There is a great primary source if you like! As a concept, it has a noble simplicity to it; the student is to be returned to zero and made to begin again with the elementary materials and primary relationships of his craft. The sophisticated shall be brought low, the honest and humble shall be lifted up. Yet all over the world the "Bauhaus syster," as this kind of teaching is often called, is in disarray and contention. Most design educators seem not to know where else to start, even while admitting that the system doesn't work. What has gone wrong? Firstly, and obviously, it never was a system, it was a body of teaching methods under constant revision from 1919 to 1933 by a body of remarkable men. And it was the men who mattered – the system never went wrong while it was administered by men who had been through the Bauhaus mill. It never went wrong on Joseph Albers, for instance. But che other thing to note is that these old Bauhausler' kept the methods under revision. There is startlingly little resemblance between what Moholy-Nagy was doing in his last years at the Institute of Design in Chicago and what he and Albers had been doing in Weimar in 1923. And I suspect the driving motivation to change everything was that one of the chief justifications of the original Weimar course invented by Hannes Itten had disappeared – it was no longer necessary to disabuse students of ingrained visual prejudices, and it is even less necessary today. A lot of things have happened to people since the Bauhaus was young, things like junk sculpture, hand-held movies, Batman, action painting, Hell's Angels, surrealism, custom-car shows, Op art, Henry Moore, Cinerama, and so on. As a result, people have become sophisricated – remarkably so – and far less visually prejudiced. Beady little eyes that can tell stainless from spray chrome at fifty paces and prefer the latter because it is more jokey clearly need a very different type of education from what suited the mystical peasants who crawled out of the Biedermier woodwork to join Gropius at Weimar. Something else that has happened to people since the Bauhaus is, of course, the Bauhaus - and industrial design generally. It has not gone unnoticed, either; the public has picked up some famous names and even a few fairly far-out tastes. A top New York design pundit told me how he observed suburban housewives admiring some Barcelona chairs in Macy's. His comment: "God, it was horrible!" My own comment on that comment would be: "When they stop throwing rocks at your head and throw a lifebelt instead, have the decency to say 'thank you' as you drown." But plenty of other design people would have responded in the same way. After a hundred years or more of regarding the bad taste of the public as one of design's major problems, it can be difficult to adjust to the idea that they may now be on your side and may have stopped throwing rocks. Furthermore, a lot of design people seem not to want to adjust. The belief that design is a thankless task definitely appeals to the martyr complex that design has inherited from the artistic forebears. And furthermore yet, being out of step was a guarantee to their consciences that they were in the right, for design‘is also part of the great progressive do-gooder complex of ideas based upon the proposition that the majority is always wrong. that the public must be led, cajoled, sticked, and garroted onward and upward. This evil backside on the face of public concern is one of the nastier aspects of worrying about the state of the art. It leaves behind some unpleasant questions, such as: Is the shine on the brow of the designer as he hands out the tablets of his lore the true stainless glitter of Messianic inspiration, or is it just the spray chrome of self-righteousness? Too many of the great unquestioned assumptions on which modern design is based have begun to peel and Aake of late; neither they nor their advocates appear to be quite such stainless representatives of the shining new world as once we thought. It is high time we checked to see which ones have rusted through and must be junked, which need to go back in the plating tank, and which only need a wipe over with the silvercloth. ## NOTE Reproduced from Banham, R., 'All thar Glitters Is not Stainless', in R. Banham (ed.) The Aspen Papers: Twenty Years of Design Theory from the International Design Conference in Aspen, London: Pall Mail Press, 1974, pp. 155–60. Copyright 1974 by the Pall Mall Press. Reprinted by kind permission of Mrs. Mary Banham and the Shelley Power Literary Agency and by arrangement with Henry Holt and Company, LLC.