# INTRODUCTION # Rebecca Houze Following the significant social and political changes of the Cold War period, which included struggles for civil rights, protests in both Europe and the United States against the war in Vietnam, and independence movements in the former European colonies of Asia, Africa and Latin America, many thinkers, artists and writers sought to describe a new cultural and psychological state of being – a condition of 'postmodernity', confusing and unstable, in which our sense of self had become fragmented. Fredric Jameson described the 1970s and 1980s as a simultaneously seductive and alienating period of late capitalism in which global commerce enabled the Aluid distribution of an enormous range of manufactured objects. For Jean Baudrillard, these objects are 'simulacra', or multiple copies for which there is no original. But we can't view postmodernism simply as a break from modernism; rather, as its name implies, it is in some senses a continuation. In All that Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity (1982), Marshall Berman described the instability of the contemporary world as a feeling that was also expressed in the work of some artists and thinkers of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The five texts in this section reflect ways in which designers, critics and historians, beginning in the late 1960s, started to reinterpret design aesthetically, socially and philosophically. Many, influenced by French post-structuralist literary theory, sought to reveal che political and economic forces behind design, while others gained a greater appreciation for the consumer's role in the design process, shaping an object's meaning in unforeseen ways. We begin with 'A Significance for A&P Parking Lots or Learning from Las Vegas', by architects Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown and Steven Izenour, first published in 1967. The Las Vegas strip of the 1960s was a vast decorated landscape oriented to a popular culture of consumption. Disconnected from the buildings themselves, oversized signs along the highway advertised hotels, gas stations and casinos with sculptural forms and neon lights that seemed both magical and banal. Was this the world of tomorrow that had been promised at the 1939 World's Fair? For Venturi, Scott Brown and Izenour, the vivid asphalt world of Las Vegas, so different from the spare and colourless modernist utopias of the early twentieth century, was a spiritualized realm of the everyday whose forms, they believed, should be celebrated. This attitude had been shared as well by Reyner Banham and the Independent Group, whose work in the previous decade oriented architectural discourse towards design history. Baudrillard, by contrast, found the excessive signage and visual stimuli of the late twentieth century to be oppressive and obscene, even pornographic', as he describes our experience of new media - especially film, television, and the emerging digital technologies – in his essay 'The Ecstasy of Communication'. The contradictory views expressed in these two essays, joyful and embracing of che fruits of capitalism on the one hand, and skeptical, pessimistic, even paranoid, in the face ofits processes on the other, represent the diverse attitudes that contributed to design historical readings of this period. German design historian Gert Selle, in his essay 'There is No Kitsch, There is Only Design!', which was written on the occasion of the 1983 exhibition Genial Design of the '80s' at the IDZ (lnternationales Design Zentrum) in Berlin, argues in the spirit of Venturi, Scott Brown and Izenour chat, 'A democratization of design has occurred ... A product culture – opulent, hedonistic, valid for all, and open to interpretation by all – has prevailed ...' Echoing the 'Populuxe' aesthetic described by Thomas Hine in a text extracted in section 4 of this Reader, Selle emphasizes the sensuous nature of this product culture and the psychological meanings that objects take on as they are adopted by consumers. His valorization of material goods was especially relevant in a politically divided Berlin, where capitalism was upheld by some as the arbiter of freedom and individuality, while demonized by others for fostering excess and greed, and where Baudrillard's postmodern critique of the 'hyperreality' of mass culture was perhaps less resonant. Whereas Selle embraced the anonymity of mass-produced goods, the Italian decorative household goods manufacturer Alessi attempted to circumvent che popular realm by insisting upon che primacy of well-known designers, such as Philippe Starck and Michael Graves. Peter A. Lloyd and Dirk Snelders question the idea of the omnipotent designer' in cheir lively and critical examination of Starck's own account of the origins of his 'Juicy Salif Lemon Squeezer', designed for Alessi in the late 1980s. In his 1968 essay 'Death of the Author', Roland Barthes argued that one ought not to bring the biography or supposed intentions of a work's maker into one's interpretation of it. Michel Foucault challenged Barthes's theory the following year in his 1969 essay 'What is an Author?' Building on the work of both Barthes and Foucault, as wel as Adrian Forry's influential book Objects of Desire: Design and Sociery Since 1750 (1986), Lloyd and Snelders demythologize Starck's exclusive role and attribute further credit to the object's users in determining the meaning of the lemon squeezer. Ellen Lupton and J. Abbott Miller examine the evolution of graphic design practices in the 1980s and 1990s under the influence of deconstruction, a school of thought based on the ideas of French philosopher Jacques Derrida, who argued in his book Of Grammatology – first published in French in 1967, expanding on the theories of linguist Ferdinand de Saussure – that the meaning conveyed through language is culturally constructed, and that writing disrupts and activates meaning, inserting itself into its production. Many artists, architects, writers and designers, from Barbara Kruger and Victor Burgin to Katherine McCoy and Daniel Libeskind, often aided by the possibilities of digital technology, explored new ways of revealing the arbitrariness and discontinuity of language and conceptual frames of reference. Postmodernism is a complex and heterogeneous cultural tendency rather than a period style and it emerged at different times in different geographical locations and within diverse media. Indeed, the very nature of postmodernist thought argued against homogeneity, unity or the completeness of the 'grand narrative', imposing instead a constant questioning, criticism and self-consciousness. While French literary critics such as Derrida, Barthes, Foucault and Baudrillard questioned the authority of myriad institutions from Western art and literature to prison systems, others, from Edward Said and Frantz Fanoć to Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak and Homi K. Bhabha, applied this critical framework to problematize cultural identity in the postcolonial worlds of India, Africa and the Middle East. Fashion, a medium that has long traversed national boundaries in its globalized production and consumption, offers a particularly fruitful avenue for postcolonial design history. In 'Fabricating Identities: Survival and the Imagination in Jamaican Dancehall Culture', first published in Fashion Theory in 2006, Bibi Bakare-Yusuf examines the idiosyncratic costumes created and worn by young women in Jamaica's 'dancehall' culture, drawing from an array of scholarship on subculture, feminist theory and racial polirics, and shows how sartorial expression can mobilize concepts of irony, history, parody and resistance. Like the sampling and recycling of 'ragga' music, Jamaican dancehall costumes are a bricolage of clashing and contradictory elements - ripped jeans, bondage tops and sparkling gold jewelry - revealing a bawdy and baroque love of excess and artificiality that references carnivalesque forms and traditions of African and Caribbean folk culture while also resisting hegemonic narratives of class, sex and race.