# INTRODUCTION TO THE GREEN CONSUMER SUPERMARKET GUIDE # Joel Makower, John Elkington and Julia Hailes (1991) Let's start with the basics: Every time you open your wallet, you cast a vote 'for' or 'against' the environment. This is more powerful than you might imagine. First and foremost, the marketplace - whether the supermarket, hardware store, or appliance showroom - is not a democracy. It doesn't take 51 percent of people 'voting' in any one direction to affect environmental change. Far from it. In fact, a relative handful of shoppers can send shock waves through an industry simply by making good, 'green' choices. Here's an example. In April 1990, three major tuna canning companies announced that they had made a revolutionary decision: They would stop buying tuna caught in a way that harmed dolphins. In the past, millions of dolphins a year were being needlessly killed simply because they became caught in the tuna fishermen's nets. When these three tuna companies made their announcement, they said nothing about 'protecting dolphins,' or even about 'saving the earth.' They spoke instead of 'consumer pressure.' What's amazing about all this is that it was a relatively small number of consumers who were 'pressuring' the tuna companies – probably less than a million active individuals, according to some reports. That's less than 1 percent of the American marketplace. In fact, during the twelve months preceding the tuna companies' announcement, tuna sales had barely changed. And so the 'votes' of a very small number of individuals revolutionized an entire industry. Another revolution took place a few months later. In October 1990, McDonald's Corporation announced that it was abandoning its polystyrene foam 'clamshell' hamburger boxes in favor of paper products. In making their announcement, McDonald's officials didn't claim that there was anything wrong with its plastic packages. But our customers just don't feel good about it,' said the company's president. 'So we're changing.' And again, while McDonald's had been the subject of consumer protests over che amount of unrecyclable trash it created, its sales had increased during the preceding year. There are other, less dramatic revolutions happening nearly every day. Since Earth Day 1990, practically every consumer products company seems to have examined its products and policies through a 'green' lens, taking a hard look at how sales might be affected by American's growing concern about the impact of their purchases on the environment. Across America, companies are listening to consumers' concerns for a cleaner environment, and watching carefully the way we 'vote' with our dollars. This book will show you how to cast votes for' Planet Earth whenever you shop for food and groceries. It is intended to help you sort through the often confusing world of Green Consumerisrmn to choose products that are environmentally sound. Why should you do this? For starters, as you'll see, some of the products we buy contribute to environmental problems. You may be surprised at the ways this can happen. For example, the manufacture of a paper towel or napkin can contribute dangerous pollutants downstream from a paper mill. The use of some aerosol products contributes to urban smog. Many products are packaged excessively in materials that are neither recycled nor recyclable. Some products are made by companies that have poor environmental records. Buying products from companies that pollute supports their lack of concern for the environment. Make no mistake: We're not suggesting we can simply shop our way to environmental health. Part of being a Green Consumer is learning when not to buy - when more is not necessarily better ... By making the right choices, you can help to minimize the pollution and waste created by many 'un-green' products and companies. [...] ## SHOPPING 'TIL WE DROP [...] [W]e've become rampant consumers. Nearly uninterrupted economic growth has helped to create a glut of goods in the marketplace. More than 20,000 new products land on supermarket shelves every year, a rate that does not appear to be slowing down. Those products arrive in stores in an astonishing assortment of materials, sizes, and formats. It's no longer simply 'regular size' and 'family size.' From aerosols to zip tops, the possibilities have been limited only by financial and technological constraints. Plastic has helped create thepackaging boom, but equally disturbing is packaging made of several materials – combinations of plastics, for example, or laminates consisting of paper, plastic, and foil. All of these present new problems and challenges when it comes time to recycle, reuse, or otherwise dispose of such trash. Ironically, some of these packaging options - aerosols and aseptic ‘juice boxes,' for example - are being presented by their creators as environmentally superior. It's been a colorful carnival of choices. But now we're finding that along with this apparent prosperity comes some tough problems, not the least of which is how to reconcile che resources being used and the trash created by it all. We've come to expect to pay extra for convenience, but we're just beginning to fully understand how high the price tag for convenience may really be. [...] ## THE THREE RS To help us remember what to do when shopping, the Green Consurmner movement has its own ser of ‘Three R's': refuse, reuse, and recycle. Each of them plays a key role in our attempts to minimize the environmental problems caused by our purchases and lifestyles. Keep in mind that this is a hierarchy: they are listed in descending order of preference. ## 1. REFUSE This is where the power of green is at its strongest. By refusing to buy wasteful and polluting products, you can make a powerful statement. As we have learned in other cases – most notably in the tuna industry's decision to go 'dolphin-safe', and in McDonald's decision to switch from polystyrene to paper – a few Green Consumers can send shock waves through an industry. What should you refuse to buy? Several things: • products packaged in many layers of packaging • products packaged in unrecycled or unrecyclable materials • single-use and other products thar have a short life before they must be thrown away • products that are not energy efficient products made by companies with poor environmental records • products purchased from retailers that have poor environmental records • products that make false or misleading claims about their 'greenness As we said before, few products are perfect. Your level of refusal to purchase some of these products will likely be influenced by the available alternatives. If a product you feel you need is available only in one form, and it is an environmentally undesirable one, you may choose to buy it anyway. But you don't have to accepc this as the best you can get.' Consider writing the manufacturer and ask them to consider changing the product's packaging or contents to make ic more environmentally responsible. Your letter will have more impact, however, if you have chosen not to purchase che product, and tell the manufacturer that [...] ## 2. REUSE Things that may only be used once before being thrown away are an inefficient use of our precious resources. It would be ideal if the products you do buy had the longest life possible. So, it is important to buy products that can be reused over and over. Consider batteries that must be chrown away – filling landfils with a mélange of hazardous chemicals - when you can buy ones that are rechargeable hundreds of times? Why buy something that will have a short life when you can buy something that will last and last? Some reusable things may cost a bit more to buy – rechargeable batteries, for example, are considerably more expensive than disposable ones – but over time, most of these products can more than pay for themselves. For example, a battery charger and four AA' batteries sell for about \$15, compared to four disposable 'AA' batteries, which retail for around \$3. But if you recharge the batteries only five times, you'll save enough money to recover the cost of the equipment, plus the electricity used for recharging. After that, you're ahead of the game! Another aspect of'reuse' is to look for products made from or packaged in recycled material. By doing this you are supporting the reuse of resources. The greater the content of recycled material, the better. Some products or packages state specifically: 'Made of 100% recycled content.' Lacking such statements, it's difficult to tell the exact amount of recycled content. ## 3. RECYCLE If you have refused and reused as much as possible, a high percentage of your leftover trash should be recyclable. And it is extremely important that you make sure to recycle what's left. Recycling is not a new idea. During World War II, it was a way of life for Americans. Everything from tin cans to scrap iron, rubber to cooking grease, was recycled to help the war effort. Everyone did his or her part to preserve the country's scarce or strategic resources. But when the war ended and the economy boomed, there was a backlash: Americans were taught by advertisers that true prosperity meant having the luxury to use things once and throw them away. Unfortunately, thar notion became a way of life for many people. Now, recycling has come full cycle. Our scarce and strategic resources are once again being associated with some of our everyday purchases – the petroleum contained in the plastic packaging we buy, for example, the bauxite and energy used to produce aluminum, the drinkable water spoiled by the effluents of paper mills, and on and on. And so, recycling has once again taken on a new importance. Consider just a few of the benefits recycling can bring: • Recycling a single aluminum can saves enough energy to produce 20 more cans. • Recycling a glass bottle or jar saves 25 percent of the energy it took to produce it and cuts up to half of the pollution created manufacturing a new one. • Using recycled paper instead of virgin paper for one print run of the Sunday edition of the New York Times would save the equivalent of 75,000 trees and reduce landfill waste. • Each year, the amount of steel recycled in chis country saves enough energy to meet the equivalent of the electrical power needs of the city of Los Angeles for more than eight years. Despite these impressive statistics, Americans recycle only about a tenth of our household trash; another 10 percent or so is incinerated. The rest of the trash is tossed into landfills. In discarding our trash, we are also discarding vast amounts of raw materials - and the energy it takes to convert these materials into finished goods. [...] ## NOTE Extracted from Makower, J., Elkington, J. and Hailes, J., 'Introduction' in The Green Consumer Supermarket Guide, New York: Penguin, 1991, Pp. 7–58. Copyright © by John Elkington, Julia Hailes, and Viking Penguin. Used by permission of Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc., and by Victor Gollancz, an imprint of the Orion Publishing Group.