# INTRODUCTION # Grace Lees-Maffei In 1987, leading British anthropologist Daniel Miller infamously decried the design historical project as being merely to 'locate great individuals such as Raymond Loewy or Norman Bel Geddes and portray them as the creators of modern mass culture'. Miller wasn't alone: design history has been criticized for focusing on a canon of 'good' design (mostly modernist) and for the perceived dominance of issues of production (that is, an emphasis on designs, designers and manufacturers). Design historian Jonathan M. Woodham's response to Miller and other critics of design history is included in the first section of Part II, 'Foundations, Debates, Historiography, 1980-2000'. The Design History Reader forms another response to such critiques. While aspects of production, the figure of the designer, a canon of greats and the concept of 'good' design are examined in various texts within the Reader, they are not represented within its organizational structure. Instead, following two sections that examine debates around the nature of design history and interdisciplinary examinations of design as a process of negotiations, the thematic sections that make up Part II of the Reader highlight themes of gender, consumption, mediation and globalization. Part I gathers together texts that inform histories of design, and Part Il demonstrates the variety of work being done in design history through thematic groupings. Following the opening section, which explores some of the foundational debates within design history about the object of study for this emerging discipline, Section 8 suggests that, rather than associating design history with the study of the object or objects, the discipline might equally be seen as centred on the examination of a range of processes, or negotiations. The texts chosen demonstrate negotiations such as those berween producers and consumers, or the negotiation of the meaning of a word such as 'craft', as well as each exemplifying the ways in which design history negotiates with other disciplines and fields. The facility with which design historians use and contribute to the work of a wide range of neighbouring subjects of study is useful and productive Section 9 reviews issues of gender and design. A classic foundational text from Judy Attfield is followed with two examinations of modernism and gender, and the section ends by extending the understanding of gender into issucs of masculinity and men's studies. The section builds on a distinction berween biological sex and culturally constituted gender to question the role of gender in the design process, to explore the ways in which taste is implicated in discourses around femininity and masculinity, and to consider the central role of objects, such as clothing and cars, in the construction of gendered identities. The role of objects in the construction of identities is also important in Section 10, on consumption. Political philosopher Marx, and sociologists Veblen and Bourdieu provide differing accounts of the role of objects in society. Semiologist, structuralist and, later, post-structuralist, Barthes examines what objects and images can mean in his study of 'Myth Today'. Clarke traces the way personal networks were exploited for comrnercial gain as Tupperware was distributed through the social ritual of party selling. Post-war America is further explored by Weems Jr., who reveals how large corporations moved from ignoring African-American consumers to targeting them as a market segment. The penultimate section addresses mediation, an aspect of enquiry that has recently achieved critical mass within design history. Such an emphasis can mean examining the channels and discourses thar exist between the producers and consumers of designed goods, such as advertising, advice literature and magazines (all are addressed in this section). Or, it can mean analysing the role of objects themselves as mediaring between individual and society. This is a fruitful area for further work. Another area demanding further investigation is explored in the book's last section: globalization. First, Crowley's case study of Poland's Zakopane style demonstrates the constructed nature of national design and can be used to question its utility as a unit of analysis. Avery and van Eeden each consider designed goods as evidence of the iniquities of colonialism. Weisenfeld explores a case study of aesthetic influence across nations and cultures and Bick and Chiper offer a comparative analysis of the non-Western consumprion of a North American brand in a process of transculturation. The thernes represented in Part II are only several from a wide range, which it has not been possible to ht into this Reader. Groupings by materials are discussed in the general introduction and groupings by place are suggested in Section 12. Further themes include, for example, domesticity, which has moved from the margins to becorne a central concern wirhin design history and cultural history. In the UK, the Arts and Humanities Research Council's Centre for the Study of the Domestic Interior (2002–6) was based ar the Royal College of Art, Victoria and Albert Museum and the Bedford Centre for che History of Wornen at Royal Holloway, University of London. It brought together the scholarship of interior design history with literary studies and ethnography. Texts in the Design History Reader that address issues of domesticity include Reid's analysis of the Khrushchev Kitchen, Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton's 'Most Cherished Objects in the Home', Sparke's introduction to her study of what she terms the sexual politics of taste', Clarke's exploration of the Tupperware party and Ferry's analysis of domestic advice. Clearly, the placement of a text in Part II is not intended to imply that it has no contribution to make to understanding of the history of design; on the contrary, we would urge readers to reflect on the texts here as contributions to Part I as much as Part Ii and vice versa. The potential readings that may be traced through The Design History Reader are various, numerous and in your hands. ## SECTION 7 Foundations, Debates, Historiography, 1980-95