# INTRODUCTION # Grace Lees-Maffei Design history has its foundations in texts unknowingly conceived as contributions to a nascent discipline. As European functionalist design gained currency between the wars, so writers produced commentaries that promoted modernist design practice. Pre-eminent among these is Nikolaus Pevsner's 1936 book Pioneers of the Modern Movement from William Morris to Walter Gropius (revised and republished in 1949 as Pioneers of Modern Design). But, while his work was influential as a catalyst for debate and research into modern design, Pevsner's position as a starting point for design history needs to be interrogated. His focus on key figures and a limited definition of design as a professional activity proved a rich spur to critical opposition. For example, although it retained aspects of Pevsner's modernist techniques, in its use of an overarching metanarrative to mount a linear, progressive history of furniture, Siegfried Giedion's anonymous history' Mechanization Takes Command (1948) moved away from Pevsner's canonical approach to an understanding of design as being embedded in everyday things. Mistakenly characterized by those outside che field as being hidebound by Pevsnerian modernist values, design history in Britain instead coalesced around the Design History Society in 1977, at least partly as a way of moving the critique beyond a celebration of modern movement designers towards a more inclusive understanding of design. As would-be design historians negotiated design history's genesis and future formation, a trail of self-consciously critical and reflective writings formed, mostly in the journal literature. A selection of this material, dating from 1980 to 1995, is presented in this section, and aspects of debates about the nature of design history are represented throughout the Reader. Questions such as 'how do we define design?' and its correlarive 'what should we be writing design history about?', 'what is the wider relevance of design history beyond its own disciplinary borders?' and. particularly, 'what is the relationship between design history and design practice?' became important for understanding current and future practice in the discipline. Informed by the British cultural studies movement centred around the University of Birmingham, Fran Hannah and Tim Putnam characterize early design history as displaying twin tendencies; neither the history of styles, nor eclecticism – the aspiration to social and historical context, assembled through dabbling in other disciplines such as business history and the history of technology – has produced satisfactory work. They advocate a design history that acknowledges the historically-specific nature of aesthetic evaluation, which replaces notions of a designer's 'innovation and influence' with deeper understanding of a designer's culture and which understands design not as a noun but rather as a series of changing processes of use. Hannah and Putnam's account, which specifies a very British story of design history responding to the needs of UK art college education, can be compared with Clive Dilnot's transatlantic perspective to reflect upon the differences berween design history as it developed in the UK and the US respectively, as can the texts by Victor Margolin and Jonathan Woodham, which also appear in this section. Dilnot's schematic 'Mapping the Field' considers the purpose, emergence and varieties of design history, with the latter placed into four spheres of interest: decorative arts, modernisms, design organisation and social relations. Dilnot extended his ideas into a second, looser and more discursive article, considering, in turn, 'Problems' and ‘Possibilities', informed by contemporary art historical practice. There, Dilnot's conclusion echoes Hannah and Putnam's: he calls for debate, which relates the design profession to the society in which it operates'. A readiness to harness che work of other disciplines has been a characteristic strength of design history. It is not in spite of but because design history emerged in opposition to an art historical umbrella chat no longer fit its needs that it has enjoyed its interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary freedom. A significant number of the texts included in The Design History Reader were not conceived specifically as design historical contributions. Design history has benefitted from sharing its concerns with neighbouring disciplines including business history, the history of technology, social history, anthropology and material culture studies as well as art history and the more recent visual culture studies. This very freedom to roam means that asking questions about the disciplinary boundaries of design history is an important and rewarding exercise. Published in 1989, John A. Walker's landmark textbook Design History and the History of Design still remains useful. Extracted here are Walker's ideas about the scope of design history, the meaning of design, the significance of a design canon', the oudline of a more inclusive production-consumption model' and the varieties of design history. A notable contribution by Victor Margolin to these disciplinary debates argued that design history's shortcomings meant it would be better off incorporated into what he has termed 'design studies'. Adrian Forty published a reply in which he stated: 'I do not feel the need, as Margolin does, to discover a boundary for design history [...] surely the discipline of history as it has developed over the last century or so already provides a perfectly satisfactory definition of the "field".' British design historian Jonathan Woodham, too, responded that design history was thriving, at least in Britain, and needed no parent discipline. As the extracts in this section make clear, the UK has developed a greater profile for design history institutionally, so that design history has been represented departmentally, with degree provision at BA, MA and PhD levels. Conversely, design history has retnained marginal to art history and American studies within the US acaderny, although this trend is slowly changing, as Margolin discusses in his revised article, which appeared in the 2002 volume of his essays The Politics of the Artificial. Scholarship proceeds collectively through questioning, disagreement and revision as well as collaboration and consensus. It is a sign of the discipline's vigour that debates about its nature and practice have continued. Design history has benefited from these foundational debates and moved on, so that the majority of design historians working today embrace a broad conception of the discipline's scope. Indeed, the transarlantic debate shown in che extracts here has been eclipsed by a global imperative for design history (discussed in section 12 of this Reader). And an early concern for good design has become less compelling during a period in which design history seeks to challenge ideas about discrimination and pursue an inclusive definition of design within social context. Because they have been useful, the writings extracted can be regarded as having achieved canonical status. Retrospectively, debates about what design is and what design history should be can be viewed as so much male jockeying indicative of a desire to draw boundaries, to prescribe the discipline and thereby gain mastery of it. Walker's book includes an important chapter by Judy Attfield on gender and design. The fact that Attfield's contribution is reproduced in Section 9 of this Reader with other gender analyses is not intended to diminish che significance of gender as a foundational issue for design history. On the contrary, it is because the editors of this volume believe that gender is absolutely fundamental as a first principle of design historical analysis that the subject has been accorded its own section for more detailed treatment than could be afforded by its appearance in chis section. The remaining sections in Part II examine some of the core questions facing contemporary design history, which have emerged as a consequence of the debates represented here.