# DESIGN HISTORY OR DESIGN STUDIES: SUBJECT MATTER AND METHODS Victor Margolin (1992) I would argue that design history has not developed on the basis of a well-understood subject matter or a set of methods and principles to guide research. Instead it has grown as a response to the initial literature in the field, first celebrating it and then criticizing it. I think, particularly, of Sir Nikolaus Pevsner's, Pioneers of the Modern Movement, first published in 1936 and later revised as Pioneers of Modern Design from William Morris to Walter Gropius. I would like to look more closely at this book for several reasons. First, because it initially proposed a narrative for design history that has been extensively criticized by many design historians working today; and second, because it raised the question of what contribution any historical narrative can make to the understanding of design. [...] Pevsner found the sublime in the work of Gropius and his fellow pioneers and by 1960 still believed that it embodied the true principles of design.' [...] It was Pevsner's entanglement of morality with subject matter that still makes his book problematic. The agenda which underlies the book excludes most of what we would accept today as appropriate subject matter for design history. Not only did Pevsner establish strict geographic limits to his investigation – its focus was Western Europe and Britain – but he also excluded all the objects of daily life used by ordinary people. For Pevsner, the study of design was an act of discrimination by which ordinary objects were separated from those which embodied an extraordinary quality. [...] Given Pevsner's restrictive view of objects worthy of historical investigation, it is no wonder that there have been so many efforts to broaden the subject matter of design history since his book was published. In England, Reyner Banham was one of the first to promote an infatuation wich popular culture, particularly thar which originated in America. Banham, a member of the Independent Group, a circle of artists, architects, and critics who gathered at the Institute of Contemporary Art in London in the early 1950s, was an important link to Pevsner since he had written his dissertation, later published as Theory and Design in the First Machine Age, under him at the Courtauld Institute of Art.2 [...] In a now-classic essay, "Who is this 'Pop'?" Banham made an important connection between Pevsner's discerning approbation of modern architecture and design and the enthusiasts of popular culture.3 [...] Although, as a critic, he wrote many articles about mass culture, Banham did not associate with the design history movement in England until the early 1970s when he contributed a volume on Mechanical Services to the Open University course on modern architecture and design and participated in a conference on design and popular culture at Newcastle Polytechnic to which he contributed a paper on American cars entitled "Detroit tin revisited." In an obituary of Banham, published in the Journal of Design History, Penny Sparke stated the importance of chis intervention. [...] Penny Sparke is correct in attributing to Banham a seminal role in opening up the subject matter of design history. His work gave younger historians the confdence to explore the history of mass-produced goods of all kinds. But Banham provided no principles for defining design as a subject with defensible boundaries. John Heskett brought a new set of concerns to design history when he wrote about military airplanes, tanks, and armored vehicles in a history of industrial design which was published in 1980. With a particular interest in understanding the conditions for design innovation, Heskett noted that the design of weapons was "heavily conditioned by military attitudes." Opening up a line of inquiry that few design historians have followed since, Heskett declared that: The aesthetics of fear are rarely discussed, or even acknowledged, yet the powerful impersonal forms of military weaponry are among the most widespread and evocative images of our age.6 We must also note that from a feminist point of view the subject matter of design history, despite its enlargement to include popular culture and military weaponry, still seems rather narrow. Cheryl Buckley cogently argued in 1986 that: To date, design historians have esteemed more highly and deemed more worthy of analysis the creators of mass-produced objects ... To exclude craf from design history is, in effect, to exclude from design history much of what women designed. For many women, craft modes of production were the only means of production available, because they had access neither to factories of the new industrial system nor to the training offered by the new design schools. Indeed, craft allowed women an opportunity to express their creative and artistic skills outside of the male-dominated design profession. What I have demonstrated thus far is a progressive opening up of the subject matter of design history to include topics well beyond what Pevsner would have been willing to recognize as valid. As further material for inclusion we could cite design in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and other regions of the world outside the European and North American orbic. But even having done that, we would still be faced with che nagging problem of whether and how we might establish boundaries for the field. We already have a fragmentation into histories of craft, graphic design, and industrial design. While these divisions serve expedient purposes in the education of students who are preparing careers in one or anocher of the design professions, they have no legitimate correspondence to fundamental categories of design activity and are simply stop-gap measures to hold off che inevitable problem of trying to define "design" itself. [...] The point I want to make here is that "design" does not signify a class of objects that can be pinned down like butterflies. Designing is an activity that is constantly changing. How then can we establish a body of knowledge abour something that has no fixed identiry? From a 19th century point of view, this is a troubling question. The 19th century mind thrived on classification. During this period. grear museums were built to house collections of discrete objects such as flora and fauna, high art, decorative arts, and technology. Boundaries berween the natural and the artificial were clearly drawn, Art was also differentiated from craft and the two were distinguished from technology. This is the legacy that clearly informed Pevsner's history and it still continues to bedevil the rest of us today. But today in the museum world, as in the universities, there are powerful intellectual forces that are breaking down the boundaries between fields of knowledge that once seemed immucable. [...] The expansion of design history's subject matter since the mid-1930s when Pevsner published his Pioneers seems to be just another redrawing of the design map. Although this expansion has continued in recent years to include current material as well as new topics such as design in Asia and Latin America, these topics have not yet contributed to a radical rethinking of the discipline. For the most part the development of design history has remained closely tied to specifc pragmatic ends, notably courses for young designers and future teachers of young designers, the preparation of museum curators, or the training of design journalists. There are no formal doctoral programs in design history anywhere in the world, although a number of individuals have received doctorates in Britain and the United States through programs of independent study. [...] To think of design history as a discipline based on firm assumptions of what design is and how we might study its past is to ignore the dynamic crossings of intellectual boundaries that are occurring elsewhere. Given the intensity of these activities and the blurred distinctions that already exist in so much current intellectual practice, we should ask ourselves whether design history as it has been constituted up to now is a viable enterprise. Having begun with such a limited subject matter as Pevsner provided, it is understandable thar significant energy would have been expended in the postwar years to broaden the range of topics that design historians might study. Although we have begun to incorporate new material from the less developed regions of the world, we have also learned from a number of feminist historians that entire categories of objects, regardless of where they were designed or produced, are suspect because of their relation to patriarchal culture which extends across all geographical regions. Feminism is the most powerful critique of design history thus far, although feminist historians are divided among those who have maintained a static definition of "design" and history's relation to it and those who are interested in using history to explore what a new feminist design practice might be like." Despite these differences, however, feminists have had to break down the distinctions berween history, theory, and criticism in order to establish a different vantage point from which to view design and design history. But even looking at design from new vantage points we must still ask ourselves whether we are studying a specific class of things that are stabilized in categories such as industrially produced objects or whether the subject matter of design is really much broader. I think the latter is true. The history of design in the 20th century shows us that designers, unlike architects, have not worked with a set of principles and rules that have proscribed the scope of their work. Rather they have invented the subject matter of their profession as they have gone along. [...] For several years my colleague Richard Buchanan and I have been working with the following theme, Design is the conception and planning of the artificial, that broad domain of human made products which includes: material objects, visual and verbal communications, organized activities and services, and complex systems and environments for living, working, playing, and learning." We recognize that the artificial as a category is not fixed but is changing rapidly as human invention is turned to phenomena that were once thought to be natural. We see this in artificial intelligence, genetic engineering, and nanotechnology, for example. To grasp the significance of these new activities, we must be continually changing our understanding of what design is while we are simultaneously pre-occupied with establishing its historical narrative. [...] What I foresee instead is that design can serve as a powerful theme around which che most diverse kinds of inquiries, related to history as well as to the contemporary situation, can be organized. Instead of developing design history as a field, or discipline as some would hope, I would prefer to think of design studies which includes history but also invites a dialogue with other specialists as well as historians. I define design studies as the field of inquiry which addresses questions of how we make and use products in our daily lives and how we have done so in the past. These products comprise the domain of the artificial. Design studies encompasses issues of product conception and planning. production, form, distribution, and use. It considers these topics in the present as well as in the past. Along with products, it also embraces the web of discourse in which production and use are embedded. Scholars in a number of different spheres of research are already contributing to a wider discourse about design. I have mentioned feminism and its critique of design in patriarchal culture. Mary Douglas, Grant McCracken, Daniel Miller and other cultural anthropologists have written extensively about consumption although they focus on it as a symbolic act while ignoring questions of how products are designed and made as well as how they are actually incorporated into the daily activities of users. In his important book, Material Culture and Mass Consumption, published in 1987, Miller was particularly critical of the kind of design history that is "intended to be a pseudo art history, in which the task is to locate great individuals such as Raymond Loewy or Norman Bel Geddes and portray them as the creators of modern mass culture."io (Since his book was published, however, Miller has participated in several conferences that have been sponsored or cosponsored by the Design History Society in the UK and his book has been cited by some design historians as being an important work for the field.) Miller, a cultural anthropologist, has focused his attention on the consumer and asserted, along with other anthropologists, that consumption is not a passive act but a creative project through which people put products to use in ways that were not necessarily intended by those who designed and produced them. Miller has thus broadened the context within which to study products in contemporary culture. A good example of such a study is the catalogue Household Choices which was produced by the Household Choices Projecr in the UK." It includes essays by historians, anthropologists, urbanists, and specialists in housing and features several photographic essays as well. John Murdock, in his introduction to the catalogue, noted the influence of new methods in art history and literary criticism on the study of design: The idea that the product, usually at the point of sale, might pass beyond the control of its manufacturer into a realm of variable understanding. interpretation and use, seemed less familiar than it had recently become to art historians, and certainly less familiar chan it was to critics of written texts.'2 This project has brought us a considerable distance from Pevsnet's Pioneers of the Modern Movement, a book from which it differs in many ways. It does not moralize about the quality of products nor does it privilege the artifacts of the Modern Movement as worthier of our attention than others. At the same time, it does not give primacy to the designer's intentions in defining the meaning of a product. It suggests a more complex identity for the product chan simply the outcome of a design process. The product is located in a situation and its meaning is created in part by its users. I do not wish, however, to privilege cultural anthropology as the disciplinary base for design studies. It is only one of a number of established fields of study – the philosophy of technology, general systerns theory, cultural studies, among them - whose scholars are now slowly beginning to recognize the significance of design in contemporary life. As I reflect on the form that design studies might take in a university setting. I do not envisage a new discipline that will close its boundaries to interventionists from elsewhere. I would follow the lead of Robert Kates who was instrumental in establishing a program on world hunger at Brown University. Instead of focusing on the problem of disciplinary boundaries, Professor Kates emphasized the definition of problers for study: But we are not a discipline, nor should we be one, despite our proto-theory, scholarly materials, or university courses. We need to be inclusive, not exclusive; we will need new skills and insights as our current inquities change." The challenge for those of us who study design at the end of the 20th century is to establish a central place for it in contemporary life. This requires bold new conceptions and the kind of openness Professor Kates advocates rather than the more limited thinking that has characterized much of design study thus far. ## NOTES Extracted from Margolin, V., 'Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter and Methods', Design Studies 13(2) (April 1992), pp. 104–16. Copyright © 1992, with permission from Elsevier. This article was reprinted in Design Issues 11(1) (1995), pp. 4–15 and a revised version appeared in Victor Margolin, The Politics of the Artificial: Essays on Design and Design Studies, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002, pp. 218–33. 1. Despite chis statement in Pioneers of Modern Design from William Morris to Walter Gropius (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1960), Pevsner had begun to rethink some of his views in the 1950s. See P. Madge, 'An enquiry into Pevsner's Enquiry' Journal of Design History, vol. 1, no. 2 (1988): 122-123. 2. D. Robbins, (ed.), The Independent Group: Postwar Britain and the Aesthetics of Plenty (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990). 3. Reyner Banham, 'Who is this "Pop"?' in Banhar, Design by Choice, (Ed. Penny Sparke) (London: Academy Editions, 1981), 94 4. Penny Sparke, 'Obituary Peter Reyner Banham 1922–1988, Journal of Design History vol. 1, no. 2 (1988): 142. 5. John Heskett, Industrial Design (New York and Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1988), 190. 6. Ibid. 7. Cheryl Buckley, 'Made in Patriarchy: Toward a Feminist Analysis of Women and Design,' Design Issues, vol. 3, no. 2 (1986): 7. 8. J. Attheld, and P. Kirkham, (Eds.), A View from the Interior (London, UK: The Women's Press, 1989); Sheila Levrant de Bretteville. 'Feminist Design: Ar the Intersection of the Private and Public Spheres,' in R. Langdon, and Nigel Cross, (Eds.), Design and Society (London: The Design Council, 1984), 86–93; A. Franck, 'A Feminist Approach to Architecture: Acknowledging Women's Way of Knowing,' in E. Perry Berkeley, (Ed.), Architecture: A Place for Women (Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989), 201–216. 9. Richard Buchanan and Victor Margolin, Program statement for the conference, 'Discovering Design,' held at the University of Illinois, Chicago, 5–6 November 1990. 10. Daniel Miller, Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell, 1987), 142. 11. T. Putnam, and C. Newton, Household Choices (n.p: Futures Publications, 1990), 12. John Murdoch, 'Foreword,' Household Choices, 5. 13. Kates, W., 'The Great Questions of Science and Society Do Not Fit Neatly into Single Disciplines' The Chronicle of Higher Education, Secrion 2 (May 17, 1989): 81.