# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING Much of the associated material for this section is cited in the texts extracted. An approach to the analysis of design and culture informed by British cultural studies is articulated in Dick Hebdige's 'From Culture to Hegemony' (1979). Another early methodological intervention is Tony Fry's 'Design History: A Debate?' (1981) and his later Design History Australia (1988) is an essential critique. A 1995 special issue of the journal Design Issues collected key contributions to the debate about design history, including Jeffrey L. Meikle's 'Design History for What? Reflections on an Elusive Goal' and Victor Margolin's 'A Reply to Adrian Forty'. More recent texts questioning what design history is and should be are Meikle's 'Material Virtues: On the Ideal and the Real in Design History' (1998) and Judy Atthield's 'The Meaning of Design: Things with Attitude' (2000). A revised version of che Margolin article extracted here was printed in his book The Politics of the Artificial: Essays on Design and Design Studies (2002). Further texts that exemplify the shape of the discipline include the bibliographies, dictionaries and encyclopaedias, anthologies and textbooks produced to support design historical study. Anthony J. Coulson's A Bibliography of Design in Britain 1851–1970, published by the Design Council in 1979, as part of its remit to promote discussion of design, provides a snapshot survey of the printed literature on design shortly after the formation of the UK Design History Society in 1977. The book's simple structure denotes its early publication within the development of the discipline: sections deal in turn with professional infrastructure (education, organisations, exhibitions, museums and collections), 'design and designers' (methods, design theory, periods, important designers) and 'Areas of design activity (design by media, such as graphics, interiors, furniture, transport etc.). A more developed thematic approach is anticipated in the short section on contextual social history. A later US counterpoint is provided by Jeffrey L. Meikle in his American Design History: A Bibliography of Sources and Interpretations' (1985), which bears comparison with Victor Margolin's 'A Decade of Design History in the United States 1977–87' (1988) and its follow-up 'Design History in the United States, 1977–2000' (2002). See also Margolin's 'Postwar Design Literature: A Preliminary Mapping' (1989). Norwithstanding its title, Simon Jervis's 1984 Penguin Dictionary of Design and Designers retained a decorative arts emphasis exemplified by The Oxford Companion to the Decorative Arts (1975, 1985) and The Penguin Dictionary of Decorative Arts (1977). Jervis's dictionary was superseded by Guy Julier's The Thames and Hudson Dictionary of Design since 1900 (1993, 2004) and Mel Byars's The Design Encyclopedia (1994, 2004). Anthologies of relevance to design history include Paul Greenhalgh's Quotations and Sources on Design and the Decorative Arts (1993), Isabelle Frank's The Theory of Decorative Art: An Anthology of European and American Writings, 1750–1940 (2000), Ben Highmore's The Design Culture Reader (2008), Hazel Clark and David Brody's Design Studies: A Reader (2009) and Fiona Candlin and Raiford Guins's The Object Reader (also 2009). Specific felds of design practice are represented by Carma Gorman's The Industrial Design Reader (2003) and Mark Taylor and Julieanna Preston's INTIMUS: Interior Design Theory Reader (2006). Architecture is the focus of Abigail Harrison-Moore and Dorothy C. Rowe's Architecture and Design in Europe and America, 1750–2000 (2006). Writings by designers are anthologised in Gillian Naylor's William Morris by Himself: Designs and Writings (1988) and Mary Greenstead's An Anthology of the Arts and Crafts Movement: Writings by Ashbee, Lethaby, Gimson and their Contemporaries (2005), to name but two examples. Two anthologies prepared for the UK's Open University in the 1970s remain useful: Christopher Harvie, Graham Martin and Aaron Scharf's Industrialisation and Culture 1830–1914 (1970) and Tim and Charlotte Benton with Dennis Sharp, Form and Function: A Sourcebook for the History of Architecture and Design 1890–1939, (1975). The early design history textbooks remain the first port of call for many readers and have therefore been influential in contributing to ideas about what design history is. Penny Sparke's An Introduction to Design and Culture: 1900 to the Present and Adrian Forty's Objects of Desire both appeared in 1986. The following year, Hazel Conway's edited collection Design History: A Student's Handbook (1987) featured introductory materials-based chapters by leading design historians. It was eclipsed by John A. Walker's 1989 textbook, extracted here. Also published in 1989, Victor Margolin's Design Discourse: History, Theory,. Criticism formed the first of a series of selections from Design Issues, including Dennis P. Doordan (ed.), Design History: An Anthology and Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan (eds) The Idea of Design (both 1995). Peter Dormer's Design Since 1945 was published in 1993. In 1996 the narrowly focussed Design and Aesthetics: a Reader appeared, edited by Jerry Palmer and Mo Dodson and the broadly based Block Reader in Visual Culture, edited by Jon Bird et al., which, like the Design Issues readers, derives exclusively from one publication. Jonathan Woodham's Twentieth-Century Design (1997) provided a textbook historical survey with a bibliographic essay, while Guy Julier's The Culture of Design (2000) set an agenda for design historians considering contemporary design issues. Further US surveys include David Raizman's History of Modern Design (2003) and Jeffrey L. Meikle's Design in the USA (2005). ## SECTION 8 Objects, Subjects and Negotiations