# INTRODUCTION # Grace Lees-Maffei While some of the questions raised in Section 7 surrounded a perceived need to define design history as a discrete discipline and to delimit its feld of study, this section proposes that two key defning characteristics of design history are the breadth of its understanding of design as a subject of study and its ability to utilize and contribute to a wide range of related disciplines. Design history is an umbrella discipline bringing together a range of felds determined by materials and processes, such as ceramics history, furniture history and fashion history and its breadth is extended through the influence of neighbouring disciplines, such as cultural studies, material culture studies, psychology, sociology and the history of technology. This section takes its cue from the call for contextualized understanding of design in the preceding section: the selection of texts presented here demonstrates how diverse is the design in design history 'Design' is a verb as well as a noun; the word can refer to a process as well as an object. The 'design' studied by design historians is not confined to objects and materials: a range of processes are implicated, including the design process, manufacturing, marketing and recailing, consumption, meaning formation and practices which extend beyond objecthood into political, social, temporal, and other realms. This section showcases some exemplary object analyses, i.e. studies of a single object and studies of a type form, which also exemplify the understanding of design as a process. Motor scooters, refrigerators and Shaker furniture are all examined here as are the processes of mediation and consumption, cherishing, market-led innovation, etymology, meaning-formation, and spiritual significance. More examples of object analyses appear throughout che Reader. For example, of the five texts extracted in Section 1, three are object analyses. Focussing on 'an Indian basket', 'a slipware dish' and 'the Wedgwood slave medallion' respectively, these texts reveal the processes of negotiation berween indigenous and settler communities in seventeenth-century America, che negoriations between local and external influences in design, manufacture and consumption of eighteenth-century vernacular ceramics, and the way a piece of jewellery could be used to denote affiliations in the largest political debate of the century. Cultural studies practitioner Hebdige considers the way in which meaning accrues to an object through the processes of design, mediation and consumption practices. His text is a case study of how an object type can form a cogent unit of analysis. Furthermore, Hebdige's text can be used to reflect on the interplay between design history and cultural studies, especially as it developed in Britain in the 1970s and 1980s, and subsequently as popular culture studies in the US. Hebdige begins by discussing how we might go beyond Roland Barthes's structuralist and semioric approach to analysing the symbolism of goods, as demonstrated in "The New Citroën' (1957), to 'reconstruct the full "cultural significance" of the DS Cirroen' (p. 81) in a range of contexts, which is what he does for the motor scooter. Psychologist Mibaly Csikszentmihalyi and sociologist Eugene Rochberg-Halton collaborated on The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self(1981). They attempt to trace the processes by which particular objects become associated with personal meanings, cherished' and therefore distinguished from the more ordinary, perhaps disregarded, objects in the home. For design historians, this book has provided great insight into consumption practices. Consumption became a dominant concern in design history since the 1990s as is examined in more detail in section 10 of the Reader. Historians of technology have made extensive studies of processes that inform the development of technologies and their application to goods and services. Ruth Schwartz Cowan's essay 'How the Refrigerator Got lts Hum' (1985) provides a case study of a process by which market forces triumphed over the best technological solution. The essay anticipated the influence of the Social Construction of Technology (SCOT) model, in which human action is shown to shape technology, rather than the reverse. Feminist historians of technology, Cowan significant among them, have illuminated the social and economic importance of the home and its technologies and provided appropriate methodologies for its study. An emphasis upon industrialization within design history has partly effaced the importance of craft for understanding mass production and the design process. While craft history perhaps plays a disproportionately small part in The Design History Reader, simply because there are many other fields crowding in for attention, there is much in the Reader to inform understanding of both historical and contemporary craft objects. In this section, Paul Greenhalgh shows how a keyword such as 'craft' is the subject of considerable negotiation in a way that makes useful comparison with the reflections on the various meanings of 'design' in the previous section. He argues that the term craft, as it has been used at least since the Second World War, is an amalgam of three intellectual elements: decorative art, the vernacular and the politics of work. In the formation of this amalgam, the separation of the idea of fine from decorative art was the earliest and most important event. Greenhalgh models the utility of erymology in uncovering a process by which meanings accrue to objects, noting that For several decades now the major debate within the craft world has been to do with the status of the word itself' and 'A space had opened up between the actuality of practice and the discourse of classification. While Dean (see section 1) discusses how the term 'vernacular' has been used as a historical category, Greenhalgh provides a brief sketch of how the vernacular was understood and negotiated in the past. Greenhalgh concludes that the commercial, institutional and creative survival' of craft practices is dependent upon achieving 'clarity and confidence' in the use of the word 'craft'. The final extract in this section continues the exploration of craft, using che highly particularized example of the Shaker religious communities. Curator Burks reveals the Shakers to be involved in a self-conscious and continual process of negotiation with the objects and spaces that surrounded them. Shaker faith was embedded in the details of design and manufacture of their furniture and ocher goods. Objects were used to negotiate religious belief, and harmonize the material and spiritual realms. While the production and consumption of goods was mediated by a set of shared rules, innovations such as metric measures were incorporated into their developing traditions of working. The texts presented here show negotiations occurring on two levels. They make clear how design history focuses on objects as ways of exploring wider processes and negotiations, berween manufacturers and consumers, consumers and objects (Hebdige, Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton), and manufacturers and retailers (Cowan). And, just as objects operate within a series of negotiations, so design history negotiates with other disciplines in order to understand the significance of those objects. These texts suggest negotiations berween design history and neighbouring disciplines including cultural studies (Hebdige), the social sciences, including psychology and sociology (Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton), the history of technology and business history (Cowan), craft history (Greenhalgh) and museology (Burks). This section aims to draw attention, by example, to the negotiations found throughout the Reader and the discipline it represents.