# THE MOST CHERISHED OBJECTS IN THE HOME Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Eugene Rochberg-Halton (1981) To find out what the empirical relationships between people and things in contemporary urban America are, in 1977 we interviewed members of 82 families living in the Chicago Metropolitan Area. Twenty of these families lived in Rogers Park, a relatively stable community at the northern limits of the city of Chicago; the remaining were selected from the adjacent suburb of Evanston, an old and diversified city in its own right, even though it is geographically indistinguishable from Chicago. Half the families belonged to the upper-middle class, half were lower-middle class as measured by Hollingshead's occupational ratings and by level of education. In each family we talked to at least one of the children, both parents, and at least one grandparent, who often lived at a different address from the younger generations. There were 79 respondents in the youngest generation, 150 in the middle one, and 86 in the oldest generation, for a total of 315 respondents. Forty-fout percent of the respondents were males. The Evanston sample was selected by street canvassing of census tracts chosen to give a stratified socioeconomic representation ranging from the poorest to the wealthiest neighborhoods in the community. The Rogers Park sample was drawn by random telephone sampling. Of the total group, 67 percent were Caucasian, 30 percent Afro-American, and 3 percent Oriental. Fifty percent of the lower SES (socioeconomic status) respondents were Caucasian, 50 percent Afro-American; the respective proportions for the upper SES groups were 87 and 13 percent. The first criterion in selecting the sample was to find families with three generations that could be interviewed, so that families with one generation living farther than one hour driving distance, or with children under 10 years of age, were excluded. [...] Each respondent was interviewed in his or her home. The interview began with a number of questions directed at the respondent's relationship to the neighborhood, community, and the city; [...] We then asked for a description of the home icself – its atmosphere, its mood, its outstanding physical characteristics. Next, we inquired about the objects it contained: 'What are the things in your home which are special to you?' After the respondent identified the special objects, the interviewer probed to ascertain why the object was special, whar it would mean to the respondent to be without it, where it was kept, how and when it was acquired, and so forth. All responses were tape recorded and later transcribed verbatim. The word 'special' was used by the interviewer throughout the interview to mean significant, meaningful, highly valued, useful, and so on. It is less precise than these other words and chus imposes on the respondent the cask of defining what constitutes the meaning of an object. A total of 1,694 things were mentioned by the people with whom we talked; on the average, this comes to slightly more than five objects for each respondent. By examining the kinds of objects mentioned as being special, we were hoping to make a first step toward understanding how people relate to the world of artifacts around them. But clearly; it was impossible to tackle all 1,694 obiects one by one. Thus we attempted to develop an empirical typology or grammar' by sorting these things into as many distinct categories as would preserve the commonsense, or emic,' characteristic of the objects. It was found that 41 categories accounted for all the objects mentioned and that each thing could be classified in one of them with at least a 95 percent accuracy. Some of these categories were much more inclusive than others: Furniture, for example, included chairs, tables, chests, sofas, and dining-room sets; TV, on the other hand, included only television sets. [...] A similar process of classification was used to organize the reasons given why the objects were special. A total of 37 meaning categories were constructed, such as 'Memento,' 'Souvenir, 'Gift,' or 'Enjoyment,' depending on whether the respondent stressed general memories or the memory of a place, the fact that the object was a gift or provided enjoyment as the reasons for cherishing the object. Because possessions actually exist in a context for the person and have multiple meanings, any one object may appear in more than one of these categories. The categories do not exhaust the range of meanings or capture the personal significance of objects for individual respondents, but they serve to uncover generally shared patterns of meaning. By using these criteria, we coded 7,875 different reasons that the objects were special; in other words, on the average, each object was coded as having four separate meanings. Interrater reliability in coding these meanings was less than for object categories but was still respectable: the agreement between two coders was approximately 85 percent for all generations. In most of the following analyses, instead of the 37 meaning categories, we shall use 11 meaning classes that resulted from combining similar categories. For instance, the categories ## THE MEANING OF THINGS Table 3.1. Percentage of total sample mentioning at least one special object in each calegory (N = 315)
<table><tr><td colspan="2">Objects</td><td>Percentage</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1. Furniture</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2. Visual art</td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3. Photographs</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>4. Books</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>5. Stereo</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>6. Musical instruments</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>7. TV</td><td>21</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8. Sculpture</td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>9. Plants</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>10. Plates</td><td>15</td></tr></table> Flgure 30. 'Percentage of total sample mentioning at least one special object in each category (N = 315)', Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Eugene Rochberg-Halton, 'The Most Cherished Objects in the Home', The Meaning of Things: Oomestic Symbols and the Self, Cambridge University Press, 1981. Chapter 3. pp. 55-89. Image on p. 58 reprinted by permission of Cambridge University Press. 'memento,' 'recollection,' 'heirloom,' and 'souvenir' were all combined in the class 'Memories. […..] With these preliminaries out of the way, we can now turn to our first question: Whar sorts of objects are significant in the lives of contemporary Americans? [Figure 30] lists the ten categories of objects that were mentioned the most by people. Taken together, they add up to about half of all the objects; the remaining 31 categories account for the other half. [...] ## FURNITURE Not surprisingly, chairs, sofas and tables are most often mentioned as being special objects in the home (beds were classified in a separate category). After all, furniture is important in the home, it is the sine qua non without which the house would be naked and one would be ashamed to have visitors. One could say that furniture is special because it makes life at home comfortable, but then one immediately thinks of a Japanese or Hindu home, which is practically devoid of furniture but equally comfortable to its inhabitants. Clearly, the notion that chairs and tables are more comfortable in an absolute sense is nor true; they are so only within a pattern of cultural habits and expectations. Furniture presupposes a settled life-style and surplus exchange power, which can be invested in these symbols of stability. Perhaps it is only after the great silent bourgeois revolution of the late Middle Ages that furniture became a central domestic symbol, a test for the family's settledness and affluence. From the early dynasties of Egypt through the Renaissance, few homes contained any furniture. [...] Initially, the possession of furniture was a clear sign of authority: In Ottoman Moslem culture until quite recently a couch (or divan) was still a symbol of the ruler and his court; it was on such a couch that the pasha or Raja conferred with his counselors, hence the name of Divan given to che supreme council and its 'prime minister.' In most cultures a throne has been the symbol of highest authority, and we still defer to the chairperson at a meeting. Thus it seems that in the evolution of cultural life forms the personal ownership of furniture is a relatively recent step, one that confers authority and power to its owner. As with any other manmade object, furniture is the product of psychic activity. It takes che concentrated attention of many people to acquire the raw material and the intention to fashion it in a shape that conforms to the human body and its actions. Therefore to own furniture, again like owning other objects, means to possess other people's psychic activity. The pre-eminent place of furniture over other objects might be due to the fact that it can be displayed more easily, that it is supposed to be useful, and that it constitutes relatively heavy investments of money, and hence of psychic energy. [...] Here is what a teenage boy says about why he selected the kitchen cable and chairs as being special to him: 'Cause I can sit on 'em, eat on 'em, play on 'em, do lots of things with the chairs and table. (What would it mean to you not to have these things?) It would mean that I wouldn't have as much comfort because those chairs are very comfortable. And with another cable, I couldn't play as good 'cause I love the feel of that table. This short answer illustrates several trends in the answers of the younger generation. The meaning of kitchen furniture for this youngster revolves about the active experiences he can have by interacting with the thing; the accent is on the utilitarian, enjoyable characteristics of the objects, and the outcome refers exclusively to the respondent's own personal self. The cable does not provide a link with others or with some ideal to be achieved; it only serves the momentary purposes of the user. Among women of the middle generation, the reasons for cherishing furniture are very different. The following is an example of why one middleaged woman finds two upholstered chairs in the living room special: They are the first two chairs me and my husband ever bought, and we sit in them and I just associate them with my home and having babies and sitting in the chairs with babies. Another respondent comments on why a wicker arm chair in the living room is special to her: It is very old. It was given to me as a present by one of the oldest black families in Evanston. They thought I would take care of it. My brother brought it home. It belonged to some very special people, and it has been in the family for years. Both these quotes illustrate quite a different set of meanings from the ones typically mentioned by younger respondents. Gone is the emphasis on comfort and enjoyment; one finds, instead, important memories, relationships, and past experiences. The egocentric attitude is replaced by a concern for other people: one's family or wider ethnic connections. There is an implicit sense of responsibility for maintaining a nerwork of social ties. In general, these themes are quite typical of the women in the sample. The same themes also appear in the answers of their husbands. In addition, the men often look at their furniture as the embodiment of a personal accomplishment, or an ideal they strive to achieve. Here is what one man says about a desk in the study: I made it. It's very simple, actually, it's just a door. Actually, of the things that I've made, the reason I'm fond of them is that I've made every effort to achieve simplicity. I have a passion for building things as compulsively as possible and as economical of design as possible. My wife and I are Junkers and garbage freaks, we like to make use of things other people don't use or throw away, that are free. In contrast to the other answers reviewed thus far, this one introduces a direct note of accomplishment, of the object embodying an abstract ideal (simplicity, economy) as opposed to personal enjoyment or social relationships. Of course [...] every category of respondents might mention any of the reasons for cherishing an object. Yet some types of reasons are more typical of some classes of respondents than of others, and this is why we use quotations from children stressing enjoyment and egocentricity, frorn adult women stressing social networks, and from men stressing accomplishment and abstract ideals. {...] Generally, when grandparents mention furniture they say it is special to them for reasons similar to those thar adult women, the mothers in our sample, also stress: the objects are signs of past events, of ties to famnily and to other people. In addition, there is also a strong concern about the object becoming a link with the younger generations; a sign representing the owner to be passed on into the future: (This chest) was bought by my mocher and father when they were married, about 70 years ago. And chey didn't buy it new, so it's practically an antique. My mother painted it different colors, used it in the bedroom. When I got it my husband sanded it down to the natural wood. It's beautiful. I wouldn't part with it for anything. And I imagine the kids are going to want it, my daughter-in-law loves antiques. It is interesting in this case that the respondent thought it noteworthy to mention the transformacions brought to che chest: Her mother painted it, her husband sanded it. These actions change the appearance of the thing while preserving its identity; chey appropriate the object at different stages of its relationships by stamping the identity of the owner on its appearance. Painting and sanding are almost rituals of passage in a relationship with the object spanning two generations. In addition to the concern for continuity of relationships in the past and in the future, the oldest generation, like the youngest, often stresses the theme of comfort and personal usefulness that a favorite piece of furniture provides. There was a total of 638 meanings given for why furniture was considered special. Of these, the largest classes referred to Memories (15 percent), Srylistic reasons (12 percent), and Experiences (11 percent). Only 5 percent of the meanings were Utilitarian, that is, focused on the usefulness of the object. The importance of the relationship between the self and the object was stressed in 17 percent of the cases; 15 percent of the time, people stressed the relationship between the object and the respondent's immediate family. Other kin and nonfamily ties were mentioned, each only about 3 percent of the time. In the range of its significance, Furniture is quite typical of the other object categories. They tend to be considered special for a limited range of reasons: because they embody memories and experiences; because they are signs of the self and of one's family. [...] ## [ANALYSIS] The first impression one receives in reviewing the evidence is the personal nature of the themes evoked by the objects that people surround themselves with in their homes. [Figure 31] lists the frequency with which all the meaning categories were mentioned. The two most frequent categories of meaning were the ones coded Self (mentioned by 87 percent of the respondents) and Enjoyment (mentioned by 79 percent). These two categories generally overlapped because objects providing enjoyment almost always were coded also as having reference to the personal self. When a reason was phrased: 'I like to work with these tools,' 'TV is entertaining.' 'I dig my bed,' or 'Guns. Shooting is my hobby,' it was coded in both the Self and the Enjoyment categories. Thus the main single reason for having objects is one that mighc be seen as egocentric and hedonistic. It might be useful to distinguish at this point hedonistic pleasure from enjoyment. The former refers to a value derived from satisfaction that is an end in itself; it is che consummation of a feeling and not the meaning or purpose of that feeling that makes the difference. Whatever will make one 'feel good' is pleasurable regardless of what effects this has on one's other goals or on the goals of others. Enjoyment, by contrast, results from the purpose aimed at by the activity and intrinsically involves the integration of the pleasurable feeling with one's context of goals. Enjoyment, then, is a purposeful feeling inseparable from the interaction and not merely a subjective, individual sensation. It implies self-control, the development of skills in the pursuit of voluntary as opposed to spontaneous goals. [...] The second major theme is that of kinship; of the ties that bind people to each other – that provide continuity in one's life and across generations. On the whole, 82 percent of the people cherished at least one object because it reminded chem of a close relative. But numbers do not begin to express the importance of kinship ties. It is the cumulative effect of hearing people talk about their parents, spouses, and children, the depth of their emotions in doing so, that is so impressive. The quotes reported earlier in this chapter should give the reader some flavor of the importance of these attachments; in later chapters we shall elaborate further on this theme. The third theme concerns the lack of certain relationships rather than their presence. In addition to meanings dealing with the self, and with one's kin and friends, there could have been a chird level of interactions represented in the home, a level referring to a wider area of meanings. One might have expected artifacts that reminded the owner of his or her ethnic background, political allegiance, cultural preferences and values. After all, homes in the past were supposed to be centered around household gods, crucifixes, icons, historical pictures, flags – symbols of attachment to widely shared cultural ideals. Such objects, however, were conspicuous by their absence. Only 7 percent mentioned religious meanings, and 9 percent, ethnic ones. Political allegiance was not represented visibly in the home, except for the pictures of a few 'heroes' like John F. Kennedy or Martin Luther King. The meaning category 'Embodiment of an Ideal,' mentioned by 24 percent of the people, was the most frequent in this area. But the ideals mentioned were often very fragmentary and idiosyncratic; the closest to a widely shared cultural ideal was perhaps the ecological consciousness symbolized by plants. 'Table 3.2. Proportion of respondents mentioning various classes and categories ofmeaning for cherishing special objects (N = 315)
<table><tr><td colspan="3">A. Person-related reasons</td><td colspan="3">B. Non-person-related reasons</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Percentage of people mentioning</td><td></td><td></td><td>Percentage of peaple inentioning</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1. Sell</td><td>87</td><td></td><td>1. Memories</td><td>74</td></tr><tr><td>2.</td><td>Imnediate Family</td><td>82</td><td></td><td>Memento</td><td>52</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Recollection</td><td>46</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Spouse We</td><td>34</td><td></td><td>Heirko</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Chilklren</td><td>33</td><td></td><td>Souvenir</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mother</td><td>35</td><td>2.</td><td></td><td>52</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Father</td><td>27 20</td><td></td><td>Associations</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Siblings</td><td>11</td><td></td><td>Ethnic</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Grandparents</td><td>12</td><td></td><td>Religious</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Grandchildren</td><td>7</td><td></td><td>Collections</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Whole Family</td><td>22</td><td></td><td>Gilts</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>3. Experiences</td><td>86</td></tr><tr><td>3. Kin</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Enjayment</td><td>79</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Relatives</td><td></td><td></td><td>Ongoing Occasion</td><td>4H</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ancestors</td><td>ar</td><td></td><td>Release</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>In-law&#x27;s</td><td>11</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>4.</td><td>Intrinsic Qualities</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>4. Nonfamily</td><td>40</td><td></td><td>Cratt</td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Friends</td><td>24</td><td></td><td>Uniqueness</td><td>17</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Associates</td><td>9</td><td></td><td>Physical</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Heroes</td><td>20</td><td></td><td>Description</td><td>46</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>5. Style</td><td></td><td>60</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>6. Utilicarian</td><td></td><td>49</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>7. Personal Values</td><td>53</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Embodiment</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>of Ideal</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Accomplishment</td><td>31</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Personification</td><td>15</td></tr></table> Flgure 31. 'Proportion of respondents mentioning various classes and categories of meaning for cherishing special objects (N = 315)', Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Eugene Rochberg-Halton, 'The Most Cherished Objects in the Home. The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self, Cambridge University Press, 1981, Chapter 3, pp. 55-89. Image on p. 85 reprinted by permission of Cambridge University Press. The reasons people give for cherishing their household possessions reveal a picture of the meaning of life for urban Americans that is in some respects familiar but in others, strikingly unexpected in its detail. We get a sense of a life in which immediate experience, a search for enjoyment, is imporcant. At the same time, one feels an almost equally strong desire to remember the good times of the past and especially to preserve the relationships experienced with people very close to oneself. This search for meaning seems to proceed in almost complete vacuum of formal goals and values. This does not mean that goals and values are absent. They are often implicit in the other reasons about which respondents talk. But none of the great spiritual and ideological systems that are supposed to have moved people in the past have left objective traces in the homes ofthese Americans nor has a new configuration as yet taken their place. Another generalization that the findings suggest is the enormous fexibility with which people can attach meanings to objects, and therefore derive meanings from them. Almost anyching can be made to represent a set of meanings. It is not as if the physical characteristics of an object dictated the kind of significations it can convey, although these characteristics often lend themselves to certain meanings in preference to others; nor do the symbolic conventions of the culture absolutely ## 88 THE MEANING OF THINGS Table 3.3. Distribution and percentages of meaning classes making up the object categories
<table><tr><td rowspan="3">N</td><td></td><td>%</td><td>N</td><td>%</td><td>N</td><td rowspan="3">%</td><td>N</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Furniture</td><td colspan="2">Visual art</td><td colspan="2">Sculpture</td><td colspan="2">Musical instruments</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Memories</td><td>98</td><td>15.4</td><td>84</td><td>15.6</td><td>79</td><td>18.0</td><td>25</td><td></td><td>10.4</td></tr><tr><td>Associations</td><td>35</td><td>5.5</td><td>28</td><td>5.2</td><td>47</td><td>11.6</td><td></td><td>8</td><td>3.3</td></tr><tr><td>Experiences</td><td>69</td><td>10.8</td><td>47</td><td>8.8</td><td>36</td><td>8.9</td><td></td><td>52</td><td>21.7</td></tr><tr><td>Intrinsic Qualities</td><td>56</td><td>8.8</td><td>86</td><td>16.0</td><td>46</td><td>11.3</td><td></td><td>8</td><td>9.3</td></tr><tr><td>Style</td><td>80</td><td>12.5</td><td>56</td><td>10.4</td><td>47</td><td>11.6</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>6.3</td></tr><tr><td>Personal V’alues</td><td>27</td><td>4.2</td><td>24</td><td>4.5</td><td>22</td><td>5.4</td><td></td><td>21</td><td>M.8</td></tr><tr><td>Utilitarian</td><td>34</td><td>5.3</td><td>1</td><td>.2</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>.3</td><td>5</td><td>2.1</td></tr><tr><td>Self</td><td>106</td><td>16.6</td><td>54</td><td>10.1</td><td>47</td><td>11.6</td><td></td><td>57</td><td>23.日</td></tr><tr><td>Immediate Family</td><td>98</td><td>15.4</td><td>84</td><td>15.6</td><td>58</td><td>14.3</td><td></td><td>41</td><td>17.1</td></tr><tr><td>Kin</td><td>18</td><td>2.8</td><td>6</td><td>1.1</td><td>10</td><td>2.5</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>.#</td></tr><tr><td>Nonfamily</td><td>17</td><td>2.7</td><td>67</td><td>12.5</td><td>19</td><td>4.7</td><td></td><td>6</td><td>2.5</td></tr><tr><td>Toual</td><td>638</td><td>100.0</td><td>537</td><td>100.0</td><td>406</td><td>100.0</td><td></td><td>240</td><td>100.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Photos</td><td colspan="8">Televisions Stereos Books</td></tr><tr><td>Memories Associations</td><td>79</td><td>26.7</td><td>1</td><td>.6 16</td><td>7.6</td><td>29</td><td>11.3</td><td>7</td><td></td><td>4.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>5</td><td>1.7</td><td>5</td><td>2.8</td><td>7</td><td>3.9</td><td>22</td><td>8.6</td><td>7</td><td>4.1</td></tr><tr><td>Experiences</td><td>27</td><td>9.1</td><td>56</td><td>31.5</td><td>59</td><td>28.1</td><td>50</td><td>19.5</td><td>36</td><td>21.3</td></tr><tr><td>Intrinsic Qualities</td><td>49</td><td>16.6</td><td>4</td><td>2.3</td><td>4</td><td>1.9</td><td>10</td><td>3.9</td><td>13</td><td>7.7</td></tr><tr><td>Style</td><td>8</td><td>2.7</td><td>2</td><td>1.1</td><td>7</td><td>3.3</td><td>3</td><td>1.2</td><td>24</td><td>14.2</td></tr><tr><td>Personal Values</td><td>7</td><td>2.4</td><td>7</td><td>3.9</td><td>4</td><td>1.9</td><td>37</td><td>14.5</td><td>25</td><td>14.8</td></tr><tr><td>Utilitarian</td><td>2</td><td>.7</td><td>20</td><td>11.2</td><td>17</td><td>8.1</td><td>14</td><td>5.5</td><td>1</td><td>.6</td></tr><tr><td>Self</td><td>22</td><td>7.4</td><td>60</td><td>33.7</td><td>68</td><td>32.4</td><td>58</td><td>22.7</td><td>39</td><td>23.1</td></tr><tr><td>Immediate Family</td><td>77</td><td>26.0</td><td>17</td><td>9.6</td><td>21</td><td>10.0</td><td>19</td><td>7.4</td><td>14</td><td>8.3</td></tr><tr><td>Kin</td><td>13</td><td>4.4</td><td>2</td><td>1.1</td><td>2</td><td>1.0</td><td>3</td><td>1.2</td><td>1</td><td>.6</td></tr><tr><td>Nonfamily</td><td>7</td><td>2.4</td><td>4</td><td>2.3</td><td>5</td><td>2.4</td><td>1</td><td>4.3</td><td>2</td><td>1.2</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>296 100.0 178 100.0 210 100.0 256 100.0 169</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>100.0</td></tr></table> Figure 32. 'Distribution and percentages of meaning classes making up the object categories', Mihaty Csikszentmihalyi and Eugene Rochberg-Halton, 'The Most Cherished Objects in the Home', The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self, Cambridge University Press, 1981, Chapter 3, pp. 55-89. Image on p. 88 reprinted by permission of Cambridge University Press. decree what meaning can or cannot be obtained from interaction with a particular object. At least potentially, each person can discover and cultivate a nerwork of meanings out of the experiences of his or her own life. This is illustrated in [Figure 32], where one sees thar every object category can serve to convey a meaning in each meaning class. One person even cherished a TV set as a carrier of memories; and another, plants, a painting, and a sculpture for utilitarian reasons —these were the most unlikely associations between objects and meanings. All other object-meaning combinations were mentioned at least twice or more often. The process of creating signification is not entirely determined by prior cultural convention. Ar che same time, (Figure 32] also indicates that although each person is free to attach any meaning to any object, in fact, some things stand for Memories much more often than others, whereas other objects recall Experiences or Personal Values more frequently. In this specialization of meaning both the object's physical characteristics and the values attributed to it in the culture at large seem to play a determining role. We have seen, for instance, that TV and stereo sets most often signify the Self; photos, the Immediate Family; and paintings, Nonfamily. Photos specialize in preserving Memories, sculptures embody Associations, and so on down the line. ## [...] In describing specific objects and meanings, we have seen that these relationships are unequally distributed. Some are characteristic of youth, others of old people; some are more prevalent among men, sore among women. This suggests that the cultivation of the self might involve transactions with different types of objects, depending on one's sex role and position along the life cycle. ## NOTE Extracted from Csikszentmihalyi, M. and Rochberg-Halton, E., chapter 3. 'The Most Cherished Objects in the Home,' The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981, Pp. 55–89. © Cambridge University Press 1981, reprinted with permission.