# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING A suggested antecedent to the work in this section is the notion of type-forms, which Le Corbusier developed in The Decorative Art of Today (1925) from the earlier thoughts on standardization of Hermann Muthesius, explored in section 3 of this Reader (see also Ulrich Conrads's Programs and Manifestoes on 20th-Century Architecture, 1989). The text by Dick Hebdige in this section refers to Roland Barthes's approach to analysing the symbolism of goods, as demonstrated in 'The New Citroën' (1957, see section 10 of the Reader) and, in turn, Penny Šparke discusses Hebdige's text in the extract from her work in section 9 of the Reader. See also Christopher Breward's discussion of the utility of cultural studies in design history in Cultures, Identities, Histories: Fashioning a Cultural Approach to Dress' (1998). Design historians have made much use of material culture studies, including Jules David Prown's 'Mind in Matter: An Introduction to Material Culture Theory and Method' (1982); Material Culture: A Research Guide, edited by Thomas J. Schlereth (1985), including chapters by Kenneth L. Ames on American decorative arts and household furnishings and Simon ). Bronner, on material culture study in American folkloristics, from Schlereth's 1983 special issue of American Quarterly; Arjun Appadurai (ed.), The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective (1986), especially Igor Kopytoffs 'The Cultural Biography of Things: Commoditisation as Process'; Daniel Miller's Material Culture and Mass Consumption (1987) and Grant McCracken's Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities (1988). The influence of material culture studies within design history is exemplified in Judy Attfield's approach to object analysis – see Wild Things (2000) and Bringing Modernity Home: Writings on Popular Design and Material Culture (2007). Also, Louise Purbrick's The Wedding Present. Domestic Life Beyond Consumption (2007) and her article on the same subject (2003), and Alison J. Clarke's work, including Tupperware: The Promise of Plastic in 1950s America (1999) (extracted in section 10 of this Reader). Further on the history of technology, Wiebe E. Bijker, Thomas P. Hughes and Trevor Pinch, The Social Construction of Technological Systems (1987); Carroll Pursell's contribution to Schlereth (ed.) (1985) and Barry M. Katz, 'Review: Technology and Design – A New Agenda' (1997). As well as the other chapters in Donald MacKenzie and Judy Wajcman (eds) The Social Shaping of Technology (1999) see Cowan's A Social History of American Technology (1997) and More Work for Mother (1983). Those interested in Paul Greenhalgh's exploration ofhistory through analysis of the changing meaning of words, as demonstrated here in discussion of'craft', will find literary and cultural studies practitioner Raymond Williams's Keywords (1976, revised 1983) useful, and its follow-up New Keywords, edited by Tony Bennett, Lawrence Grossberg and Meaghan Morris, professors of sociology, communication studies and cultural studies respectively (2005). The remaining essays in The Culture of Crafi, edited by Peter Dormer, from which the Greenhalgh essay here is taken, are useful, as are: Tanya Harrod's The Crafis in Britain in the 20th Century (1999); Janet Kardon (ed.), Revivals! Diverse Traditions: The History of Twentieth-Century American Craft, 1920–1945 (1994); Pioneers of Modern Craft, edited by Margot Coatts (1997); Sue Rowley's Australian edited collection Craft and Contemporary Theory (1997); Glenn Adamson's Thinking Through Craft (2007), and chree special issues of The Journal of Design History: Craft, Culture and Identity (1997), Craft, Modernism and Modernity (1998), both edited by Tanya Harrod, and Dangerous Liaisons: Relationships between Design, Craft and Art, edited by Grace Lees-Maffei and Linda Sandino (2004). Mary Butcher's 'Eel-Traps without Eels', in the former volume, provides a particularly lucid and concise case-study of the place of function in the understanding of craft objects. See also Berg's new The Journal of Modern Craft for developed analyses of the significance of craft. On Shaker design see Mary Lyn Ray, 'A Reappraisal of Shaker Furniture and Society' (1973) and Beverly Gordon's 'Victorian Fancy Goods: Another Reappraisal of Shaker Material Culture' (1990); Timothy D. Rieman and Jean M. Burks, The Complete Book of Shaker Furniture (1993) and Stephen Bowe and Peter Richmond, Selling Shaker (2006). ## SECTION 9 ## Gender and Design