# 'IN LONDON'S MAZE': THE PLEASURES OF FASHIONABLE CONSUMPTION, FROM THE HIDDEN CONSUMER Christopher Breward (1999) ## THE PLAYGROUND OF CITY LIFE: CLOTHING AND THE CONVTVIALITY OF BACHELORDOM Arkinson now comes in to put the finishing touches to his master for the morning promenade. He brings half a dozen cravats, and a whole trayful of scarf pins ... Seton is to choose ... puts a forefinger on a scarf of quiet grey; then again, laying it on a perfect pearl ... retires to his dressing room, followed by his man. When he reappears, it is as the finished product of civilization. He is booted, hatted. gloved and generally carried out in all the details of a perfect scheme ... His valet regards him with the pride of the stableman who has just drawn the cloth from the loins of a flawless horse. Cigarettes, Atkinson, I think. Put the cigars in the bag!' The cigarettes are in a tiny case of enameled gold, which bears an 'S' in inlaid diamond points on the lid ... 'Which cane sir?' 'Let me see!' and he turns to a suspended rack at the door. There are as many canes as scarf pins. He hesitates berween a trife in snakewood, with a handle of tortoiseshell, and a slender growth of some other exotic timber, capped with clouded amber almost as pale as the pearl ... Now we are out of doors, and skimming, in Seton's private hansom over the well watered roads ... until we reach the flower shop in Piccadilly for the morning button hole ... Our dandy looks at a whole parcerre and points to one bloom, like the chess player who knows that he is pledged to the choice by touching the piece.' Lynn Hapgood characterizes No 5 John Streer as 'a world of surfaces in a text full of sensuous detail that exposes the deceitful nature of what the physical eye sees... the upper class in particular is portrayed as all surface since its concerns are with life as art, in a deliberate evasion of reality.' Cercainly the dressing rituals of Seton detailed above appear to conform to that commonly held notion of aristocratic dandyism as the denial of sordid realities through the deliberate manipulation of appearances, the construction of a protective and critical carapace of finely tuned sartorial exhibitionism. Yet beyond the caricaturing tendencies of the novel and the abstract definitions of dandvism, Seton's self-presentation can be seen also to link with real debates and concerns over the state of masculinity, the advances of consumerism and the problems of city life that informed an understanding of male behaviour and desire berween c.1880 and 1914. In the pages of popular novels, tourist guides, journalistic accounts and advertising promotions both rea! and imaginary men like Seton were seen to epitomize a mood of assertive masculine acquisitiveness whose challenging potency has since been overlooked or misconstrued by historians of consumption and gender alike. Cultural historian Richard Dellamora, in finding connections between these disruptive models and the sexual upheavals ofthe 1890s, conjectures the reasons for the dismissal of such characters and their signifcance in broader histories when he states that Heretofore, political historians, by which I mean male political historians, have been blind to the significance of homosexual scandal in the 1890s ... a less defensive approach by historians would acknowledge the crisis of masculinity at the time. And a less pure history, which permitted itself to be contaminated by literary scandal and gossip, would recognise how anxiety about gender roles inflects a wide range of interactions. Along with Elaine Showalter, Regenia Gagnier and others, Dellamora repositions the fin de siècle dandy at the centre of these interactions, in a manner which, while it illuminates the rhetorical intentions of a cosmopolitan minority, perhaps ignores the day-to-day commercial significance of his type. His rise and downfall is used portentously to reflect 'a loss of balance berween the dual imperatives of leisure and work incumbent upon Victorian gentlemen. The dandy is too relaxed, too visible, consumes to excess while producing little or nothing." In the spectacular and very singular figure of Oscar Wilde, whose 1895 disgrace is generally quoted as precipitating the crisis over masculinity that informed twentiethcentury attitudes towards manliness, the two models of dandy and gentlemen are seen to have become dangerously confused. As Gagnier states, berween the demise of his aesthetic mode in 1882 to the moment of his trial 'Wilde made the respectáble sartorial choice of non-working class men: to appear as a gentleman ... in a manner which had been perfected by a dandy'.º In his mannered appropriation of the evening suit and other trappings of a leisured lifestyle, Wilde mocked the ideals of gentlemanliness with ultimately disastrous results. But, beyond that affront to notions of bourgeois respectability, the dandy is held to signify very little else, perhaps because it is difficult to extrapolate broad cultural meanings from the posturings of one man, or because the close association of dandified forms of presentation and behaviour with the image projected by Wilde has succeeded in limiting their application elsewhere. While acknowledging the unsettling effects that figures like Wilde had on the literary, legal and medical construction of sexualities, and agreeing with the necessity for revisiting the period of the 1890s as a key moment in the development of their 'modern' forms, I would argue here for a clearer recognition of the less spectacular circumstances which gave rise to an identifiable 'dandified' style as being rooted in a more popular, generalized celebration of leisured urban masculinity relatively untouched by high moral debate. The adoption of a visibly relaxed and 'non-productive' sartorial rhetoric was not in itself transgressive; only the context and manner in which it was mobilized made it so. In equating an embracing of idle display so closely with sexual dissonance, historians are in danger of obscuring or distorting similar choices made by men who identified wich the status quo. Furthermore, one might claim that the metropolitan dandy drew on a thriving, self-consciously virile culture of cosmopolitan masculine consumption which had been in evidence since che 1860s at least, and which colonized wider forms of popular culture at precisely the moment that Wilde's version was acquiring its problematic sexual reputation, sending the established version into partial eclipse. The two strands of leisured display, one associated with political, sexual and social resistance, the other with a commercial engagement with the urban market place, require careful unraveling if the defining features of the latter are not to be subsumed by the polemics of the former. The fictional figure of Seton, with his carefully judged appearance and assiduous collecting of fashionable possessions, is chus as much a reflection of what London's shops and catalogues offered the ambitious young man at the turn of the century as he is evidence of decline and decadence. His literary scopophilia may look to the obsessions of Dorian Gray in one direction, but in the other it finds a brighter resonance in the pages of Doré's illustrated price list of tailored goods. That the mannered presentation of self could simply represent an unproblematic adherence to the rules of 'smart' society in an expanded arena of consumer choices is clearly communicated in guides such as London and Londoners, published in 1898, where the author provided tongue-in-cheek guidance to che ways of modern society: It is fashionable to be radical in theory and advocate women's privileges. To have an inner knowledge of all classes of society. To know the latest club scandals. To have some particular fad. To wear some particular garment different from anybody else ... To telegraph always, but rarely write a letter, unless one has a secretary. To be up in the slang of the day ... to know the points of a horse. To have an enormous dog in the drawing room ... To know the latest music hall song ... To go to Paris twice a year and at least once to Monte Carlo. Never to be in town after Goodwood or to return to it before November. To be abroad from January to March ... To excel in one's special sport, fox hunting for preference, and to be able to drive a tandem. To subscribe to every journal published. To belong to a club and have some of one's letters and telegrams sent there. Always to fill one's rooms with more men chan women. While such a list evidently reveled in the paradoxical nonsense of trivia, its pointed social observation map the co-ordinates of an accumulated cosmopolitan knowledge that defined the exalted status of the fashionablc bachelor. In its random citation of desirable adherences it is possible to discern che more serious juxtapositions of high and low culture, reactionary posturing and avant-garde enthusiasms artistic affectation and hearty philistinism, chat influenced a prevalent model of fashionable masculinity at che turn of the century. Here was a dandified position that comfortably accommodated sexual conformity, advanced tastes and commodity fetishism within its remit. Of particular significance are the references to music hall, slang, sport, new technology and travel. Beyond the expected mention of club life, gambling and hunting which would have denoted aristocratic excess in a list produced ffry years earlier, this engagement with the modernity of London, in company clearly defined as male, positioned the potential flâneur in che midst of a culture enthralled rather chan repelled by the notion of masculine pleasures. More than this, the figure of the leisured London bachelor, targeted by the publishers of such guides, had hirnself come to symbolize a modern and fashionable position by che 1890s, as potent in commodity terms as the Gibson girl or the Dollar Princess. And, like his sisters, he was utilized by retailer and consumer as a prop upon which products and attitudes could be hung. Aside from clothing, the elevation of certain forms of metropolitan recreations to the status of a bachelor 'specialism' had been a marked characteristic of popular writing from the mid nineteenth century. The 1860s were identified with the beginnings of a celebration of the romantic, itresponsible lifestyle associated with the cosmopoliran single man which reached its apex by 1900.\* The twin poles of his existence, around which all other characteristics circulated and drew their influences, from political persuasion to visual appearance and interior decoration, were food and drink and the brash culture of the modern man's journal. Thus the apotheosis of the bon viveur was the man who spent his days either 'researching articles' for the popular press or reading them in the comfort of a West End restaurant or café, and his evenings at che theatre. [...] However, while the assertive models of masculine consumption offered by popular journals proclaimed a bullish adherence to the clean and flourishing style of the bachelor dandy, less accommodating descriptions of his appearance and behaviour on the streets and in the bars of the metropolis give some indication of the tensions implicit in the ideal. Confined to the tailoring catalogue or the society column the leisured bachelor epitomised the essence of West End fashionable poise, and offered a refreshingly positive reading of the sartorial options open to the aspirant 'man about town'. Yet so ubiquitous did his figure become from the 1880s onwards, through its reproduction in yellowback novels, advertising campaigns and stage productions, that more negative or less closed interpretations were inevitable (Figure 37]. For every clean-cut Englishman puffing the 'smart' attractions of the Arrow collar or Wood-Milne shoeshine there was a more derogatory model espousing the 'wicked attractions of the East End or the quick fortune to be made from venture capitalism. Beyond the fixing of the bachelor type as a model for an unproblematic, if occasionally risqué, consumerism, his mediation and wider diffusion through urban culture was revealing of a more profound crisis in the nature of an English middle-class and aristocratic masculinity not entirely secure with the tenure of its hegemony. The tendency at the turn of the century to equate certain forms of dandified appearance with an entrepreneurial crassness and betrayal of the gentlemanly ideal clearly held anti-semitic implications. Those novels which celebrated the freedom and decency of che bachelor existence were equally insistent on presenting a parody of the Jewish playboy to which the 'natural reserve' of an English sartorial style might be favourably compared. Duncan Schwann offered a formulaic caricature of the type when he recalled that his friend James Berners was wrapped in a fur coat, the impossible collar of which was formed of two seal skins, others giving each sleeve the appearance of muffs. On his head at an angle of forty five degrees was set a Tyrolese hat, with a cloakroom ticket stuck in the band ... He carried an ivory topped cane in his hand, a cauliflower, or was it a tomato? In his buttonhole, and a cigar, in an amber holder stuck out from the middle of his pale face ... he looked like a son of a Shylock and the Queen of Sheba, dressed as a combination of stage lobster and a millionaire from the far west, with his crimson waistcoat, check suit, and the precious stones he scattered over his tie and fingers." Similarly Montague William QC was unable to resist describing the wardrobes of 'Mr Herbert Maurice – Plutocrat and son of a Jewish trader and his son Gerald' in his reminiscences on life as a London judge. Of Herbert Maurice's riding habit he noted that though his get up in the saddle is of the most sporting descripcion and similar to that of all the fashionable young men of the day, there is always something outré about it'. And true to form On arriving at man's estate Gerald became a member of one or two second rate clubs. He smokes an enormous number of cigarettes and passes a great portion of his time at the billiard table ... He wears collars that reach half way up his cheek ... and trousers that cling so closely to his chin legs as to suggest difficulties in the way of getting them off ... a remark he is very fond of making at the Rockingham Club is Hang it all, I think I ought to know a gentleman when I see one'.10 Further inversions of fashionable masculinity might be found in the figure of the bohemian artist, whose lack of meaningful employment and laboured manipulation of appearances set him up as a potential rival to the bachelor in the role of London flâneur." Schwann dismissed him as a 'blighter who never washed, ate with his fingers and let his hair grow as long as Samson's ... they slouch about Soho with seedy squash hats and seedier fur overcoats which they pinched from the