# SELF-MADE MOTORMEN: THE MATERIAL CONSTRUCTION OF WORKING-CLASS MASCULINE IDENTITIES THROUGH CAR MODIFICATION # Andrew Bengry-Howell and Christine Griffin (2007) ## INTRODUCTION This paper examines the cultural significance of the motorcar to young men who modify their cars and explores how the active process of doing car modification operates in the construction and maintenance of masculine identities. It draws on a study of 30 young white working-class car modifers from the East and West Midlands and North Wales, who owned modified cars and were all associated with the British cruising scene. As a collective cultural practice, the cruising scene developed out of unauthorized gatherings of young people in modified cars, called cruises, that started occurring on car parks in retail parks and industrial estates late at night during the 1990s.' These gatherings provided a forum for young modified-car enthusiasts to meet and socialize, and for modified car owners to exhibit their symbolically and mechanically enhanced vehicles and engage in performative motorcar displays before an appreciative audience.² ## THE SOCIAL AND CULTURAL MEANING OF THE CAR Throughout its history the motorcar has been a highly gendered commodity, with a strong discursive association with men and masculinity. Although a small number of women purchased and drove motorcars from the earliest days of cheir manufacture, the cultura! meaning of the motorcar has been historically constituted in terms of a symbolically powerful and normalized relationship between masculinity and technology.' Although this changed somewhat in the 1950s with the arrival of the family car, which was marketed for mixed use by the whole family," the symbolic power of men was reproduced through the seating grid, in which the husband/father was positioned as the driver, with his wife sat by his side as a passenger and their children sat behind them in a row in the back. Since the 1960s, shifting gender relations have seen a dramatic increase in che number of female car owners and female drivers; by the end of the twentieth century 42 per cent of new cars sold in Britain were being bought by women,ª and female drivers are projected to outnumber male drivers during the early part of the twenty-first century." This has corresponded with mocorcars becoming increasingly gendered, with certain makes and models specifically marketed at women, whilst others are marketed at men.'º For woren, the motorcar is constituted as a safe means of independent transportation" that is associated with fun, freedom and individualism." For men, the motorcar continues to be constituted as a symbol of status and masculine power." ## YOUTH AND MOTORCARS Since the 1950s the motorcar has been central to the cultural identities of many teenagers in western industrialised societies, where it has represented a means of escaping parental control'⁴ and realising personal freedom." For young people who could afford it, acquiring a mocorcar heralds the arrival of an important stage of transition, fromn dependency on public transport and private transport controlled by parents to individual car-based autonomy and independent automobility."6 For young men, motorcar ownership holds particular cultural resonance in that it reproduces a traditional association between masculinity and technology' and marks a cultural rite of passage into manhood. [...] As a researcher, ABH [Andrew Bengry-Howell] had been interested in the cruising scene for a number of years, although prior to this particular study his knowledge in this area had been largely gleaned from cruising web sites and articles in car magazines. He had never mixed with car modifers on a regular basis nor attended cruises, and was surprised when he first arranged to meet a small group of car modifiers to find that, with the exception of one girlfriend, the group entirely consisted of men. As he made contact with ocher car modifiers it became apparent chat most were male, and although he did encounter a small number of women at mcets and cruises he attended in the course of the study, they were almost always girlfriends of young men who owned modified cars rather than owners of modified cars themselves. As such we have constituted car modifying and cruising as predominantly masculine practices and our analysis foregrounds the significance of the motorcar to the identity work of young men. For our participants, car modification was an inherently practical activity, which was realised through the material process of changing aspects of a motor vehicle's original design." Although our research participants generally enjoyed talking about their cars and the modifications that they had made, most ascribed greater significance to the practice of doing car modifications. The significance of car modifying was constituted in terms of the physical labour invested in practices like lowering a car's suspension, fitting oversized alloy wheels, replacing a car's original panels with those from a body kit, tinting windows, enhancing an exhaust system to produce a desired sound and improve performance, and a whole range of alterations that serve to personalise a car and make it truly theirs. The process of car modification was one in which our participants deliberately attempted to extricate their cars from the style boundaries imposed by the manufacturer's production design'” and culturally produce a car to individual specifications. ## [...] To some degree the car modifers in this study engaged in similar practices to standard car owners (i.e., they washed and polished their cars regularly, maintained and serviced rhem, and were careful to secure their vehicles when they were left unattended). Whereas such practices generally embody an owner's attempts to preserve a vehicle in its original condition, car modifying precipitated a very different relarionship between owner and commodity. The practice of modifying a car generated a much more fixed and intimate form of ownership wherein motorcars were produced as commodities that were symbolically and uniquely associated with those who owned and modified them.2° Car modificarion transformed the act of consumption into a set of practices² through which car modifers produced their cars as symbolic extensions of themselves.2 The importance that was placed on an owner modifying their car themselves can be understood as a reflection of traditional working-class values. The sense of 'achievement' cultivated through being able to 'say' that 'you're actually building the car', and others' appreciation of the products of your labour, resonated with a working-class masculine tradition in which physical work was a source of pride² and personal achievement was measured in terms of doing a good job. Traditionally, working-class pride has been located within work-based settings, where it was realised through occupational roles like craftsman and other skilled workers.2 For car modifiers, however, a sense of 'pride' and 'achievement' in manual work and its output was aligned with practices that assumed meaning though leisure and consumption within non-work-based contexts of everyday life.2 [...] ## IT WAS A BIT OF A CHICK CAR: TRANSGENDERED CARS AND THE PRACTICE OF 'DEBADGING ABH: I think it's interesting that when you chose a car you picked the Mondeo as it's not a car that is usually associated with young people Jane: I think that people who modify cars don't really go by the adverts. If you look Novas and Corsas are advertised like a woman's car, but there are so many people that have modified them now ABH: Presumably the things that people do to them change their meaning so chat they are no longer a woman's car? Spoiler: Make them more aggressive and all that. ABH: So what made you want to start modifying it, was it something that you wanted to do as soon as you got the car? Dale: I didn't think about making it a project really (right) but then (2) I had it I come to the point my sister's had about three cars (1) and she's twenty one now (right) and like my dad helped me out buying this (1) and it came to the point and I was thinking about getting rid of it (right) (1) and I said well (1) if we can make it better and we go halves on whatever I do to it then I'll keep it for (1) till it stops basically ABH: Why did you want to get rid of it? Dale: Don't know cos (2) it's only a 1.3 (right) cos it's a Fiesta (right) and I had some comments that it was a bit of a chick car (right) one of my ex girlfriends (1) her friends said that's a chick car chat is ABH: It's a what car? Dale: Chick car (right) (1) a girl's car.\* The modified Novas, Corsas and Fiestas thar most of our participants owned were cars that in their standard form manufacturers have primarily targeted at a female market, or at families where they have been marketed as a second car. It was within this context that the other main reason for debadging a car carried significance, as it marked the beginning of a transgendering process in which standard production-line cars that were culturally associated with women were reconfigured as cars chat were associated with men. Dale explicitly constituted his incentive to modify his car in terms of a resolution to a problem that had arisen for him when a friend of his girlfriend had publicly identifed his Ford Fiesta as a chick car'. The label 'chick car' positioned Dale as the owner of a type of car that was symbolically associated with women, and thus served to discursively undermine the cultural legitimacy of his masculinity. In response, Dale had attempted to reconcile the incongruity of being a man in possession of a woman's car by removing all che insignia from his car that identified it as being a Fiesta, and modifying the overall shape of the car with a body kit that he had seen advertised in Max Power. The symbolic work that Dale invested in modifying the physical appearance of his car amounted to a deliberate attempt to de-feminise his standard car and culturally produce it in a form more beftting for a man. This symbolic process of masculinising a car through modification was one that, for Spoiler, was represented as making a car 'more aggressive', which in Dale's case was contingent on him degendering the existing meaning of his car and deconstructing its chick car' status. ## [...] Within this context, the significance of practices like debadging go beyond symbolic concealment, to mark the commencement of a transformative process in which a car modifier deliberately deconstructs the material signs that define and differentiate his standard car within dominant discourse and attempts to relocate it in a nonbranded symbolic world or reinvent it as their own brand. Although this play with brands and radical transformation of a common cultural commodity challenges dominant discourses of consumption, the fervent desire of car modifiers to have a unique car leads them to purchase increasingly expensive equipment and accessories, and thus serves to reinforce dominant consumption practices. As such, car modifers' consumption practices are both conventional and unconventional, and their consumption of the motorcar serves to position them as both active consumers and producers of cultural commodities. Studies on young people's consumption of clothes have identifed che important role that brands play in identity work, with brands that carry kudos being actively sought out and those that are deemed less worthy actively avoided.2 Within the context of current understandings of how brand associations and brand loyalties influence young people's consumption practices, young car modifiers' consumption of branded motorcars is particularly interesting. Young people's consumption practices are often said to be influenced by the symbolic, rather than intrinsic, qualities of commodities and their relative meaning within the context of their peers.27 In the case of our participants' consumption of standard motorcars, a range of external factors restricted them to types of motorcar that are marketed at and discursively associated with women, which carried negative associations among their peer group since they were classed as chick' cars. It runs somewhat contrary to prevailing understandings of young people's consumption to suggest that young car modifiers would actively select a commodity that they and their peers viewed in negative terms, and it was within this context that debadging a car was a particularly important practice. Debadging a car served to deconstruct a car's standard feminine identity and symbolically distance it from gendered meanings that were undesirable, and to constitute it as a 'blank canvas' that could then be inscribed with idiosyncraric meanings and desired masculine cultural associations. This degendering practice embodied a symbolic attempt at resolving the contradiction of being a man in possession of a woman's car, and configuring a standard feminised motorcar as an object of masculine identity construction. Masculine identities constructed through modified cars were produced and reproduced as gendered configurations of practice', in which meaning was socially defined in relation to and contradistinction from models of femininity.²\* The cultural production of meaning chrough car modifcation is an intensely creative process through which young white working-class male car modifiers discursively mark themselves out from the mass of standard-car owning subjects and materially constitute themselves as 'unique' car owning individuals. Car modification is an inherently physical practice that is creatively constituted in che 'hand-made space' where the human body, tools and material objects eneage. This 'space' holds particular historic significance for working-class men, whose pride and achievements have been traditionally organised around the skilful manipulation of cools, and the 'machinic pleasure',3º sensual delight and powerful emotions derived from embodying technologies." Economic change has displaced men's 'machinic pleasure' and the craft ideal from its traditional occupational setting into free time," and car modification projects provide an important leisure-based opportunity for young working-class men to reconnect with a set of associations and values that have traditionally defined working-class men's lives." Although most of our research participants were in paid work, they attributed relatively little importance to their occupations. Paid work was constituted as necessary in order to finance the car modification projects they undertook in their leisure time, which were the principal site of their identity construction. The consumption-based opporrunities that car modification projects offered for identity construction were predicated on young men being financially supported by their parents, and thus able to afford to invest a high percentage of their modest incomes on modifying their cars. In a British social context where protracted youth transitions3 are said to constrain young people's opportunities for independent living by making them financially dependent on their parents,"s the young men in our study utilised a situation that is ofen presented as problematic in order to construct masculine identities grounded in theit consumption practices. During their protracted transition to adulthood they had relatively few financial responsibilities that might restrict their consumption. Since they were financially dependent on their parents, these young working-class men were 'free' to constitute themselves as independent, unique and individual consumers through the material construction of modified cars. Studies of young working-class men often represent them as victims of the socioeconomic changes that have transformed Britain over the past 20 years." Faced with the erosion of many occupations that were traditionally associated with working-class men, young working-class masculinity has been said to be in crisis."7 It would be tempting within this context to constitute car modification in terms of a compensatory practice and represent our participants as socially disadvantaged on the basis of their age, social class, modest academic achievements, occupational status, limited financial resources and the localities that they reside in, or as subordinate to hegemonic masculinities." This, however, would be imposing an interpretation of the meaning of car modifying for our research participants that was not supported by our data. Whilst it could be argued that car modification is in some way compensatory, this notion along with the idea that car modifers were in anyway disadvantaged was complerely absent from our research participants' talk. On the contrary, most positioned themselves as culturally privileged on che basis of their ownership of, and ability to produce, highly conspicuous motorcars, to which they and others ascribed cultural value. Within the context of their peers and significant others who appreciated the aesthetics of a modified car, the products of a car modifier's symbolic labour were a source of considerable cultural capital.³9 Car modification enabled the participants in our study to differentiate themselves from consumers of standard cars, however prestigious, and those for whom motorcars primarily functioned as a means of transport, who were disparagingly referred to as 'A to B drivers'. Modified cars were performatively displayed as the ultimate conspicuous commodity, which embodied and culturally celebrated the practical skills and personal achievements of the individuals who had physically and symbolically laboured to produce them. ## NOTES Extracted from Bengry-Howell, A. and Griffin, C., 'Self-Made Motormen: The Material Construction of Working-Class Masculine Identities through Car Modification', Journal of Youth Studies 10(4) (2007), pp. 439–58. Reprinted by permission of Taylor & Francis Ltd. \*Editors' Nore: Parentherical Notations in the interview refer to the length of the pause in seconds and the direction of the speaker's face. 1. Mills, M. (2000) 'All the people I know, drive like idiots', The Guardian, 28 April, pp. 4–5; Bengry-Howell, A. (2001) Bigging it Up: Young Masculinities and the Symbolic Appropriation of the Car, Unpublished MPhil Thesis, University of Birmingham, UK. 2. Ibid. 3. Flink, J. (1988) The Auromobile Age, MIT Press, London. 4. Scharff, V. (1991) Taking the Wheel: Women and the Coming of the Motor Age, Free Press New York. 5. Wajcman, J. (1991) Feminism Confronts Technology, Polity, Cambridge; Mellström, U. (2004) 'Machines and masculine subjectivity: technology as an integral part of men's life experiences', special issue: Masculinities and Technology, Men and Masculinities , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 368–382. 6. Wernick, A. (1991) Promotional Culture, Sage, London, p. 72. 7. Ibid. 8. Coward, R. (1999) 'Into the driving seat'. The Guardian, 16 November, [Online] Available at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/ Columnists/Column/0,,247913,00.html (2 August 2007). 9. Silverton, P. (1999) 'Allo, Jane, gotta new motor?', Red, December, pp. 113–116. 10. Coward, R. (1999) 'Into the driving sear'; Silverton, P. (1999) 'Allo, Jane, gotta new motor?' 11. Hubak, M. (1996) 'The car as a cultural statement: car advertising as gendered sociotechnical scripts', in Making Technology Our Own? Domesticating Technology into Everyday Life, eds M. Lie & K. Sorensen, Scandinavian University Press, Oslo, pp. 171–200. 12. Silverton, P. (1999) 'Allo, Jane, gotta new motor?' 13. Wajcman, J. (1991) Feminism Confronts Technology 14. Pickett, C. (1998) 'Car fetish', in Cars and Culture: Our Driving Passions, ed. C. Pickett, Powerhouse Publishing and HarperCollins, Sydney, p. 27. 15. Bayley, S. (1986) Sex, Drink and Fast Cars: The Creation and Consumption of Images, Faber & Faber, London and Boston, MA. 16. Carrabine, E. & Longhurst, B. (2002) Consuming the car: anticipation, use and meaning in contemporary youth culture', The Sociological Review, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 181–196. 17. Wajcman, J. (1991) Feminism Confronts Technology. 18. Bengry-Howell, A. (2005) Performative Motorcar Display: The Cultural Construction of Young Working Class Masculine Identities, Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of Birmingham, UK. 19. Brownlie, D., Hewer, P. & Treanor, S. (2005) 'Identity in motion: an exploratory study of conspicuous consumption among car cruisers', Finanza Marketing e Produzione, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 99\~107. 20. Bengry-Howell, A. (2005) Performative Motorcar Display: The Cultural Construction of Young Working Class Masculine Identities. 21. Willis, P., Jones, S., Canaan, J. & Hurd, G. (1990) Common Culture: Symbolic Work at Play in the Everyday Cultures of the Young Open University Press, Milton Keynes. 22. Belk, R. W. (1988) 'Possessions and the extended self', Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 15, pp. 139–168. 23. Willis, P. (1977) Learning to Labour, Saxon House, Farnborough. 24. Ibid. 25. Bengry-Howell, A. (2005) Performative Motorcar Display: The Cultural Construction of Young Working Class Masculine Identities. 26. Miles, S., Cliff, D. & Burr, V. (1998) "“Fitting in and sticking out": consumption, consumer meanings and the construction of young people's identities', Journal of Youth Studies, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 81–96; Frosh, S., Phoenix, A. & Pattman, R. (2002) Young Masculinities: Understanding Boys in Contemporary Society Palgrave, London. 27. Miles et al. (1998) "Fitting in and sticking out": consumption, consumer meanings and the construction of young people's identities'. 28. Connell, R. (2005) 'Hegemonic masculinity: rethinking the concept', Gender Society, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 829–859. See p. 848. 29. Law, J. (2001) Machinic Pleasures and Interpellations, Centre for Science Studies, Lancaster University, [Online] Available at: http://www.lancs.ac.uk/fss/sociology/papers/ Law-Machinic-Pleasures-and-Interpellations. pdf (2 August 2007). 30. Ibid. 31. Mellström, U. (2004) 'Machines and masculine subjectivity: technology as an integral part of men's life experiences'. 32. Moorhouse, H. F. (1988) 'American automobiles and worker's drearns', Sociological Review, vol. 31, pp. 403–426. See p. 421. 33. Willis, P. (1977) Learning to Labour. 34. Furlong, A., Cartmel, F., Biggart, A., Sweeting. H. & West, P. (2003) Youth Transitions: Patterns of Vulnerability and Processes of Social Inclusion, Central Research Unit, Scottish Executive, Edinburgh. 35. France, A. & Wiles, P. (1997) 'Dangerous futures: social exclusion and youth work in late modernity', Social Policy Administration, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 59–78. 36. McDowell, L. (2003) Redundant Masculinities? Employment Change and White Working Class Youth, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford. 37. Horrocks, R. (1996) Masculinity in Crisis, Macmillan, London. 38. Connell, R. (1995) Masculinities, Polity Press Cambridge. 39. Bourdieu, P. (1979) Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.