# INTRODUCTION # Rebecca Houze Under the influence of anthropology, ethnography and material culture studies, and a desire to move beyond a canon of designers and manufacturers, consumption has been a core focus of interest within design history. We have explored several of these areas already throughout the Reader, from John Styles's study of eighteenth-century England to Thomas Hine's examination of 'Populuxe' in 1950s America. Indeed, there are few areas of design history chat do not touch upon consumption in some aspect. Within design history, srudies of consumption have tended to be informed by ideas about the role of the reader' (or viewer, or user) in making meaning for cultural artifacts (texts, objects), initiated by French structuralist and post-structuralist writers such as Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault, under the influence of early twentieth-century semioticians, Ferdinand de Saussure and Charles Pierce. Such studies have further been informed by Marxist critique of the role of objects within consumer society and by postmodern theory. It is thus fitting to begin this section with an extract from Karl Marx's 1867 essay The Fetishism of the Commodity and its Secret' from the first volume of Capital. Marx begins, 'A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleries and theological niceties.' What is a commodity? Is it a thing? A symbol? The strangeness of the commodity, Marx demonstrates, results from che fact thar it is valued for exchange rather than use. Although Marx described the commodity fetish' as specific to industrialized capitalist societies, the fetish more generally can be understood in both anthropological and psychoanalytical terms, as an object invested with ritual power, on the one hand, and of displaced sexual desire on the other. A half century later, Norwegian-American sociologist Thorstein Veblen identified conspicuous consumption' as the act of spending on things or in ways that signify social class. In earlier, pre-industrial societies, he writes, the patriarch's power was expressed through his own clothing, possessions and consumotion of expensive food and drink – luxuries that were wichheld from those in his service, including wife, children and slaves. Over time, this system transformed such chat a man's wealth became increasingly visible through the expenditures of his wife on household objects, clothing and leisure activities, the conspicuous wastefulness of which was reflected upon him, as provider. Although Veblen's theories were developed at the turn of the twentieth century and reflect late-Victorian spending habits, chey can also be used to help us understand mid-twentieth-century Western sociery in which women were also frequently viewed as the chief household consumers whose decorative and sartorial expressions signified their husbands' social standing. Roland Barthes's semiotic readings of French advertisements and expressions of popular culture in the 1950s, such as dish and laundry detergents, new plastics and the stylish Citroën D.S. car, have been extremely inßuential as early examples of poststructural literary criticism. In his essay 'Myth Today', informed by Saussure's theory of language as an arbitrary and culturally constructed system, Barthes suggests that visual images can be read as a type of 'speech', which mythologizes their ideological underpinnings. His reading of these images and designed objects expands upon Marx's notion of the commodity as a 'social hieroglyphic', a form, like language, which is socially constructed and distinct from nature. For Barthes, myth is 'depoliticized speech' in which the troubled history of French colonialism in Africa, for example, can be obscured by the image of a young black man in uniform, saluting, we imagine, the French Alag. If myth obscures ideology, does design do so as well? In the rwo essays reproduced here, from Mythologies, the sleek and elegant 'D.S.', the new Nautilus, becomes the 'Déesse' (goddess) in our imaginations, just as the alchemical transformations of modern plastics evoke the world of Greek mythology and the futuristic realm of science fction. The selections here invite a comparison with the critique of consumption in section six offered by Vance Packard and Jeffrey Meikle, whose analyses of automotive styling and the plastics industry reveal the dangerous consequences of mid-century industrial design. Excessive and irresponsible consumption has proved to be increasingly problematic, a view raised by the collection of texts in section 6 on Sustainable Futures. There, Joel Makower, John Elkington and Julia Hailes propose more environmentally friendly modes of shopping in The Green Consumer Supermarket Guide (1991), while Nicky Gregson and Louise Crewe analyse the recycling and reuse of discarded objects, in ‘Redefining Rubbish' (2003). Pierre Bourdieu's ethnographic survey of French consumers in the 1960s and 1970s has been useful in establishing taste' as a set of social relationships having to do with education, profession and family class origin. Complicating Veblen's understanding of 'conspicuous consumption', Bourdieu demonstrates that cultural capital represented by the artifacts we purchase, collect, or desire has less to do with one's own fnancial wealth than with onc's understanding of the cultural value of music and literature, furnishings, clothing, and decorating styles, gained through education, experience, or privilege. The chree case studies we've reproduced here describe variations in consumption habits among the French middle class, from the 'Grand Bourgeois', dismissive of popular style, furnishing and décor, who enumerates his eccentric, idiosyncratic collection of antiquities and special objects acquired chrough inheritance and travels abroad, to the university professor who enjoys shopping for antiques with his wife, but who, for financial reasons, chooses to purchase simpler, less expensive and more practical furnishings, to the young advertising executive, compelled to dress in stylish, expensive, distinctive fashions for professional appearances but whose busy domestic life with working wife and two young children does not afford the luxury of a well-appointed home or car that might match his work clothes. This section includes several 'primary texts' that have laid a foundation for further studies of consumption from a design historical perspective, especially related to economic and social class. The final two selections go beyond these pioneering srudies to make explicit the dimensions of gender and race within consumprion. In her entertaining and illuminating look at Tupperware in the 1950s, Alison J. Clarke explores the developing culture of suburbia in the United States, and women's ambiguous roles as both conspicuous consumers and as arbiters of domestic taste. In ‘The Ascent of the Tupperware Party' we se how the plastics company captured an enormous market by employing housewives to sell the products at informal gatherings in their homes, combining entrepreneurial spirit with sociality. Robert Weems, Jr. explores strategies of companies in the 1960s that tried to cnter the African-American marker by appealing to a politicized expression of racial pride. Although this may have bolstered the influence of black entrepreneurs and black media, it is also clear during this period of increasing racial tension, with riots and 'white flight' to the suburbs of American cities, that 'while desired as shoppers'. African Americans were, 'often less desired by whites as classmates, co-workers, and neighbors'.