# INTRODUCTION TO DESIGN AND THE MODERN MAGAZINE # Jeremy Aynsley and Kate Forde (2007) Most commercially sold magazines result from a division of labour between editors, advertisers, journalists, illustrators, typographers, designers, art directors and, in more recent years, stylists. As such, magazine publishing is a complex area of study and the methods needed for its understanding cross a range of academic disciplines. Moreover, since magazines are composite rather than singular objects their character reflects different sources and disciplines. (...} Perhaps because of their ambivalent status as ephemeral and potentially marginal forms, both as literature and as object, magazines have received relatively brief attention from historians concerned to identify their contribution to the design landscape. Nevertheless, design history, we suggest, is well-suited to do this, given its interest in combining immanent analysis of objects with considerations of manufacture and consumption. Indeed, the cultural and economic concerns that magazines hold in tension, their synthesis of image and text, even their three-dimensionality, are ideal territory for the interdisciplinary methods of design history. [...] ## EARLY MAGAZINES AND METHODOLOGY In order to situate the periodical in context, however, it is relevant to consider its earlier beginnings and to take a cursory glance at the history of printing. From the second half of the eighteenth century, factors such as the increase in population, expansion of trade, improved means of communication and advances in technology stimulated both the printing industry and the market. Print and typographic historian Michael Twyman deliberately omits books from his otherwise comprehensive history of printing, favouring instead the playing cards, devotional prints, reward notices, livestock sale posters, sheet music, tickets and other printed matter that flourished during the period.' It may be useful to see the magazine emerging from che ephemera he depicts, as much as from its more obvious precursors, the book and the newspaper. Twyman's study is also relevant for its consideration of the printing industry's historical structure, and the unsung labour force behind it. [...] At the beginning of the nineteenth century [magazines] were fairly general productions which sought to capture as wide a market as possible by including a mixture of comment on politics, social life, fashion, etiquette, religion and morality. The earliest specialist magazines were those aimed at women. First produced during the late 1800s, they identified a readership which remains crucial today. New titles were funded by advertising for goods that simultaneously became branded commodities. These very often depended on their gtaphic identity in press advertisements, just as much as in point of sale and poster designs in the wider world, contributing to what historian Thomas Richards has called 'the commodity culture' of late nineteenth-century society.² The process of diversification of target readers has continued since then, causing che commentators Tebbel and Zuckerman to note that there is now 'no interest known to mankind which does not have at least one magazine to serve it'. Given the sheer volume of material, only a few historians have attempted to provide comprehensive surveys of the magazine industries in England and America. David Reed's history of the popular magazine in Britain and America limits its terms by laying emphasis on the magazine as a manufactured product, using this as a corrective to what he regards as overly literary or personalised histories. This is the magazine as a phenomenon born of technology and commerce. Reed, therefore, describes the conditions under which such a commodity might flourish, identifying increasing urbanisation as one of the key factors. Comparing Britain's continuing industrial development in the nineteenth century (which was linked to its coal industry of the eighteenth), to America's later explosion of industrial activity, he explains how both countries' populations came to be concentrated in cities. This shift resulted in significantly lowering the unit costs of distribution for all goods, including magazines. In turn, transportation systems both within and outside the urban centres developed to make them realistic working propositions. Railway systems resulted in faster postal services, which facilitated both business comnmunication and the dissemination of magazines. The effect of chese shifts in turn stimulated a remarkable growth in education, ensured the rise of public libraries; and instilled the habit of reading in an evolving middle class. Inevitably, such surveys deal in generalisations rather than subrleties. Nonetheless, they acknowledge the economic concerns that drive the magazine publishing industry and the precise circumstances of its manufacture – the presses, paper production, typesetting machines, colour science and advances in mechanical illustration techniques, all of which had an important impact on the speed and facility with which magazines might be produced. One such landmark technology was the first web-fed rotary perfecting press installed at The New York Sun in 1865. The machine brought about a great acceleration in production times because rolls of paper, the web, meant faster machines which printed on both sides simultaneously. Such an example reminds us of the materiality of magazines, as does Reed's description of the race to find a suitable vegetable source for paper which until the midnineteenth century was extracted from cotton and rag waste. After all, it is ultimately the differing qualities of paper chat are the parameters defining many aspects of a modern publication's nature. The size, strength, flexibility and porosity of the paper are all things which affect the printing process and in another significant development in magazine production was the introduction of the half-tone process as an illustrative technique. For most of che ninereench century, wood engraving had been the basis of magazine illustrations, but it was an extremely costly and labour-intensive process. Half-tones, which use small specks of ink to create a delicate shading effect, were a radically cheaper alternative, taking hours rather than days to prepare. As an example, the high cost of engravings meant that the Illustrated London News cost sixpence in 1848, about half the day rate of a labourer, whereas fifty years later, the use of multiple illustrations was commonplace and the price had dropped to three pence." As the century drew to a close, half-tone illustrarions and, subsequently, the introduction of photography would change the appearance of magazines forever, heralding a new era dominated by the power of the image. Magazines have often been viewed as unique historical resources for the historian because they record the incredibly complicated flow of life in a breadth of detail chat is unavailable in any other medium. Tebbel and Zuckerman, for instance, point out that most of the visual images we have of America in the nineteenth century come from magazine pages that first displayed woodcuts and, in time, photography to illuminate the world. Their account of the American periodical is decidedly partisan, claiming it as possibly the 'most democratic institution the country has yet produced'." The reason for their tribute is that whilst they emphasise the pivotal role that the magazine has played in promoting conformity and shaping consumer culture, they also see it as expressing the limitless interests of the most diverse population in the world. In order to demonstrate this, their wide-ranging volume covers several specialist as well as popular titles, including extensive discussions of the abolitionist press, African-American periodicals, children's magazines and story-papers. They, too, cite che emergence of the half-tone as a crucial technological factor in the magazine's history, linking it to the success of the muckrakers' – the magazines which flourished between 1895 and 1918 by running exposés of corruption within large corporations and government institutions. Not only were these publications sensational in content, they looked exciting and were rich with colour. Costing only a dime, instead of the usual 35 cents, they were part of a wave of magazines that was reaching a new American public with less education and less money than before. As magazines diversified, the roles of those producing them also became more specialised. William Owen traces this division of labour in his study Magazine Design, citing Aubrey Beardsley as the first to be credited with the title 'art director' in the Yellow Book of 1894." His is one of several accounts which identifies the magazine as a vehicle for the work of graphic designers, and asserts that design is a communicative rather than a decorative act." Owen argues that because the early magazine lacked a unique visual format it became an ideal medium for graphic exploration. Focusing on the course of magazine design during the twentieth century, he identifies design protagonists from the fields of photojournalism, the Modern Movement in Europe and the underground press who all had an impact on the medium. Crucially he draws attention to the difference in American and European magazine design of the 1940s. Reeling from the effects of the Second World War, Europe's publishing business lacked not only resources but the market and advertisers to pay for it. Whilst editorial design was advancing steadily in the United States, in Europe, pulp weeklies were churning out escapist fiction and magazine producers were preoccupied by the need to conserve paper. Not until the post-war boom of the 1950s did the influence of American abstract expressionism, with its generosity of colour and space, really take hold in Europe. Studies that focus on the aesthetics of magazines often function partly as reference manuals for those working in the field and partly as manifestos for the profession. Highlighting the role of the magazine designer, they uncover what is sometimes understood as a personal struggle to relinquish traditional book and newspaper typography and to create an entirely new medium of text and pictures. As a professional designer himself, Ruari McLean's studies in typographic history, for instance, stem from a desire to elevate the reputation of the business from craf to art.1º Whilst this approach can usefully reconstruct the creative effort involved in the production of magazines, it risks overestimating the autonomy of the designer and misreading the endeavour as a chiefly aestheric instead of commercial enterprise. The sarne charge might be levelled at histories which have focused on editors and publishing magnates." Whilst the particular skills and predilections of such characters certainly affected the magazines produced under their leadership, an overemphasis on individual personalities can obscure the fact that they are working within the constraints of cultural inheritances, economic relationships and technical boundaries. Salme Harju Steinberg's study of Edward Bok (editor of the hugely successful American periodical, The Ladies' Home Journal) is unusual in chis context. Steinberg uses Bok to explore a wider theme, namely the uneasy coexistence of reform journalism with an increasingly powerful advertising presence in the late nineteenth and early twentieth-century magazine. Steinberg never loses sight of the magazine as a double proposition, registering that its success was due to its ability to conform to the needs of both advertisers and readers. Her work identifies a relationship of compromise which is at the heart of most modern magazines. The significance of advertising to magazines is indicated by the fact that before the advent of radio in 1920s America, the periodical press was the only way to reach a national audience. (In England newspapers as well as magazines carried advertising.) From the early nineteenth century, industrialists realised they could translate the new pursuit of reading into consuming. by building direct relationships with the market through increasingly sophisticated printed salesmanship. The interdependence of the publishing and promotional industries has ensured that many of the most insightful commentaries on modern magazine history are to be found in studies of advertising.12 The conversion of readers to consumers has also been the subject of several recent studies, many of which focus on the magazine's cultivation of a mass female market." It is a salutary thought that the only reliable figures we have concerning magazine circulation come from institutions such as the Association of American Advertisers, formed in 1899 to drag out accurate statistics from periodical publishers. In this sense, even the most objective aspects of magazine history are always and inextricably linked to the commercial sphere. ## OTHER METHODOLOGIES Moving to those studies which are predominantly concerned with the contents of magazines, they usually divide berween those which analyse the text and those which give priority to images, whether in advertisements or editorial pages.' A number of sociologically informed interpretations have focused on how particular groups of people and sectors of society make use of magazines or how they can shape aspirations. Through such an approach, reading magazines becomes an active form of cultural production. The first inroads towards understaniding magazines and valuing them as a form of literature in Britain was signalled in Richard Hoggart's seminal book, The Uses of Literacy, a study of working-class life, first published in 1957.1 This tradition was continued in cultural studies by Raymond Williams, whose impressive study, The Long Revolution (1961) was also formative for the analysis it gave of the mechanisms of popular publishing. part of what Williams saw as a continuation of the project of the Enlightenment." Williams's approach, it should be added, concentrated on the textual. An equal consideration of the visual and textual was introduced in the work of Dick Hebdige and Angela McRobbie, whose respective studies of magazines directly marketed towards youth subcultures and teenage girls applied a cultural studies approach to more contemporary material.' In this and much subsequent work, a fluent reading of the allure of magazines was key. Unlike design history, however, cultural studies rarely engages with the circumstances of production, the design process or the material qualities of che magazines. {...) An enduring legacy of the Frankfurt School on interpretations of popular culture has been to disparage areas of consurmption associated with the female sphere.'8 And too often in this tradition, women have been cast as passive consumers, duped by the forces of persuasion into pursuing false needs and desires. The extent to which a magazine can function as a reliable source of information rather than distraction therefore becomes a contested issue. In general, the literəcure on magazines varies as to whether it sees magazines as a source of manipulation of desire or fount of useful knowledge, or indeed boch. Either way, it is a question that none can avoid. With this in mind, it is possibly not surprising that women's magazines were all too often treated with a lack of seriousness in academic circles. It was not until 1970 that Cynthia White, a sociologist, published the first complete study of women's magazines, which laid down important foundations for much subsequent work.'" The emphasis of this work was to plot the circulation histories of leading American and Brirish magazines against broad social and cultural changes in women's lives. A central issue addressed in this study is whether magazines could be said to reflect the experience of women beyond their pages. Through the bringing together of women's studies and literature studies, magazines have been recognised as a central element in women's lives, in work that has explored their intrinsic ambivalence. This has predominantly been through studies of individual titles, such as Jennifer Scanlon's account of the leading American women's title, The Ladies' Home Journal, and the thematic interpretation of how magazines engaged with issues of gender, home and leisure.2º Interestingly, much of the pioneering work in this field has concentrated on the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in Britain and America – a time when many of these structures first came in to being on such a scale. These studies are concerned wherever possible to reconstruct the reader. In a work such as Ellen Gruber Garvey's, The Adman in the Parlor: Magazines and the Gendering of Consumer Culture, 1880s to 1910s, the approach taken is a close literary reading of the editorial pages, letter pages and the mode of address made to the reader, in the form of the advertisements.2 Her study reveals that 'reading' was far from a passive activity. Rather young women readers used magazines to inform their hobbies; collecting or cutting and pasting them, and incorporating their newly gained knowledge in their domestic lives in ways that magazine proprietors could not have predicted. In turn, women's involvement as professionals in the magazine industry has also received interpretation, especially in the case of the United States. Ellen Mazur Thomson has traced the engagement of women art directors and designers in American graphic design from 1870 to 1920.2² Michelle Bogart studied the place of women as illustrators for mainstream periodicals and the hierarchies and terms of employment in the early twentieth century.² And in at least one case, the life and work of a pioneering woman art director, Cipe Pineles, who was active in mid-century America as a designer of women and teenage girl magazines, has now been researched.24 A central concern in the literature on magazines, therefore, is cheir relationship with their consumers, the readers. Were readers simply recipients of what the editors or magazine proprietors fed them, or could the relationship be more complex, one of negotiation and possible dissent? While magazines were an imaginative space full of potential, did they in fact reinforce traditional stereotypes, and present deeply conservative attitudes? [...] With translations of French theoretical writings on culture becoming available, the interpretation of magazines experienced what has been called a 'linguistic turn' in the 1970 and 1980s. In particular, Roland Barthes' writing was especially infuential on a generation who were developing approaches to popular culture.2 [...] Barthes [...] revealed how popular imagery can work ideologically to incorporate accepted social values and political beliefs, making them appear natural. [...] Barthes and other French thinkers led more generally to a tradition of deconstruction and decoding of photographic imagery in advertising and magazines.26 The advantage of the semiological method is that it offers ways to interpret encoded meanings in magazines and understand desire and pleasure of the text. It has been applied most successfully to systems of representation that deal with fashion, style and sexuality. The potential danger for the historian is that it can present the object of srudy. in this case the magazine, in a form of the continuous present while overlooking the specific circumstances of manufacture and intention. [...] Among the empirical methods available to the design historian is what is known as content analysis, a model drawn from the social sciences and employed in media studies.27 This can be useful if the historian of the magazine wishes to establish a representative point of view. It allows for moving beyond the interpretation of a particular issue of a magazine to establish a narrative that does justice to its changes over time. In this connection, it is useful to distinguish between a diachronic study, which seeks to explain change over time and the synchronic, which focuses on a single moment or a crosssection.28 Most historians accept that adopting a quantitative approach can be helpful when dealing with change over time. In the case of magazines, research can start by taking a broad survey of a title and then a decision is made to pursue sampling based on regular intervals over a number of years, applying the same criteria of analysis. [...] Design historians are attentive to the changes in design layout as one of the most significant elements of a magazine. For instance, change or continuity of a title's masthead [...] suggests how attitudes to the title as a whole can be conveyed. Similarly, a change of typeface or the introduction of a grid to reorganise the page layout of a magazine may be important in design history but overlooked by other kinds of interpretation. [...] Another established method within design history is to use the interview as a source of oral testimony. In Britain, many of the principal methods of gathering oral evidence for historical purposes have been ourlined in Paul Thompson's work, which emphasises social history.2 In order to establish a history of magazines, for example, interviews with key figures are sometimes the only way in which the everyday workings of a magazine can be retrieved. [...] ## NOTES Extracted from Aynsley, J. and Forde, K., 'Introduction', Design and the Modern Magazine Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2007, Pp. 1–16. Reproduced by permission of the authors and Manchester University Press. 1. M. Twyman, Printing: 1770–1970: An Illustrated History of its Development and Uses in England (London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1970). 2. T. Richards, The Commodity Culture of Victorian Britain: Advertising and Spectacle, 1851–1914 (London: Verso, 1991). 3. J. Tebbel and M. E. Zuckerman, The Magazine in America, 1741–1990 (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991), p. 244. 4. See D. Reed, The Popular Magazine in Britain and the United States, 1880–1960 (British Library: London, 1997), and Tebbel and Zuckerman, The Magazine in America. 5. Reed, The Popular Magazine, p. 43. 6. Cited by William Owen, Magazine Design (London: Laurence King, 1991). 7. Tebbel and Zuckerman, The Magazine in America, p. 382. 8. Owen, Magazine Design. p.13. 9. See also, R. McLean, Magazine Design (London: Oxford University Press, 1969); P. Jobling and D. Crowley, Graphic Design: Reproduction and Representation since 1800 (Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 1996); D. Crowley, Magazine Covers (London: Mitchell Beazley, 2003). 10. Ruari McLean, Typography, (London: Thames & Hudson, 1980); and How Typography Happens, (London: The British Library and Oak Knoll Press, 2000). 11. See, for instance, C. Seebohm, The Man who was Vogue: the Life and Times of Condé Nast, (London: Weidenfeld Nicolson, 1982), and Salme Harju Steinberg, Reformer in the Markesplace: Edward W Bok and The Ladies Home fournal, (Baton Rouge and London Louisiana State University Press, 1979). 12. See, for instance, S. Strasser, Satisfaction Guaranteed: the Making of the Mass Market, (New York: Pantheon Books, 1989), and R. Marchand, Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity 1920-1940, (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986). 13. M. Beetham, A Magazine of Her Own? Domesticity and Desire in the Woman's Magazine 1800-1914, (London: Routledge 1996); J. Scanlon, Inarticulate Longings: The Ladies' Home Journal, Gender, and the Promises of Consumer Culture, (New York: Routledge, 1995); and H. Damon Moore, Magazines for the Millions: Gender and Commerce in the Ladies' Home Journal and the Saturday Evening Post, 1880–1910 (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1994). 14. See M. Beetham, A Magazine of Her Own? and J. Winship, Advertising in Women's Magazines, 1956–74, (Birmingham: Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, University of Birmingham, 1980). 15. R. Hoggart, The Uses of Literacy (Harmonds. worth: Penguin, 1958). 16. R. Williams, The Long Revolution (Harmonds. worth: Penguin, 1965). 17. D. Hebdige, Hiding in the Light: On Images and Things, (London: Comedia, 1988); A. McRobbie, Feminism and Youth Culture: From Jackie to Just Seventeen, (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1991). 18. W. Schirmacher (ed.), German 20th Century Philosophy: The Frankfurt School (New York: Continuum, 2000). 19. C.L. White, Women's Magazines 1693–1968 (London: Michael Joseph, 1970). 20. J. Scanlon, Inarticulate Longings and Ros Ballaster et al., Women's Worlds: Ideology Femininity and the Woman's Magazine (London: Macmillan, 1991). 21. E. G. Garvey. The Adman in the Parlor: Magazines and the Gendering of Consumer Culture, 1880s to 1910s (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996). 22. E. M. Thomson, The Origins of Graphic Design History (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1997). 23. M. H. Bogart, Artists, Advertising and the Borders of Art (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995). 24. M. Scotford, Cipe Pineles: A Life of Design (New York and London: W. W. Norton, 1999). 25. R. Barthes, Mythologies, edited and translated by A. Lavers (London: Vintage, 1993). and Image, Music, Text, edited and translated by S. Heath (London: Fontana, 1977). 26. See, for example, J. Williamson, Decoding Advertisements, (London: Marion Boyars, 1978); Sean Nixon, Hard Looks: Masculinities, Spectatorship and Contemporary Consumption (London: UCL Press, 1996), and P. Jobling, Fashion Spreads: Word and Image in Fashion Photography since 1980 (Oxford: Berg, 1999). 27. J. Fiske, An Introduction to Communication Srudies (London: Methuen, 1982). 28. E.H. Carr, What is History? (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1987). For the specific implications for design history, see J.A.Walker, Design History and the History of Design, (London: Pluto Press, 1989), pp. 78–81. 29. P. Thompson, Voice of the Past: Oral History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978).