# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING In addition to the work by Benjamin extracted here, landmark work on mediation, relevant to design history, includes that of Canadian media analyst Marshall McLuhan, French literary theorist Roland Barthes and British cultural studies practitioner Stuart Hall. McLuhan's work has achieved mass popularity while also informing professional media practitioners and exerting an inescapable infuence upon media studies as an academic subject. See The Mechanical Bride (1951), a series of analyses of newspapet and magazine articles and advertisements, and The Gutenberg Galaxy: the Making of Typographic Man (1962), Understanding Media (1964) and The Medium is the Massage (1967), in which McLuhan suggests that the medium through which content is delivered is more imporcant than the content itself and has an impact on learning and thinking and, ultimately, social organization. Just as McLuhan distinguished between 'hor' and ‘cool' media which invite differing degrees of audience participation, so Barthes proposed that cultural texts encourage readers to respond in readerly' or 'writerly' ways, as a receiver or a writer of meaning respectively. Roland Barthes's essays demonstrate his shift from structuralism to poststructuralism, and have been enormously influential cools for understanding meaning within popular culture. ‘The Death of the Author' (1968) and 'From Work to Text' (1971) clarify an idea, drawn from Saussurian linguistics, that cultural artefacts can accrue meaning independently from those meanings intended by their producers. Stuart Hall's 'Encoding/Decoding' (1973, 1980) similarly explicates the operation of meanings in mass culture (in this case, specifically, television). There is a wealth of writing on advertising, so selecting a case study is a useful way of narrowing down the literature. An often-cited example is that of Tibor Kalman's work for Benetton. See Pasi Falk, 'The Bennetton-Toscani Effect: Testing the Limits of Conventional Advertising' (1997); Serra A. Tinic, 'United Colors and Untied Meanings: Benetton and the Comnmodification of Social Issues' (1997) and Marwan M. Kraidy and Tamara Goeddertz, 'Transnational Advertising and International Relations: US Press Discourses on the Benetton "We on Death Row" Campaign' Media, Culture Society (2003). The literature on magazines is extensive. In addition to the essays in Jeremy Aynsley and Kate Forde's Design and the Modern Magazine, the following are of specific design historical interest: Ellen Mazur Thomson, 'Early Graphic Design Periodicals in America' (1994); Jill Seddon, 'The Architect and the “Arch-Pedant": Sadie Speight, Nikolaus Pevsner and "Design Review" (2007); Barbara Usherwood, 'Transnational Publishing: the Case of Elle Decoration' (1997); Jeremy Aynsley's ""Gebrauchsgraphik" as an Early Graphic Design Journal, 1924–1938' (1992) and 'Graphic Change Design Change: Magazines for the Domestic Interior, 1890–1930' (2005); and Jennifer Scanlon's Inarticulate Longines: The Ladies' Home Journal, Gender, and the Promises of Consumer Culture (1995). On fashion magazines, particularly, see Susan Sellers, ""How Long Has This Been Going On?", Harpers Bazaar, Funny Face and che Construction of the Modernist Woman' (1995) and Christopher Breward's 'Femininiry and Consumption: The Problem of the Late Nineteenth-century Fashion Journal' (1994). Also on fashion writing, see Eugenia Paulicelli in ‘Fashion Writing under the Fascist Regime: An Italian Dictionary and Commentary of Fashion by Cesare Meano, and Short Stories by Gianna Manzini, and Alba De Cespedes' (2004) and Barthes, The Fashion System (1967). Further analysis of the use and significance of advice books for design history is gathered in Lees-Maffei (ed.) 'Domestic Design Advice' (2003), from which Emma Ferry's article is extracted here. For a useful consideration of oral history and design history, see Linda Sandino's Oral Histories and Design: Objects and Subjects' (2006) and the articles in the special issue to which this forms an introduction. Other studies of mediation include Otakar Máčel's study of legal records 'Avant-Garde Design and the Law: Litigation over the Cantilever Chair' (1990); Deborah Ryan's "All the World and Her Husband": The Daily Mail Ideal Home Exhibition, 1908–1939' (2000); and Michelle Jones's 'Design and the Domestic Persuader: Television and the British Broadcasting Corporations Promotion of Post-war "Good Design"(2003).