# LAND ROVER AND COLONIAL-STYLE ADVENTURE Jeanne van Eeden (2006) ## INTRODUCTION In December 2000, a three-page advertisement for the Land Rover Freelander was published in a range of glossy magazines in South Africa. These magazines, aimed primarily at the leisure and so-called men's market, included African Environment and Wildlife, Car, Complete Fisherman, Complete Golfer, Getaway, GQ, House and Garden, Leisure Wheels, Men's Health, Out There and the international issue of Time. For the purposes of the arguments in this article, it is significant that the advertisement was not found in upmarket magazines such as Tribute or Ebony that are aimed primarily at a black market and that generally focus on luxury items, and cars not carried at all by the other black magazines." Produced by the South African advertising agency TBWA Hunt Lascaris, the first page of the advertisement shows a Himba' woman from Namibia standing in a barren saltpan; the picture plane is divided into two equal horizontal areas, namely sky and earth, and forms the backdrop for all three pages. She wears traditional animal skin garments and ornamęnts, and is naked from the waist up. Although she is thin and conforms to westernized ideals concerning beauty, her elongated breasts are propelled sideways in a ridiculous manner. The second and third pages of the advertisement show that this distortion of her breasts has been caused by a rapidly passing Land Rover 4×4 Freelander that envelops her legs in a cloud of dust. She ostensibly 'admir{es] the product" by allowing her eyes to follow the movement of the Freelander. The body copy on the second and third pages reads: "The new more powerful Freelander. The 130 kW, 240 Nm V6 or the 82 kW, 260 Nm Td4 diesel, both available with 5 speed steptronic transmission. The only thing tougher will be deciding on which one you prefer.' [...] In capitalist societies, advertisements are considered to be instrumental in reproducing social structures and maintaining myths by establishing 'structures of meaning' chat reflect ideological ways of perceiving the world. Advertising images therefore stem from sets of power relations and enlist cultural codes, stereotypes, myths and ideologies in their social production of meaning. Alchough adverrisements generally depict particular mythologies or stereotypical ideals of "the good life" ... [based on] representations of gender, class and race',' the polysemic potential of representations should be borne in mind. Deborah Root states that che former colonies of the West are frequently represented by means of advertising images that are rich with colonial connotations, such as unbounded sexuality, luxury, power and adventure." I hope to show that the Himba advertisement is an example of how advertising can appropriate such discourses and keep certain representations in cultural circulation, even chough these may be in the form of pastiche or parody. [...] In order to understand the discomfort that the Himba advertisement elicited, it is necessary to understand some of the context of colonial rule in Namibia. Namibia, then known as South West Africa, was colonized by Germany between 1884 and 1918, and this period is characterized by the usual iniquities perpetrated by the politics of imperialism. The majority of the Europeans who visited the region during that time did so in their capacity as explorers, missionaries and hunters. Colonial rule was characterized by the violent suppression of the indigenous peoples; it is estimated that as many as 65,000 Herero (who include the Himba) were exterminated during their revolt against the Germans between 1904 and 1907. It is significant, in terms of the Himba advertisement, that the Germans were subsequently accused of destroying tribal culture and of exploiting women and children for financial gain." In 1915, during World War I, South Africa ejected Germany from the region and Germany renounced sovereignty in the Treaty of Versailles. In 1920, the League of Nations granted South Africa mandate over the territory, which was surrendered with the gaining of Namibian independence in 1990. The Himba are nomadic cattle herders who live in parts of Northern and Western Namibia, southern Angola and Botswana.'º Unlike other indigenous peoples in Namibia, the Himba generally had litdle contact with westerners. During colonial times, the region where they lived was declared a reservation and access was restricted by the subsequent South African apartheid government. Only when Namibia became independent in 1990 did regions such as Kaoko in Western Namibia become popular tourist destinations," particularly for South Africans. Because the Himba did not relinquish their traditions or mode of dress,'² they are considered one of the last so-called unspoilt, traditional peoples of Africa." [...] ## LAND ROVER AND THE ADVERTISING STANDARDS AUTHORITY There has been an intimate relationship between Western Namibia (the setting of the Himba advertisement) and Land Rover since the early 1950s, when it became the preferred leisure vehicle chat enunciated gendered notions of travel, exploration and adventure.' Although the Managing Director of Land Rover in South Africa, Moira-Anne Moses, protests that they 'wouldn't want Land Rover to be only a white male product (suggesting that it essentially stil is), my reading of the Himba advertisement is based on the reality that [t]raditionally most Land Rover owners have been male, and most still are'. The assumption that is made in chis analysis that the driver is a (white) male is defensible in terms of the overwhelmingly white market segment thar has been able to afford the Land Rover, and because Land Rover has been coded as an adjunct of the myth of masculinity for many decades. This does not invalidate Bertelsen's viewpoint that since 1994, democracy in South Africa has increasingly been redefined as the individual freedom of (black) people to participate in the act of consumption, merely that this tendency has not yet been discernible in the culture surrounding Land Rover." The Advertising Standards Committee, a sub-section of the South African Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) met on 7 December 2000 to consider the complaints lodged against the Himba advertisement by members of the public, the Human Rights Commission, the Commission on Gender Equality and the Namibian Ministry of Forcign Affairs, Information and Broadcasting. The advertisement was subsequently ruled to be in breach of the International Code of Advertising Practice, and was withdrawn in April 2001. All che magazines that had carried che initial advertisement were obliged to print a statement from the ASA explaining the retraction, the costs of which were carried by Hunt Lascaris. Moreover, Namibian government officials considered requesting redress for the damage perpetrəted against the Himba by means of the advertisement." The Himba advertisement elicited indignation on many counts. Whereas the Namibian government objected to the exploitation of a minority ethnic group, namely the Himba," Mogam Moodliar, head of the South African Human Rights Commission's legal department felt that '[i]t demeans women generally, depicting them as sexual objects. The [breasts} are not in [their] natural form. They are tilted in a certain direction as a result of the speed of the Land Rover'.' The Namibian Campaign on Violence against Women and Children believed that the advertisement contravenes the Namibian constitution.2º Diane Hubbard of the Legal Assistance Centre in Windhoek, the capital of Namibia, commented that the image is 'tremendously insensitive, poking fun at the Himba's traditional dress. It smacked of the same kind of exploitation that occurred during colonial times. Would a white woman in a bathing costume have been given the same treatment?'"' Indeed, some critics pointed out that the advertisement operated in the same tradition of objectification and exploitation to which the Khoi woman Sarah Baartman had been subjected in the early nineteenth century.² In addition to racism and sexism, which are inextricably linked," the advertisement was also accused of encouraging people using 4×4 vehicles to drive recklessly through the Himba's remote ancestral grazing and burial grounds.'4 Following deliberations with Hunt Lascaris, the ASA articulated four issues in their judgment: • When viewed against the diverse population and culture of South Africa the advertisement is irresponsible, as it does not contribute towards the work of gender and racial healing essential to the building of a new society. • The manner in which, the female figure is depicted is exploitative and constitutes racial stereotyping.2 • It is not the nudity in the advertisement but the misuse, abuse and distortion of the woman's nudity that violates human dignity. [...] • The insensitive portrayal of the Himba woman is discriminatory and makes a mockery of African culture thereby perpetuating gender and cultural inequality. Representatives from Hunt Lascaris responded to charges regarding the 'cultural pornography' of the image by stating that it had been conceived as a a harmless parody and exaggeration designed to amuse the consumer'26 and explained that a multiracial pilot study had found it inoffensive. [...} Hunt Lascaris further declared that consumers of 'motor vehicles would likely view the advertisement on a humorous basis [as hyperbole] and would merely conclude that there is a quicker version thereof'.27 As Bertelsen points out, advertisements are inherently parasitic and make opportunistic use of jokes and puns.2ª A common defence against offensive imagery is therefore that it is 'only entertainment', which obscures the reality that entertainment (and advertisements) operate on an ideological level and have the capacity to inscribe racist or sexist meanings.²9 Moira-Anne Moses attempted to justify why the Himba image had been chosen: We wanted to keep an African context and were obviously a little hesitant [about this advertisement], but research showed it was perceived in the light it was intended ... We withdrew it immediately there were complaints. It was not our intention to offend people. Moses noted, however, that '(q]uite a lot of men phoned in to say that they had enjoyed the ad and people who were offended should not be so sensitive'.3 Hunt Lascaris insisted that they had not exploited the Himba woman as she had given her consent and was apparently aware of the manner in which her photograph would be used. Her face was replaced, however, by that of an employee ar the advertising agency before the whole image was digitally manipulated." [...] ## TRAVEL AND COLONIAL-STYLE ADVENTURE The metonymic association of woman with the African landscape reverberates throughout the nineteenth century, when exploration was established as an exclusively masculine act, a moment of penetration into a suggestively feminized (and empty) locale'." But this practice did nor end with decolonization. [...] Pritchard and Morgan point out that the "“masculine", "technological" west and north curns its gaze to consume tourism delights in che "natural" "feminine" landscapes of the south and east';ª this meeting of opposites is also enacted in the Himba advertisement. Colonial-style adventure, which is conventionally based on the notion of white privilege, is explicitly referred to in many contemporary advertisements and commodities, and words such as 'discover' are coded to reflect this." Accordingly, Land Rover's choice of names such as Defender, Discovery, Freelander and Range Rover play on ideas of 'defence, freedom, territory, and ... mobility." [...] One of the objectives of colonialism was the imperative to dominate and tame che Other. [...] [C]olonial discourse thus constructed che colonized as a fixed reality which is at once an "other" and yet entirely knowable and visible'." The Other was invariably fetishized in fantasy images that operated on the principles of metaphor and metonymy," fashioning ambivalent stereotypes of attraction and repulsion chat still inform the cultural politics of identity. [...] There are many contemporary examples of exploitative representations of black women in South African advertisements, travel literature and tourist postcards. In these representations, women are the signifiers of absolute difference - racial, sexual and cultural. Although these examples are generally not as shocking as the Himba advertisement, they constitute a visual lexicon that has been naturalized by its continual use. Stuart Hall consequently alerts us to the fact that how things' are represented and the "machineries" and regimes of representation in a culture do play a constitutive, and not merely a reflexive, after-the-event, role'.39 ## EXPEDITION DISCOURSE AND THE 'GENTLEMAN'S SAFARI' In order to understand some of the further cultural resonances that I believe operate in the Himba advertisement, it is helpful to refer to two types of adventure travel that flourished in Western Namibia (specifically in the Kaoko region) during the twentieth century. First, the expedition discourse' was a predominantly visual discourse comprising photographic records of'the technical conquest of an unfriendly natural surrounding by male-groups', in which hazardous car journeys featured prominently."º The inhospitable cerrain of Western Namibia was consequently established as a stage for masculine heroism and a testing ground for western technological supremacy.' It can therefore be argued that the Himba advertisement was sited in a colonialist landscape to reinforce the notions of masculinity, freedom, modernity, status and a leisure lifestyle already attached to the Land Rover.“ [...] Second, from the 1950s onwards, the so-called Herrensafari or gentlemen's safari became established in Namibian society. [...) The Herrensafari was a privileged form of leisure and colonial travel only available to those in possession of a 4×4 vehicle. [...] Henrichsen points out that the main activity of the Herrensafari was driving, thereby not only enacting the physical control of space by leisure adventurers, but also emphasizing their symbolic temporary escape from an urban middleclass milieu43 [and] technological supremacy. [...] ## BINARY OPPOSITIONS Ashcroft explains that binary oppositions established power relations and sustained 'the violent hierarchy on which imperialism is based and which it actively perpetuates'.\*\* Binary oppositions are mutually exclusive, and because they attach positive values to only one of the pair, they naturalize ideological meanings. [...] The manner in which the advertisement is structured, with the Himba woman on the left of the picture plane and the Land Rover on the extreme right, seems to validate a reading in terms of binary opposition. The first set of binaries gravitates around the notion of a western paradigm and includes the following: white/black; first world/third world; West/Africa;" North (Euro-America)/South (Africa); colonizer/colonized; centre/margin; self/ other; modernity/pre-modernity; technological/pre-technological; civilization/primitivism; present/past; and fast, change/slow, changeless. [...] (T)he Himba woman is positioned not only as the conventional Other of the white European male, but also specifically of the South African male at whom this advertisement is targeted. This is suggested by the linguistic sign of the number plate on the Freelander: the initials GP signify Gauteng Province, which connotes wealth, culture and technology in the industrial and financial hub of South Africa. [...] The second set of binaries involves conventional gendered constructs, and includes the following: male/ female; culture/nature; urban/rural; exploring the land/of the land; empowered/disempowered; active/passive; strong/weak; public/domestic; and action/reaction. [...] ## NOTES Extracted from van Eeden, J., 'Land Rover and Colonial-Style Adventure', International Feminist Journal of Politics 8(3) (2006), pp. 343–69. Copyright © 2006 Routledge, reprinted by permission of Routledge (Taylor & Ffancis Group, http:/ www.informaworld.com). Editor's note: This article was not illustrated with figures in its original form for reasons of copyright permission. 1. Annie Coombes notes that Tribute is a glossy magazine aimed at a middle-class black entrepreneurial readership', Coombes, A. E., History after Apartheid: Visual Culture and Public Memory in a Democratic South Africa, Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003, p. 12. 2. Bertelsen, E., 'Ads and Amnesia: Black Advertising in the New South Africa', in Nuttall, S. and Coetzee, C. (eds) Negotiating the Past: The Making of Memory in South Africa, Cape Town: Oxford University Press, 1999, pp. 221–41, p. 230. The recently launched South African magazine Blink (subtitled 'The key to being a man') targets upmarket black male readers and carries an advertisement for the Land Rover Range Rover (Blink, February 2005, pp. 88–9). However, the Freelander and Range Rover are not coded in precisely the same manner and have different connotations since the Range Rover has limited on-road performance ('Land Rover: The Fifty Year Miracle Origin of the Species', 1997, Available at http://landrover.co.za/company/heritage/ com\_heri.asp (accessed 17 October 2002). 3. The use of the Himba woman as a stereotype of Africa is common; another example with a similar context is an advertisement for Britz 4×4 rentals chat features a Himba woman and three images of 4x4s. The text reads: Selfdrive ... into the wilderness and see the parts of southern Africa you only dreamed of. Getaway, December, 2004, p. 306. 4. It is strange that her skirt does not seem to move in response to the speed of the Freelander. The notion of speed has traditionally been coded as an adjunct of male success and sexual power (Bayley, S., Sex, Drink and Fast Cars: The Creation and Consumption of Images, London: Faber, 1986, p. 31), and supports the assumption made in this article that the driver of the Freelander is a male figure. 5. Keeton, C., 'Icon of Adventure.' Available at http://www.leadership.co.za/issues/nov/ articles/landy.html. 2001, p. 1 (accessed 8 October 2002). 6. Williarson, J., Decoding Advertisements, London: Boyars, 1978, p. 12. 7. Wallis, B., Art after Modernism: Rethinking Representation, Boston, MA: David R. Godine, 1984, p. xv. 8. Root, D., Cannibal Culture: Art, Appropriation, and the Commodificasion of Difference, Boulder CO: Wesrview, 1996, p. 25. 9. Grobler, J., 'Still No Redress for Hereros." Mail Guardian, 13–19 March 1998. p. 7; 'Herero to File Atrocity Claims against Germany', Mail and Guardian, 22 January 2003, p. 12. 10. The Himba are part of the Herero who currently number about 100,000 out of the total population of Namibia of less than 2 million. 11. Rademeyer, R., 'Ons Lyk Mos Nie So Nie!', Available at http://www.news24.com/Beeld/ Wereld/0371\_957122,00.html , 2000, p. 2 (accessed 30 July 2003). 12. The Himba dress of animal skins and bodily adornment by animal fat and ochre have become iconic for the tourism industry. 13. Rademeyer, 2000, p. 2; Pillinger, C., 2001, 'Land Rover's U-Turn Over "Racist and Sexist" Advert', available at http://www.millenniumdebate.org/suntel28jan6.htm (accessed 30 July 2003). It is ironic that this 'innocence is confrmed by the fact that very few Himba saw the advertisement under discussion, as they are not the target market at which the product is aimed. 14. See Henrichsen, D., 'Pilgrimages into Kaoko: Herrensafaris, 4 x 4s and Settler Illusions', in Miescher, G. and Henrichsen, D. (eds) New Notes on Kaoko, Basel: Basler Afrika Bibliographien, 2000, pp. 159–85. 15. Keeton, 2001, p. 1. 16. Bertelsen, 1999, p. 228. See note 3. [...] 17. Pillinger, 2001, p. 2. 18. Rademeyer, 2000, p. 1. 19. Jacobs, C., 'Land Rover Boobs with Racy Ad Campaign', Sunday Times, 10 December 2000, p. 3. 20. Rademeyer, 2000, p. 1. 21. Pillinger, 2001, p. i. 22. Sarah Baartman was taken from Cape Town to Europe in 1810 and [...] exhibited as a so-called oddity because of her physical appearance (particularly her breasts and sexual organs). [...] 23. hooks, b., Yearning: race, gender, and cultural politics, Boston, MA: South End Press, 1990, p. 57. 24. This accusation is ironic given Land Rover's ostensible commitment to conservation and environmental issues. Keeton 2001; Pillinger, 2001, ρ. 2. 25. The charges of racism in the advertisement were also projected onto the advertising industry in general in South Africa, which was alleged to be 'still white and racist.' Donaldson, A., 'How to Keep Abreast in Advertising - and Other Matters', 2000, p. 1. Available at http:// www.suntimes.co.za/2000/12/10/insight/ in06.htm (accessed 15 June 2003). 26. Jacobs, 2000, p. 3. 27. TBWA Hunt Lascaris' Justification Document, 2000. 28. Bertelsen, 1999, pp. 226–8. 29. See Wolf, M. J., The Entertainment Economy: How Mega-Media Forces Are Transforming Our Lives, New York: Times Books, 1998. 30. Keeton, 2001, p. 1. 31. Farquhar, J. 'Playing with Fire.' Advantage with Advertising Age: A Compelling Insight into Media and Advertising, 8 January 2001, p. 22. 32. Van Wyk, E., 'An Investigation of the Objections that the ASA (Advertising Standards Authority) Presented for the Retraction of the December 2000 Land Rover Freelander Advertisement.' Unpublished research paper, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, 2001. 33. Bunn, D. 'Embodying Africa: Woman and Romance in Colonial Fiction', English in Africa, vol. 15, no. 1 (1988), pPp. 1–28, p. 1, p. 7). Travel writing was established as a decisively gendered trope, in which the '[e] xplorer-man paints/possesses newly unveiled landscape-woman.' Pratt, M. L. Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation, London: Routledge, 1992, p. 213. 34. Pritchard, A. and Morgan, N. J. 'Privileging the Male Gaze: Gendered Tourism Landscapes', Annals of Tourism Research, vol. 27, no. 4 (2000), pp. 884–905, p. 892, p. 894. 35. Root, 1996, p. 133, p. 148. 36. Henrichsen, 2000, p. 178. 37. Bhabha, H. K., 'The Other Question: The Stereotype and Colonial Discourse', Screen 24 (6 (1983), pp. 18–36, 23. 38. Bhabha, 1983, p. 29. 39. Hall, S., 'New Ethnicities' in Morley, D. and Chen, K.-H. (eds) Stuart Hall. Critical Dialogues in Cultural Studies, London: Routledge, 1996, pp. 441–49, p. 443. 40. Miescher, G. and Rizzo, L. 'Popular Pictorial Constructions of Kaoko in the 20th Century', in Miescher and Henrichsen, eds., 2000, PP. 10–47, p. 34). 41. Henrichsen, 2000, p. 180. 42. Ibid. p. 176. 43. Ibid. p. 160, 167–8. Henrichsen, (p. 166) believes that the Herrensafari was a ritualized form of temporary escape from modernity that was necessary specifically during the fraught political circumstances contingent upon the practices of colonialism in Namibia. 44. Ashcroft, B., 'Globalism, Post-Colonialism and African Studies', in Ahluwalia, P. and Nursey-Bray, P. (eds) Post-Colonialism: Culture and Identity in Africa, New York: Nova Science Publishers, 1997, pp. 11– 26. p. 14. 45. Brantlinger (1985: 199) affirms the presence of the constructed binary opposition between the West (self) and Africa (Other). Brantlinger, P., 'Victorians and Africans: The Genealogy of the Myth of the Dark Continent', Critical Inquiry vol. 12 (1985), PP. 166–203.