## ACTION # Reflexes; The Ego; The Executive The Results of Behaviour. The Problem of Bchaviour. Humphrey's General Principle: Conservation and Development. Reflexes. The Ego. The Ego as a Ficld Object. The Problem of Its Segregation. A Case of a Behavioural World Without an Ego. What Are the Conditions tor an Experience to Be Incorporated an the Ego? The Complexity of the Ego. The Executive. The Control of the Executive. Thrce Cases. The Demand Characters. An Excursion into Acsthetics. Dynamie Relations Betwcen Objects and Ego. Objects Determinıng Our Bchaviour. Physiognomic Characters. The Actual Control of the Executrve. General Princıple of Action ## THE RESULTS OF BEHAVIOUR Psychology is concerned with behaviour, and behaviour is, of all natural events, one of the most interesting. Let us compare the earth as it was before life appeared on it with what it is now, to give substance to this claim of ours. Then we would have to compare a “pure" landscape such as we may now find in polar regions or on the top of the highest mountains with our big cities, our villages, our harbours, and our tilled fields. As a purely geographical event the change is stupendous. Ore has been dug out of the bowels of the earth, has been purifed, made into iron and steel, and these are now girding the globe in railway tracks, supporting the huge buildings of our cities, racing over oceans, and working for us day and night in our various machines. Similarly the coal deposits have been opened up and millions and millions of tons of coal are being consumed to make our engines go and to protect us against the harshness of our climate. Rivers have been deflected, valleys have been flooded, the rank growth of vegetation has been forced to give way to a regular alternation of crops of a few plants necessary for the support of men. Cities have sprung up, each of them being a system of such a complex structure and of such order as never existed before man appeared and had time to develop h civilization. And the strangest things happen in these cities: thert are buildings, filled every night with crowds of people who watch in semi-darkness a white screen and listen to sounds produced by an intricate machinery, there are other buildings in which men flock to stare at pieces of canvas covered with paints, and still other ones where men sit quietly turning over the leaves of curious objects called books, books which need other men and big machines to be produced. And then there are funny strips of paper called money, which pass from person to person, are kept in great numbers in other kinds of buildings called banks, and" which govern the behaviour of the buzzing millions and millions of men. I could go on indefinitely describing mere geographical differences between the world devoid of life and the world as it is today; and all these momentous changes are due to behaviour. No wonder, then, that we, the behaving agents, are interested in this our own behaviour, our interest in behaviour being itself behaviour. But great as this interest is, and essential as I deem it for the future of our civilization, historically it appears late, and is secondary. The particular behaviour which is "interest in behaviour" is necessarily posterior to behaviour which is "intcrest in the world." At first we are concerned with getting food and shelter and warmth, only then with ourselves, as the providers of these necessities, and our activities in this labour. ## THE PROBLEM OF BEHAVIOUR I shall not develop this historical theme. Rather, I shall begin with the problem as it faces us today. We see what behaviour has done and we want to explain it; for by now we have developed a particular type of behaviour, called science, which turns back on itself and tries in this enterprise to follow the methods which it has developed in other fields. Can Its Solution Proceed Unconcerned with Its Orderly and Meaningful Results? But if we want to explain behaviour, behaviour which has been such a powerful agent in the world, can we ever hope to succeed if, right at the outset, we forget what behaviour has accomplished? That is to say, must we not, in order to explain behaviour, first gain some knowledge about those universal aspects of behaviour which have been responsible for its success? Will it do to introduce explanatory principles indifferent to the results of behaviour, principles which would explain as well, or better, utter chaos, when in reality we have civilization, chaotic as this civilization may appear at the moment if measured in terms of civilization? Can we use principles which by themselves,would make the probability of any kind of civılization, nay, of any survival of men and animals, infinitely small, calling the fact that this improbability has come to be realized by the name of chance? Or would not such an explanation be ultimately the abandonment of any explanation? Provided we knew what happened in every nerve, every muscle, every separate part of our organism during our behaviour acts, would that explain our railway systems, our literature, art and music, and our science? These processes would be exactly the same if a man transported a stone from a place A to a place B whether this was a mere transportation or a part in the great activity of building a pyramid or a Gothic cathedral. Man's behaviour, however, has been very definitely of the type of building rather than of mere transporting. Can, then, any attempt at an explanation of behaviour hope to succeed which excludes this fact from its fundamental principles? Otherwise expressed, in terms introduced in our first chapter, can a science of behaviour even begin without the categories of order and meaning? Mechanism Leads to Vitalism. Any attempt to proceed in such a way will find, sooner or later, that it can never accomplish its task that behaviour as the agency that created civilization, behaviour even that preserves the individual for a definite span of time in the everchanging environment, remains the same X in the equation that we started with. And therefore any such attempt has always led to a dead wall. The human mind, unwilling to be stopped by such an obstacle, has built itself ladders to climb across it; i.e., it has introduced a new principle, totally alien to and different from the principles which kept it from its goal. The dualisms, or pluralisms, which we introduced in the first chapter, have been the necessary results of all such attempts. Since mechanistic theories, to call them by the name which they gave themselves, always failed to explain why behaviour is orderly rather than chaotic, these theories were supplemented by vitalism, which attributed order and meaning to a new agent, inherently endowed with order and meaning and capable of imposing them on mechanistic nature. At the very beginning we refused to accept such a solution, and later on we showed how order and meaning can be kept in the theoretical system without such a deus ex machina. This was done in the field of perception. Humphrey's General Principle: Conservation and Development. Our frst aim must therefore be to achieve the same end in the field of behaviour. "The organism may be said to behave as an intricate system of material processes, tending actively to maintain a complex pattern under constantly changing conditions" (Humphrey, P. 41). This proposition, amply developed by its author, gives us such a first principle. It claims that the organism is a peculiar kiná of system, a kind, however, which may also be found in the inorganic world, and which is so constituted that all its reactions have a conservative tendency. We may also say: if we consider the organism and its (geographical) environment as one system, then any disturbance of the equilibrium of this system will end in the reestablishment of an equilibrium which is also an equilibrium for the organism alone; 1 the equilibrium of the organism, then, is a stable equilibrium inasmuch as it re-establishes itself after a disturbance. Of course this is not strictly true; the new equilibrium of a living organism will never be quite the same as the old. Thus, what actually happens is not a mere conservation of pattern, but its development. The system is conservative and evolving at the same time. Were it not conservative, were it to become perpetually different at successive instants, it would never be the same organism long enough for us to call it so. Were it only conservative so as to revert always to exactly the same condition, it would not be an organism. "Objectively considered organic identity is then rather far removed from the continued identity of an inert thing. . . . Not identity' of matter, nor identity of form, gives it, but a spatio-temporal unity of developing and changing form; we may say that the gradually changing pattern of any organic system is a single long event, conditioned by external change, at the same time regulated from within, and taking place, as do all events in our experience, in four dimensions, three of space and one of time" (Humphrey, pp. 54-5). Humphrey has investigated what properties of systems make such behaviour possible. Instead of following him in his very general approach, which encompasses parts of physics and chemistry, physiology and psychology, we shall stick to specific psychological problems and see how his general principle is borne out there. One more word before we begin. The general principle which we took over from Humphrey seems at first sight far removed from the kind of principle we wanted, a principle, namely, which would en visage at the outset the orderly and meaningful results of behaviour. What has Humphrey's principle to do with civilization? That it cannot be sufficient is obvious. It applies to animals as well as to men, but animals have not produced a civilization. Granting this, acknowledging that we have to do more, we can still see that the principle at least starts us on the right road towards finding this needed more. For in the first place it excludes chaos as the result of behaviour, and in the second, by taking into account the developmeat of the system, it leaves a place for such behaviour results as we call civilization. In that sense it fulfils the demand which we made. It will be our task to fill in the gaps and to show what are the distinguishing characteristics that lead human behaviour so far beyond the results achieved by animals. But in outline even this answer may be anticipated: the new equilibria which organic systems establish depend upon the disturbances to which the old ones are exposed. Therefore we might expect the possibility of disturbances and thereby the possibility of equilibria to be enormously increased in the phylogenetic series and most particularly in the step from the subhuman to the human. ## REFLEXES Traditional Theory. The traditional theory of action begins with the so-called reflexes, i.e., with relatively isolated movements elicited by relatively isolated stimul; the knee jerk and the contraction and dilation of the pupil may serve as examples. Traditional theory uses these reflexes in two ways: first it makes an extremely simple hypothesis about their occurrence, an hypothesis based on certain anatomical findings, and secondly it postulates these simple reflexes as the elements out of which by mere combination all our actions have been developed. In both respects the reflex theory is the direct counterpart of the sensation theory which we discussed in our third chapter, and in both respects it is equally unsatisfactory. Since I have discussed this theory at great length in an earlier book (1928, Chap. III, §§ 4 and 5), and since it is rapidly disappearing from the system of psychology, if not from the text books, I shall be very brief here. A reflex as a process found its explanation in a structure, the socalled reflex-arc, consisting of an afferent neurone, an efferent neurone, and ordinarily one or more intermediate connecting neurones. Excitation started at one end would travel over the whole arc, the stimulus would elicit the response. It is obvious that this theory is of the type which, a short time ago, we characterized as not very lıkely to give a satisfactory explanation of behaviour; for this theory lacks any principle from which the orderliness and meaningfulness of behaviour could follow. The organism being endowed with an enormous number of reflex arcs, a great many of which are being stimulated at the same time, how does it happen that the resulting behaviour is orderly, that it conserves the system, instead of changing it by every reaction? Moreover, one pattern of stimulation follows upon another, and in this sequence a great deal is perfectly haphazard; and yet behaviour is not haphazard, but purposive, goaldirected, i.e., orderly and meaningful. Eye-movements. Let us then discuss a whole set of reflexes whose rôle in the total behaviour of the organism is patent, our eye-movements. Each eye has six external muscles attached to the bulb which can move it in its orbit, these six pairs of muscles being innervated by three different cranial nerves originating in a number of different cortical centres. Besides, each eye has the internal ciliary muscle² which controls accommodation. Thus, anatomically, the complexity of the oculomotor system is enormous. This system produces three distinguishable kinds of movements: (1) accommodation, (2) fixation and pursuit, (3) convergence. AccommobAtion. We have already discussed the first rather amply (Chapter IV, pp. 74 and 119 f.). Accommodation means the creation of the best possible conditions for clear organization. Equilibrium is achieved when articulation is clear, i.e., when the sensory processes have attained a maximum property. If no clear articulation is possible, as when we look at a screen with a badly focussed picture upon it, the oculomotor system is under constant stress, our eyes begin to ache. Accommodation has all the characteristics of a true reflex, it is automatic and occurs "unconsciously,"we have no notion of its taking place. But in terms of the stimulus arc theory: What is the stimulus for accommodation? The same retinal clements that were stimulated before accommodation took place are still stimulated afterwards, though somewhat differently. But there is no systematic way of describing this difference except by referring it to its success, the ensuing organization of visual processes. Thus this first example shows the helplessness of the pure reflex arc theory and gives at the same time an indication of a true theory: the reflex as a part event in a larger process of good organization. Fixation ANd PursuIr. Although we have not discussed the second function of the oculomotor system, fixation and pursuit, directly, we have used it as an example when we derived the figure-function of the retinal centre. We connected it then with the fact that if the visual organization was a figure on a homogcneous ground, the eyes would move in such a way as to create the conditions for this figure to be as much figured as possible by making it the enclosed part, i.e., by shifting it on to the centre, by fixating it. We might add that under such simple conditions the balance of the whole field would be most stable if the figure were in the centre, since this is the condition ## ACTION of greatest symmetry. Our explanation of fixation in this simple case, then, is exactly the same as our explanation of accommodation: a movement of the receptor organ occurring in such a way that the organization resulting from the stimulation of the receptor is as good as possible. Let us compare this explanation with the current one. "When carefully examined, these processes reveal a complicated and finely differentiated system of interconnections between the impression of light upon separate points of the retina and the specialized impulses of eye-movements. Strictly speaking, a different movement must arise from every retinal point; therefore every fibre of the optic nerve must have a different central connection with the motor nerves which innervate eye-movements"(Bühler, 1924, Pp. 103f.). I have argued against this explanation on several grounds (1928, pp. 78 f.). In the first place it has to be remembered that from each retina there issue about one million sensory fibres, so that all in all two million of such separate connections must exist. We should not, however, be frightened by mere numbers. What should give us pause is the much more startling fact that all these two million connections must be arranged in such a way that by their mere arrangement they give rise to the orderly result of fixation. The observed fact is, e.g., that wherever in a dark room a point of light appears, it will be fixated; otherwise expressed: the end state, projection of the solitary point on the fovea, will be reached whatever the initial state, i.e., wherever this point of light was originally projected. Who or what produced this arrangement? It was this difficulty that led men like Helmholtz to have recourse to an empiristic theory even for eye-movements, a theory which is as futile here as in other fields and as little in accord with the observed facts. Yet a rejection of the empiristic explanation does not improve the case for the nativistic one. Our concise formulation of the actual event, independence of the final state from the initial one,ª points directly to a different kind of explanation, for the feature is common to a great number of purely physical events which occur without any such system of special connections as was assumed in the nativistic theory of fixation movements. A swinging weight suspended by a string will eventually come to rest in the same position no matter in what direction or how far it had been swung out, because in this position the actual forces, gravitation on the one hand and the elasticity of the string on the other, are in perfect equilibrium. s See Köhler, 1927a, and Humphrey. In the second place I have argued that the case as presented by Bühler is oversimplified. For although the end result is independent of the initial position of the eyes, the actual movements by which this end result is achieved are not. Therefore, instead of the two million connections which we found it necessary to assume before, we have to postulate many times two million such connections; if the first system possessed in itself a negligibly small probability, this probability is still indefinitely diminished. In the third place I referred to some transplantation experiments by Marina which refute this theory directly, and which I shall omit here. Instead I shall offer a fourth argument, viz., that the theory involves the experience error, that without it it cannot produce a stimulus for the response; in short I shall show that in this respect fixation and pursuit are similar to accommodation. In the experiment so far described, a single point of light in a dark room, no difficulty seems to appear. But as far as fixation goes this case is no different from the opposite one: a homogeneous light field with a black spot emerging somewhere. In ordinary life conditions are much more complex. If we disregard for the moment the influence exerted on fixation by our attitudes and interests there is still the case of our eyes roaming around and coming to rest now on this object, now on that, but not, as a rule, on the intervening space. Then there are the pursuit movements in which our gaze follows a moving object, and lastly there is the fact that we turn our eyes also in the direction of a sound which suddenly breaks in upon us, a reaction which Lowenfeld found to be typical for the infant at three months. What inferences can we draw from these four instances? If a dark point on a light background has the same effect as a light point on a dark background, then the stimulus as a physical event is no longer defined. In this case the whole retina is stimulated except for the one point which elicits the reaction. It is therefore in either case not a point stimulus that starts the reflex movement, but a stimulus inhomogeneity, and the movement takes place in such a way that this stimulus inhomogeneity is brought into the centre of the retina. Formulated in this way the fact of fixation no longer indicates anything like that complex system of neural connections which the nativistic theory assumes. For the cause of the whole process is no longer located in one retinal point, the peripheral starting point of the reflex, but resides in the total retina, or a part sufficiently large to give rise to inhomogeneous stimulation. Now we know that such inhomogeneous stimulation will give rise to a segregated figure, and we understand the whole process as a process of articulation and balancing of the visual field. The fact that our roaming eyes are directed by contours and come to rest on things (not on the background) emphasizes the same point. The whole retina is again stimulated, each point is connected with a different eye-movement; why then are certain parts of the stimulus pattern carried into the fovea and not others? Unanswerable from the point of view of a mechanistic or machine-like reflex theory, which again cannot assign the proper stimulus to this effect, and easily explicable when the eye-movements are considered in conjunction with the total process of field organization. I need not repeat the argument for the pursuit movement, and turn now to the fixation of a sound. The function of this response is essentially the same as that of all the other fixations, viz., to bring the momentarily outstanding figure into the centre of the field. The only new fact added by this case is that this figure may be an auditory as well as a visual one. Thus this case involves no new principle from our point of view. But what about the reflex theory of eye-movement? What is here the initial peripheral end of the arc? ConvERGENce. We turn now to the last oculomotor function, convergence. This is a binocular function par excellence, for it guarantees that at any one moment as many points of external space as possible will be projected on corresponding points on the two retinae. No doubt, there exists an anatomical substratum for this function; as Hering, who compared the two eyes to a team of horses guided by the same rein, pointed out long ago (1868, p. 3), the two eyes will move together also if one of them is excluded from the act of vision. But we have learned that the existence of an anatomical structure may be primarily the effect of a function, which in its turn it influences only secondarily. That this must be the true state of affairs in our case is amply proven by the ease with which the normal co-operation of the eyes can be altered provided such alteration serves the end of vision. Hold a prism of not too great a refracting power in front of one of your eyes; you will not see things double. Let us assume that the eyes remained in their position when this deflecting device was introduced; then the same external points would no longer be projected on corresponding points of the two eyes, since everything would remain unchanged in the unobstructed eye, while the retinal pattern would be shifted on the other. Therefore we should see everything doubled, and the fact that we do not, proves that eye-movements have taken place so as to re-establish the old condition in which a maximum of points of external space was projected on corresponding points. Therefore, although an anatomical structure for convergence exists, we must seek our explanation of convcrgence elsewhere. We use a case of eye-movements about which Kohler has made a great number of as yet unpublished experiments to prove his theory, which will underlie the new discussion as it did the preceding one. We start with a fact known from our study of spațial organization, the law of proximity. Two similar objects in our field of vision will attract each other with a force decreasing with the distnce between them. When ordinarily wc look at two parallel lins fairly close to each other this force will have no measurable effect of displacing them.º But distribute these lines over the two eyes by means of a stereoscope or haploscope, and the effect of this force wili at once become apparent. One line only will be seen, the eyes moving automatically in such a way as to bring the two lines on corresponding lines in the two eyes. The same principle explains why ordinarily we do not see things doubled. Let us consider a case of ordinary fixation, our fixation point being the centre of a vertical line. Any slight oscillation in the state of convergence would produce a slight disparity of the two lines and thereby a slight doubling. But at once forces of attraction would arise which because of the very small distance would be very strong and would, therefore, at once innervate the eye muscles in such a way that the lines would be pulled together again, that perfect convergence would be re-established. Thus our explanation of the lack of double images becomes dynamic. We can grant the existence of an anatomical structure which facilitates normal co-ordination of the two eyes—a structure which will have been built up by the function in the general manner which we described above in discussing the structural difference of centre and periphery of the retina (p. 2o7), but we cannot admit that such a structure would be perfect enough to exclude any double images without special forces. No fixation is perfect, slight tremor movements occurring during all continued fixation. This again is understandable, since a slight displacement on the retina identical in both eyes changes the field organization in a negligibly small degree. On the other hand, with the fixation "mechanism" not perfect, how can we assume a perfect convergence mechanism? But we must not overlook the difference between the two cases, for here the slightest deviation from perfection will arouse strong forces which at once push the system back into a norm,il position. Thus convergence is a beautiful example of Humphrey's conservative tendency, of the stability of organic equilibria. Let us summarize our position. The traditional nativistic theory was unable to cope with accommodation, and in order to explaın fixation it had tq assume an enormously complex structure, workıng with an unheard-of perfection in an orderly manner, the order being due to the structure, and therefore no “real" order but only accidental order.º Our theory has to make one assumption only, viz., that the condition of the peiceptual field may, by starting and "steering" it, influence the oculomotor system. This assumption 1s inherent in the traditional theory in the concept of the relex arc, the centripetal excitation arousing a centrifugal one. Our assumption is more general and at 'he same time a much more powerful theoretical tool. For from this assumption all the rest follows: if communication between the sensory and the motor system exists —and this existence is not in doubt—then these two systems become part-systems of a larger system, the final equilibrium being an equilibrium of this larger system. The best equilibrium would, therefore, be that in which not only the larger system would be balanced, but also each of the two part systems by itself. Since the equilibrium of the oculomotor system, due chiefly to the arrangements of the eye muscies and the strains resulting therefrom, seems to be accomplished when the eyes are slightly divergent, such perfect equilibrium can never be accomplished so long as visual perception occurs. Consequently each actual equilibrium obtained during vision is an equilibrium against the motor system. However, over a wide range of positions the strains in the oculomotor system are very small, so that the forces originating in the sensory system determine the final equilibrium. Only with extreme positions of the eyes will the stresses in the oculomotor system assume high values, and then they have to be considered as determining factors in the final balance. If we try to fixate a point to our extreme left or right, it will quickly split up into double images, the forces of attraction in the sensory field being no longer strong enough to overcome the opposed forces of the oculomotor system. Eye-movements, considered as typical reflexes, thus find their explanation, not in facts of anatomical structure, but in facts of systemic equilibria produced by processes of organization. Reflexes as Special Cases of Humphrey's Principle. We can see now how hopelessly wrong the attempt was to explain behaviour by the combination of reflexes of the reflex-arc theory type. Instead we shall derive from our discussion the clue that behaviour must be explained in harmony with Humphrey's principles, as a process of the establishment of equilibrium. THE “ToTALLY-UNcONscIOus" ReFLExEs. We shall now briefly discuss the reflexes which have no conscious counterpart whatsoever, like most of our tonic reflexes which regulate incessantly the tone of our entire musculature and thereby preserve our poise and balance. Are they to be explained according to our conception or do they at lcast fall under the old reflex-arc scheme? I have no doubt that the first is true, and that the equilibrium they serve to maintain is an equilibrium of organization in lower brain centres and the spinal cord. The simplicity and rigidity which under certain conditions distinguish such reflexes must be duc to the fact that under these conditions the sub-system whose equilibrium is disturbed and re-established is comparatively small and relatively well isolated from the rest. When we extended our psychophysical field beyond the confines of the behavioural environment (see Chapter II, p. 5o) the reflexes were among our reasons for doing so. It is not the purpose of this book to follow up this idea, but this remark was necessary lest the reader should think it possible that at least for some reflexes the traditional theory were tenable. The reader more specifically interested in this problem may turn to Goldstein's papers on the subject. REFLEXES AND ORGANIZATIONS AS "SILENT" AND "NON-SILENT." Another point is more important in our context. We have, as a rule, no direct knowledge of the dynamics of our eye-movements. Of the movements of accommodation and convergence this is completely true, while we frequently know that our eyes have wandered, resting first on this, then on that object. But even here our awareness of our eye-movements, or, otherwise expressed, the eye-movements in our behavioural worldwhere of course they belong to the behavioural Ego and not to the behavioural environment—may be very different from the real eye-movements. Before psychologists became interested in the subject, nobody knew, e.g., what kind of eye-movements we execute when we read. It was thought, because that was what everybody who is aware of his eye-movements while reading experiences, that the eyes moved continuously over the line, ## ACTION while we now know that the eyes are at rest most of the time, making no more than three or four fast sweeps while a line of print is read. But more often than not we are not aware of these movements at all. When we are not, the whole interplay of forces described in the preceding discussion has no counterpart in experience, just as the interplay of forces that produces sensory organization remains almost entirely outside experience (which contains only the result of these dynamics). Kohler, who was the first to emphasize this aspect of sensory organization, called it "silent organization" (1929, p. 371). The silence then refers also to the movements which contribute to this organization. Our fixation and pursuit movements, however, are, as we have mentioned, not always silent. But the fact that their experience is by no means always veridical is significant. We add to the instance of the eye-movements during reading, two other cases: it has happened in many experimental investigations that the subjects, instructed to fixate a certain object during a definite interval, reportèd that their eyes had remained perfectly steady, while objective records show that the eyes had made distinct, sometimes quite considerable, movements; on the other hand a subject who follows the contours of an after-image figure, without moving his eyes, has the distinct impression that his eyes have taken part in the exploration (Rubin). Thus the experience of eye-movements is in such cases not due to any separate sensations from the bulbs or muscles of the eyes, but a result of the total field organization, just as perceived motion of an object may not be due to the real movement of the object as in induced movement. In one respect, however, fixation really goes beyond these limits: it happens that we feel our eyes riveted to a certain object, that we cannot avert them and that when, with great power of will, we have looked elsewhere, we find an almost irresistible compulsion to turn our eyes back to this fascinating object. Here the force which controls our fixation is revealed in experience, here the motor side of our act of vision is no longer “silent." But in these cases the eyes are not merely indifferent receptor organs which work for us without telling us of their work; in such cases the eyes are very definitely parts of our Ego, and not only the eyes, our whole Ego is in such cases pulled in the direction of the attracting object. Therefore this case leads us beyond such cases of action as happen without participation of the Ego. We have just dealt with the second point of our program, developed at the end of the second chapter, and must now turn to the third, take a new step, long deferred and often anticipated, and introduce the Ego. The stage is set, enter the hero of the play. ## THE EGO But how is he to introduce himself? What are his opening lines to be? Many modern psychological text books, if not the majority of them, are surprisingly reticent about this question. As a matter of fact, they give you to understand that psychology has nothing to do with the Ego or the Self, that the Self has to' disappear from psychology as completely as the soul. The lonely voice of Miss Calkins, who waged a gallant fight for a Self-psychology, remained unheeded, nor did the way in which McDougall treated the Self in his system influence the current of psychological theory. Too much philosophical speculation had clustered round the Self-concept to make it acceptable to scientific-minded psychologists. They wanted facts, observable data, and so they turned their trained introspection on the alleged self and found either nothing or kinaesthetic sensations or feelings, but no special element, the Self. This is not surprising; for because of their systematic preconceptions they had to use a mental microscope in their search for an empirical foundation of the Self. But one will never discover that such things as faces exist if one looks through a microscope. The same psychologists who treated the Ego in this manner and saw it disappear from psychology treated shapes, things, motions, no better. If motion is nothing but a “grey flash" the Ego may well be nothing but "kinaesthetic sensations from the lower trunk or from parts of the body in strained position" (Titchener, 1911, p: 547). Since we have established the reality of shapes, things, and motions, we shall have much less difficulty in establishing the reality of the Ego. 'Indeed, it has proved impossible to discuss the behavioural environment without including the Ego. On the one hand we found the environment itself dependent upon the Ego, its attention and attitudes. On the other hand we found the orientation of the Ego established pari passu with the organization of the spatial framework. Both these groups of facts will be utilized as clues for our introduction of the Ego, but we deal first with the second, localization, orientation and motion of the Ego, since it is in a direct line with our preceding discussion. The Ego as a Field Object. The Problem of Its Segregation. For in these last respects the Égo seems to behave like any other segregated object in the field. Is there then any justification for treating the Ego in this way? Our first question should be: What are the segregating forces? I do not think that this question has as yet been formulated, and therefore any answer to be given in the following paragraphs must needs be provisional and incomplete. But if the Ego, in however many respects it may differ from the other field objects, is to be treated as an object in the field, we must know at least that there are possible factors which may produce its segregation. We have advisedly used the term "Ego" without a proper definition, for no such definition could at the start of our discussion be adequate; the Ego cannot even be said to be constant, to be confined within unchanging limits. A possible test of such limits is an exploration of the means by which an Ego may be touched, insulted or elated. Imagine a sensitive person in the society of a vulgar and boisterous crowd. His Ego will shrink as a means of protection from their crude outbreaks of emotion. He will, to use popular parlance, which is probably nearer the truth than we ordinarily think, withdraw into his shell. To go further, there is the martyr at the stake; the shell into which he has withdrawn excludes even his body, whose mutilations cannot affect his Ego any more. That, on the other hand, under more normal conditions our body belongs to our Ego seems obvious. It is I who drove the ball into the corner of my opponent's court just clearing the net, I who sprinted the 10o yards, I who climbed the difficult "chimney," this "”" not being a spiritual point somewhere but something of which my body, which after all did all these things, forms an integral part. Or look at the other side of the picture: deformities, moles, false teeth, the falling out of our hair, all these things we try to conceal as best we can; and there is nothing that hurts Miss N's Ego more than Mr. M's remark that she is not half so good-looking as her friend. But the skin need by no means be the boundary surface of the Ego. Miss N would feel almost as insulted if the gentleman had said that her friend was so much better dressed than she. Indeed our clothes, which, as Flugel remarks, form an intermediate layer between ourselves and the outside world, may easily become a true part of our Ego. In the perfect dandy they have even reached the centre of his self. The confines may be still wider. Mrs. P will think Miss Q an odious person and a bad teacher because Miss Q finds Mrs. P's little boy a lazy and stupid brat. Her Ego has been touched through her child, just because her child belongs to her Ego. This is a grim truth, a truth which lies at the bottom of many a struggle that often enough has a tragic quality, the struggle of the young to free themselves from the parents. But even the family is not the limit; you can rouse violent emotions in a good citizen by attacking the Republican or the Tory party. We need not continue. The limits of the Ego will vary from case to case, and with the same person in different situations. There are conditions which will contract the boundaries of the Ego, like a great sorrow, a cruel disappointment, and there are others which will expand it, until it may embrace practically the whole world, as in states of true ecstasy. But this inconstant boundary is not a feature entirely peculiar to the Ego, without any counterpart in the external (behavioural) world. Here is a billiard ball, a thing in itself. But now we see the whole billiard table, of which the ball is only one item; and now we watch the progress of the game, and here the whole table has become part of a greater unit, the gamc. The expansion is not a continuous process, but goes by leaps and bounds prescribed by the boundaries of higher units. just so with the Ego. From our skin to our clothes, from them to our families, and so forth. This remark was not added to minimize the specific character of the Ego, but to allay the criticism that the inconstancy of boundary by itself proved futile our attempt to treat the Ego as an object in the field. Granted, then, that the boundary of the Ego is variable, it is still in each case a boundary, and our question remains, What forces produce it? First Step Towards the Solution of Our Problem. This question, although not formulated in general terms, has been given a partial answer by Köhler as far as the bodily Ego or at least the visible bodily Ego is concerned (1929, pp. 224 f.). I sit at my desk writing this book. The top of the desk, my writing pad, my pen, are distinct, well-segregated units in my behavioural environment. Where is my pen? It is held by my hand, my hand being exactly such a unit in my field as pen and pad and desk top. The forces which segregate my hand from the pen are of the same kind as those which segregate pad and desk top, those forces which we have amply discussed in our fourth chapter. The same is of course true of the other parts of my body that I see. They are segregated and unified in my visual field exactly as any part of the visual behavioural environment. A Second Step: Why Does My Visually Segregated Hand Appear as "My" Hand? But there remains this question: Why do I see this hand as my hand, this arm as my arm, and so forth, and not merely as a familiar hand and arm, or Koffka's hand and arm, just as I see X's and Y's hand and arm? There is sufficient evidence to believe that infants see parts of their bodies as external objects. Another argument of Kohler's which I have heard him use in discussion takes us a bit nearer to the answer of this question, which is a psychological question par excellence, although it is not even mentioned in our standard psychological texts. It starts with the behavioural environment: yonder is the wall of the room; in front of it is a desk; on that desk are various objects, nearer and nearer; there are other walls to the right and the left, and other objects between me and these walls; but space is not only in front and at the sides, space is also, though less articulated, less clearly defined, behind. That this last statement is true, though again not mentioned in psychological text books, can easily be demonstrated. Suppose in lecturing I was standing on a platform behind which the floor dropped for thousands of feet. The platform might be wide enough for me to walk along it comfortably, but would I behave on that platform as I would on an ordinary one? Certainly not. The fact that behind me there was empty space, dangerous empty space, would determine my actions at every moment. Therefore my normal activity on the platform is equally determined by the normal "behind"; but that implies that the behind exists, that behavioural space does not confront me but encloses me. Now then, Kohler's argument continues, what is there between the last thing just in front and the behind? Is space absolutely empty there? The answer is: Certainly not; here, between the "in front" and the "behind," is that part of the behavioural world which I call my Ego. It has a very definite place in that world, and well-defined, if variable, boundaries. From this argument we can take the following answer to our question: "in front," "to the left and right," "behind," and "above and below" are characteristics of space which it possesses with regard to an object which serves as the origin of the system of spatial co-ordinates. This object, then, is functionally different from all others, inasmuch as it determines fundamental space aspects. Therefore, we should expect this object to have properties different from all others. And thus we have gained a first clue in our search; for the object which we call Ego is in one decisive respect different from all other objects, just as the term Ego implies a difference between the object so designated and all other objects. This is a first clue, no more. Only one side, and a relatively superficial one, of the Ego can be the result of its rôle in space organization. But with all this restriction we have got something to build upon, and we can now give a first answer to the question why my hand, although it be organized by the same factors as a pen, a box, or another hand, appears as "my hand." It must, if it belongs to that nuclear object which determines the "in front," "behind," "left and right." A Last Step: Laws of Organization Applied. We are still far removed from a complete theory of the Ego, we have not even answered our first question yet as to the forces which segregate this unit in the total field. But we have demonstrated that for mere reasons of organization this unit must be of a peculiar kind. We must now return to our question. In accordance with the principles we have introduced in the beginning of the fourth chapter, there could be no segregation in an entirely homogeneous field. There we considered purely visual fields, and saw what they will be like when they are completely homogeneous. But then we still had the Ego; that is to say, we did not investigate those conditions under which the total field is totally homogeneous. I doubt whether it will ever be possible to produce such conditions in the laboratory, for they are, of course, totally unnatural. But they do occur. A CasE OF A BeHaviOURAL WoRLD WITHOUT AN EGo. I know of an extremely good example, the report of a famous mountain climber who woke from a deep swoon low down in a crevasse. The essay was written in 1893, I suppose soon after the experience, although the author does not state this point explicitly. Professor Eugen Guido Lammer, a teacher in Vienna, had made all by himself the first ascent of the Thurwieserspitze by the north face, a sheer cliff of ice, and had returned over the west ridge to the glacier below. The further descent led him through one of the worst glaciers in the Eastern Alps, a glacier torn by a labyrinth of crevasses covered by snow, which he crossed during the hottest hours of the day when the snow, which in the morning had been hard and safe to tread upon, had become softened by the heat of the sun. He had almost come across this glacier when a snow bridge on which he had stepped unawares gave way, and he fell into the chasm, hitting the side walls of the crevasse several times and losing consciousness. I now translate his description as literally as I can: ". . . fog . . . darkness . . . fog . . . whirring . .. grey veil with a small lighter spot ... fog .. . faint dawn ... a soft humming . . . dull discomfort . . . fog . . . something has happened to somebody ... gloomy fog, and always that lighter point ... a shivering shudder: something clammy . .'. fog ... how was it? . .. an effort at thinking ... ah, still fog; but besides that light point there outside, there emerges a second point inside: right, that ## ACTION is I! ... fog, dull ringing sound, frost ... a dream?... Yes, indeed, a wild, wild, wild dream!—It has dreamed-no, rather I have dreamed . . ."7 I shall not continue the quotation to the end, the full awareness of the situation, nor relate how by his own efforts the heroic climber succeeded in freeing himself. The part so far quoted is sufficient for our discussion. It shows, provided the description is correct, and its vividness and impressiveness makes it yery likely to be so, that phenomenally quite a long period of time passed without an Ego, a period which began with as complete a homogeneity as we can imagine. The Ego did not even emerge with the first articulation of the field, the light point, not even with the first feeling of discomfort, and apparently not even with the first conscious thought, though it was this which led very soon to the momentary establishment of the Self, which was, however, as yet quite unstable; it disappeared again and re-emerged with greater stability and better organization, the experience appearing as a dream. ConcLusions FRom THIs Case. Interesting as this last turn is, we shall not discuss it here, but shall, instead, draw our conclusions: the Ego, just as any other field object, does not become segregated before the field possesses a sufficient amount of inhomogeneity. Let us try to collect the different constituents of the field at the moment when the Ego emerged: there are visual data, dark fog with a lighter point in it, auditory data, a soft humming, coenaesthetic data, the dull discomfort, the shivering, which also indicates temperature-sense data, and finally thought. All these data appear in the same field, phenomenally and physiologically, i.e., in accordance with the principle of isomorphism we assume that all these processes, started from the various parts of the body, occur in the same brain field. This is nothing new, since we have shown before that one and the same space contains objects of different sensory qualities. At first these various processes are spread more or less indiscriminately over the entire field. And then organization takes place, the field becomes bipolar, the visual figure, the light spot, becoming the one pole (objectively the light spot was produced by the light coming through a hole in a snow bridge halfway down the crevasse which Lammer's falling body had opened), and the Ego the other. We may assume that this point forming the core of the Self will have attracted to it the somatic data, while the auditory and visual data will have remained with the external pole. How this point-core itself was formed we do not know. It must have had a great deal to do with the victim's earlier Ego, his wishes, fears, determinations, which are now brought into play. I am certain that an infant would never experience a Self under such conditions; as a matter of fact an infant will lead his life for a fairly long time without an Ego organization, and a still longer period with a very fluctuating and unstable one. But if we disregard the person's history there is enough left to make us understand the segregation of the Self, for there are on the one hand the visual and auditory, on the other the somatic data, including the general feeling of the cold. It looks as though these latter had something in common which differentiated them from the others so that they formed a unit by themselves whose place in the total field would be determined by these others. We would then assume that with no other than purely visual homogeneous stimulation the field would be nothing but fog, fog without anything in it, not even a hole in the place where the Ego afterwards appears. As long as there is nothing to break the homogeneity of stimulation, there should be nothing to interrupt the fog which would constitute the whole behavioural field. The segregation, then, produced by inhomogeneity, would be due to the law of similarity, equal processes consolidating themselves and segregating themselves from others. The well-known fact that the data of the lower senses are much less different from each other than those of the higher ones tends to support our view, which would lead to the conclusion that at an early evolutionary stage, ere the different senses became separated, no Ego-world articulation will occur, a conclusion unfortunately not amenable to proof. However, where such differences of sensory process occur, Ego organization becomes possible, the boundary surface between these different excitations may become the boundary “membrane" which holds the Ego system together and separates it from the rest of the field. Whether this first attempt at a solution is right or wrong I cannot say; but that some solution on such or similar lines must be true, unless our whole theory is wrong, seems to me obvious. OTHER HYPOTHESES: CERTAIN ExPERIENCES BY THEMSELVES EGO-ReLarep. In order to make more explicit what this hypothesis means I shall compare it with other possible hypotheses. One might say that there are certain processes, or experiences, which are by their very nature Ego-experiences, that they, by themselves, quite apart from any organization, constitute the Ego. Such experiences might be: pleasure and pain, the emotions, needs, wishes, and desires and ## ACTION our thoughts. But for most, if not for all of them, we can show that they can belong to parts of the enyironmental field as well as to our Ego. Let us begin with the emotions, which have been adduced so often in the past as examples par excellence for "subjective," i.e., Ego-related, experiences. And yet we may see a gloomy landscape, even when we ourselves are perfectly cheerful; may not a poplar look proud, a young birch shy, and has not Wordsworth immortalized the glee of the daffodils! Traditional psychology will retort: it is you who have projected these feelings into those objects of nature; you cannot seriously uphold that a landscape is really sad, that the daffodils are really gleeful. You yourself endow these objects with your own emotions by the process called empathy. The plausibility of this objection rests on two assumptions, the one palpably false, the other turning the argument into a vicious circle. The first is the assumption that when we ascribe sadness to a landscape we mean "the geographical landscape. This of course would be absurd, but equally absurd is this interpretation of our opinion. Sadness and glee, and the other characteristics we have employed, apply in these descriptions primarily to the behavioural objects, and not to the geographical ones. And that these characteristics are characteristics of behavioural objects is explicitly admitted by our opponents who try to explain how they have come to be such, viz., by projection, empathy. The second assumption is that emotions are really subjective. Since, so the argument runs if made explicit, external objects appear to be endowed with emotions which, according to the assumption just stated, are purely subjective states, we must have projected these emotions into the objects. The cogency of this inference rests, of course, on the assumption of the subjectivity of the emotions, and therefore empathy does not prove this subjectivity. Rather, only when we make this assumption are we forced to postulate empathy, a process not directly verifiable, to doubt the truth of our first description, and replace it by the other one—the landscape is not really sad, but I project my sadness into it. But no proof is given for this assumption, whereas the fact mentioned above, that our own emotion of the moment may be different from, even in contrast with, the emotional characters of the objects we perceive, puts the empathy theory in a difficult position. But do we not experience emotions as processes of our Egos? Certainly we do; it was never claimed that emotions were always characters of external behavioural objects. But as little was it claimed that they were always Ego-related, and the fact that they are in some, or in a great many, cases nowise proves that they are so in all. Therefore it seems much more natural to say that emotions may be carried by (behavioural) objects as well as by myself, that they may enter other organized units in the field as well as that unit which we call the Ego. I should even be inclined to think that a field which contains no Ego organization may be highly emotional, and I believe that Dr. Lammer's extraordinary experience was emotionally tinged, if not charged, before his self-consciousness appeared. What about wishes, needs, desires? As far as i see, the answer will be the same. We see the “greed" in that face over there, bu do not experience it as our own desire, and we may admire the stern resolve shining through the eyes of our friend when we ourselves cannot make up our minds what to do. Even inanimate objects may appear with needs, like the melody before it is finished, or when it is broken off before its end, or an incomplete figure pattern. What about our thoughts? Can thoughts be experienced outside of my Ego? The fact that we may see a man sunk in thought is not a case in point, for we do not know what his thoughts are. But there are other cases which prove that thoughts also may belong to external objects, which, for all normal persons, will be other persons. Many people have had dreams like or similar to the following: they are taking an oral examination with a group of colleagues; the examiner asks them a question which they are unable to answer, whereupon the examiner turns to the next candidate, who promptly supplies the correct answer. In this dream occur two thoughts and both in minds which are not the dreamer's Ego, although they are in his dream. The question is asked by the examiner, and the right answer is given by a student, while the Ego of the dreamer was unable to produce it. The answer then occurs in the dreamer's field, but not in that part of it which makes up his Ego. I have no evidence, but I believe that in the work of playwrights and novelists the same thing will occur. The author will get directly thoughts and speeches as thoughts and speeches of the "children of his mind," but not as his own thoughts and speeches. There remain pleasure and pain. From Lammer's report we know that discomfort may be experienced without an Ego and therefore there is no reason to exclude the assumption that mild pleasure might be experienced in the same way. We may come pretty near to it when sleepily basking in the sun or drowsing in our hot bath. Intense pain, however, seems always an affair of the Ego. If it is, it proves no more than that an Ego must be there in order that severe pain be experienced. That of all experiences pain alone should be by and of itself the carrier of the Ego is too improbable to be believed without direct proof, although pain, or rather such excitation as will ordinarily lead to pain, may under given conditions contribute greatly to the organization of the Ego. WHAT ARE THE CONDITIONS FOR AN ExPERIENCE TO BE INCORPOR-ATEp 1N THE Eco? We conclude from this discussion that no process by itself and in isolation has an Ego-character, that it has to be incorporated in the Ego system to acquire it and that certain such processes are more than others fit to become so incorporated. But in each particular case the question remains: Why does this process at this moment belong to the Ego and not to an external object, a question which is closely connected with the other one: Which are the forces that at this moment keep the Ego segregated? We have guessed before at some of the forces which may be primarily responsible for this segregation. But we also mentioned that the Ego problem cannot be properly treated in the three dimensions of space alone, that without taking time into consideration we shall miss some of its main aspects, an idea which will be elaboratèd presently. An AnsweR to Our Questions. But let us return to our questions. Even though we have, at the moment, no real knowledge of the forces which keep the Ego unified and segregated from the rest, we must assume the Ego to be a particular field part in constant interaction with the rest of the field. And we can now turn to the other question—why certain processes are incorporated in this subsystem and others not. That not all processes occurring at a particular moment can form part of the Ego is a simple conclusion from our theory: no Ego would exist, as a special system, unless it segregated itself from other systems. THE DIFFERENT SENSE DATA AND THE EGO. That visual data, apart from those of our own body, will remain outside the Ego derives directly from the nature of visual experience with its rich articulation into a great number of separate objects. If vision supplies us with many objects spatially distributed and clearly articulated, then vision must supply us mainly with non-Ego things. What then about the visible parts of our body, why are they drawn into the Ego? The answer can only be given in outline, but this outline is fairly clear. For we have knowledge of our limbs not only from vision but also from those other sources which give us notice about the non-visible parts of our body. These processes, aroused in the entero- and proprio-ceptors, form probably, as we have explained, the first material for the organization of the Ego. If, then, the place of the visual body data coincides with the place of the other data ## ACTION belonging to the same part of the body ("coincides," of course, in behavioural space), then we should be able to apply our law of proximity to explain why the visual data are experienced with the Ego character, "my hand," "my leg," etc. For the local kinaesthetic processes, since in their entirety they help to organize the Ego, are not independent local events, but part events in a larger system of events. If then a visual datum is welded together with a kinaesthetic one, it must also of necessity become a part in a greater whole, i.e., it must be incorporated in the Ego system. This welding together seems, as previously mentioned, not to occur right at the beginning of life, since the distinction between the infant's own body and other objects does not seem to become perfectly clear till well on in the second year. While we found it à problem to explain why I see this hand before me as “my" hand and not just as a hand, psychology for a long time was occupied with the opposite problem: Why do I see things outside and not within me? That this problem originated in a bad confusion of the Ego as a datum of experience and the body as a part of the real world, and that it disappears as soon as this confusion is cleared up, has been beautifully demonstrated in Köhler's "Gestalt Psychology" and need therefore not be repeated here. Besides, the reader should be able to supply the argument himself. EMoTIoNs AND THoUGHTs. The localization of emotions does not seem any more difficult (barring the problem of the nature of the emotions themselves, which we shall take up later). But if we grant that emotions are processes with certain peculiarities, then their localizations in the Ego or external objects will depend on questions of proximity. When I see a rearing horse ánd hear its wild neighings, then the emotion carried by these processes will be incorporated in the horse. Conversely there must be special factors which will make the emotion appear as my own emotion, factors which must have the same relation to the Ego system that the rearing and neighing had to the horse system. To say more at the moment would be mere speculation. What holds for the emotions is true for the thoughts, except that we have still fewer concrete data to support our explanation with. We shall leave this to the future, satisfied that we have posed a problem and indicated possibilities of its solution. THE NEEDS. CONSTANCY OF THE EGO DESPITE ITS LAPSE FROM THE BE-HAvIouRAL woRLD. We could say the same about the needs, but they necessarily introduce a new and very important point. Emotions and thoughts are processes which, though they leave their traces in the organism, no longer exist after they have happened. But needs are, as we shall discuss more fully, states of tension which persist until they are relieved. Our most general aims are therefore permanent, tensions which last through great parts of our lives. These needs being our needs, they belong, of course, to the Ego system. Now we have discussed at least one case in which the behavioural field contained no Ego at all. Must we, then, assume that the Ego system had disappeared completely for the time being? Such an assumption would not be reconcilable with the facts, for the needs of the person survived that accident. Not only was he the same kind of person afterwards as before, with the same interests and ideals; he himself believes that his behaviour during his escape from the icy chasm was largely due to needs set up in his previous life. I translate again: "In retrospect it seems to me as though during this whole ascent my consciousness had never become fully clear. The purposiveness of my actions resembled more or less that of a somnambulist in the gutter on a roof; like a clockwork my brain did what for years I had planned to do. I cannot recommend warmly enough that one acquire the habit of dreaming through all possibilities in imagination. Although it makes one more cowardly, it also accounts for the flash-like presence of mind' which has often saved me" (l. c., p. 71). Our conclusion is clear: the disappearance of the Ego from the behavioural world does not mean for the normal adult an annihilation of the Ego. It survives as a part of the psychophysical field even when it is not represented in consciousness, and that forces us to the conclusion that normally, when the Ego exists in our behavioural world, this phenomenal, or conscious, Ego is not the whole Ego. It is probable that the Ego is first formed in organization which proceeds on the conscious level. But after it has been formed it becomes more and more stable, more and more independent of momentary conditions of organization, so that eventually it is a permanent segregated part of our total psychophysical field. This is, as I see it, the true justification of the various psychoanalytic theories which investigate the particular properties of this permanent Ego, the strains and stresses within it. The psychoanalytic terminology is, at least, misleading. The psychoanalysts' use of the term unconscious was unfortunate. We have briefly referred to it in our second chapter (p. 5o f.), where we said that the reason for this terminology would disappear if we treated the phenomena so designated as field events. Our Ego concept has fulfilled this promise. The Ego being a sub-system in a larger field, its states are field events even when this field is not the behavioural field, when it is not conscious. The emphasis on the "unconscious" seems to me to indicate, paradoxical as it may sound, an over-estimation of the conscious.8 The term unconscious makes the conscious the reference point for all mental activity. The unconscious events are treated as though they were conscious. From the point of view here defended the mental or, if you like, the behaviour aspect transcends the phenomenal, the conscious, the latter being always but a small fragment of a much larger field event. But rightly interpreted the principles of psychoanalysis cannot be dismissed by a shrug of the shoulder, much as the special claims of any psychoanalytic school may be open to just and severe criticism. The development of psychoanalysis has been influenced by the two poles which have affected the whole of psychology, the pole of mechanism, which was paramount in Freud's earlier work, and the pole of vitalism, vitalism even with a mystical tinge, which became so prominent in the later development, particularly in the hands of Jung. Psychoanalysis will, I dare to predict, enter a new and healthier state of development when it frees itself of the mechanistic and the vitalistic biases. Two ConSEQUENCes: (r) THE EGo As ConSTANT ANd DeVELOPING IN TIME; FoUNDATION OF A THEORY OF PERSONALITY. In a science which for such a long time has done all it could to disparage the idea of an Ego it is not easy to appraise justly the importance of our concept of the enduring Ego system. It may exert a far greater influence on the whole body of psychology than we can see at present. At the moment I shall only mention two consequences which it entails. In the first place it gives us a real basis for the scientific understanding of the development of a personality. For in all changes of the behavioural field the Ego remains as a segregated part. The segregation will not proceed along the same boundary lines all the time, it will not invariably be of the same strength, and the relative importance of the Ego in the field will change. Still the Ego within the total field seems comparable to the physical organism in its geographical environment. Both are strongly organized stable subsystems within a larger system, and just as in all changes the organism maintains its identity and thereby produces its growth and development, so will the Ego grow and develop by maintaining itself in the flux of the behavioural environment, or more generally of the psychophysical field. And the study of action as conduct is just the study of the continuous process of balancing the Ego subsystem in the total field, so that it may be possible to apply the ## ACTION prineiple of organic behaviour, which we have taken over from Humphrey, to the Ego. Now, the Ego in maintaining its identity in the stream of varying conditions must develop in accordance with the disturbances to which it is exposed and to the kind of Ego it is. It is in that respect not different from any real organism in any real environment. That the disturbances will vary enormously from case to case is so obvious as to need no further mention. But the Egos themselves, in their first formation, and owing to the nature of the individual psychophysical make-up, will perhaps not be less different. We shall go into the details of these differences later. Here we emphasize the point that mental development, as any other development, is not a mere chance affair, much as chance may affect it. The stable organization of the Ego system prevents it from being changed by every new influx. The term stability has, moreover, to be rightly interpreted. At no moment, even apart from external influences, can we regard the Ego to be completely balanced, completely at rest; the Ego in itself is fundamentally temporal, it is not a time-independent state. It is always going somewhere, and the stability of the Ego must, therefore, always be seen in relation to the direction in which it is moving. The law of good continuation which we discovered as a factor of space organization will find its application in this most vital problem of all psychology. Future work will, it is hoped, establish the workings of this principle. Its mere formulation is a step in breaking down the artificially erected barriers between scientific and understanding psychology, for it supplies to the study of personality what the "understanding psychologists" missed in the scientific body of psychology. Also the old problem of heredity and environment, of nature and nurture, will gain a new aspect from this side of our Ego-concept (Koffka, 1932). (2) MENTAL PeRMaNENCE DiFFERENT FROm MEmoRy. In the second place our Ego gives us “mental" permanence and continuity, which is different from memory as usually understood. After having abandoned the soul, psychology was left with the fleeting processes of each moment, with the stream of consciousness, although often enough psychologists treated ideas or images most inconsistently as actually persisting objects. The only factor to account for the consistency of mind was memory, a concept much more widely employed than clearly defined in much psychological writing. We shall treat memory later; we must only emphasize here that the persistence of the Ego is in our theory not à matter of memory, 'but of a direct persistence through time. Identity in time, persistence through time, may have different forms. A discussion of this point would fall outside the scope of this book," but two extreme cases may be mentioned: the persistence of a diamond, which is characterized by the fact that the same material which made it up yesterday makes it up today and will make it up tomorrow; and the persistence of an organism from conception to death, where the material of which it is composed changes constantly, and where even the form in which the material is organized is not constant. The second persistence can be called memory as little as the other. And therefore the persistence of the Ego, which must resemble the persistence of the organism, cannot be called memory either. On the other hand, as we shall see later, it is this persistence of the Ego which makes memory in some of its aspects possible. But if the Ego survives as a separate system, even when it disappears from consciousness or when consciousness disappears completely, it must survive in an environment from which it is segregated. Therefore the conclusion we have just drawn for the Ego applies also, in principle, to the behavioural environment. If the Ego persists as an actuality and not as mere potentiality, the same must be true of the behavioural world in which the Ego exists. And this conclusion must affect our whole theory of memory, as we shall see in a later chapter. The Complexity of the Ego. We return to a more detailed study of the Ego as it is constituted at a given time. We have seen that its boundaries are variable, and that very fact implies that the Ego, unless it has shrunk to its minimum size, is complex, consists of a variety of parts which must be considered as sub-systems. Our modern psychology owes this conception of the complex character of the Ego to Lewin (r926). Its empirical foundation lies in facts of mental dynamics, in the realm of action. All action as a change of the pre-existing state requires forces to set it going, and so the question as to the nature of these forces has to be raised. ThE Causes oF Acrion. I write a letter to an absent friend. What makes me do so? The answer which during the last twenty years has been given to this and all questions of a similar kind by the behaviourists and those many other psychologists who fell under the sway of behaviourism, was: Writing, since it is a response, must have been evoked by a stimulus, just as the knee jerk occurs as a response when the tendon below the patella is stimulated by a tap. The stimulus-response concept had fascinated psychologists, particularly in America, and it was hard to árgue against it, because any cause for an action which one demonstrated was at once downed by the question: Isn't that a stimulus, and how can any response take place without a stimulus? Therefore, if I said now that my writing of this letter was caused by my wish to do so, they might retort that the wish was the stimulus. But then they would be playing with words, and in this game the word stimulus would have lost all its original meaning by which it was to be an affection of a sense organ by an external agency. And such an external agency, such a stimulus in the legitimate sense, cannot be adduced to account for my action. The sight of neither pen nor paper is necessary to set my wish into execution. If I want to write and have no material at hand for carrying out my wish, I run over to the stationer's and buy it. If that is out of the question, I write a letter "in my mind." And when I have finally posted my letter, I may see pens and sheets of paper without beginning to write again. The writing of the letter must then be due to forces which disappear through the act of writing, to tensions which are being relieved by my writing. These tensions must be tensions within the Ego system, and action appears as a means of relieving these tensions. THE COMPLEXITY OF THE EGO-STRUCTURE. ZEIGARNIK's EXPERI-Ments. Now such a simple reflection leads at once to the conclusion that the Ego must be complex. Let us explore this complexity by considering one of the finest pieces of experimental work so far issued from Lewin's school, an investigation of remembering by Mrs. Zeigarnik. Since this investigation is as remarkable for its results as for its flawless technique, which proves that real experiments can be made in fields so much closer to the true psychological problems than any we have reported yet, I shall go somewhat into the detail of this study. The procedure of the experiment was to present the subjects during one sitting with a number of tasks (in one series twenty-two), half of which they were allowed to finish, while they were interrupted in the other half by the presentation of a new task at a time when they were well on the way to a solution. The subjects did not know beforehand whether they would be allowed to complete the tasks or not; they had no idea that interruption qua interruption was one of the principal features of the experiment. At the end of the hour the experimenter asked the subjects to tell her what they had been doing during the hour. Since after each task all materials had been put into a drawer "for the sake of keeping the table tidy," nothing in the situation had any direct connection with the diverse tasks. The subjects then enumerated a number of tasks, varying (for thirty-two subjects) between seven and nineteen, with an average of $\mathrm { \tt t r . I } = 5 0 \% ;$ in another series with twenty different tasks (and fourteen subjects) between seven and sixteen, with an average of $\mathbf { \delta I 0 _ { 9 } }$ again $50 \%$ The experimenter then classified these tasks with regard to their completeness and incompleteness and thereby discovered whether either of these classes was favoured by recall. Since naturally some tasks will per se be better remembered than others, the total number of subjects was always divided into two groups, which received the same tasks but were treated differently with regard to completion; the tasks completed by one group were interrupted for the other. The relation of the remembered incomplete to the remembered complete tasks, ${ \frac { \mathbf { R I } } { \mathbf { R C } } } = \mathbf { P } ,$ is a numerical expression for any such preference. If $\mathbf { p } = \mathbf { r } _ { 3 }$ there is no difference between them; if $\mathbf { p } > \mathbf { \varepsilon _ { I } } ,$ the incompleted ones are more frequently remembered; if $\mathbf { P } < \mathbf { \mathbb { r } } _ { 3 }$ the completed ones are preferred. THE sSUPERIORITY OF THE INCOMPLETED TASKS. In the first series of thirty-two subjects P was equal to $\mathbf { I } . 9 $ in the second series with fourteen subjects $\mathbf { P } = 2 . 0$ . That is, the incompleted tasks were remembered about twice as often as the finished ones. The tasks were of all kinds and difficulties; they involved drawing, e.g., the continuation of a honeycomb pattern, other kinds of manual skill, like the stringing of beads or the punching of holes, ingenuity in combination, as in a jig-saw puzzle, certain memory tests, like the task of finding a German philosopher, actor, and city all beginning with the same designated letter. The result varied from task to task; some tasks (four in the first series) had P quotients greater than $^ { 3 , }$ and for three P was $< \tt { I }$ . We disregard for the moment the influence of the task, and turn to the explanation of this perfectly clear result which was amply confirmed in group experiments, where P for forty-nine students turned out to be $= \tt { I } . 9 ,$ and for forty-five children from elcmentary schools between thirteen and fourteen years of $\mathsf { a g e } = \pmb { 2 . 1 }$ TWO POSSIBLE EXPLANATIONS OF THIS SUPERIORITY REFUTED. A firSt explanation may be based on the emotional shock produced by the interruption. The emotional tone which the interrupted tasks received because of the interruption might be responsible for their better recall, in conformity with the view that an affective tone is favourable for memory. This assumption was tested by the following method. Certain tasks must be interrupted, so as to be endowed with the emotional shock, but then again given for completion. The new presentation should for two reasons increase their recall value: on the one hand they would receive a second emotional tone by being presented for the second time, on the other the repetition of the same task should add to its memory value. Two series were performed with this method. In the first, twelve subjects were given eighteen tasks, half of which were interrupted and not resumed while the other half was first interrupted and then completed. In the second series twelve other subjects were again given eighteen tasks, but there were now three kinds, the totally incompleted ones, the totally completed ones, and those that were first interrupted and then completed. In both series each task was as often of one kind as of the other. The first series yields again only one quotient, the incomplete over the interrupted-completed, $\frac { \mathbb { R } \mathbb { I } } { \mathbb { R } ( \mathbb { I } - \mathbb { C } ) } { = } \bar { \mathbb { P } } ^ { \prime }$ , the second series this and the old P quotient. The $\mathbf { \nabla } \mathbf { P ^ { \prime } }$ quotient of the first of these two series was 1.85, fe., exactly the same as the old P quotient, creating a strong presumption in favour of the conclusion that the tasks first interrupted and then completed are perfectly equivalent to those which are completed straight away. This conclusion is confirmed by the comparison of the $\breve { \mathbf { P } }$ and $\bar { \mathbf { P ^ { \prime } } }$ ratio of the second series, the former being 1.94, the latter r.9, and the correlation between the two quotients for the different subjects being .8. The original assumption has thus been disproved. The tasks never completed are better remembered than those completed, whether the latter are temporarily interrupted or not. The emotional shock of the interruption can therefore not be the cause of the better recall of the incompleted tasks. Another possible explanation of the superiority of the incompleted tasks would be that the subjects thought that they might be asked to finish the interrupted task later. Aall had proved that when subjects had been told before learning that they would be required to remember material for a long time, they remembered it better than when they had been given the instruction to learn for immediate recall. Although the situation in Zeigarnik's experiments was different from that in $\mathbf { A } { \ : } \mathbf { { \vec { \mathbf { \mathbf { \Phi } } } } } \mathbf { { \vec { \mathbf { \Phi } } } } $ a similar factor might have played a decisive rôle. This was tested by two new series, each with twelve subjects; in the first of these the subjects were told, when they were interrupted in a task, that the task would be completed later, in the second the interruption was characterized by the experimenter as final. If this explanation were right, the superiority of the incompleted tasks should be greater in the first of these two series than in the second. As a matter of fact P was in the first series $\mathbf { \delta } \mathbf { r } . 7 _ { \mathbf { \delta } }$ and in the second 1.8. Even though the difference is probably not significant, the assumption on which we started is disproved. THE TRUE THEORY: THE TENSIONS AT THE MOMENT OF RECALL. Therefore the explanation has to be sought in the conditions which obtain at the moment of recall. It is here that the theory of systems under tension enters. The question of the experimenter, "What have you been doing this hour?" sets up a tension in the subject which is relieved by the actual recall. Similarly each task had set up a tension which was only relieved when the task was actually executed but remained unrelieved for the interrupted tasks. Therefore, at the moment of recall there exist two vectors deriving from these two tensions; the first is directed towards the recall of all tasks which had engaged the subject during the hour, the second one directed towards the completion of the unfinished ones. The result of the experiment indicates that the latter become effective also for recall, making the unfinished tasks more readily available. On the other hand it follows that the actual relation of remembered incomplete and complete tasks must depend upon the relative strength of these two vectors. Zeigarnik shows in a very thorough discussion of her results that these two assumptions are justified. The existence of the stresses towards completion is evidenced by the resistance which the subjects offered to the interruption and by the tendency to resume the tasks after the other work was finished. This last tendency was made the object of a special study by Miss Ovsiankina, which can only be mentioned here. Characteristically this tendency was much stronger with children than with adults, the former taking these tasks much more seriously than the latter. For days afterwards children would ask to be allowed to finish the incomplete tasks, while they never asked for the repetition of a completed task, however interesting it might have been. In conformity with this stronger stress towards resumption the children also had a higher P quotient, 2.5 as compared to 1.9. The influence of the tension towards recall can be studied by a comparison of the different subjects. Some took the recall as a new task, comparable to the others, or even thought it was the main part of the experiment, which then appeared to them as a memory test; others, on the contrary, did not link the experimenter's question up with the experiment proper but treated the recall as an informal report, a social action. P for the former was $\pmb { \tau } . 5 ,$ for the latter 2.8, the former remembering chiefly more finished tasks than the latter and thereby lowering their P quotient. ## ACTION The same instruction, therefore, does not in the least guarantee that the subjects undertake the same tasks; only individual analysis, not a statistical treatment, can reveal such differences and their dynamic effects. The same is true of the effect of the interruption. Interruption of a task which has been completed subjectively though not objectively will have the effect of completion; the subject, really, though not in actual fact, having solved his problem, will have relieved his tension. Conversely, objective completion need not always coincide with subjective completion; the subject may feel that his success was more or less a chance affair, that he has not really mastered the task, and would not be able readily to accomplish it a second time. Such cases of objectively completed tasks are dynamically cases of incompleted ones. Individual analysis of P quotients bears out these arguments. Lastly, the acceptance of a task itself will be different for different individuals. We have already seen that to the children these tasks meant more than to the adults, but it is possible to rob the task completely of its individual task character by making each individual task a mere specification of the general task, viz., behave as a good subject, do what the experimenter tells you. For such a subject there can be no incompleted task, because the interruption is to him as much a fulfilment of his general task as a real completion. This deduction was specially tested by a group of 1o high school children who had been told by their teacher that they should go to the psychological laboratory to see what such a place was like. They were not interested in the tasks themselves, only in the fact that in a psychological laboratory such tasks were being used. The result was that their average P quotient was 1.03, varying between 1.5 and .8, whereas the variation in the very first series with average P value of 1.9 had been from 6.o to .75!' Thus incompletion qua mere objective lack of completion does not exert any favourable influence on recall at all; only such incompletion does as sets up real tensions. COMPLEX NATURE OF EGO: THE DIFFERENT SUB-SYSTEMS. And nOW we can at last use these experiments to prove the complex nature of the Ego, by stating explicitly what has been implicit in this whole discussion. We spoke of tensions set up by each task and retained by the incompleted ones. That means, of course, that each of these incompleted tasks must have been a sub-system, relatively independent of the other sub-systems. Without this degree of independence the discharge of tensions would have cleared the whole system. The fact, on the other hand, that the incompleted tasks were better remembered proves that they really belonged to separate systems. But this deduction was again submitted to new experimental tests. The whole experiment was so conducted that isolation of the different tasks was made more difficult or entirely prevented. The procedure was very simple. At the beginning of the hour the subjects were told all the tasks which they were to undertake during the hour. In this way their task became: all these things I shall have to do, whereas in the other experiments each individual problem had been a task by itself. The eight subjects who'worked with this new instruction gave a P quotient of .97, with a variation between 1.25 and .75; that is, in the averages there was no difference between the completed and the incompleted tasks, owing to the fact that at the end of the hour the total task, viz., working at the previously known number of different problems, had been finished. FATIGUE PREVENTS THE ESTABLISHMENT OF WELL-INSULATED SUB-SYS-TEms. The establishment of separate systems under tension can also be prevented by other means. If the subject is tired at the time of working on the tasks,1° the P quotient is $< _ { \tt I _ { 3 } }$ the average P of ten subjects being $\cdot 7 4$ with a variation between 1.2 and .5. Of these ten subjects five had six months previously taken part in the regular experiment. Their average P at that time had been 2.18, while it was now ${ \cdot } 7 9 ,$ the fact of the repetition itself being without any influence, as other experiments proved. During fatigue, then, insulated sub-systems which can preserve their tensions are not so easily produced-it would be premature to say that they cannot be produced at all, since for adult persons these tasks involve relatively irrelevant problems, which should not be taken as typical of all possible tensions; the explanation is that in fatigue the system is less solid, less able to establish strong insulating walls between different parts. The same result, $\mathbf { p } = { \cdot } 7 8 \mathbf { ; }$ was obtained with excited subjects; in this case the variable extra tensions which caused the excitement prevented the establishment of the small sub-systems. THE COMPLETED TASKS MORE STABLE THAN THE INCOMPLETED ONES. Why, however, is in these cases $\mathbb { P } < \mathbb { r }$ and $\mathbf { n o t } = \mathbf { r } \ ?$ The answer given to this question by Zeigarnik is the more interesting since we shall learn later of entirely different experiments by M. R. Harrower which prove the same principle. The answer is this: a completed task is a closed whole and therefore leaves a trace of a well organized and stable nature, while the traces left by the incompleted tasks, ## ACTION now that they do not have the tension towards completion, lack this stability which derives from complete closure. Being less stable these traces are less likely to survive, and less powerful in determining future recall. Zeigarnik points out that this argument adds new weight to her main result, the superiority of the incompleted tasks for recall, inasmuch as it proves "that the dynamic tensions of the respective quasi-needs is in our experiments of incomparably greater importance for recall than the stable closure of the completed form" (p. 69): However, in consideration of Harrower's later experiments, briefly referred to, a slightly different interpretation seems equally possible if not more plausible. The very tensions which remain in the incomplete task-systems may keep them at a greater degree of organization. The two factors which Zeigarnik sets against each other are not mutually independent; recall depends to a high degree, as Harrower has proved, upon the organization possessed by a trace, and the Zeigarnik tensions are a factor which contributes to the preservation of such organization. PERsisTENCE OF THE TENsIoNs. How long will these tensions persist? That must depend upon the persistence of the walls which separate the sub-system from the rest of the Ego. And this, in its turn, must be a function of the initial firmness of the walls and the forces which attack them. Since, however, at least during our waking life more and more tensions are created and relieved within our total Ego system, the constraining walls of any one sub-system will be constantly exposed to pressure from the outside so that we shall expect the tensions within to disappear unless the walls are strong enough to withstand such perpetual battering. It is not likely that the sub-systems created in Zeigarnik's experiments were of that nature and therefore we should expect the superiority of the incompleted tasks to disappear if the recall is made sufficiently long after the original performance. This prediction was proved to be true by special experiments. Eleven subjects, tested for recall 24 hours after the original work, had an average P of 1.14, and eight of these, who had six months previously taken part in a normal experiment with a P of 2.1, now had a P of 1.13. That time qua time is not responsible for the difference, but only inasmuch as it contains other occurrences, is proved by new experí- ments with a much shorter interval between work and recall (ro-3o minutes), which, however, was filled with highly emotional experiences; the subjects' systems were, as Zeigarnik puts it, thoroughly shaken up. Six such subjects had an average P of .64. It would be interesting to see whether an interval of twelve hours would have a different effect on the conservation of the stressed systems if it was passed in waking or sleeping; experiments performed after the pattern of those by Jenkins and Dallenbach on retroactive inhibition should decide this issue. That tensions of not too high intensity in small sub-systems may disappear through mere "leakage" due to a loss of the wall-stability has thus been proved. But one should be cautious in generalizing from these cases to others where higher tensions and larger sub-systems are involved. One might indeed be tempted to explain the rather trivial saying that time heals all wounds by this principle. But where very strong needs belonging to the core of the Ego are concerned the dynamics of this leaking process may be of quite a different kind. COMMUNICATION WITH MORE CENTRAL PARTS OF THE EGO. THE SELF. This leads us to a last point in connection with Zeigarnik's work. So far we have attributed the tensions exclusively to the subjects' acceptance of the tasks put before them, i.e., to their intention to solve these tasks. There are two other possibilities: (1) the incompleteness of the tasks as such, apart from the original intention to solve them, might produce a stress towards completion. This cause, which we shall discuss later when we treat of thinking, has probably been virtually negligible in Zeigarnik's experiments. (2) The tasks may not be as isolated as we assumed but may be in communication with other and deeper systems of the Ego. Zeigarnik found among her subjects nine persons who seemed particularly ambitious. The average P for these subjects was 2.75, as compared to 1.9 of the general average, with a variation from 6 to 1.5. What does that mean? For an ambitious person to miss the solution of a task means "failure," means that the achievement has fallen below his "personal standard," means therefore a definite affection of that part of the Ego system which we shall now call the "Self." The importance of this Self system, its dynamics in behaviour, and its relation to success and failure will be discussed much later. Here it must be emphasized that if the tasks of the experiment were in communication with the Self either through ambition or through other channels, then the tensions of the incompleted tasks became particularly strong, whereas such subjects as excluded their Selves completely from the experiment, who despised these childish occupations, had tensions far below the average, their P being 1.I (six subjects). Conclusion for Complex Structure of Ego. Thus these experiments have led us far beyond the original confines. Over and above the relatively temporary sub-systems which they investigated, they ## ACTION led us straight on to a permanent sub-system, the Self, whose tensions are much greater than those of the other sub-systems, representing real needs as opposed to the quasi-needs of our superficial intentions. And this gives us a new insight into the nature of the complexity of the Ego: the sub-systems do not simply exist side by side, they are organized in various ways. One principle of organization is that of surface-depth organization. The Ego has a core, the Self, and enveloping this core, in various communications with it and each other, are other sub-systems, comparable to different layers, until we come to the surface, which is most easily touched, and most easily discharged. Another principle of organization concerns the communication between the different systems, a third relative dominance. ## THE EXECUTIVE Action, we said before, results as a process of relieving existing stresses. This aim may be achieved in a great variety of ways for which we shall introduce the name "the executive."ii The executive comprises, then, all the ways in which action can relieve stresses or contribute to such relief. Not All Relief of Stresses Is Action. Not all relief of stresses, however, is action. Sensory organization, with its interplay of forces resulting in a minimum of remaining tension in the sensory field, is a relief of stress without action. Action occurs in such organized fields and frequently reduces the stresses within them. But it may even be that after a first sensory organization has been achieved the stresses within it are so strong as to change it without action, i.e., without interference of the executive, and we shall find similar events in processes of thought. We shall disregard these cases and turn instead to the workings of the exccutive. In most cases the executive will relieve stresses by producing movements of the body or some of its parts. Thus in vision the executive works through accommodation, fixation, and convergence; the stress which makes me write my letter is relieved by the actual writing of it, which includes actual bodily movements. And the same is true in so many other cases that the question arises whether it is not true in all cases, namely, that the executive is the power of the psychophysical field to initiate and regulate the movements of the body. But the answer to this question must be negative. I can think of at least two classes of stress relief where ordinary motor phenomena play either no rôle at all or not the decisive one. To the one class belong the attitudes, to the other thoughts. Let us begin with the latter. We have mentioned before that my wish to write·a letter may be temporarily satisfied by my writing the letter merely "in my head," i.e., in thought. True enough, as a rule this will not definitely assuage my desire, but it certainly is a process which to a certain degree lessens the existing tensions. Now in this action no actual movement need occur, or where it occurs, as the incipient vocalizations of internal speech, these movements qua movements do not relieve the stress in the way in which accommodation does, or my taking off my overcoat when I feel too warm. It is the thought process itself that has the decisive function in our case, and those vocal movements are of significance only as far as they are necessary for thought. Another example: I am faced with a scientific problem which I want to solve. A stress exists, and again it is relieved by mere thinking. What kind of process this is we shall discuss in another chapter. But whatever it is, it may belong to the executive. Let us now turn to attitudes. We are shown a puzzle picture like that of “my wife and my mother-in-law" published by Boring. We see one face and we are curious to find the other. What can we do to relieve this tension? Just remain directed towards the picture, changing perhaps the point on which our “attention" is centred, but keeping the pattern within the field of our interest, and waiting. The relief is accomplished when under this attitude the picture reorganizes itself so that we see the heretofore hidden face. Certainly our attitude may be more specific, we may try to see a certain line as a mouth, a certain area as a chin, and so forth, but all these attempts have only an indirect effect by facilitating the change of sensory organization. With these effects in my mind I defined the executive by stating that it either relieved pressure or contributed to such relief. Direct and Indirect Effects of the Executive. This gives us one criterion by which we can discriminate various executive functions, direct and indirect, a distinction which cuts across our first division according to the kind of process involved. For motor performances also may have only an indirect effect; in our last example of the puzzle picture, e.g., a change of fixation may help to produce the change of organization, or switching or the lamp may relieve the stress of discomfort which we feel when we read at dusk. And the same point of view is, as we shall see later, applicable to thought, Our two examples have made it evident that the indirect way of relief may have various forms, which in their turn might serve as a principle for classifying actions and their dynamics. The Čontrol of the Executive. Three Cases. But there is another equally important point of view for differentiating between different forms of the executive. We compare three examples: accommodation, the writing of the letter, and the flight from a danger. In the first the stress is entirely limited to the sensory field; it is relieved by a movement which is started and regulated by this fieldstress, and has nothing to do with the Ego. In the second case the stress resides completely within the Ego system; the relief is started by this stress, the actual execution of the action which it entails may be regulated by the field, my pen, paper, support and so forth. In the last case the stress arises between the Ego and a field object, say a snake. This stress starts the movement, which again will be more or less directed by other field forces. The relation of the executive to the Ego is different in each of the three cases. In the first it has nothing to do with it, in the second the Ego is its main cause, while in the third the stress exists between the Ego and an object and disappears normally with the removal of the object. Two Possible Interpretations of the Last Case. This last case, which we have not considered before, raises a difficult problem. In the first the executive was clearly under the control of the sensory field, in the second equally clearly under the control of the Ego. But how is it in the third? Two alternatives appear: the first being that the Ego-object stresses control the executive, the second that in this case also the actual control belongs to the Ego. The argument for this second possibility would run like this: the snake creates fear, i.e., a certain strong need for flight within the Ego, and it is this Ego need which initiates the actual movements. This interpretation could point to the fact that often the action persists long after the object which produced the stress has disappeared from the field. One might run for dear life for a long time ater one was out of any danger, and the fright emotion might not subside even then. Furthermore, very strong reactions to particular field objects or events may leave tensions in the system which will break out again and again as neurotic symptoms. In short, there is sufficient evidence for the assumption that in such cases one or more of the Ego systems have been strongly affected and that it is their tension that is responsible for the behaviour, that the executive is entirely under Ego control. LEWIN's THEORY OF THE ReCIPROCAL RELATION BETWEEN NeEDS AND DEMAND CHARAcTERs. Lewin's theory of the reciprocal relation between a demand character and a need also seems to adopt this interpretation. Thus he says: "To a certain degree the two propositions: 'this or that need exists' and this or that range of objects possesses a demand character for these or those actions' are equivalent" (1926 a, p. 353). This proposition is derived from a number of facts in which the demand character disappears with the satisfaction of the need, the relief of the particular tension. The most delicious food ceases to attract us after a copious meal, and the letter box, which just now interrupted my conversation and made me cross the street to post an important letter, leaves me completely cold when I pass it again on my way back. Furthermore "a person's world undergoes a fundamental change when his fundamental aims are changed" (Lewin, 1926 a, p. 353), because all demand characters change; things which were indifferent become attractive and important, repulsive ones may become indifferent, the attractive ones repulsive, and so on. THE OrHER PossIBILITY. However, neither of these arguments is absolutely conclusive. The first may mean no more than that in many such cases where the original stress derives from a field object the Ego becomes charged so that its own stresses participate in the control of the executive and may eventually have complete control over it, although originally the executive was under the influence of the object-Ego stresses. Ón the other hand Lewin acknowledges the type of action which he calls "field-action," "i.e., an action which takes place directly according to the field forces" (p. 378). If we grant that the object-Ego stress can charge the Ego, we admit a direct effect exerted by the object on the Ego. It is, then, an equally plausible assumption that this same stress may affect the executive. As a matter of fact it seems quite likely that this effect is quicker than the other, that it takes more time to charge an Ego system with tensions which will in their turn control the executive than it does to influence the latter directly. The fact that frequently a quick action provoked by the situation precedes the emotion seems to support this interpretation. But we shall have to go into the nature of the demand characters before we can with greater conviction decide for this alternative. What, then, does Lewin mean by demand characters? Let us approach this question from a very general point of view. ## ACTION THE pEMAND CHARACTERs. Our description of the total field has so far been incomplete. We have emphasized the articulation of the field into a number of separate objects, those which form the behavioural enyironment and that which composes our Ego, but we have failed to emphasize explicitly that the product of organization is a unity, though in this unity the various parts have a greater or smaller degree of independence. As far as the behavioural environment goes this independence is often very great. The removal of the telephone from the right-hand corner of my desk does not change the aspect of the books right in front of me, and innumerable other examples prove the same point. On the other hand to put a pile of cigarette boxes next to an Égyptian statuette spoils to some extent the effect of the latter, also we do not hang side by side a picture by Renoir and one by Durer, or set a Chinese vase on a modern steel table. This indicates that the segregation of the behavioural objects is not complete, that each object has around it a "field" which it determines, so that conversely it will be affected if this field is distorted by another object or its field. As a matter of fact we have already discussed a striking illustration of this, the Jastrow illusion (Chapter II, pp. 32 f.), and have seen that this influence exerted by one field object on another is not restricted to human fields but has been proved also for chickens. In one respect, certainly, the Jastrow illusion is different from our other examples. In the illusion the effect is "silent," to use again Köhler's term; we see two ring sectors of different size without any direct knowledge that this difference is due to their interaction. In the other instances, on the contrary, the actual effect of change is much less striking than in the case of the illusion—it is, for instance, much more difficult to describe in what respect the Durer picture has changed by the introduction of the Renoir picture-but the mutual infuence appears in experience itself as that feeling of incompatibility which prevents us from hanging our pictures in such combinations. One must not object to this argument that there would be many people who would neither detect a change in the Dürer picture when the Renoir is hung by its side nor feel the slightest incongruity in such an arrangement. The influence we speak of is an influence existing between the pictures not as geographical but as behavioural objects, and the behavioural objects depend also upon the organism whose behavioural objects they are. The old maxim: Si duo faciunt idem, non est idem, has its counterpart in the maxim: Si duo vident idem, non est idem. A Renoir can affect a Dürer only if both are seen "properly," and not just as two pictures, or as two objets d'art worth so and so many thousand dollars. An Excursion into Aesthetics. The question what their “proper" appearances are belongs rightly to aesthetics. But we may devote a few words to it, particularly since this discussion will help us later in the solution of the problem which at the moment holds our main interest. The "Proper Quality" of a Work of Art. Is there, so many psychologists and relativists in general will ask, a "proper" way in which a picture should be seen, a piece of music heard, a poem or a drama understood? Can science do more than describe as fully as possible all the various ways in which these products of art, in the widest sense of the word, are apprehended? How can science discriminate between persons and attribute greater weight to one man's apprehension than to that of another? How can science introduce value, objective standards, according to which one could say to any one person: You should see this picture in this particular way and not in that? This relativistic argument sounds very plausible; it gains added weight from the fact that aestheticians and critics who stood up for and stuck to absolute standards have so often been mistaken when they rejected as fraudulent impositions on a gullible public works which afterwards were recognized as some of the great masterpieces of all times. Does not this failure of the critics, which has occurred with almost every new movement in any of the arts, prove conclusively that the scientist can do no more than register the different reactions without any evaluation of their intrinsic worth? Were the critics who refused to take van Gogh seriously and kept him from selling a single picture during his lifetime so much more stupid than our critics who now appreciate him? We can easily reject so simple an explanation without accepting the consequence which the relativists would derive from such a rejection. The relativist's argument neglects in the first place the distinction between the picture as a geographical and a behavioural object. But the mere fact that critics disagree with regard to a behavioural object does not even indicate that they find different things beautiful or ugly, if we now mean by things behavioural ones, which are the only ones that can directly affect their aesthetic judgments. For it may happen, nay, it must happen, that the geographical object produces two radically different behavioural ones in our two critics. If our two critics are called A and B, the geographical picture, or other work of $\mathsf { a r t } , \mathsf { P } ,$ and the two behavioural artobjects $\pmb { \mathrm { p } } _ { \pmb { \mathrm { a } } }$ and $\mathbb { P } _ { \mathfrak { b } _ { \mathfrak { p } } }$ then $\mathbf { A } _ { \mathbf { y } }$ who likes $\boldsymbol { \mathbf { p } } ,$ does so on the ground of $\mathtt { p _ { \mathtt { s } } } _ { \mathtt { s } }$ and $\mathbf { B } ,$ who dislikes $\mathbf { i t } ,$ is guided by $\mathbb { P } _ { \mathtt { b } }$ It is still possible that A would dislike $\mathbf { P _ { b } }$ as much as $\mathbf { B } ,$ and B like $\pmb { P _ { \textrm { a } } }$ as much as $\mathbf { A } _ { \mathfrak { s } }$ if either of them could realize these behavioural objects. Now, although it is impossible to make any $\pmb { \mathrm { P _ { a } } }$ absolutely like a $\mathbb { P } _ { \infty }$ it is possible to make it so in fundamental respects, fundamental enough at any rate to ake B change from condemnation to admiration, or A from praise to contempt. A great deal, if not the most important part, of our education in art appreciation attempts just this, and, as I believe, with a fair amount of success. The aesthetician should therefore ask his question of the existence of general standards first with regard to the $\mathbf { P _ { a } } , \mathbf { P _ { b } }$ , and then turn to the relation between these, $\mathbf { P _ { a , b } }$ and $\mathbf { P } ,$ a question which he cannot avoid since the artist creates a P and can produce the $\mathbf { P _ { a , b \_ \cdot \cdot } }$ only through the medium of P. We can only take up the second question as to the relation between the painting on the canvas and the experì ence of the picture, because it is a more general formulation of our former problem whether there is a “proper" way of seeing a picture, hearing a piece of music. Whether such a proper $\bf { P _ { a } } ,$ if it exists, is good or bad will depend upon the circumstances; why it is good or bad is a question which we must leave unanswered, since the theory of art is not our topic. We return to the fact that the $\mathbf { P _ { a , b \_ \cdot \cdot \cdot } }$ are not simple functions of P, but also of the A, B . . . We may express this by the formula $\bar { \mathbf { P _ { a } } } { = } \mathbf { f } \ ( \mathbf { P } , \mathbf { N } )$ , whıch is only a brief form of applying our general theorem that every behavioural object depends upon the external and internal conditions to the case of art-apprehension. In order to understand the variability of the $\mathbf { P _ { \overline { { p } } } }$ with a constant P we must, then, examine the variability of the N. If we confine the range of our N to normal individuals, we exclude such variations as colourblindness, lack of power of articulation, and similar ones. But there remain others of greater importance for our particular problem. For each N is an organism with its history. Each critic, to return to the concrete case, has seen many pictures and has formed his taste by them. What does that mean? We have, in order to answer this question, to introduce a new concept, a concept akin to our framework category. To do so we must again envisage each individual person in his full reality, which includes time, and we shall thereby add another new characteristic to the behavioural world itself. When we described it as composed at any moment of a number of well segregated objects we gave a true picture. But when we go beyond the moment, another statement must be added: temporally considered, most objects which appear in our behavioural world are not completely isolated; a new object appears it is large, yellow with purple trimmings, ornamented with silver clasps and what not; in short it is different from everything we have seen before, and yet it is a book. We walk through the streets of New York, and we see men and women although they are perfect strangers. Generalized, the behavioural world, temporally considered, consists of a great number of class-object's which is very much smaller than the number of all individual objects. Such a class is a very real psychological reality, because it determines the actually appearing individual object. To us a Chinese or a Papuan in his native dress looks strange, and similarly we look outlandish to Chinese or Papuans who come in contact with white people for the first time. In these cases there exists a conflict of forces: on the one hand, the person of the other race still appears with the claim to be a human being; on the other he does not fit the class schema of human beings as it has been built up. The results of this conflict may take various forms, only two of which will be mentioned. Provided that the conflict does not remain a more or less isolated occurrence but bccomes fairly regular, the class schema itself will be affected: a human being will now be something that may have any colour of skin and whose main characteristics will appear equally well in different forms. But although this is the most stable resolution of the conflict, it is not, unfortunately, very easily achieved. As a rule the class schema remains unaffected and determines the characteristic of the individuals who, although they raise the claim to belong to it, deviate from it in certain striking aspects. The class schema, then, forms a sort of framework, or standard, and what does not fit into the framework, or does not conform to the standard, appears as inferior. The stranger is the barbarian; he is inferior in every respect, simply because he is different from the type; he is less intelligent, less honest, less sensitive, and so forth.1ª The application to our art critics is simple. When we see a picture, we do not only see this particular object, different from all other objects, but we see a picture, i.e., a member of a class. And therefore its quality will depend to a large extent upon the degree to which it fits into our picture schema. In Mohammedan countries, where pictures have been newly introduced and where there are consequently no standards, this inpovation is greeted with acclaim, and every picture is desirable. Thus in Samarkand one sees 12 Another rcason for the aversion to strangers will be discussed in a later chapter. ## ACTION the streets lined with photographers who have the most atrocious backgrounds, canvasses painted in the most vulgar manner and representing ugly objects, against which the patrons stand to have their photographs taken. And that in a city which harbours a great number of superb Islamic buildings with glorious façades. The reason is simple. The Islamic religion forbids the taking of pictures. Therefore the people there grew up without pictures; with the old political order the religious order collapsed also, pictures were introduced and'as a part of the new order were in themselves something good. The result may, of course, all too easily be that the picture schema which these people build up will be a very bad one indeed. That one cannot explain this delight in horrid pictures by the innate lack of taste of these peoples is clearly proved by the fact that they do not accept jazz music. They had their own music, and to that they faithfully stick. Our critics, however, have a picture schema. And if their schemas are as rigid as most of our schemas are, they will necessarily perceive as inferior a new work of art which does not fit into them. But schemas, historically considered, are not immutable. The more works of the new kind are produced, the more will they contribute to the picture schema, particularly since the different schemas are not unrelated to each other. The same needs that make one or more painters paint new pictures will make architects erect new buildings, musicians compose new music, poets write new poems, and even the dressmakers invent new fashions. Consequently the same forces appearing in different fields, moulding different class schemas, will support each other mutually. Moreover, there will always be men whose schemas are not so rigid as to remain unaltered by the appearance of a new object. Thus, if our critics delight in van Gogh it is not because they are of themselves better critics, but because they have had a chance to develop other schemas than those who held his pictures up to ridicule when he painted them. Summary: The Class as a Temporal Characteristic of Our Whole Behavioural Environment. Let us pause for a moment to consider what we have so far achieved. We have added a category to the description and explanation of our behavioural environment which, quite apart from its value in aesthetics, is of paramount importance in introducing time into the structure of our world. Style, fashion, manners, frequently enough even morals, are all manifestations of the same fundamental principle, the development of class schemas with their particular "levels." These class levels play a part perfectly comparable to the spatial framework, inasmuch as they also "put things in their places." By introducing the class level and demonstrating its effect upon the appearance of things we have at least opened the door for the introduction of absolute standards in aesthetics, For if a work of art is condemned because it does not fit the schema, it is not condemned on its own merits. Expressed in our old terminology: the work P is rejected because it appears as $\scriptstyle \mathbf { P } _ { \mathbf { n o a - } \mathbf { \theta } }$ as a P dętermined by its deviation from the schema s, and not as it would appear without any schema or without the particular schema of the critic. Class Schema and Absolute Value. The relativist may grant all this and interpret it as an argument in support of his own position. He will say: Each $\mathbb { P } _ { \mathbf { a } }$ has to be taken for what it is, an experience occurring under special conditions. We can even go further and find that historically certain $\mathbf { P _ { \overline { { \mathfrak { n } } } } }$ are apt to appear first and gradually to disappear in favour of others. By studying the causes of these changes we may even be able to explain the history of aesthetic appreciation, but nowhere shall we get beyond the mere facts into a realm of value, at no point of this whole investigation will the question as to the “proper" $\mathbf { P _ { \tilde { a } } }$ emerge. But this argument forgets the artist, the man who created $\mathbf { p , }$ and who in doing so wanted to create something definite, who in his work was guided by an idea of his picture which we shall call $\mathbf { P _ { a } }$ . We are not concerned here with the question whether any particular $\mathbf { P _ { a } }$ is good or bad, nor whether such a distinction is valid; neither do we consider the question whether the P which he has created is an adequate expression of $\mathbf { P _ { a } } ,$ i.e., an object which will in the proper persons produce a $\mathbf { P _ { n } }$ which is fundamentally like $\mathbf { P _ { a } }$ . Our point here is only that the existence of the $\pmb { \mathrm { P _ { a } } }$ introduces a criterion by which we can discriminate between the $\mathbf { P _ { n } } .$ For those will be the most proper among them which come closest to the $\mathbb { P } _ { \mathtt { a } } .$ This would be a perfectly valid criterion if we knew what the $\mathbf { P _ { a } }$ is. But as a rule the artist leaves us the P and nothing more. Still, the mere existence of the $\mathbf { P _ { a } }$ justifies our distinction of proper and improper apprehensions of works of art, even if we cannot in a given case decide which is the proper one. This may seem a small gain which for all practical purposes would leave the relativist's position unshaken. But we can go a step further, although I can do no more here than indicate the direction this step will have to take. We go to a concert and hear a pianist play a piece of music. The critics will then say whether he has played it well or not. What does that mean? Óne criterion would be that he has played the score correctly, $\therefore e . ,$ all notes of the score as they stand, with the proper tempo and rhythm. But this is neither sufficient nor even necessary for the judgment that the pianist gave a good performance. One man may play with perfect technique and literally correctly, and yet the critics and the audience will be disappointed, his reproduction will appear empty and shallow. Another man may play with great freedom, not sticking always to the score, but he will produce an effeçt which will stir the audience and make the critics say that despite his inaccuracies he has rendered the spirit of the work more faithfully than the correct player. And I have no doubt that the composer would agree with this judgment of the critics. Often enough a famous virtuoso or conductor will present a piece better than the composer could, as the composer will gladly admit. That seems to indicate that in a great work of art the P demands a certain $\mathbf { P _ { \lambda \mathbf { a } } }$ rather than another, and that the performance of the artist, which mediates between the $\mathbf { P } ,$ the score, and the $\mathrm { \bf P _ { z 9 } }$ is judged according to its capacity of producing the proper $\pmb { \mathrm { P } } _ { \pmb { \mathrm { a } } } .$ 1 This is nothing entirely new. When we discussed the laws of perception we saw that for the majority of stimulus distributions there is one most stable organization. When we look for the first time at the picture of Fig. 50 (p. 173) we are puzzled; something in the pattern is not right. We may discard it as a silly jumble of lines, but when we see it again and again we shall be dissatisfied with its chaotic nature. There seems to be something within it which demands a better order. As soon as the face appears everything is all right. The strain has disappeared and we shall find it very diffcult to see the original chaos again when we are presented with the same pattern. Now it seems clear that in this example the face is the proper $\mathbf { P _ { \overrightarrow { a } } } $ the chaos of lines an improper one. And then we see how on purely psychological grounds we must acknowledge that there are proper and improper ways of apprehending a work of art. Return to Non-Silent Forces in the Behavioural Environment. Let us now return to our main problem, the non-silent influence exerted by one object in the behavioural environment on another, the incongruity of an Egyptian statuette and a pile of cigarette boxes. We say that persons who feel such incongruities and arrange their rooms in such a way that such incongruities do not appear have good taste. By this we mean that they are capable of seeing things in their proper way and of seeing greater parts of the behavioural world in unity. It may be necessary to do the first without the second as in an auction room where all sorts of objects are put into view. Here the proper attitude of the expert who wants to buy is to isolate each object as much as possible. But the rooms in which we live will look the better, the more we are able to perceive them as unities in which the "fields" of the different objects do not clash with each other. The less a person perceives a room as a unit, the less will he experience such clashes, and the less taste are his rooms likely to reveal. But the fact that for some persons any combination of objects is possible does not prove that for those others who are grossly offended by incongruities of style or quality these characters of ugliness and bad taste do not exist. These "incompatibilities," then, are true properties within the behavioural world of those who experience them. Thus we see that even within the behavioural environment organization is not entirely silent. Dynamic Relations Between Objects and Ego. Objects Determining Our Behaviour. From the fields of forces which surround thc objects in our behavioural environment and affect other objects therein, we now turn to the dynamic relations which exist between the objects and the Ego. A description of the objects within our behavioural environment would be incomplete and inadequate if we omitted that some of these objects were attractive, others repulsive, and others indifferent, the terms attractive and repulsive to be taken in the broadest sense. Now for an object to be attractive means that there are forces within the field starting from the object which tend to shorten the distance between it and myself; the opposite is true of repulsive objects, whereas the indifferent objects exert no such pressure upon me. Within the two groups of attractive and repulsive objects there exists again a variety of special characteristics. A handle wants to be turned, a step invites a twoyear-old infant to climb it and jump down from it (Lewin), chocolate wants to be eaten, a mountain to be climbed, and so forth. There is less differentiation in the repulsive group, naturally, since a negative behaviour will depend much less in its detailed execution upon the particular object by which it is started. Nevertheless we can distinguish the group of escape and avoidance reactions, ranging from a mere turning of the eyes to panıcky flight, and the destruction reactions, which may be regarded as lying between the limits of tearing up a piece of paper and the drum fre of modern warfare. The Origin of These Forces. At any rate the things in our environment tell us what to do with them; they may do so more or less urgently and with any degree of specificity. But their doing so indicates a field of force between these objects and our Egos, a field force which in many cases leads to action, and which is in most cases of the non-silent kind. What is the origin of these forces? Examples: (1) Letter Box. In order to answer this question we have to discuss several examples. We begin with the letter box which attracts us when we are carrying a letter in our pocket but is an indifferent object once the letter is disposed of. In this case no property of the letter box as a visual object is responsible for our action. The,red pillar in England will have the same effect as the green receptacle in the U. S. or the blue boxes in Germany. I must have learned that these objects are letter boxes, in other words these objects must have acquired a definite relation to my behaviour. In the second place, however, these objects, once they have acquired the character of being letter boxes, will influence my behaviour directly only under special conditions, viz., when I want to post a letter. Their dynamic function then is to effect the actual execution of a deferred action; they affect the Ego in such a way that a system—intention to post a letter-which up to that moment was. under tension and did not control the executive, gains that control. The action itself, however, derives ultimately from the intention, i.e., from the tension within the particular Ego system. This case is typical of a great many. It exemplifies Lewin's theory of the reciprocity of a need and a demand character, for the very aspect of the red or green or blue object which makes me approach it and drop a letter into it is called by Lewin its demand character. Indeed, without the need to post a letter this object, although it appears in my field not as a coloured object but as à letter box, does not have this particular demand character. The dynamic situation, then, is this: I have a need which for the moment cannot be satisfied; then an object appears in my field which may serve to relieve that tension, and then this object becomes endowed with a demand character—the emergence of the particular object and its endowment with a demand character may actually be two different moments, but it may also be that the object emerges simultaneously with the demand character, in which case the need would have been effective in the very first organization of the object; since we have as yet no exact knowledge of the condition under which either of these two cases is realized, we neglect this difference. The next step is that our behaviour changes, the unrelieved stress gets command of the executive; but the action is regulated by the object with the demand character; in other words, the executive must be also under the influence of the force which, as demand character, issues from the latter. Thus, dynamically speaking, this case is very complex, because of the rôle which the Ego plays in it At first, through a tension within one of its sub-systems, it determines the field organization, and then its actions are codetermined by the object which it has endowed with the attractive (or repulsive) force. Even in this case we cannot describe the situation, however, without granting to the forces between the Ego and the object some influence on the executive, although the Ego tension which preexisted before the object appeared, is the prime mover, the chief commander of the executive. (2) Food. Let us turn from momentary quasi-needs, intentions, resolves, etc., to more fundamental motives. The hungry animal will be attracted by food, the animal after a good meal will leave the same food unheeded—again a close correlation between need and demand character. How delicious a beefsteak looks when we return from a long walk, and how cold we feel towards it after a sumptuous repast. It no longer looks the same, having lost its demand character. There remains, however, one question: Why does the beefsteak and not the napkin or a candlestick look delicious to the hungry man? It seems a silly question to ask, for we can eat the former, but not the latter, as we know by experience. But I did not want my question to be taken quite so literally. Why does a young hungry animal, like a chick, peck at certain objects and not at others? How can the chick know that the things it pecks at are eatable? It is easy to quash this question by the counterquestion: How do I know that the animal knows? Instinct vs. Reflex-theory. This antithesis of point of view is the quintessence of a good deal of the discussion of instinct. Those psychologists who try to keep that orderliness and purposiveness in their theories which they observed in the behaviour of animals would speak of instinctive activities in such cases as we are discussing now, while those who try to exclude orderliness from their premises would speak of mere reflexes, i.e., stimulus-response connections. The difference between these two interpretations, as far as it affects us here, comes to this: whereas the reflex theory connects behaviour directly with the stimulus, the instinct theory connects it, in our terminology, with the behavioural environment of the animal, or with its psychophysical field, and that in such a way that it ascribes to the particular field-part such qualities as make it arouse the specific reaction. Thus MacDougall says: "Reflex action is response to a stimulus; instinctive action is in many cases a response to an object," and the capacity for perception “is given in the innate constitution of the animal and is as essential a part of ## ACTION the total instinctive disposition (or instinct) as the capacity to execute the train of bodily movements which catch our eye"; and lastly: "We may therefore define ‘an instinct' as an innate disposition which determines the organism to perceive . . . any object of a certain class, and to experience in its presence a certain emotional excitement and an impulse to action .. ." (1923, Pp. 75, 99, 11o). In our terminology this would mean that because of its instinctive endowment an animal will see certain objects as things to be eaten, others as things to be killed, others again as things to run away or hide from. In other words the adherents of a true instinct theory would claim that because of their instinctive endowment animals see certain objects with certain demand characters. We can easily avoid the disputable term instinct and yet retain the gist of this theory, for we have all along declined to explain action in terms of stimulus-response connections and have instead established the dependency of action upon properties of the psychophysical field or the behavioural environment of the animal. Thus our question as to the reasons for the animal's selection in its search for food is a perfectly legitimate question. The animal, under the stress of a hunger need, approaches certain objects which it eventually swallows. This means that there must be something in the object that makes it attractive, even if it possesses this demand character only when the animal is hungry. Since from the very first there is some selection, since not all objects are endowed with demand characters, and certainly not all with the same ease, there must be something in these objects to account for this selection. In formulating our conclusion thus, we put the reason in the (behavioural) object and not in a mystical knowledge of the animal's, a point worthy to be mentioned in consideration of many attacks levelled against instinct theories. But if it is so, then the demand characters cannot all be entirely dependent upon the needs and preacquired knowledge of the animal. Rather must we assume that certain objects have, qua behavioural objects, certain demand characters. We recall the fact established by Gotz (see Chapter III, p. 88) that chicks prefer the larger to the smaller grains. It is more than unlikely that this can be explained by experience; for quite apart from the intrinsic difficulties inherent in such an explanation, the same preference is shown by rats to sunflower seeds, where the difference of size resides only in the uneatable husk and not in the real seed (Yoshioka).1ª Since it takes more time and effort to unhusk the seeds from the larger than from the smaller husks, experience, if it had anything to do with the matter, should favour the smaller rather than the larger pieces. Therefore we may safely assume that the preference for the larger morsel of food is not acquired. Then it can only mean that the larger has the stronger demand character. Again, moving objects have much stronger demand characters than stationary ones. In short, our assumption that certain behavioural objects possess by themselves demand characters seems to be confirmed by the facts. The relation between demand character and need js still there, but we see that it is not sufficient to explain the arousal of a demand character. Silent vs. Manifest Organization in These Two Examples. Let us consider the demand characters and their corresponding needs and quasi-needs (intentions) from another point of view. We saw at the end of our discussion of the latter how complex the dynamical situation is. How much of this complexity is silent, how much "manifest"? The intention, or need, is manifest, or will be at least in a great many cases; similarly the demand character will be manifest; i.e., we see the letter box as the proper object we needed to carry out our intention; the piece of steak looks most appetizing; and lastly the relation of our actions with regard to both need and demand character is again, in most cases, manifest. When we cross the street in order to get to the letter box, we know why we are doing it, and when we lift the piece of meat to our mouth we are also well aware of the meaning of this action. The functional relation between demand character and need, however, is silent. When we are hungry we do not know, except perhaps indirectly on account of rather sophisticated experience, that those delicious dishes spread on the table will have lost all their glamour after we have eaten; and we are not aware that the letter box owes its force of attraction to our intention to post a letter. Finally the inherent demand character, which we found it necessary to assume, belongs to the object in the same way as its shape and colour, i.e., because of silent organization. If we can accept our feeling of forces which make us do things as true indications of actual field forces, if, in other words, our concept of the manifest organization is correct, then indeed our executive must be subject directly to forces existing between the Ego and the field. (3) The Telephone Bell. Signals. Let us turn to a third example: we hear the telephone bell ring and we rush to the instrument, or, when we have just settled down to a nice,afternoon nap, we still experience the claim and grow angry at the disturbance, even if we do not actually obey the summons. That the specific demand character of the bell is a product of experience is obvious; also that it appeals to certain of our needs. But again this does not seem to be the whole story. With this "signal," as with many others, we have to raise the question why it has been selected. And in our attempt at answering this question we shall find that we choose our signals often enough because they are particularly suitable to be signals, because they possess certain demand characters by themselves which make them fit to assume a specific meaning. The suddenness, intensity, and recurrence of the bell are such characteristics. Attention. All these three characteristics have been listed as "conditions of attention," together with several others of which we shall only mention quality: certain qualities, like a bitter taste, the smell of musk, and the colour yellow having a particularly strong effect on attention. The discussion of the conditions of attention which twenty-five years ago was carried on with great vigour and played a leading rôle in the psychological drama has ceased to interest psychologists. The reason for this change seems to me to lie not so much in the facts which supplied the matter for this discussion as in the concept or concepts of attention which set their mark upon it. It would serve no useful purpose to review these old conceptions. Instead we shall define attention in conformity with our general system, thereby achieving a definition which is in perfect accord with the meaning of the word as used in ordinary language. When we encountered attention before (Chapter V, p. zo6) we said it was a force starting within the Ego and being directed towards an object. This is, of course, what we ordinarily mean by it when we say: "Please pay attention to what I am saying," or "Please concentrate on your problem." To treat of attention (as Titchener did, 19ro) as a mere property, attribute, or dimension of field objects, called clearness, robs it of its main character, its Ego-object relationship. And if we define attention as an Ego-object force we can do justice both to so-called voluntary and to involuntary attention. In the former the force starts from the Ego; in the latter, primarily from the object. This way of looking at attention is, naturally, not absolutely new. It was kept from gaining its due weight by the psychologists' wish to keep the Ego, and with the Ego all psychological dynamics, out of their science. But when we read Stout's definition: "Attention is the direction of thought to this or that special object in preference to others" (1909, I, p. 203), we recognize the same general idea. True, we must substitute the Ego for Stout's "thought." Intensity, suddenness, recurrence, as conditions of attention assume a very definite meaning under our definition. Attention as a force within the total field cannot be aroused by stimuli directly, but by field objects which in their turn owe their existence to stimuli. Consequently we must say that such objects as are produced by strong, sudden, recurring stimuli, and by stimuli of particular qualities, possess characters by virtue of which they affect the Ego. If these old statements about the conditions of attention are true, they indicate again that demand characters may belong to field objects apart from Ego needs which produce them. (4) Physiognomic Characters. A last group of examples will raise this conclusion which has been forced upon us again and again to a state of certainty. We go to an interview upon which our whole future may depend. We are determined to be as nice and amiable as we can, and then we come into the presence of a man whose face makes it quite impossible to carry out our resolutions. True enough, we force à smile and use polite language, but inwardly we shrink with aversion and have to make the greatest effort not to betray our real feelings. It is unnecessary to multiply examples of this kind and it would be just as easy to find instances where the demand characters of the face were as positive as they were negative in our case. But I will remind the reader of an experiment which Köhler performed with his chimpanzees. He had prepared a painted cardboard copy of a Singhalese demon mask, a ghastly-looking face. When he entered the animals' playground, the apes, as usual, approached to greet him, when suddenly he held the mask in front of his face, with the result that with one exception all the animals disappeared into a box, where they were joined by the last animal after Köhler had approached a few more steps. We conclude that objects in the field may possess characters which can be expressed in terms neither of shape and colour nor of practical use, and which are apt to exert a powerful influence on our behaviour. These characters are for us most pronounced in human forms, but may belong to almost any object. Our preoccupation with practical use and scientifically classifiable properties has robbed our world of a good many of them. A corpse has to the ordinary person a very strong character of gruesome awe, but no longer to the medical student who has dissected corpses by the score. On the other hand, if we can abandon our practical or scientific attitude, we become aware of more and more such characteristics. Among us the poets and artists are those who are most free from the craving for efficiency. And truly, for them the world is richer in such characters than it is for us. I have already referred to Wordsworth's daffodils (p. 326), and I could add any number of examples from poetry and prose, Rilke's novel "Malte Laurids Brigge" being particularly full of them. How even a humble piece of furniture may possess such characters is revealed by a painting by van Gogh in the Tate Gallery in London, where we see a simple chair which seems to carry the pathos of the world. It does not seem adequate to me to call these characters demand characters. I choose a term which gains greater and greater significance in modern psychology, viz., physiognomic character. Several psychologists have been led to the belief, which I consider well founded, that at more primitive stages of human development, for children and primitive peoples, these physiognomic characters play a much greater rôle than in our behavioural world (Scheler, Werner). The primitive behavioural world is, as Werner puts it, a physiognomic world, which means that the organization of the field is such as to enhance the physiognomic characters at the expense of those properties which we find as the outstanding features. Food, then, if it is selected without prior experiences, must possess physiognomic characters, which may reside in its looks, or as much or even more so in its smell. Thus our discussion of the demand characters which correspond to the real needs and of those which belong to signals has anticipated the introduction of the physiognomic aspect of our behavioural environment. If a girl has "sex appeal," she has a definite physiognomic character. A Conclusion About the Classical Theory of Sensation. If we look at the classical theory of sensation from this point of view, it gains a very different aspect. Sensations and their attributes appear as products of a particular kind of organization achieved by human beings in highly developed civilizations, but no longer as the raw material out of which all consciousness is built. "We must assume that features like 'threatening' or tempting' are more primitive and more elementary contents of perception than those we learn of as 'elements' in the textbooks of psychology" (Koffka, 1928, p. 150). Or a quotation from Wertheimer: "Does a child or a primitive man experience a certain tint of red in the scientific sense of a quality of sensation? Surely his actual experience is much closer to exciting, 'gay,' 'strong,'. . ."(1925, p. 15). Without such a view it would be hard to understand the magic-mystical world of primitive peoples or the behaviour of small infants. Origin of Physiognomic Characters. Although, then, the existence of the physiognomic characters in our behavioural environment is safely established, we have to enter the field of mere hypothesis when we try to raise the question as to their origin. For a number of cases, those to which the term physiognomic is most pertinent, viz., the understanding of the other person's emotions, Kohier has given a satisfactory theory which we shall discuss in our fourteenth chapter. Here we shall try to approach our problem in an even more general way, advancing for critical consideration and possible experimentation an hypothesis which must necessarily be in keeping with our system. Óur hypothesis must, in other words, be an hypothesis about the nature of the organization of the field. We take our clue from the consideration of the most pronounced physiognomic characters, the horrible, the majestic, the enchanting. Words like these describe objects with reference to ourselves. May we then venture the assumption that these characters arise in organizations which include the Ego? This does not mean that they belong to the Ego; we leave them where we find them, in certain objects, but we claim that these objects possess them only in an organization which also includes an Ego, and an Ego of a special kind. Such an hypothesis would well accord with the fact previously mentioned that on more primitive levels the physiognomic characters are far more pronounced than at our own level of civilization. For the separation between the Ego and its environment increases with the progress of civilization. The more unitary the total field composed of Égo and environment, the more should the latter be endowed with physiognomic characters. Lack of separation means ample dynamical interplay. Therefore the presence of an Ego in an organization should affect the environmental parts the more, the less the degree of separation of the Ego. This is again in full harmony with Wertheimer, who conceives of the original Ego-environment relation not as of a purely cognitive one, in which the Ego merely takes cognizance of objects, but as of a conative one, in which the Ego adapts its behaviour to the environment (1925, p. 15). Again we are tempted to refer to instinctive behaviour; the common man applies the term instinctive to this kind of situation: a person doing the right thing without knowing why and yet feeling that he had to. When we say: Women rely more on instinct than men, we mean just this, that in a woman's behaviour the Ego is less separated from the environment than in a man's, and that therefore the mutual interplay of forces which determines the behaviour on the one hand and the physiognomic characters on the other is stronger. How many men accept their wives' judgment about the character of new acquaintances and even their old friends, and how many women accept their husbands'? This popular usage of the word instinctive seems, therefore, to be well founded, to be perfectly compatible with the theory of behaviour. And in this meaning it is also well applicable to the instinctive activity of animals, which has led to so many controversies. Truly, the Ego will be much less separated in an animal than in man, and therefore we ought to expect a much more direct dependence of the animal's behaviour on its behavioural environment, less and less cognition, more and more direct response —but of course not in the sense of the stimulus-response or the reflex concept. We return to the physiognomic characters. According to our hypothesis they arise in objects when these objects are in dynamic relation with the Ego, when, otherwise expressed, a state of tension exists between them and the Ego. It is important to keep in mind that the kind of tension will vary for the different physiognomic characters. Not only will it be different in sign—positive or negative -and in degree, but also in quality. The kind of tension will determine our responses: attack, flight, approach, succour, disregard, compassion, and so forth. Gaps in Our Hypothesis. This reveals a first gap in our hypothesis, for as yet we can translate only a few physiognomic characters into kinds of tensions, and probably for a long time to come we shall have to be satisfied with a behavioural description of the physiognomic characters and their relation to action, without being able to assign to them very definite distributions of forces. But our hypothesis contains another and more serious gap: we do not know in ever so many cases why a certain object possesses its physiognomic character. We can link up the insistency of objects produced by intense and sudden stimuli with the sharp gradient by which they emerge from the field, which entails a large potential difference or tension; we may equally connect the physiognomic character of colours, particularly the impressiveness of red and yellow, with their hardness, which again means a better segregation and thereby a greater tension, but for most other cases we have frankly to admit our ignorance, hoping only that the explanations which we find possible in the more simple cases may serve as clues for the more complex ones. We may even doubt the general validity of our hypothesis. Is it true that all physiognomic characters require an Ego-object organization; may not physiognomic characters also arise within the organization of the external field without participation of the Ego? I do not mean the case where organization has not reached the Egolevel. Tensions in such organizations will have to be described in behavioural terms as neither Ego-emotions nor physiognomic characters, but something from which either of these two kinds of experiences will later emerge. The total field, not yet differentiated into Ego and object, will as a whole be satisfactory or unsatisfactory, a state which we may approach in our transitions from waking life to sleep. I mean the opposite extreme, organization with a strong Ego separation. That under these conditions physiognomic characters deteriorate, we have already emphasized. At the same time the articulation of the field gains in many other respects. Should we then attribute the remaining physiognomic characters to the remaining Ego-object relation, or should we also envisage the possibility that they may be due to the interplay of forces in the environment? I shall be satisfied with raising the question without an attempt at giving an answer, which at the present time would be no morc than guess-work. Return to Problem of Executive Control. We are now prepared to return to our problem whether the executive can be controlled directly by the forces between the Ego and the surrounding field. For we have found that objects possess not only demand characters with which they are endowed by pre-existing Ego-tensions, but also physiognomic characters which do not depend upon any such specific stress, although in many, and possibly in all, cases they presuppose an Ego for their appearance. Perhaps this distinction might become a true terminological distinction; it grows ambiguous only in those cases where, as in the appetizing character of food, both factors seem to be combined. The attractiveness of an eatable object would have to be called a demand character, inasmuch as it disappears in states of satiety, and a physiognomic character inasmuch as it depends upon the properties of the food object itself. We leave the terminological question open, content with having pointed out the interplay of different forces. What then is our answer to the question whether the executive can be directly controlled by the object-Ego forces? Complexity of the Dynamic Situation. The answer seems simplest in cases of direct reactions to physiognomic characters. Here, at least in the beginning, the executive seems indeed to be under the control of these forces. The Ego-field relation is unstable, and the executive changes the situation in the direction of greater stability of this relation. In actual fact clear-cut cases of this simple nature will be very rare. If the Ego-field relation is unstable, the Ego itself will become unbalanced also, i.e., the object-Ego stress will produce intra-Ego stresses, which in their turn will begin to control the executive so as to re-balance the Ego. Nevertheless it seems plausible in these cases to attribute the primary impetus to action or the original control of the executive to the Ego-object stresses. That the situation is much more complex with typical demand characters follows directly from our previous discussion of the dynamic situation in these cases. In consideration of this complexity I am loth to attribute the entire control in these cases to the Ego. At least one would have to distinguish between a direct and an indirect influence of the Ego. The first follows directly from the need, the second by way of the demand character, which though it has been, at least partly, created by the need, is an Ego-object force. ToLMAN's THEORY OF PHYSIOGNOMIC CHARACTERS AND THE ACTIONS CoRREspoNDING To THEm. Is it possible to simplify our interpretation and at the same time make it more adequate? Tolman proposes a theory which, in our terminology, would exclude the object-Ego stresses from the control of the executive, reserving this to the Ego itself. I quote: "Similarly, the state of agitation to be called fright . . . does not arise merely, or primarily, as a result of danger-threatening 'disturbing stimuli,' but rather as a result of an initiating internal physiological state which, for want of a better name, we may call timidity, and which must be present in order to make the animal sensitive to such disturbing stimuli'"(pp. 273-4). Tolman's main reason for such an interpretation seems to be that the same real object may arouse different emotions with their corresponding reactions, e.g., fright and pugnacity. I quote a few more passages: "Both fright and pugnacity are gettings-away from their respectively evoking disturbing stimulus-situations. But the manner of getting away is characteristically different in the two cases." "This difference in the characters of fright and pugnacity is particularly obvious and pronounced when it is one and the same environmental object . . . which happens in the one individual to arouse fright, and in another pugnacity. . . . Given equal or similar past trainings, . . . if he (the animal) have a large dose of the initiating physiological state which we have designated timidity, then his fright impulse will be aroused. . . . If, on the other hand, .. . he have a large dose of the initiating state of pugnaciousness, his pugnacity impulse will be aroused" (pp. 28o-281). I shall try to discuss this view in our terminology and within our system, disregarding the fact that "large doses of initiating states of timidity or pugnacity" can hardly be accepted as final explanations. We must, to appraise Tolman's argument, distinguish two cases; in the first the same real object appears to two different people with two different physiognomic characters, in the second the physiognomic characters are the same, yet the reactions are different. For our first case we choose the following example: two persons have an encounter with the same ruffian. One of our two persons is a writer who never takes any physical exercise, the other a first-rate prize-fighter. To the first the ruffian will look formidable, to the second he will appear as a weak boaster. Why? Because the first possesses a great dose of timidity, is, to put it bluntly, a coward, and because the second has an equal dose of pugnaciousness, is, again, in blunt words, a rowdy? I do not admit for a moment that this explanation, though it is possible, is necessary. Our writer may be extremely pugnacious and our prize-fighter, like Cashel Byron after his marriage, a perfectly peaceful man, and yet the ruffian may appear formidable to the first and despicable to the second. Our hypothesis of the physiognomic characters allows for an explanation of this possibility. We derived the physiognomic character from the particular object-Ego organization achieved at the moment. This organization will, as all organizations, depend upon the relative properties of the objects organized. Now in the writer's field there is this bulky and heavy fellow, i.e., a physically large person, and his Ego, which is physically small and weak: a good reason for the ruffian to look formidable. Conversely, for the prize-fighter the physical Ego may be considerably larger than that of his opponent, with the result that the ruffian's physiognomic character is that of a sham power. Thus we agree with Tolman inasmuch as we also accord to the Ego an influence on the physiognomic character of the other person, but we disagree with him in our interpretation of this influence. But we shall follow our example a little further. What will the two men do in their encounter with the ruffian? Should not, in Tolman's theory, the writer try to make his escape, and the prizefighter "sock the ruffian in the jaw"? Again a real possibility. But it may just as easily happen that the writer gives fight and is badly beaten up, while the fighter turns away with a contemptuous shrug of the shoulder. These types of behaviour are particularly interesting, because they reveal a new complexity of behaviour which we have not yet discussed. We are, however, well aware of the fact that all action affects the existing organization and tends to maintain the organism intact. We have also applied the same conception to the Ego-part of the total field. What would happen to the Ego ## ACTION of our writer if he ran away? Most probably he would avoid physical injury, but certainly he would feel humiliated, an effect which everybody understands and which we shall treat systematically later. It is enough here to say that flight would set up new stresses within the Ego system, more specifically within the Self, and that if these stresses are strong enough, our writer will not turn to escape but will face the danger. Unnecessary to apply the same trend of thought to the prize-fighter. Our discussion has shown us that Tolman's basis of discussion is too narrow, that the complexity of behaviour is dynamically far greater than his system allows. And let us now turn to the second case. An object looks threatening. There are then, as the discussion of the first case has shown, two or more ways of action. Which of these will actually be taken depends upon a host of circumstances. The effect of the action upon the Ego is one of them, but others may be equally effective; thus the fact that our reaction would produce relief in the quickest and simplest way may determine the actual selection. The case in which a condition of dynamic stress has only one way of relief, the problem only one solution, is extremely rare in mental and organic life. We found this same situation even in perception when we studied ambiguous patterns. In short, it seems not an adequate explanation to derive flight in all cases from a pre-existing state of timidity, fight from one of pugnaciousness. The dynamical situation is much more complex, and in this dynamical situation Ego-object forces may play an important part in controlling the executive. The Actual Control of the Éxecutive. Complex as the dynamic situation appears when we consider all the factors which control the executive, it is in reality still more complicated. For at any one moment there are numerous other factors which, although they are not in control, might be so. The Ego, being the complex structure we have shown it to be, contains a great number of sub-systems under pressure, all of which could be relieved by some action or other. Naturally most of these stresses must, for the time being, remain unrelieved. So the question arises which of all the possible factors—and we must include among them the pure field forces and the object-Ego forces as well as the pure Ego-forces—will at a given instant of time gain control. It is impossible to give an answer to this question at the present state of our knowledge. But such an answer, when it is available for a number of concrete cases, will have to take into account not only the individual factors by themselves, but their interplay, the structure and interconnection of the Ego systems, the results which any one action will have not only with regard to special forces but also with regard to the whole Ego and its relation to its environment. ## GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF ACTION All action is a process by which stresses existing in the total feld are decreased or removed. Because of the multiplicity of such tensions and their mutual interdependence the possibilities of action are practically infinite. And small actions may have enormous effects. An action may relieve a stress in an Ego system which at the moment was isolated from the rest of the Ego and in full command of the executive. The result of this action may revolutionize the whole life of the agent.