# 1 Introduction The famous anthropological absorption with the (to us) exotic ... is, thus, essentially a device for displacing the dulling sense of familiarity with which the mysteriousness of our own ability to relate perceptively to one another is concealed from us. (Geertz 1973, p. 14) The problem of shared understanding, or mutual intelligibility, has defined the field of social studies for the past hundred years. On the one hand, interpreting the actions of others has been the social scientist's task; to come up with accounts of the significance of human actions is, after all, the principal charge of ethnographic anthropology. On the other hand, to understand the mutual intelligibility of action as a mundane, practical accomplishment of members of the society is, in large measure, the social scientist's problem or subject matter. An account of that accomplishment would constitute an account of the foundation of social order. While studies of mutual intelligibility have been concerned exclusively with human action, we now have a technology that has brought with it the idea that rather than just using machines, we interact with them as well. Already, the notion of 'humanmachine interaction"pervades both technical and popular discussion of computers, whether about their design or their use. In the debate over specific problems in the design and use of interactive machines, however, no question is raised about the bases for the very idea of human-machine interaction as such. And recent developments in the social sciences regarding the foundations of human interaction have had remarkably little influence on the discussion of interactive machines. The following chapters examine the conception of purposeful action, and consequently of interaction, informing the design of interactive machines. My central concern in the investigation is a new manifestation of an old problem in the study of mutual intelligibility: namely, the relation between observable behavior and the processes, not available to direct observation, that make behavior meaningful. For psychological studies, the crucial processes are essentially cognitive, located inside the head of the actor, and include the formation and effect of beliefs, desires, intentions, and the like. For social studies, the crucial processes are interactional and circumstantial, located in the relationships among actors, and between actors and their embedding situations. In either case, the problem of meaningful action turns on the observation that behavior is inherently subject to indefinitely many ascriptions of meaning or intent, while meaning and intent are expressible through an indefinite number of possible behaviors. Whether the final arbiter of action's significance is taken to be private psychological processes, or accountability to the public world, the question to be resolved - what constitutes purposeful action and how is it understood – is the same. The new manifestation of this question concerning the nature of purposeful action and its interpretation arises in research on machine intelligence. Theoretically, 'the goal of that research is a computational model of intelligent behavior that not only, given some input, produces the right output behavior, but that does so by simulating human cognitive processes. Practically, the goal is just a machine that, given some input, produces behavior that is useful and appropriate to the situation at hand. In either case, insofar as rightness or appropriateness of behavior means that behavior is accountably rational in the eyes of an other, the measure of success is at bottom an interactional one. For the moment, at least, the question of theoretical versus practical criteria of adequacy for machine intelligence is rendered moot ## Introduction by the problems involved in constructing a device that even appears to behave in ways that are purposeful or intelligent, at least outside of the most highly constrained domains. It may simply turn out that the resistance of meaningful action to simulation in the absence of any deep understanding will defend us against false impressions of theoretical success. In any case, my purpose here is not to resolve the question of whether or not artificial intelligence is possible, but rather to clarify some existing troubles in the project of constructing intelligent, interactive machines, as a way of contributing to our understanding of human intelligence and interaction. Every human tool relies upon, and reifies, some underlying conception of the activity that it is designed to support. As a consequence, one way to view the artifact is as a test on the limits of the underlying conception. In this book I examine an artifact built on a planning model of human action. The model treats a plan as something located in the actor's head, which directs his or her behavior. In contrast, I argue that artifacts built on the planning model confuse plans with situated actions, and recommend instead a view of plans as formulations of antecedent conditions and consequences of action that account for action in a plausible way. As ways of talking about action, plans as such neither determine the actual course of situated action nor adequately reconstruct it. While for purposes of practical action this limitation on plans is irrelevant, for purposes of a science of practical action it is crucial. Specifically, if we are interested in situated action itself, we need to look at how it is that actors use the resources that a particular occasion provides – including, but crucially not reducible to, formulations such as plans – to construct their action's developing purpose and intelligibility. Beginning with a view of interaction, or communication – I shall use the two terms interchangeably – as the mutual intelligibility of action, I investigate the basis for beginning to speak of interaction between humans and machines. Chapter 2 introduces the notion of interactive artifacts, and its basis in certain properties of computing machines. Chapter 3 examines the view of plans as the basis for action and communication held by designers of artificially intelli- ## Introduction gent, interactive machines, while chapters 4 and 5 present the alternative view of action and communication as situated, drawn from recent developments in social science. Finally, chapters 6 and 7 offer an analysis of encounters between novice users of a machine and a computer-based system intended to be intelligent and interactive. The aim of the case study is not to criticize the particular design, but to view the design as reifying certain premises about purposeful action. The task is to articulate those premises, to see how they succeed as a basis for human-machine communication and how they fail, and to explore the implications of their success and failure both for the design of human-machine communication and for the general explication of purposeful action and mutual intelligibility. ## 2 Interactive artifacts Marginal objects, objects with no clear place, play important roles. On the lines between categories, they draw attention to how we have drawn the lines. Sometimes in doing so they incite us to reaffirm the lines, sometimes to call them into question, stimulating different distinctions. (Turkle 1984, p. 31) In The Second Self (1984), Sherry Turkle describes the computer as an "evocative object," one that raises new questions regarding our common sense of the distinction between artifacts and intelligent others. Her studies include an examination of the impact of computer-based artifacts on children's conceptions of the difference between categories such as 'alive" versus "not alive," and 'machine"versus "person."In dealing with the questions that computer-based objects evoke, children make clear that the differentiation of physical from psychological entities, which as adults we largely take for granted, is the end product of a process of establishing the relationship between the observable behavior of a thing and its underlying nature.¹ Children have a tendency, for example, to attribute life to physical objects on the basis of behavior such as autonomous motion, or reactivity, though they reserve humanity for entities evidencing such things as emotion, speech, and apparent thought or purposefulness. Turkle's observation with respect to computational artifacts is that children ascribe to them an "almost aliveness," and a psychology, while maintaining their distinctness from human beings: a view that, as Turkle points out, ## Interactive artifacts is remarkable among other things for its correspondence to the views held by those who are the artifacts' designers.² In this book I take as a point of departure a particular aspect of the phenomenon that Turkle identifies: namely, the apparent challenge that computational artifacts pose to the longstanding distinction between the physical and the social, in the special sense of those things that one designs, builds, and uses, on the one hand, and those things with which one communicates, on the other. While this distinction has been relatively non-problematic to date, now for the first time the term 'interaction"– in a sense previously reserved for describing a uniquely interpersonal activity - seems appropriately to characterize what goes on between people and certain machines as well.³ Interaction between people and machines implies mutual intelligibility, or shared understanding. What motivates my inquiry, therefore, is not only the recent question of how there could be mutual intelligibility between people and machines, but the prior question of how we account for the shared understanding, or mutual intelligibility, that we experience as people in our interactions with others whose essential sameness is not in question. An answer to the more recent question, theoretically at least, presupposes an answer to the earlier one. In this chapter I relate the idea of human-machine communication to some distinctive properties of computational artifacts, and to the emergence of disciplines dedicated to making those artifacts ## Automata and cognitive science intelligent. I begin with a brief discussion of cognitive science, the interdisciplinary field devoted to modeling cognitive processes, and its role in the project of creating intelligent artifacts.4 Along with a theoretical interest in intelligent artifacts, the computer's properties have inspired a practical effort at engineering interaction between people and machines. I argue that the description of computational artifacts as interactive is supported by their reactive, linguistic, and internally opaque properties. With those properties in mind, I consider the double sense in which researchers are interested in artifacts that explain themselves: on the one hand, as a solution to the longstanding problem of conveying the artifact's intended purpose to the user, through its design and attendant instructions and, on the other hand, as a means of establishing the intelligence, or rational accountability, of the artifact itself. ## 2.1 Automata and cognitive science Historically the idea of automata – the possibility of constructing physical devices that are self-regulating in ways that we commonly associate with living, animate beings – has been closely tied to the simulation of animal forms. McCorduck (1979) points out that human-like automata have been constructed since Hellenic times: statues that moved, gestured, spoke, and generally were imbued by observers – even those well aware of the internal mechanisms that powered them - with everything from minds to souls.5 In the fourteenth century in Western Europe, learned men were commonly believed to construct talking heads made of brass, considered as both the source of their creator's wisdom and its manifestation. More prosaically, Jacques de Vaucanson in the eighteenth century designed a series of renowned mechanical statues, the most famous being a duck, the inner workings of which produced a variety of simple outward behaviors. ## Interactive artifacts At the same time, Julien de la Mettrie published Man, A Machine in which he argued that the vitality characteristic of human beings was the result of their physical structure, rather than either of some thing immanent in their material substance or of some immaterial force. Cognitive scientists today maintain the basic premise of de la Mettrie with respect to mind, contending that mind is best viewed as neither substantial nor insubstantial, but as an abstractable structure implementable in any number of possible physical substrates. Intelligence, in other words, is only incidentally embodied in the neurophysiology of the human brain, and what is essential about intelligence can be abstracted from that particular, albeit highly successful, substrate and embodied in an unknown range of alternative forms. This view decouples reasoning and intelligence from things uniquely human, and opens the way for the construction o intelligent artifacts.6 The preoccupation of cognitive science with mind in this abstrac: sense is in part a concern to restore meaning to psychological expla nation (see Stich 1983, ch. 1). At the turn of this century, the recog nized method for studying human mental life was introspection and, insofar as introspection was not amenable to the emerging canons of scientific method, the study of cognition seemed doomed to be irremediably unscientific. In reaction to that prospect, the behaviorists posited that all human action should be understandable in terms of publicly observable, mechanistically describable relations between the organism and its environment. In the name of turning cognitive studies into a science, in other words, the study of cognition as the study of something apart from overt behavior was effectively abandoned in mainstream psychology. Cognitive science, in this respect, was a project to bring thought back into the study of human action, while preserving the commitment to scientism. Cognitive science reclaims mentalist constructs such as beliefs, desires, intentions, symbols, ideas, schemata, planning, and problem-solving. Once again human purposes are the ## Automata and cognitive science basis for cognitive psychology, but this time without the unconstrained speculation of the introspectionists. The study of cognition is to be empiricized not by a strict adherence to behaviorism, but by the use of a new technology: namely, the computer. The sub-field of cognitive science most dedicated to the computer is artificial intelligence. Artificial intelligence arose as advances in computing technology were tied to developments in neurophysiological and mathematical theories of information. The requirement of computer modeling, of an "information processing psychology,"seemed both to make theoretical sense and to provide the accountability that would make it possible to pursue a science of otherwise inaccessible mental phenomena. If a theory of underlying mental processes could be modeled on the computer so as to produce the right outward behavior, the theory could be viewed as having passed at least a sufficiency test of its psychological validity. The cognitivist strategy is to interject a mental operation between environmental stimulus and behavioral response: in essence, to relocate the causes of action from the environment that impinges upon the actor to processes, abstractable as computation, in the actor's head. The first premise of cognitive science, therefore, is that people – or "cognizers" of any sort - act on the basis of symbolic representations: a kind of cognitive code, instantiated physically in the brain, on which operations are performed to produce mental states such as 'the belief that p,"which in turn produce behavior consistent with those states. The relation of environmental stimuli to those mental states, on the one hand, and of mental states to behavior, on the other, remains deeply problematic and widely debated within the field (see, for example, Fodor 1983; Pylyshyn 1974, 1984; Stich 1983). The agreement among all participants in cognitive science and its affiliated disciplines, however, is that cognition is not just potentially like computation, it literally is computational. There is no reason, in principle, why there should not be a computational account of mind, therefore, and there is no a priori reason to draw a principled boundary between people, taken as "information-processors" or "symbol manipulators" or, in George Miller's phrase, "informavores" (Pylyshyn 1984, p. xi), and certain computing machines. The view that intelligence is the manipulation of symbols finds practical implementation both in so-called expert systems, which structure and process large amounts of well-formulated data, and industrial robots that perform routine, repetitive assembly and control tasks. Expert systems - essentially sophisticated programs that manipulate data structures to accord with rules of inference that experts are understood to use - have minimal sensory-motor, or 'peripheral,"access to the world in which they are embedded, input being most commonly through a keyboard, by a human operator. Industrial robots - highly specialized, computer-controlled devices designed to perform autonomously a single repetitive physical task - have relatively more developed sensory-motor apparatus than do expert systems, but the success of robotics is still confined to specialized activities, under controlled conditions. In both cases, the systems can handle large amounts of encoded information, and syntactic relationships of great sophistication and complexity, in highly circumscribed domains. But when it comes either to direct interaction with the environment, or to the exercise of practical, everyday reasoning about the significance of events in the world, there is general agreement that the state-of-the-art in intelligent machines has yet to attain the basic cognitive abilities of the normal five-year-old child. ## 2.2 The idea of human-computer interaction In spite of the current limits on machine intelligence, the use of an intentional vocabulary is already well established in both technical and popular discussion of computers. In part, the attribution of purpose to computer-based artifacts derives from the simple fact that each action by the user effects an immediate machine reaction (see Turkle 1984, ch. 8). The technical definition of "interactive computing" (see, for example, Oberquelle, Kupka, and Maass 1983, p. 313) is simply that real-time control over the computing ## The idea of human-computer interaction process is placed in the hands of the user, through immediate processing and through the availability of interrupt facilities whereby the user can override and modify the operations in progress. This definition contrasts current capabilities with earlier forms of computing, specifically batch processing, where user commands were queued and executed without any intermediate feedback. The greater reactivity of current computers, combined with the fact that, like any machine, the computer's reactions are not random but by design, suggest the character of the computer as a purposeful, and, by association, as a social object. A more profound basis for the relative sociability of computerbased artifacts, however, is the fact that the means for controlling computing machines and the behavior that results are increasingly linguistic, rather than mechanistic. That is to say, machine operation becomes less a matter of pushing buttons or pulling levers with some physical result, and more a matter of specifying operations and assessing their effects through the use of a common language.7 With or without machine intelligence, this fact has contributed to the tendency of designers, in describing what goes on between people and machines, to employ terms borrowed from the description of human interaction – dialogue, conversation, and so forth: terms that carry a largely unarticulated collection of intuitions about properties common to human communication and the use of computer-based machines. While for the most part the vocabulary of human interaction has been taken over by researchers in human-machine communication with little deliberation, several researchers have attempted to clarify similarities and differences between computer use and ## Interactive artifacts human conversation. Perhaps the most thoughtful and comprehensive of these is Hayes and Reddy (1983). They identify the central difference between existing interactive computer systems and human communication as a question of "robustness," or the ability on the part of conversational participants to respond to unanticipated circumstances, and to detect and remedy troubles in communication: The ability to interact gracefully depends on a number of relatively independent skills: skills involved in parsing elliptical, fragmented, and otherwise ungrammatical input; in ensuring that communication is robust (ensuring that the intended meaning has been conveyed); in explaining abilities and limitations, actions and the motives behind them; in keeping track of the focus of attention of a dialogue; in identifying things from descriptions, even if ambiguous or unsatisfiable; and in describing things in terms appropriate for the context. While none of these components of graceful interaction has been entirely neglected in the literature, no single current system comes close to having most of the abilities and behaviours we describe, and many are not possessed by any current systems. (p. 232) ## Hayes and Reddy believe, however, that: Even though there are currently no truly gracefully interacting systems, none of our proposed components of graceful interaction appears individually to be much beyond the current state of the art, at least for suitably restricted domains of discourse. (p. 232) They then review the state of the art, including systems like LIFER (Hendrix 1977) and SCHOLAR (Carbonell 1971), which display sensitivity to the user's expectations regarding acknowledgement of input; systems that resolve ambiguity in English input from the user through questions (Hayes 1981); systems like the GUS system (Bobrow et al. 1977) which represent limited knowledge ## The idea of human-computer interaction of the domain that the interaction is about; work on the maintenance of a common focus over the course of the interaction (Grosz 1977; Sidner 1979); and Hayes and Reddy's own work on an automated explanation facility in a simple service domain (1983). Two caveats on Hayes and Reddy's prescription for a gracefully interacting system (both of which, to their credit, they freely admit) are worth noting. First, they view the abilities cited as necessary but not sufficient for human interaction, their claim for the list being simply that "it provides a good working basis from which to build gracefully interacting systems"(1983, p. 233). And, not surprisingly, the abilities that they cite constitute a list of precisely those problems currently under consideration in research on humanmachine communication. There is, in other words, no independent assessment of how the problems on which researchers work relate to the nature and organization of human communication as such. Secondly, research on those problems that have been identified is confined to highly circumscribed domains. The consequence of working from an admittedly partial and ad hoc list of abilities, in limited domains, is that practical inroads in human-computer communication can be furthered, while the basic question of what human interaction comprises is deferred. Deferred as well is the question of why it is, beyond methodological convenience, that research in human-machine interaction has proceeded only in those limited domains that it has. Moreover, while Hayes and Reddy take the position that 'it is very important for a gracefully interacting system to conduct a dialogue in as human-like a way as possible"(ibid., p. 233), this assertion is a point of controversy in the research community. On the one side, there is an argument to the effect that one should acknowledge, and even exploit, the fact that people bring to computer use a tremendous range of skills and expectations from human interaction. Within research on human-computer interaction, for example, some progress has been made toward allowing people to enter commands into computers using natural language ## Interactive artifacts (i.e. languages like English, in contrast to programming languages). On the other side, even Hayes and Reddy admit that: the aim of being as human-like as possible must be tempered by the limited potential for comprehension of any foreseeable computer system. Until a solution is found to the problems of organizing and using the range of world knowledge possessed by a human, practical systems will only be able to comprehend a small amount of input, typically within a specific domain of expertise. Graceful interaction must, therefore, supplement its simulation of human conversational ability with strategies to deal naturally and gracefully with input that is not fully understood, and, if possible, to steer a conversation back to the system's home ground. (ibid., p. 233) While Hayes and Reddy would make these recovery strategies invisible to the user, they also acknowledge the 'habitability'problem identified by Watt (1968) with respect to language: that is, the tendency of human users to assume that a computer system has sophisticated linguistic abilities after it has displayed elementary ones. This tendency is not surprising, given the fact that our only precedent for language-using entities to date has been other human beings. As soon as computational artifacts demonstrate some evidence of recognizably human abilities, we are inclined to endow them with the rest. The misconceptions that ensue, however, lead some like Fitter (1979) to argue that English or other "natural' languages are in fact not natural for purposes of human-computer interaction: for the purpose of man-computer communication, a natural language is one that makes explicit the knowledge and processes for which the man and computer share a common understanding . . . it becomes the responsibility of the systems designer to provide a language structure which will make apparent to the user the procedures on which it is based and will not lead him to expect from the computer unrealistic powers of inference. (ibid., p. 340, original emphasis) In view of our tendency to ascribe full intelligence on the basis of partial evidence, the recommendation is that designers might do best to make available to the user the ways in which the system is not like a participant in interaction.8 In this spirit, Nickerson (1976) argues that: The model that seems appropriate for this view of personcomputer interaction is that of an individual making use of a sophisticated tool and not that of one person conversing with another. The term "user"is, of course, often used to denote the human component in a person-computer interaction, as it has been in this paper. It is, to my taste, preferable to the term "partner,"not only because it seems more descriptive of the nature of the relationships that existing systems permit, and that future systems are likely to, but because it implies an asymmetry with respect to goals and objectives that ′partner"does not. 'User"is not a term that one would normally apply to a participant in a conversation. (p. 111) The argument that computational processes should be revealed to the user, however, is potentially counter to the promotion of an intentional vocabulary in speaking about computer-based devices. As Dennett (1978) points out, it is in part our inability to see inside each other's heads, or our mutual opacity, that makes intentional explanations so powerful in the interpretation of human action. So it is in part the internal complexity and opacity of the computer that invites an intentional stance. This is the case not only because users lack technical knowledge of the computer's internal workings but because, even for those who possess such knowledge, there is an 'irreducibility" to the computer as an object that is unique among human artifacts (Turkle 1984, p. 272). The overall behavior of the computer is not describable, that is to say, with reference to any of the simple local events that it comprises; it is precisely the behavior of a myriad of those events in combination that constitutes the overall machine. To refer to the behavior of the machine, then, one must speak of 'its" functionality. And once reified as an entity, the inclination to ascribe actions to the entity rather than to the parts is irresistible. Intentional explanations relieve us of the burden of understanding mechanism, insofar as one need assume only that the design is rational in order to call upon the full power of common-sense psychology and have, ready at hand, a basis for anticipating and construing an artifact's behavior. At the same time, precisely because the mechanism is in fact unknown, and, insofar as underspecification is taken to be characteristic of human beings (as evidenced by the fact that we are inclined to view something that is fully specified as less than human), the personification of the machine is reinforced by the ways in which its inner workings are a mystery, and its behavior at times surprises us. Insofar as the machine is somewhat predictable, in sum, and yet is also both internally opaque and liable to unanticipated behavior, we are more likely to view ourselves as engaged in interaction with it than as just performing operations upon it, or using it as a tool to perform operations upon the world (see MacKay 1962). ## 2.3 Self-explanatory artifacts In the preceding pages I have proposed that the reactive, linguistic, and opaque properties of the computer lead us to view it as interactive, and to apply intentional explanations to its behavior. This tie to intentionality has both theoretical and practical implications. Practically, it suggests that, like a human actor, the computer should be able to explain itself, or the intent behind its actions, to the user. Theoretically, it suggests that the computer actually has ## Self-explanatory artifacts intent, as demonstrated precisely in this ability to behave in an accountably rational, intelligible way. For practical purposes, "user interface" designers9 have long held the view that machines ideally should be self-explanatory, in the broad sense that their operation should be discoverable without extensive training, from information provided on or through the machine itself. On this view, the degree to which an artifact is selfexplanatory is just the extent to which someone examining the artifact is able to reconstruct the designer's intentions regarding its use. This basic idea, that a self-explanatory artifact is one whose intended purpose is discoverable by the user, is presumably as old as the design and use of tools. With respect to computer-based artifacts, however, the notion of a self-explanatory artifact has taken on a second sense: namely, the idea that the artifact might actually explain itself in something more like the sense that a human being does. In this second sense the goal is that the artifact should not only be intelligible to the user as a tool, but that it should be intelligent - that is, able to understand the actions of the user, and to provide for the rationality of its own. In the remainder of this chapter, I look at these two senses of a self-explanatory machine and at the relation between them. The first sense – that a tool should be decipherable by its user - reflects the fact that artifacts are constructed by designers, for a purpose, and that the user of a tool needs to know something of that design intent. Given their interactional properties, computational tools seem to offer unique capabilities for the provision of instruction to their users. The idea that instructions could be presented more effectively using the power of computation is not far from the idea that computer-based artifacts could actually instruct: that is, could interact with people in a way that approximates the behavior of an intelligent human expert or coach. And this second idea, that the ## Interactive artifacts artifact could actually interact instructively with the user, ties the practical problem of instruction to the theoretical problem of building an intelligent, interactive machine. ## 2.3.1 The computer as an artifact designed for a purpose At the same time that computational artifacts introduce new complexity and opacity into our encounters with machines, our reliance on computer-based technology and its proliferation throughout the society increases. One result is the somewhat paradoxical objective that increasingly complex technology should be usable with decreasing amounts of training. Rather than relying upon the teachings of an experienced user, the use of computers is to be conveyed directly through the technology itself. The inherent difficulty of conveying the use of a technology directly through its design is well known to archaeologists, who have learned that while the attribution of design intent is a requirement for an artifact's intelligibility, the artifact's design as such does not convey unequivocally either its actual or its intended use. While this problem in construing the purpose of artifacts can be alleviated, it can never fully be resolved, and it defines the essential problem that the novice user of the tool confronts. Insofar as the goal of a tool's design is that use of the tool should be self-evident, therefore, the problem of deciphering an artifact defines the problem of the designer as well. As with any communication, instructions for the use of a tool are constrained by the general maxim that utterances should be designed for their recipients. The extent to which the maxim is observed is limited in the first instance by the resources that the medium of communication affords. Face-to-face human interaction is the paradigm case of a system for communication that, because it is organized for maximum context-sensitivity, supports a response designed for just these recipients, on just this occasion. Face-to-face instruction brings that context-sensitivity to bear on problems of skill acquisition. The gifted coach, for example, draws on powers of language and observation, and uses the situation of instruction, in ## Self-explanatory artifacts order to specialize instruction for the individual student. Where written instruction relies upon generalizations about its recipient and the occasion of its use, the coach draws pedagogical strength from exploitation of the unique details of particular situations.10 A consequence of the human coach's method is that his or her skills must be deployed anew each time. An instruction manual, in contrast, has the advantage of being durable, re-usable, and replicable. In part, the strength of written text is that, in direct contrast to the pointed commentary of the coach, text allows the disassociation of the occasion of an instruction's production from the occasion of its use. For the same reason, however, text affords relatively poor resources for recipient design. The promise of interactive computer systems, in these terms, is a technology that can move instructional design away from the written manual in the direction of the human coach, and the resources afforded by face-to-face interaction. Efforts at building self-explicating machines in their more sophisticated forms now adopt the metaphor of the machine as an expert, and the user as a novice, or student. Among the most interesting attempts to design such a computer-based "coach"is a system called WEST (Burton and Brown 1982). The design strategy adopted in WEST is based on the observation that the skill of a human coach lies as much in what isn't said as what is. Specifically, the human coach does not disrupt the student's engagement in an activity in order to ask questions, but instead diagnoses a student's strengths and weaknesses through observation. And once the ## Interactive artifacts diagnosis is made, the coach interjects advice and instruction selectively, in ways designed to maximize learning through discovery and experience. In that spirit, the WEST system attempts to infer the student's knowledge of the domain - in this case a computer game called 'How the West was Won,"designed to teach the use of basic arithmetic expressions – by observing the student's behavior.11 While the project of identifying a student's problems directly from his or her behavior proved considerably more difficult than expected, the objectives for the WEST coach were accomplished in the prototype system to an impressive degree. Because in the case of learning to play WEST the student's actions take the form of input to the computer (entries on a keyboard) and therefore leave an accessible trace, and because a context for those actions (the current state of, and history of consecutive moves across, the 'board") is defined by the system, each student turn can be compared against calculations of the move that a hypothetical expert player would make given the same conditions. Each expert move, in turn, requires a stipulated set of associated skills. Evidence that a particular skill is lacking, accumulated across some number of moves, identifies that skill as a candidate for coaching. The coach then interjects offers of advice to the student at opportune moments in the course of the play, where what constitutes an opportune moment for interjection is determined according to a set of rules of thumb regarding good tutorial strategy (for example, always coach by offering the student an alternative move that both demonstrates the relevant skill and accomplishes obviously superior results; never coach on two turns in a row, no matter what, and so forth). ## 2.3.2 The computer as an artifact having purposes While the computer-based coach can be understood as a logical development in the longstanding problem of instruction, the requirement that it be interactive introduces a second sense of self-explanatory machine which is more recent, and is uniquely tied to the advent of computing. The new idea is that the intelligibility of artifacts is not just a matter of the availability to the user of the designer's intentions for the artifact, but of the intentions of the artifact itself. That is to say, the designer's objective now is to imbue the machine with the grounds for behaving in ways that are accountably rational: that is, reasonable or intelligible to others, including, in the case of interaction, ways that are responsive to the other's actions. In 195o, A. M. Turing proposed a now-famous, and still controversial, test for machine intelligence based on a view of intelligence as accountable rationality. Turing argued that if a machine could be made to respond to questions in such a way that a person asking the questions could not distinguish between the machine and another human being, the machine would have to be described as intelligent. To implement his test, Turing chose a game called the 'imitation game."The game was initially conceived as a test of the ability of an interrogator to distinguish which of two respondents was a man and which a woman. To eliminate the evidence of physical embodiment, the interaction was to be conducted remotely, via a teleprinter. Thus Turing's notion that the game could easily be adapted to a test of machine intelligence, by substituting the machine for one of the two human respondents. Turing expressly dismissed as a possible objection to his ## Interactive artifacts proposed test the contention that, although the machine might succeed in the game, it could succeed through means that bear no resemblance to human thought. Turing's contention was precisely that success at performing the game, regardless of mechanism, is sufficient evidence for intelligence (Turing 1950, p. 435). The Turing test thereby became the canonical form of the argument that if two information-processors, subject to the same input stimuli, produce indistinguishable output behavior, then, regardless of the identity of their internal operations, one processor is essentially equivalent to the other. The lines of the controversy raised by the Turing test were drawn over a family of programs developed by Joseph Weizenbaum in the 196os under the name ELIZA, designed to support "natural language conversation" with a computer (Weizenbaum 1983, p. 23). Of the name ELIZA, Wiezenbaum writes: Its name was chosen to emphasize that it may be incrementally improved by its users, since its language abilities may be continually improved by a "teacher." Like the Eliza of Pygmalion fame, it can be made to appear even more civilized, the relation of appearance to reality, however, remaining in the domain of the playwright. (p. 23) Anecdotal reports of occasions on which people approached the teletype to one of the ELIZA programs and, believing it to be connected to a colleague, engaged in some amount of 'interaction" without detecting the true nature of their respondent, led many to believe that Weizenbaum's program had passed a simple form of the Turing test. Notwithstanding its apparent interactional success, however, Weizenbaum himself denied the intelligence of the program, on the basis of the underlying mechanism which he described as "a mere collection of procedures"(p. 23): The gross procedure of the program is quite simple; the text [written by the human participant] is read and inspected for the presence of a keyword. If such a word is found, the sen- ## Self-explanatory artifacts tence is transformed according to a rule associated with the keyword, if not a content-free remark or, under certain conditions, an earlier transformation is retrieved. The text so computed or retrieved is then printed out. (p. 24, original emphasis) In spite of Weizenbaum's disclaimers with respect to their intelligence, the ELIZA programs are still cited as instances of successful interaction between human and machine. The grounds for their success are clearest in DOCTOR, one of the ELIZA programs whose script equipped it to respond to the human user as if the computer were a Rogerian therapist and the user a patient. The DOCTOR program exploited the maxim that shared premises can remain unspoken: that the less we say in conversation, the more what is said is assumed to be self-evident in its meaning and implications (see Coulter 1979, ch. 5). Conversely, the very fact that a comment is made without elaboration implies that such shared background assumptions exist. The more elaboration or justification is provided, the less the appearance of transparence or selfevidence. The less elaboration there is, the more the recipient will take it that the meaning of what is provided should be obvious. The design of the DOCTOR program, in other words, exploited the natural inclination of people to deploy what Karl Mannheim first termed the documentary method of interpretation to find the sense of actions that are assumed to be purposeful or meaningful (Garfinkel 1967, p. 78). Very simply, the documentary method refers to the observation that people take appearances as evidence for, or the document of, an ascribed underlying reality, while taking the reality so ascribed as a resource for the interpretation of the appearance. In the case of DOCTOR, computer-generated responses that might otherwise seem odd were rationalized by users on the grounds that there must be some psychiatric intent behind them, not immediately obvious to the user as "patient," but sensible nonetheless: If, for example, one were to tell a psychiatrist 'I went for a ## Interactive artifacts long boat ride"and he responded 'Tell me about boats," one would not assume that he knew nothing about boats, but that he had some purpose in so directing the subsequent conversation. It is important to note that this assumption is one made by the speaker. Whether it is realistic or not is an altogether different question. In any case, it has a crucial psychological utility in that it serves the speaker to maintain his sense of being heard and understood. The speaker further defends his impression (which even in real life may be illusory) by attributing to his conversational partner all sorts of background knowledge, insights and reasoning ability. But again, these are the speaker's contribution to the conversation. They manifest themselves inferentially in the interpretations he makes of the offered response. (Weizenbaum 1983, p. 26, original emphasis) In explicating the ELIZA programs, Weizenbaum was primarily concerned with the inclination of human users to find sense in the computer's output, and to ascribe to it an understanding, and therefore an authority, unwarranted by the actual mechanism.12 While unmasking the intelligence of his program, however, Weizenbaum continued to describe it as "a program which makes natural language conversation with a computer possible"(1983, p. 23). Nevertheless, as part of his disclaimer regarding its intelligence, Weizenbaum points to a crucial shortcoming in the ELIZA strategy with respect to conversation: ELIZA in its use so far has had as one of its principal objectives the concealment of its lack of understanding. But to encourage its conversational partner to offer inputs from which it can select remedial information, it must reveal its misunderstanding. A switch of objectives from the concealment to the revelation of misunderstanding is seen as a precondition to making an ELIZA-like program the basis for an effective natural language man-machine communication system. (p. 27, original emphasis) More recently, the inevitability of troubles in communication, and the importance of their remedy to the accomplishment of 'graceful interaction,"has been re-introduced into the humanmachine communication effort by Hayes and Reddy (1983). They observe that: During the course of a conversation, it is not uncommon for people to misunderstand or fail to understand each other. Such failures in communication do not usually cause the conversation to break down; rather, the participants are able to resolve the difficulty, usually by a short clarifying subdialogue, and continue with the conversation from where they left off. Current computer systems are unable to take part in such clarifying dialogues, or resolve communication difficulties in any other way. As a result, when such difficulties occur, a computer dialogue system is unable to keep up its end of the conversation, and a complete breakdown is likely to result; this fragility lies in stark and unfavourable contrast to the robustness of human dialogue. (p. 234) Hayes and Reddy go on to recommend steps toward a remedy for the fragility of human-computer interaction, based on the ## Interactive artifacts incorporation, from human communication, of conventions for the detection and repair of misunderstanding. They acknowledge, however, that their recommendations are unlikely to be sufficient for successful communication in other than the simplest encounters, e.g. automated directory assistance, or reservation systems. The question of why this should be so – of the nature of the limits on human-machine communication, and the nature and extent of robustness in human interaction - is the subject of the following chapters. ## 3 Plans Once the European navigator has developed his operating plan and has available the appropriate technical resources, the implementation and monitoring of his navigation can be accomplished with a minimum of thought. He has simply to perform almost mechanically the steps dictated by his training and by his initial planning synthesis. (Gladwin 1964, p. 175) Every account of communication involves assumptions about action, in particular about the bases for action's coherence and intelligibility. This chapter and the next discuss two alternative views of action. The first, adopted by most researchers in artificial intelligence, locates the organization and significance of human action in underlving plans. As old at least as the Occidental hills, this view of purposeful action is the basis for traditional philosophies of rational action and for much of the behavioral sciences. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that it should be embraced by those newer fields concerned with intelligent artifacts, particularly cognitive science and information-processing psychology. On the planning view, plans are prerequisite to and prescribe action, at every level of detail. Mutual intelligibility is a matter of the reciprocal recognizability of our plans, enabled by common conventions for the expression of intent, and shared knowledge about typical situations and appropriate actions. The alternative view, developed here in chapter 4, is that while the course of action can always be projected or reconstructed in terms of prior intentions and typical situations, the prescriptive significance of intentions for situated action is inherently vague. The coherence of situated action is tied in essential ways not to individual predispositions or conventional rules but to local interactions contingent on the actor's particular circumstances. A consequence of action's situated nature is that communication must incorporate both a sensitivity to local circumstances and resources for the remedy of troubles in understanding that inevitably arise. This chapter reviews the planning model of purposeful action and shared understanding. Those who adopt the planning model as a basis for interaction between people and machines draw on three related theories about the mutual intelligibility of action: (1) the planning model itself, which takes the significance of action to be derived from plans, and identifies the problem for interaction as their recognition and coordination, (2) speech act theory, which accounts for the recognizability of plans or intentions by proposing conventional rules for their expression, and (3) the idea of shared background knowledge, as the common resource that stands behind individual action and gives it social meaning. Each of these theories promises to solve general problems in human communication, such as the relation of observable behavior to intent, the correspondence of intended and interpreted meaning, and the stability of meaning assignments across situations, in ways that are relevant to particular problems in people's interaction with machines. ## 3.1 The planning model The planning model in cognitive science treats a plan as a sequence of actions designed to accomplish some preconceived end. The model posits that action is a form of problem solving, where the actor's problem is to find a path from some initial state to a desired goal state, given certain conditions along the way.¹ Actions are described, at whatever level of detail, by their preconditions and their consequences: ## The planning model In problem-solving systems, actions are described by prerequisites (i.e. what must be true to enable the action), effects (what must be true after the action has occurred), and decomposition (how the action is performed, which is typically a sequence of subactions). (Allen 1984, p. 126) Goals define the actor's relationship to the situation of action, since the situation is just those conditions that obstruct or advance the actor's progress toward his or her goals. Advance planning is inversely related to prior knowledge of the environment of action, and of the conditions that the environment is likely to present. Unanticipated conditions will require re-planning. In every case, however, whether constructed entirely in advance, or completed and modified during the action's course, the plan is prerequisite to the action. ## 3.1.1 Plan generation and execution monitoring One of the earliest attempts to implement the planning model on a machine occurred as part of a project at Stanford Research Institute, beginning in the mid 196os. The project's goal was to build a robot that could navigate autonomously through a series of rooms, avoiding obstacles and moving specified objects from one room to another. The robot, named by its designers Shakey, was controlled by a problem-solving program called STRIPS, which employed a means-end analysis to determine the robot's path (Fikes and Nilsson 1971). The STRIPS program examined the stated goal, and then determined a subset of operators, or actions available to the robot that would produce that state. The preconditions of those actions in turn identified particular subgoal states, which could be examined in the same way. The system thus worked backward from the goal until a plan was defined from the initial state to the goal state, made up of actions that the robot could perform. Subsequent work on probiem solving and plan synthesis consisted in large part in refinements to this basic means-ends strategy, toward the end of achieving greater efficiency by constraining the search through possible solution paths.² ## Plans Beyond the problem of constructing plans, artificial intelligence researchers have had to address problems of what Nilsson (1973) terms 'failure and surprise"in the execution of their planning programs, due to the practical exigencies of action in an unpredictable environment. The objective that Shakey should actually be able to move autonomously through a real (albeit somewhat impoverished) environment added a new class of problems to those faced by mathematical or game-playing programs operating in an abstract formal domain: for a problem-solver in a formal domain is essentially done when it has constructed a plan for a solution; nothing can go wrong. A robot in the real world, however, must consider the execution of the plan as a major part of every task. Unexpected occurrences are not unusual, so that the use of sensory feedback and corrective action are crucial. (Raphael, cited in McCorduck 1979, p. 224) In Shakey's case, execution of the plan generated by the STRIPS program was monitored by a program called PLANEX. The PLANEX program monitored not the actual moves of the robot, however, but the execution of the plan. The program simply assumed that the execution of the plan meant that the robot had taken the corresponding action in the real world. The program also made the assumption that every time the robot moved there was some normally distributed margin of error that would be added to a 'model of the world," or representation of the robot's location. When the cumulative error in the representation got large enough, the plan monitor initiated another part of the program that triggered a camera which could, in turn, take a reading of Shakey's location in the actual world. The uncertainty to which Shakey was to respond consisted in changes made to the objects in its environment. Another order of uncertainty was introduced with Sacerdoti's system NOAH (an acronym for Nets of Action Hierarchies). Also developed at the ## The planning model Stanford Research Institute as part of the Computer-Based Consultant project, NOAH was designed to monitor and respond to the actions of a human user. With NOAH, Sacerdoti extended the techniques of problem-solving and execution monitoring developed in the planning domain to the problem of interactive instruction: NOAH is an integrated problem solving and execution monitoring system. Its major goal is to provide a framework for storing expertise about the actions of a particular task domain, and to impart that expertise to a human in the cooperative achievement of nontrivial tasks. (Sacerdoti 1977, p.2) The output of the planning portion of Sacerdoti's program is a "procedural net," or hierarchy of partially ordered actions, which becomes in turn the input to the execution-monitoring portion of the system. The execution monitor takes the topmost action in the hierarchy, provides the user with an instruction, and then queries the user regarding the action's completion. A principal objective of the innovations that Sacerdoti introduced for the representation of procedures in NOAH was to extend execution monitoring to include tracking and assessment of the user's actions in response to the instructions generated: The system will monitor the apprentice's work to ensure that the operation is proceeding normally. When the system becomes aware of an unexpected event, it will alter instructions to the apprentice to deal effectively with the new situation. (ibid., p. 3) A positive response from the user to the system's query regarding the action is taken to mean that the user understood the instruction, and has successfully carried it out, while a negative response is taken as a request for a more detailed instruction. The system allows as well for a 'motivation response," or query from the user as to why a certain task needs to be done (to which the system ## Plans responds by listing tasks to which the current task is related), and for an "error response," or indication from the user that the current instruction cannot be carried out. Just as the accumulation of error in the PLANEX program required feedback from the world in order to re-establish the robot's location, the error response from the user in Sacerdoti's system requires that NOAH somehow repair its representation of the user's situation: PLANEX presumed that an adequate mechanism existed for accurately updating the world model. This was almost the case, since there were only a small number of actions that the robot vehicle could take, and the model of each action contained information about the uncertainty it would introduce in the world model. When uncertainties reached a threshold, the vision subsystem was used to restore the accuracy of the world model For the domain of the Computer-based Consultant, or even for a richer robot domain, this approach will prove inadequate ... NOAH cannot treat the world model as a given. It must initiate interactions with the user at appropriate points to ensure that it is accurately monitoring the course of the execution . . . [W]hen a serious error is discovered (requiring the system to be more thorough in its efforts to determine the state of the world), the system must determine what portions of its world model differ from the actual situation. (ibid., pp. 71-2) The situation in which Shakey moved consisted of walls and boxes (albeit boxes that could be moved unexpectedly by a human hand). The problem in designing Shakey was to maintain consistency between the represented environment and the physical environment in which the robot moved. In introducing the actions of a user, the computer's environment becomes not only a physical but a social one, requiring the interpretation of the user's actions, and an assessment of the user's understanding of his or her situation. The diffi- ## The planning model culty of maintaining a shared understanding of a situation, as we will see more clearly in chapters 4 and 5, is not just a matter of monitoring the course of events, but of establishing their significance. Nonetheless, with Sacerdoti we have at least a preliminary recognition of the place of the situation in the intelligibility of action and communication. ## 3.1.2 Interaction and plan recognition Adherents of the planning model in artificial intelligence research have taken the requirement of interaction as an injunction to extend the planning model from a single individual to two or more individuals acting in concert. The planning model attempts to bring concerted action under the jurisdiction of the individual actor by attaching to the others in the actor's world sufficient description, and granting to the actor sufficient knowledge, that he or she is able to respond to the actions of others as just another set of environmental conditions. The problem of social interaction, consequently, becomes an extension of the problem of the individual actor. The basic view of a single, goal-directed agent, acting in response to an environment of conditions, is complicated - the conditions now include the actions of other agents – but intact. The problem for interaction, on this view, is to recognize the actions of others as the expression of their underlying plans. The complement to plan generation and execution in artificial intelligence research, therefore, is plan recognition, or the attribution of plans to others based on observation of their actions. The starting premise for a theory of plan recognition is that an observer takes some sequence of actions as evidence, and then forms hypotheses about the plans that could motivate and explain those actions. One persisting difficulty for action understanding in artificial intelligence research has been the uncertain relation between actions and intended effects. Allen (1984) illustrates this problem with the example of turning on a light: There are few physical activities that are a necessary part of performing the action of turning on a light. Depending on the context, vastly different patterns of behavior can be ## Plans classified as the same action. For example, turning on a light usually involves flipping a light switch, but in some circumstances it may involve tightening the light bulb (in the basement) or hitting the wall (in an old house). Although we have knowledge about how the action can be performed, this does not define what the action is. The key defining characteristic of turning on the light seems to be that the agent is performing some activity which will cause the light, which was off when the action started, to become on when the action ends. An important side effect of this definition is that we could recognize an observed pattern of activity as "turning on the light" even if we had never seen or thought about that pattern previously. (p. 126) Allen's point is two-fold. First, the "same"action as a matter of intended effect can be achieved in any number of ways, where the ways are contingent on circumstance rather than on definitional properties of the action. And secondly, while an action can be accounted for post hoc with reference to its intended effect, an action's course cannot be predicted from knowledge of the actor's intent, nor can the course be inferred from observation of the outcome. Allen identifies the indeterminate relationship of intended effect to method as a problem for planning or plan recognition systems: a problem that he attempts to resolve by constructing a logical language for action descriptions that handles the distinction between what he calls the 'causal definition" of an action (i.e. the pre and post conditions that must hold in order to say that the action has occurred, independent of any method), and the action's characterization in terms of a particular method or procedure for its accomplishment.³ ## The planning model While Allen's approach to the problem of plan recognition is an attempt to reconstruct logically our vocabulary of purposeful action, a few more psychologically oriented researchers in artificial intelligence have undertaken experiments designed to reveal the process by which people bring the actions of others under the jurisdiction of an ascribed plan. Schmidt, Sridharan, and Goodson (1978) observe, for example, that plan attribution seems to require certain transformations of the sequential organization of the action described.4 They report that throughout the process of plan attribution the problem to be solved by the subject remains ‘"illformed,"by which they mean that at any given time neither the range of possible plans that the other might be carrying out, nor the criteria for assessing just what plan is actually in effect, are clearly defined (p. 8o). Nonetheless, they report that their subjects are able to posit an underlying plan. Their strategy appears to be to adopt tentatively a single hypothesis about the other's plan, rather than entertain all or even some number of logical possibilities simultaneously. The preferred hypothesis regarding the other's plan then affects what actions are noted and recalled in the subject's accounts of the action, and the temporal order of events is restructured into logical 'in order to" or 'because" relationships, such that relations among actions are not restricted to consecutive events in time. At the same time, the current hypothesis is always subject to elaboration or revision in light of subsequent events, to the extent that subjects are often required to suspend judgment on a given hypothesis, and to adopt a "wait and see" strategy. Wherever possible, actions that violate the structure of an attributed plan are explained away before the plan itself is reconsidered. Schmidt, Shridharan, and Goodson conclude that all of these observations "support the generalization that action understanding is simply a process of plan recognition"(p. 50). It is worth noting, however, that while these observations clearly point to a ## Plans process of plan attribution by the observer, there is no independent evidence that the process of plan attribution is a process of recognizing the plan of the actor. ## 3.1.3 The status of plans Assessment of the planning model is complicated by equivocation in the literature between plans as a conceptual framework for the analysis and simulation of action, and plans as a psychological mechanism for its actual production. When researchers describe human action in terms of plans, the discussion generally finesses the question of just how the formulations provided by the researcher are purported to relate to the actor's intent. The claim is at least that people analyze each other's actions into goals and plans in order to understand each other. But the suggestion that the plan is "recognized" implies that it has an existence prior to and independent of the attribution: that it actually determines the action. The identification of the plan with the actor's intent is explicit in the writing of philosophers of action supportive of artificial intelligence research, like Margaret Boden, who writes: unless an intention is thought of as an action-plan that can draw upon background knowledge and utilize it in the guidance of behavior one cannot understand how intentions function in real life. (1973, pp. 27–8) Intentions, in other words are realiżed as plans-for-action that directly guide behavior. A logical extension of Boden's view, particularly given an interest in rendering it more computable, is the view that plans actually are prescriptions or instructions for action. An early and seminal articulation of this view came from Miller, Galanter, and Pribram (196o), who define an intention as "the uncompleted parts of a Plan whose execution has already begun" (p. 61). With respect to the plan itself: Any complete description of behavior should be adequate to ## The planning model serve as a set of instructions, that is, it should have the characteristics of a plan that could guide the action described. When we speak of a plan . . . the term will refer to a hierarchy of instructions . . . A plan is any hierarchical process in the organism that can control the order in which a sequence of operations is to be performed. A Plan is, for an organism, essentially the same as a program for a computer . . . we regard a computer program that simulates certain features of an organism's behavior as a theory about the organismic Plan that generated the behavior. Moreover, we shall also use the term 'Plan" to designate a rough sketch of some course of action . . . as well as the completely detailed specification of every detailed operation . . . We shall say that a creature is executing a particular Plan when in fact that Plan is controlling the sequence of operations he is carrying out. (p. 17, original emphasis) With Miller, Galanter, and Pribram, the view that purposeful action is planned is put forth as a psychological "process theory,' compatible with the interest in a mechanistic, computationally tractable account of intelligent action. By improving upon or completing our common-sense descriptions of the structure of action, the structure is now represented not only as a plausible sequence, but as an hierarchical plan. The plan reduces, moreover, to a detailed set of instructions that actually serves as the program that controls the action. At this point, the plan as stipulated becomes substitutable for the action, insofar as the action is viewed as derivative from the plan. And once this substitution is done, the theory is self-sustaining: the problem of action is assumed to be solved by the planning model, and the task that remains is the model's refinement. While attributing the plan to the actor resolves the question of the plan's status, however, it introduces new problems with respect to what we actually mean by 'purposeful action." If plans are synonymous with purposeful action, how do we account, on the one hand, for a prior intent to act which may never be realized, and, on the other, for an intentional action for which we would ordinarily say no plan was formed ahead of time?⁵ And if any plan of action can be analyzed at any level of detail, what level of description represents that which we would want to call purposeful action? If at every level, there is no reason in principle to distinguish, for example, between deliberate action and involuntary response, as the latter always can be ascribed to a process of planning unavailable to the actor. In fact, this is just what Boden would have us do. On her account, action can be reduced to basic units for which"no further procedural analysis could conceivably be given."Those units compose "complex procedural schemata or action-plans," which in turn produce "complex intentional effects"(1973, p. 36). Psychological processes at the level of intention, in other words, are reducible ultimately to bodily operations. But while the planning model would have a statement of intent reflect an actual set of instructions for action, even casual observation indicates that our statements of intent generally do not address the question of situated action at any level of detail. In fact, because the relation of the intent to accomplish some goal to the actual course of situated action is enormously contingent, a statement of intent generally says very little about the action that follows. It is precisely because our plans are inherently vague - because we can state our intentions without having to describe the actual course that our actions will take - that an intentional vocabulary is so useful for our everyday affairs. The confusion in the planning literature over the status of plans mirrors the fact that in our everyday action descriptions we do not normally distinguish between accounts of action provided before and after the fact, and action's actual course. As common-sense ## Speech acts constructs, plans are a constituent of practical action, but they are constituent as an artifact of our reasoning about action, not as the generative mechanism of action. Our imagined projections and our retrospective reconstructions are the principal means by which we catch hold of situated action and reason about it, while situated action itself, in contrast, is essentially transparent to us as actors.6 The planning model, however, takes over our common-sense preoccupation with the anticipation of action, and the review of its outcomes, and attempts to systematize that reasoning as a model for action itself, while ignoring the actual stuff, the situated action, which is the reasoning's object. ## 3.2 Speech acts A growing number of research efforts devoted to machine intelligence have as their objective, for both theoretical and practical reasons, human-machine communication using English, or "natural language'(for example, Brady and Berwick 1983; Bruce 1981; Joshi, Webber, and Sag 1981). Researchers in natural language understanding have embraced Austin's observation (1962) that language is a form of action, as a way of subsuming communication to the planning model. If language is a form of action, it follows that language understanding, like the interpretation of action generally, involves an analysis of a speaker's utterances in terms of the plans those utterances serve: Let us start with an intuitive description of what we think occurs when one agent A asks a question of another agent B which B then answers. A has some goal; s/he creates a plan (plan construction) that involves asking B a question whose answer will provide some information needed in order to achieve the goal. A then executes this plan, asking B the ## Plans question. B interprets the question, and attempts to infer A's plan (plan inference). (Allen 1983, p. 110, original emphasis) As with the interpretation of action, plans are the substrate on which the interpretation of natural language utterances rests, insofar as "[hluman language behavior is part of a coherent plan of action directed toward satisfying a speaker's goals"(Appelt 1985, p. 1). We understand language, and action more generally, when we successfully infer the other's goals, and understand how the other's action furthers them. The appropriateness of a response turns on that analysis, from which, in turn: The hearer then adopts new goals (e.g., to respond to a request, to clarify the previous speaker's utterance or goal), and plans his own utterances to achieve those. A conversation ensues. (P. Cohen n.d., p. 24) Given such an account of conversation, the research problem with respect to language understanding is essentially the same as that of the planning model more generally: that is, to characterize actions in terms of their preconditions and effects, and to formulate a set of inference rules for mapping between actions and underlying plans. Among researchers in the natural language area of artificial intelligence research, Searle's speech act theory (1969) is seen to offer some initial guidelines for computational models of communication: We hypothesize that people maintain, as part of their models of the world, symbolic descriptions of the world models of other people. Our plan-based approach will regard speech acts as operators whose effects are primarily on the models that speakers and hearers maintain of each other. (Cohen and Perrault 1979, p. 179) Searle's conditions of satisfaction for the successful performance of speech acts are read as the speech act's 'preconditions,"while its illocutionary force is the desired "effect': Utterances are produced by actions (speech acts) that are ex- ## Speech acts ecuted in order to have some effect on the hearer. This effect typically involves modifying the hearer's beliefs or goals. A speech act, like any other action, may be observed by the hearer and may allow the hearer to infer what the speaker's plan is. (Allen 1983, p. 108) In describing utterances by their preconditions and effects, speech acts seem to provide at least the framework within which computational mechanisms for engineering interaction between people and machines might emerge. But while Searle's "conditions of satisfaction"state conventions governing the illocutionary force of certain classes of utterance, he argues against the possibility of a rule-based semantics for construing the significance of any particular utterance. While the maxims that speech act theory proposes – for example, the felicity condition for a directive is that S wants H to do A - tell us something about the general conditions of satisfaction for a directive, they tell us nothing further about the significance of any particular directive. With respect to the problem of interpretation, Gumperz (1982b, p. 326) offers the following example from an exchange between two secretaries in a small office: A: Are you going to be here for ten minutes? B: Go ahead and take your break. Take longer if you want. A: I'll just be outside on the porch. Call me if you need me. B: OK. Don't worry. Gumperz points out that B's response to A's question clearly indicates that B interprets the questions as an indirect request that B stay in the office while A takes a break, and, by her reply, A confirms that interpretation. B's interpretation accords with a categorization of A's question as an indirect speech act (Searle 1979), and with Grice's discussion of implicature (1975); i.e. B assumes that A is cooperating, and that her question must be relevant, therefore B searches her mind for some possible context or interpretive frame that would make sense of the question, and comes up with the break. But, Gumperz points out, this analysis begs the question of how B arrives at the right inference: What is it about the situation that leads her to think A is talking about taking a break? A common sociolinguistic procedure in such cases is to attempt to formulate discourse rules such as the following: 'If a secretary in an office around break time asks a co-worker a question seeking information about the co-worker's plans for the period usually allotted for breaks, interpret it as a request to take her break." Such rules are difficult to formulate and in any case are neither sufficiently general to cover a wide enough range of situations nor specific enough to predict responses. An alternative approach is to consider the pragmatics of questioning and to argue that questioning is semantically related to requesting, and that there are a number of contexts in which questions can be interpreted as requests. While such semantic processes clearly channel conversational inference, there is nothing in this type of explanation that refers to taking a break. (1982b, pp. 326–7) The problem that Gumperz identifies here clearly applies equally to attempts to account for inferences such as B's by arguing that she "recognizes" A's plan to take a break. Clearly she does: the outstanding question is how. While we can always construct a post hoc account that explains interpretation in terms of knowledge of typical situations and motives, it remains the case that with speech act theory, as with the planning model, neither typifications of intent nor general rules for its expression are sufficient to account for the mutual intelligibility of our situated action. In the final analysis, attempts to construct a taxonomy of intentions and rules for their recognition seem to beg the question of situated interpretation, rather than answer it. ## 3.3 Background knowledge Gumperz's example demonstrates a problem that any account of human action must face: namely, that an action's significancé ## Background knowledge seems to lie as much in what it presupposes and implies about its situation, as in any explicit or observable behavior as such. Even the notion of observable behavior becomes problematic in this respect, insofar as what we do, and what we understand others to be doing, is so thoroughly informed by assumptions about the action's significance. In the interpretation of purposeful action, it is hard to know where the observation leaves off and where the interpretation begins. In recognition of the fact that human behavior is a figure defined by its ground, social science has largely turned from the observation of behavior to explication of the background that seems to lend behavior its sense. For cognitive science, the background of action is not the world as such, but knowledge about the world. Researchers agree that representation of knowledge about the world is a principal limiting factor on progress in machine intelligence. The prevailing strategy in representing knowledge has been to categorize the world into domains of knowledge (e.g. areas of specialization, such as medicine, along one dimension, or propositions about physical phenomena, such as liquids, along another), and then to enumerate facts about the domain and relationships between them. Having carved out domains of specialized knowledge, the catch-all for anything not clearly assignable is "common sense," which then can be spoken of as if it were yet another domain of knowledge, albeit one that is foundational to the others. While some progress has been made in selected areas of specialized knowledge, the domain of common-sense knowledge sò far remains intractable and unwieldy. One approach to bounding common-sense knowledge, exemplified by the work of Schank and Abelson (1977), is to classify the everyday world as types of situations, and assign to each its own body of specialized knowledge. The claim is that our knowledge of the everyday world is organized by a "predetermined, stereotyped sequence of actions that define a well-known situation" or script (ibid., p. 422). Needless to say "[s]cripts are extremely numerous. There is a restaurant script, a birthday party script, a football game script, a classroom script, and so on' (p. 423). Every situation, in other words, has its plan made up of ordered action sequences, each action producing the conditions that enable the next action to occur. Admittedly, the normative order of these action sequences can be thrown off course, by any one of what Schank and Abelson term "distractions," "obstacles," or"errors." Distractions, about which they have little to say, comprise the interruption of one script by another, while: An obstacle to the normal sequence occurs when someone or something prevents a normal action from occurring or some enabling condition for the action is absent. An error occurs when the action is completed in an inappropriate manner, so that the normal consequences of the action do not come about. (p. 426) Not only does the typical script proceed according to a normal sequence of actions, in other words, but each script has its typical obstacles and errors that, like the script itself, are stored in memory along with their remedies, and retrieved and applied as needed. While plans associate intentions with action sequences, scripts associate action sequences with typical situations. In practice, however, the stipulation of relevant background knowledge for typical situations always takes the form of a partial list, albeit one offered as if the author could complete the list, given the requisite time and space: If one intends to buy bread, for instance, the knowledge of which bakers are open and which are shut on that day of the week will enter into the generation of one's plan of action in a definite way; one's knowledge of local topography (and perhaps of map-reading) will guide one's locomotion to the selected shop; one's knowledge of linguistic grammar and of the reciprocal roles of shopkeeper and customer will be needed to generate that part of the action-plan concerned ## Background knowledge with speaking to the baker, and one's financial competence will guide and monitor the exchange of coins over the shop counter. (Boden 1973, p. 28) Like Boden's story of the business of buying bread, attempts in artificial intelligence research to formalize common-sense knowledge rely upon an appeal to intuition that shows little sign of yielding to scientific methods. The difficulty is not just that every action presupposes a large quantity of background knowledge; though it would pose practical problems, such a difficulty would be tractable eventually. Just because "implicit knowledge" can in principle be enumerated indefinitely, deciding in practice about the enumeration of background knowledge remains a stubbornly ad hoc procedure, for which researchers have not succeeded in constructing rules that do not depend, in their turn, on some deeper ad hoc procedures. Nevertheless, the image evoked by "shared knowledge"is a potentially enumerable body of implicit assumptions or presuppositions that stands behind every explicit action or utterance, and from which participants in interaction selectively draw in understanding each other's actions. This image suggests that what actually does get said on any occasion must reflect the application of a principle of communicative economy, which recommends roughly that to the extent that either the premises or rationale of an action can be assumed to be shared, they can be left unspoken. That means, in turn, that speakers must have procedures for deciding the extent of the listener's knowledge, and the commensurate requirements for explication. The listener, likewise, must make inferences regarding the speaker's assumptions about shared knowledge, on the basis of what he or she chooses explicitly to say. What is unspoken and relevant to what is said is assumed to reside in the speaker's and listener's common stock of background knowledge, the existence of which is proven by the fact that an account of what is said always requires reference to further facts that, though unspoken, are clearly relevant. ## Plans This image of communication is challenged, however, by the results of an exercise assigned by Garfinkel to his students (1972). Garfinkel's aim was to press the common-sense notion that background knowledge is a body of things thought but unsaid, that stands behind behavior and makes it intelligible. The request was that the students provide a complete description of what was communicated, in one particular conversation, as a matter of the participants' shared knowledge. Students were asked to report a simple conversation by writing on the left hand side of a piece of paper what was said, and on the right hand side what it was that they and their partners actually understood was being talked about. Garfinkel reports that when he made the assignment: many students asked how much I wanted them to write. As I progressively imposed accuracy, clarity, and distinctness, the task became increasingly laborious. Finally, when I required that they assume I would know what they had actually talked about only from reading literally what they wrote literally, they gave up with the complaint that the task was impossible. (p. 317) The students' dilemma was not simply that they were being asked to write "everything"that was said, where that consisted of some bounded, albeit vast, content. It was rather that the task of enumerating what was talked about itself extended what was talked about, providing a continually receding horizon of understandings to be accounted for. The assignment, it turned out, was not to describe some existing content, but to generate it. As such, it was an endless task. The students' failure suggests not that they gave up too soon, but that what they were assigned to do was not what the participants in the conversation themselves did in order to achieve shared understanding. While the notion of 'background assumptions" connotes an actual collection of things that are there in the mind of the speaker – a body of knowledge that motivates a particular action or linguistic expression, and makes it interpretable - Garfinkel's exercise, as ## Background knowledge well as the phenomenology of experience, suggest that there is reason to question the view that background assumptions are part of the actor's mental state prior to action: As I dash out the door of my office, for example, I do not consciously entertain the belief that the floor continues on the other side, but if you stop me and ask me whether, when I charged confidently through the door, I believed that the floor continued on the other side, I would have to respond that indeed, I did. (Dreyfus 1982, p. 25) A background assumption, in other words, is generated by the activity of accounting for an action when the premise of the action is called into question. But there is no particular reason to believe that the assumption actually characterizes the actor's mental state prior to the act. In this respect, the "taken for granted' denotes not a mental state but something outside of our heads that, precisely because it is non-problematically there, we do not need to think about. By the same token, in whatever ways we do find action to be problematical, the world is there to be consulted should we choose to do so. Similarly, we can assume the intelligibility of our actions, and as long as the others with whom we interact present no evidence of failing to understand us, we do not need to explain ourselves, yet the grounds and significance of our actions can be explicated endlessly. The situation of action is thus an inexhaustibly rich resource, and the enormous problems of specification that arise in cognitive science's theorizing about intelligible action have less to do with action than with the project of substituting definite procedures for vague plans, and representations of the situation of action, for action's actual circumstances. To characterize purposeful action as in accord with plans and goals is just to say again that it is purposeful and that somehow, in a way not addressed by the characterization itself, we constrain and direct our actions according to the significance that we assign to a particular context. How we do that is the outstanding problem. Plans and goals do not provide the solution for that problem, they ## Plans simply re-state it. The dependency of significance on a particular context, every particular context's open-endedness, and the essential ad hocness of contextual elaboration are resources for practical affairs, but perplexities for a science of human action. And, to anticipate the analysis in chapter $^ { 7 , }$ it is an intractable problem for projects that rest on providing in advance for the significance of canonical descriptions - such as instructions – for situated action.