# GENERAL EDITOR’S FOREWORD

Imperialism was more than a set of economic, political, and military phenomena. It was a habit of mind, a dominant idea in the era of European world supremacy which had widespread intellectual, cultural, and technical ramifications. The ‘Studies in Imperialism’ series is designed to explore, primarily but not exclusively, these relatively neglected areas. Volumes are planned on the scientific aspects of imperialism, on education, disease, the theatre, literature, art, design, and many more. But in redressing the balance in favour of these multi-disciplinary and cross-cultural studies, it is not intended that the economic, political, and military dimensions should be ignored. The series will contain books in these fields too and will seek to examine colonial and imperial developments in a variety of periods and in diverse geographical contexts. It is hoped that individually and collectively these works will illumine one of the most potent characteristics of modern world history.

Paul Greenhalgh’s book illustrates the breadth and depth of the imperial idea extremely well. The international exhibitions examined here were a product of the European and American sense of being involved in a mighty global enterprise. In concentrating on the progression from raw materials to manufactured goods (via technical processes and the application of design values) the exhibitions reflected the economic geography of imperial specialisation. In displaying the marriage of scientific advance to manufacture, trade, and transport, they were affected by and in turn influenced the contemporary traditions of spectacular theatre, architectural eclecticism, and showmanship arising from a fascination with human and natural historical taxonomies. They offered a racial commentary on the alleged superiority of European civilisation, produced spectacular displays associated with conquest and frontiersmanship, and stimulated the appearance of commemorative ephemera, bric-à-brac, and music. As well as touching on every aspect of the industrial and imperial system, they provide insights into domestic developments in art and design, the status and self-assertion of women, the expression of national character, and the articulation of both private and governmental agencies in planning and funding. They were at the same time global and local, reducing complex sets of economic, scientific, and cultural interactions to one vast display.

As Paul Greenhalgh shows, they were both magnificent and disappointing, progressive and reactionary, sometimes fostering misunderstanding and aggression rather than conciliation. They became entrammelled in an

## GENERAL EDITOR’S FOREWORD

overblown grandiloquence, a riotous eclecticism that led the public to regard them as little more than gigantic funfairs. Disentangling intention and effect is always problematical and this is particularly true of the exhibitions. Their treatment of Asian and African peoples neatly illustrates the point. People from Asia and Africa were used for racial display bordering on the peep-show. Yet the influence of Asian music (principally through Indonesian gamelan players) reached European composers through exhibition performances, while displays of African art, treated as no more than ‘ethnic’ curios, had a profound effect on post-impressionism. The exhibitions sucked the world into patterns of dependence, dominance and subjection on one great site, but they also permitted unexpected contacts to take place and mutual influences to flourish.

John M. MacKenzie

# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

There are a lot of people to thank. First and foremost, the students of Cardiff College of Art and Design have been a constant inspiration to me. Likewise my colleagues in the School of History and Theory of Art and Design: Patricia Cusack, Martin Gaughan, Jenny Godfrey, Howard Harris, Helen Long and, perhaps most of all, Noel Upfold. The staff at the Open University in Cardiff and the students of the Arts Foundation course there. My proof readers proved resilient and vital: David Gould, Belinda Greenhalgh, Jackie and Mike McCandless, Judith Harper and Stephen Young. Stuart Meeling, Rose Newman, Julian Sheppard and Laurence Simon gave great assistance with the illustrations. The book could not have been written without the unending support of John Beynon, tutor-librarian of Cardiff College of Art and Design. Also the library staff of the Royal Society of Arts, The Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Library, Colindale. The patience and support of Ray Offord and his staff at Manchester University Press was welcome. Here follows a list of those who in one way or another helped to forge the various positions the book takes; I apologise in advance to those I forget, I am sure the list could go on: Tim Benton, Michael Casson, James Castle, Michael Crowther, Ray Crozier, Geoff Davies, Diane Duffield, André Garo, David Gould, Bill Greenhalgh, Julian Holder, Michael Hose, Donald Knight, Bernard Mader, John MacKenzie, Alan Reece, Beryl Robinson, Peter Sharpe, Penny Sparke, Peter Starkey, Chris Stevens, Stephen Young.

For Belinda and Jack-Hector, without whom this could not have happened