# INTRODUCTION

‘A World’s Fair – the idea was fresh and fascinating; for here, after the appearance of so many marvellous mechanical devices, was the device of bringing them all together. Here, after such unparalleled progress in increasing production, in extending communications, in freer and free trade, was the occasion of inventory and stock-taking; best of all, here was the greatest opportunity that the working world had ever seen of combining business with pleasure, of having the very best of market-days and holidays in one. For what is better for a man than that he should enjoy the good of all his labour?’

## Patrick Geddes, ‘The Closing Exhibition – Paris 1900’, The Contemporary Review November 1900.

Imagine an area the size of a small city centre, bristling with dozens of vast buildings set in beautiful gardens; fill the buildings with every conceivable type of commodity and activity known, in the largest possible quantities; surround them with miraculous pieces of engineering technology, with tribes of primitive peoples, reconstructions of ancient and exotic streets, restaurants, theatres, sports stadiums and band-stands. Spare no expense. Invite all nations on earth to take part by sending objects for display and by erecting buildings of their own. After six months, raze this city to the ground and leave nothing behind, save one or two permanent land-marks.

The international exhibitions held around the world between 1851 and 1939 were occurrences such as this, spectacular gestures which briefly held the attention of the world before disappearing into an abrupt oblivion, victims of their planned temporality. Millions of visitors strolled through the sites, were taught, indoctrinated and mesmerised by them. Urban centres were re-planned to accommodate them, national economies damaged, fortunes made and wars postponed. They were the largest gatherings of people – war or peace – of all time. On both a high and a popular level they ranked amongst the most important events held in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; they remain unsurpassed in their scale, opulence and confidence.

During the ninety year period under discussion hundreds of international exhibitions were staged all over the world, in Africa, Asia, Australasia and South America as well as Europe and North America. This text could not hope to examine in any meaningful way the whole tradition, nor does it attempt to. Rather, it is a study of how the events emerged, how they gained legitimacy as a medium of national expression and how they maintained it through one of the most traumatic stretches in world history. It concentrates almost exclusively on exhibitions held in Britain, France and the United States of America, as these nations were responsible for defining the shape and scope of events everywhere. Known in Britain as Great Exhibitions, in France as Expositions Universelles and in America as World’s Fairs, under the guidance of the three the genre became a self-perpetuating phenomenon, the extraordinary cultural spawn of industry and empire. The British inaugurated the tradition in 1851, the French embellished its form and became the acknowledged masters of ${ \mathrm { i t } } ,$ the Americans pushed its size and expense to a final extreme. Having shaped the exhibitions, the three stabilised and institutionalised their baroque excesses, sanctioning and lauding costs which edged onto economic and moral absurdity.

Even within the three main nations the sheer numbers of exhibitions prevents an empirical completeness; hopefully the study is close enough to this to inspire confidence in its conclusions. Some thirty events are dealt with in detail and around forty further ones, of a national as well as international character, are treated with varying degrees of brevity. Where necessary, exhibitions of importance other than those held in America, Britain and France come into the discussion. Amongst these are included ones held in Amsterdam, Antwerp, Barcelona, Dublin, Moscow, Vienna and Turin. After two chapters of an introductory and general nature, the text is constructed thematically rather than chronologically or nationally, each chapter concentrating on a single topic. This appeared the best way to emphasise correlations and divergences in exhibiting policies and it also allowed for the highlighting of aspects previously left in shadow. I hope this proves to be an aid to clarity rather than confusion for the reader.

# CHAPTER ONE

## Origins and conceptual development

International Exhibitions did not spring into existence with all the features this book is dedicated to discussing. Rather, they evolved slowly as a cultural phenomenon for almost a century before the first event identifiable as an international exhibition actually took place, in 1851. Through this preliminary period, in tandem with the unfolding of the industrial revolution, institutions formed in France and Britain with the specific aim of promoting the principle of display. In the first instance this was to be a device for the enhancement of trade, for the promotion of new technology, for the education of the ignorant middle classes and for the elaboration of a political stance. Backed firmly by government, early establishers of the art of exhibiting attempted to formulate a system of presentation in the absence of any adequate precedents, to invent a way of showing manufactured objects so as to render them meaningful beyond themselves.

The French were the first to establish an ongoing national policy for the holding of large displays of industrial and craft produce, when the need to stimulate trade and industry in the post-revolutionary period became acute. The idea of an exhibition as an economic expedient appeared a logical one to French statesmen, whose predecessors had founded Fine Art training and display centres as far back as the reign of Louis XIV.<sup>1</sup> These earlier institutions had had political and economic motives behind their creation. The aim was simple enough in the first exhibition, held in 1797, and that was to sell produce. The Directory sanctioned it in the hope that a good showing would not only dispose of stockpiled goods but also show the French public that their industry was still intact and capable of competing internationally. Two men are customarily credited with the idea, the Marquis d’Avèze and François de Neufchâteau. In early 1797 d’Avèze, one of the few aristocrats to survive the Terror intact and with power, decided to have a public display of goods in the forecourt of the Louvre. At the time he was one of the major controllers of the three great national (formerly Royal) factories, Sèvres, Les Gobelins and Les Savonneries. The exhibition principally consisted of the wares of the three, namely ceramic, tapestries and carpets, and was intended to help dispose of produce which had proven difficult to sell in the aftermath of 1789. At that time also, the English were blockading French ports as the Napoleonic Wars grew toward their most active phase, making the export of goods extremely difficult. The event lasted four days, proving to be a success on two levels; it sold produce, but more than this, it attracted crowds. People were willing, even keen it seems, to amble through stalls and stands of quality goods, even if purchase was not an intention. At this point François de Neufchâteau, minister for the Interior, stepped in with a plan to expand the concept.

With the help of d’Avèze, Neufchâteau planned a second exhibition, to be held in 1798, this time in specially constructed temporary facilities on the Champs de Mars, the still unspoiled edge of Paris where Napoleon was to celebrate his victories. The prestige of the site, despite its novelty, the money allocated to the preparation of the buildings and the association of the event itself with issues of national importance, marked out the 1798 exhibition as being different from any previous cultural event of its type. The aims of the exhibition were expanded well beyond those of the first one. Selling was still a central aim but an instructive element entered into the rationale, directed principally at the manufacturers of France. They were encouraged to try harder, to take note of self-presentation as an issue and to introduce a more abrasive competitive edge into their marketing techniques. The developing age of capital, led by the ever advancing English, was beginning to exert its first real influence on French craft trades. The exhibition was a national event, but the concerns which motivated it were, economically speaking, international. The fear of English industries amongst French manufacturers and politicians was becoming acute even in those early days of the industrial revolution, as cheap English goods revealed their ability to penetrate the French market and dismantle home industry. Textiles and ceramics in particular by 1795 were English dominated areas of produce. The growth of the factory system in Lancashire created a surplus which sold cheaply in Europe, alarming indigenous producers everywhere. Dependence upon England for anything was undesirable, but for something as fundamental as cloth it was unthinkable. More wounding than the textile industry, not least in terms of pride, were the activities of Josiah Wedgwood in Staffordshire. By the time of his death in 1795, he had created a ceramic empire that was in the process of bringing the great Royal Factories of Europe, Sèvres included, to their knees. The superior quality of the material, the elegance of the fashionable classical style and the strikingly low cost of Wedgwood ware proved irresistable everywhere. A progressive Liberal passionately in support of the Revolution, Wedgwood was not slow to take advantage of the love of classicism in France which was growing with revolutionary activity; he had written as early as 1786 to the Duc de Choiseul, minister of finance, to complain of import duties and to extol the virtues of free trade. He remarked in this correspondence, not without irony, on the desirability of allowing his produce lower tarifs, ‘knowing the taste they have in France for everything which comes from England.’<sup>2</sup> The young Republic was justifiably wary of the guile of such entrepreneurs, the national exhibitions being early evidence of the struggle against them.

Fear of damage to French industry from abroad was only one aspect of the economic outlook of Neufchâteau however, as he himself stated:

The French have surprised Europe with the rapidity of their military exploits, and must advance with the same ardour on the paths of commerce and of peace . . . This is not merely an episode in the struggle against English industry, but also the first stone in a mighty edifice which time alone can complete and which will be adorned each year by the joint efforts of industry and commerce.<sup>3</sup>

The exhibition was decidedly Utopian in its projection of French life after the Revolution, a firm attempt to suggest that what the English had done to their industries was not impossible in France. It aimed, as many of its international successors would, to breed popular confidence via example. What France had achieved already and would go on to achieve was the key note, intended to stir the buying public into economic patriotism and to give manufacturers courage to expand their horizons. Altogether there were 110 exhibitors, a collection of firms and individual entrepreneurs who were allocated amounts of space in the ‘Temple of Industry’, the centre-piece of the site. Around the Temple the other structures formed an arcaded square boasting sixty large arches. This was designed by the painter J. J. L. David, France’s premier artist and fervent supporter of the Revolution. In fact the most memorable aspects of the event in contemporary eyes were not the exhibits themselves but the splendour of the setting around them. A plethora of activity filled the Champs de Mars; there were military parades, splendid balls, firework displays and dozens of unofficial sideshows and stalls on the edge of the site. The strange combinations of carnival and ceremony, of circus and museum, of popularism and elitism which typified the Expositions Universelles therefore emerged in embryonic form at the very opening of the tradition. Several features of the administration equally anticipated the later events. One of these was a specially compiled catalogue, containing the names and addresses of participating firms. The potential of this publication as an effective free advertiser was quickly realised by manufacturers, making them keen supporters of succeeding events. The decision to hold exhibitions on a regular basis was an even more significant move. In isolation, any exhibition has limited importance, but when a policy is formed providing for the staging of events at regular intervals, the opportunity for development and growth appears. Between 1797 and 1849 ten national exhibitions were held, each one increasing in size and scope from its predecessor, establishing a firm notion of continuum. The importance of these for Government at the time was evident; they were no mere trade fairs or festive celebrations, they were outward manifestations of a nation attempting to flex economic, national, military and cultural muscles.

The exhibitions of 1801 and 1802 were held in the Louvre courtyard and attracted 220 and 540 manufacturing firms and craft workshops respectively as exhibitors. 1802 also saw the founding of the Société d’Encouragement, largely under the guidance of Chaptal, Neufchâteau’s successor.<sup>4</sup> The Société established a jury for the assessment of exhibits and awarded medals as prizes at events after 1802. The exhibition of 1806 moved over to the Esplanade des Invalides and lasted twenty-four days with a total of 1, 422 exhibitors. Apparently Napoleon himself fixed the date of this show in February, so that it could function as a celebration of the Peace of Presbourg in December 1805.<sup>5</sup> The exhibitions of 1819, 1823 and 1827 were staged inside the Louvre and moved from thirty-five, to fifty, to sixty-two days in length over the three events. The 1827 display had 1, 695 exhibitors. In 1834 buildings off the Place de la Concorde were used for the first (and only) time, before the principle of erecting temporary structures was finally returned to. In 1839, 1844 and 1849 temporary buildings were constructed on the Champs Elysées and the timescale for exhibitions was expanded from two months for the first two to six for the last one. The latter was to be the commonly accepted length of international exhibitions in the future. The 1849 event was also closer to the grand size of these; 4,532 exhibitors were present at the Champs Elysées,<sup>6</sup> arousing a great deal of foreign interest even though the enterprise was strictly national in scope. The Parisian successes encouraged other French cities to stage their own events, the most impressive of which were held in Nantes (1827), Lille (1835), Bordeaux (1835 and 1845), Toulouse (1836) and Dijon (1836).<sup>7</sup> National exhibitions had become a recognised and regular feature of the cultural calendar, participation in them being, by 1849, a most desirable thing, causing other European nations to envy the French initiative. The somewhat eccentric ploy by the Marquis d’Avèze in 1797 had had consequences that no-one could have forseen, least of all the unenthusiastic manufacturers who were initially cajoled into participation.

By 1839 the French national exhibitions had acquired an atmosphere of cultural pageantry exceeded only by the international exhibitions they were the forerunners of. It would be a mistake however to see these as the only precedents. From a remarkably early date in fact, exhibitions of art and industry of some size had been held in England, albeit in a far more modest way. These were organized by an association founded by William Shipley in 1754 called ‘The Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce’. The association was more commonly known as the ‘Society of Arts’, and after 1847 as the ‘Royal Society of Arts’.<sup>8</sup> Shipley was a drawing-master working in Northampton at the time he had the idea of forming the Society, publishing a pamphlet in 1753 suggesting ‘proposals for raising by subscription a fund to be distributed in premiums for the promoting of improvements in the liberal arts and sciences, manufactures, etc.’<sup>9</sup> A meeting was held in 1754 at a coffee house in Covent Garden at which the Society was founded and Lords Folkstone and Romney named as its first and second presidents. It was the first in England of its type, the only other associations in existence which could be seen as even vaguely similar were the Royal Society, wholly concentrated upon science or ‘natural philosophy’, and the Society of Antiquaries. It soon attracted a wide spectrum of members, including noted artists, architects, business entrepreneurs and enlightened aristocrats. Shipley’s aim was to give rewards to worthwhile ventures in the liberal arts where they could be shown to have beneficial effects upon commerce and industry. For example, one of the first awards was offered for the discovery of cobalt and the growth of madder. These were dyes vital to the textile industry, still in its preindustrial days, and thus proved of immediate practical use. Later a collection was built of mechanical devices, including some of the most important inventions in the early industrial revolution. Stansfield’s saw-mill, Kay’s Flying shuttle and Hargreaves Jenny were all in the Society’s holdings. Design for industry was also a central concern, Shipley determining ‘to bestow premiums on a certain number of boys or girls under the age of sixteen who shall produce the best piece of drawing . . . it being the opinion of all present that the Art of Drawing is absolutely necessary in many employments, trades and manufactures.’<sup>10</sup> In 1760, the Society expanded its own brief and decided to make a display of the arts, crafts and inventions it considered worthy. Kenneth Luckhurst has rightly labelled this the ‘first fully organised public exhibition of art in this country.’<sup>11</sup>

The Society of Arts exhibitions were small and unambitious compared with the later French ones, but they had the intellectual advantage of being borne not out of economic desperation but out of curious dilettantism. Paintings, sculptures, architectural models, pumps, ploughshares and weaving looms were displayed together under the communal heading of ‘inventions’, for the edification of the membership and the enlightenment of farmers, manufacturers and businessmen. Experimentation was encouraged, as was the ideal of making the various branches of intellectual endeavour work in harmony. Founded as it was before the age of specialisation and the division of labour, the Society was not afflicted with the compartmentalization which was to undermine the effectiveness of later institutions. Indeed, the diversity of its exhibiting policy was one of the best features it bestowed on the international exhibitions it heralded. At the core of it of course was a dour English insistence on making all things work toward a useful end, i.e. art was to enhance industry and hence improve trade, yet even so the Society has to be seen as one of the more positive institutions of the English Enlightenment. As the eighteenth century drew to a close, its exhibitions became popular events amongst the middle classes, and kept art as an idea constantly in focus as an important ingredient in civilized life. In 1769, the Royal Academy was founded, largely through the efforts of the Society of Arts.

Into Victoria’s reign the scope of English exhibitions was widened by the Mechanics Institutes. Inspired by the example of the Royal Society but concerned mainly with the leisure and education of the working classes, the Mechanics Institutes began to stage large displays of art and industry after 1837. The first was held in that year in Manchester, setting the pace for what was to be essentially a northern English phenomenon. The Manchester Guardian publicised it, describing its contents as ‘Models of Machinery, Philosophical Instruments, Works in Fine and Useful Arts, Objects in Natural History and Specimens of British Manufacturers, etc., etc.’<sup>12</sup> It was an enormous success and was followed in the immediately succeeding years by literally dozens of similar ventures, held usually on the premises of the Mechanics Institutes themselves. Sunderland, Newcastle, Salford, Leeds, Sheffield, Stoke, Derby, Birmingham, Preston, Macclesfield, Wigan, Halifax, Huddersfield, Nottingham, Wakefield, Stockport, Stroud, Leicester, Liverpool, Bradford, Ripon and Oldham were among the many towns and cities which staged events, often erecting extra facilities to house them.<sup>13</sup> The flavour of all Mechanics Institutes exhibitions was philanthropic rather than economic, the aim being principally to stimulate working class consciousness and to generally advance industrial culture. The obvious links to Trade Unionism tended to politicise the events, but to no extensive degree, as this almost certainly would have led to conflict with central government. The achievements of these exhibitions taken as a whole were to render the urban-industrial environment less despicable in the eyes of the educated classes, and to provoke debate on the nature of working class culture. There can be no doubt that the social and moral philosophy they presented had an effect on the coming generation of international events. Whilst the latter were ultimately to be of dubious benefit to the working classes, they did not ignore them in the way most earlier cultural manifestations had done.

Between the two of them, the French and British national exhibitions showed an impressively complete range of produce from all areas of their respective cultures, housing the exhibits in increasingly lavish surroundings. Up to 1849 however, there was little in the way of a commonly understood rationale as to what an exhibition in itself should constitute, a vision of what the exhibition as a medium should hold within its scope. The Society of Arts exhibitions in particular tended to be ‘catch-all’ in principle, in that the parameters were only set by what was of economic, scientific, artistic, and curiosity value at the time the show was arranged. The idiosyncracy of the national exhibitions in both countries, excepting the last French one in 1849, prevented them from having a widespread or lasting effect. Left at that point of development the tradition of arts and industries exhibitions would hardly have been a memorable one. Several stages of conceptual and physical growth had to take place before the events could exercise a genuine cultural insertiveness, the critical one being the move to internationality.

There were a number of exhibitions similar to the French and British ones in other European countries from the turn of the century, the French model being the one generally followed. The most important were in Munich (1818), Ghent (1820), Stockholm (1823), Tournai (1824), Haarlem (1825), Dublin (1826), Madrid (1827), New York (1828), Moscow (1829), St.Petersburg (1829) and Brussels (1830).<sup>14</sup> This latter show included Netherlandish countries, and so could make claims to being international in character, as could the most dramatic and impressive of those held outside of France, the Berlin ‘All German Exhibition’ of 1844. The most interesting aspect of the ‘All German’ though was not the cooperation of independent German States, but the tacit recognition that an exhibition could exert influence in an international political arena as well as in a local cultural and economic one. Such an exhibition clearly had an eye on the foreign visitor and was intended as a showcase for German national identity. Similarly, the French national exhibition which followed it five years later took care to cater for the foreigner, concentrating on the image of France as a European power, fully in the knowledge that the rest of Europe was looking on. But so far, no exhibition had risked opening an event to the produce of a wholly separate foreign power for the purpose of generating a discourse between nations. This was partly due to the fear most European nations still had of economic competition, a fear exacerbated by the voracious capacity of English industries to flood a market with cheap mass-produced goods.

Even though free trade as an economic ideal was increasingly popular by the mid-century, few wished to see their home industries destroyed by foreign produce. The French, after all, had begun having exhibitions in the first place in order to stimulate production and consumption at home. The English for their part had not, up to 1847 (when the Society of Arts acquired its Royal Charter) seen the need for exhibitions to become international. At that point in time the emphasis in their events had not been directly on selling but on technological advance, it being widely considered that in this area the English had little to learn from anyone else, industrially speaking at least, and so would not benefit from foreign participation. By 1850 however, when the largest exhibition ever held in Britain was going through its initial planning phase, it was decided, for the first time anywhere, to invite all nations of the world to participate. The raison d’être of English exhibitions had thus gone through an abrupt change. Whilst in London English industry was still considered to lead the world, it was also recognised that competition was growing and that the only way to defeat it was to out-sell it. To invite all nations of the world to take part in ‘the friendly competition’ of an international exhibtion was to create a potential for market expansion abroad. One of the main motives behind the international character of the Great Exhibition of 1851 therefore was economic; Britain wanted more market, and was confident when the foreigner came he would buy British goods.

In retrospect it seems logical that the nation with the most advanced industry and with a free trade policy would be the first to open its doors to foreign exhibitors to inaugurate the tradition of international exhibitions. Interestingly enough however, the idea of making exhibitions international evolved not in Britain but in France, some time before 1851. French government, despite its usual inclination toward protectionism, genuinely felt its manufacturers might benefit from seeing foreign produce up close. As early as 1834, a Monsieur Boucher de Perthes, President of the Societé Royale d’Emulation, recommended the French exhibitons become international:

Let us not quarrel with competition. That alone will enlighten us, and point out the path of our industry. It is competition that makes the good workman, because it is competition that indicates to each one his proper task. Exhibitions, which have so beneficial an influence upon industry are but an embodiment of this rivalry. It is here that the producer brings the fruit of his labour side by side with that of his neighbour – takes the measure of his efforts, estimates the merits of his productions . . . exhibitions are better than prohibitions, which tend to separate men and isolate them. Why then are exhibitions still restrained within narrow limits? Why should we be afraid to open our halls to manufacturers whom we call foreign; to the Belgians, to the English, to the Swiss, to the

Germans? How noble would be a European exhibition, and what a mine of instruction it would be for all. Do you imagine that the country in which it should take place would be the loser by it? . . . No gentlemen, France would not suffer any more than the foreigner; exhibitions are always beneficial, and beneficial to all.’<sup>15</sup>

Boucher de Perthe’s idea was simple enough. No-one would really lose from the presence of foreign exhibitors at exhibitions, and the French stood to gain from the experience in various ways. He hints also that beyond immediate material needs, more wholesome and brotherly aspects would emerge. His idea failed to become a reality for several reasons. French manufacturers did not believe him, and through the offices of local councils objected violently. Also, in the absence of any indication from the French government that tarifs on imported goods would be reduced, foreign producers were less than enthusiastic about the idea. Competition could hardly be fair, it was reasoned, when the opposition was heavily handicapped. For a second time, in 1849, the French government, through the offices of the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce, attempted to gain support for the principle of an international exhibition. The issue was raised in a circular sent out to manufacturers and townhalls:

At a time when my colleagues in office and myself are busily engaged in doing all we can to give the exhibition, which opens on June 1st. next, a character of public utility, it has occurred to me that it would be interesting to the country in general to be made acquainted with the degree of advancement towards perfection attained by our neighbours in those manufactures in which we so often come into competition with in foreign markets . . . you will therefore, give your opinion on the abstract principle of exhibiting the productions of other countries; and to enumerate to me officially the articles you consider would be the most conducive to our interests when displayed in the ensuing exhibition.’<sup>16</sup>

The circular was replied to aggressively by interested parties all over France still unconvinced of the free trade principle behind internationalism. The idea was dropped and the 1849 exhibition remained national. It was left to Englishman Henry Cole, main organiser of the Great Exhibition of 1851 in London, to take up the unrealised French idea and advance exhibitions into the international arena. Apparently the idea was given to him in Paris whilst he was visiting the 1849 exhibition. He decided to put it to the President of the Royal Society of Arts, Prince Albert, on his return to England. He recorded his discussion with the Prince:

I asked the Prince if he had considered if the exhibition should be a national or an international exhibition. The French had discussed if their own exhibition should be international, and preferred that it be national only. The Prince reflected for a minute, and then said, ‘It must embrace foreign productions’, to use his words, and added emphatically, ‘International certainly. ‘<sup>17</sup>

Thus, the tentative attempts of French government to enlighen their public by bringing in foreign nations was seized upon by the English for their most ambitious scheme to date. Through the participation of the most industrially advanced nations of the world and their empires, the ‘Great Exhibition of the Industry of all Nations’ became the largest exhibition so far held anywhere, with a scope in terms of produce which rendered all previous exhibitions redundant. Of the nations invited to take part through the diplomatic channels, thirty-four accepted. These were Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bremen, Chile, China, Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany (the States of the Zollervein), Greece, Hamburg, Hanover, Holland, Lubeck, Mexico, Mecklenburg-Strelitz, New Granada, Oldenburg, Persia, Peru, Portugal, Rome, Russia, Sardinia, Schleswig-Holstein, Society Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunis, Turkey, Tuscany and the United States of America. Future events would add to this number, but on average between twenty and thirty nations normally participated in first class events. If the various empires are added into the statistics – for Britain alone this would mean around thirty nations – the global scope of the events is apparent.<sup>18</sup> The Great International Exhibition as a concept had arrived; it was quickly to be taken up by nations all over the world.

The sheer size of the Great Exhibition of 1851 was its most impressive feature. A single vast building covering almost nineteen acres, and enclosing thirty-three million cubic feet, was erected to house most of the exhibition, which was sited centrally in London at Hyde Park.<sup>19</sup> The Crystal Palace, as it was christened, became a symbol which earned comment and emulation around the world; in itself it was responsible for attracting a large proportion of the six and a half million visitors. Many of the exhibits inside it were self-consciously showy, providing a source for spectacular entertainment for the crowds and beginning a trend whereby the international exhibition would aim to present produce in the most overblown proportions possible. The highest, biggest, newest and costliest of artefacts and structures became the commonplaces of all events, often in vulgar exercises tantamount to criminal waste. The Great Exhibition also created the four exhibiting categories later to become standard, Manufactures, Machinery, Raw Materials and Fine Arts, and provided the model for space allocation. Half the floor area was given over to Britain and her empire and half to participating countries and empires, Britain occupying the western side of the building and foreign exhibitors the east. The mix of exhibits was extraordinary, ranging from classical sculpture to giant lumps of coal, from a Nubian Court to wrought iron fire-places, from steam engines to Indian miniatures, from rubber plants to stained-glass windows. The artefacts in this lavishly orchestrated jamboree had only one thing in common, the awesome power of the technologies that had taken them there. Everything was explicable directly or indirectly in terms of technology; the prefabricated building housing the exhibition, the steam engines, the manufactured products, the colossal objects transported to the site by machinery, the imperial produce won with commercial and military technology. The Great Exhibition, like virtually all its successors around the world, fetishised the machine, choosing exclusively to see in it a glorious past and the chance of a blemishless future.

The only inadequate areas of the Great Exhibition were the fine art sections. These were concentrated mainly into exotic ‘courts’, with major emphases on architectural fittings, decorative art and sculpture.<sup>20</sup> Elsewhere in the building, in keeping with the general rule, the visual arts had to demonstrate an element of scientific, technological or industrial advance to gain admittance. There were no official painting areas; the sections devoted to various print media were there for their technical innovation. Architectural exhibits were few and mainly associated with developments in building strategies and materials. Sculpture was adequately presented, but it was seen as a medium for harmonising the building through the decoration of courts and vistas, rather than as a self contained category. Thus the vital rôle the fine arts were to play in most future exhibitions did not emerge in 1851, many of the earlier national exhibitions having had far more complete representations in this area. The organizers of the Great Industrial Exhibition in Dublin in 1853 recognised this inadequacy and went some way toward correcting the imbalance. Whilst accepting the primacy of the industrial or ‘utilitarian’ arts, a case was made for including the fine arts;

In truth it is difficult, when once we have emerged from the rudest and most elementary stage of society, to deny that the fine arts themselves are utilitarian. The desires of the eye for that which is beautiful in form and colour, if not essential to mere existence, assuredly are so to the enjoyment of life; and hence sculpture and painting, in the abstract, may, it is presumed, be fitly exhibited without transgressing the strict limits which should be assigned to an Industrial Exhibition . . . under this conviction the committee have admitted works which are not utilitarian, in the ordinary sense of the word.’<sup>21</sup>

It was left to the French however to determine a clear and central rôle for the fine arts, when their first international exhibition was arranged for 1855. In many ways the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1855 can be seen as a direct reply to the Great Exhibition, various areas seemingly being developed in response to successes and failures of the 1851 event. Particularly clear in retrospect was the French determination to confirm the notion of Paris as the pre-eminent artistic centre, this being achieved principally through the presentation of a vast art section at the Exposition. The event was also intended in a wider sense to stamp France as the supremely artistic nation, a label believed to have far more than merely cultural significance. Concern for the fine arts at the Exposition was such that a decree was sent out signed by Napoleon the Third himself to guarantee their standing amongst other exhibits,

We have decided and do thereby decree as follows, Article one: An universal exhibition of the fine arts will be held at Paris at the same time as the universal exhibition of industry. The place at which this exhibition will be held will be designated hereafter. Article two: The annual exhibition of the fine arts of 1854 is postponed to 1855, and will be united with the universal exhibition. Article three: Our minister of state is charged with the execution of the present decree, given at the Palace of Saint Cloud, this 22nd. June 1853.’<sup>22</sup>

An accompanying letter sent to all potential exhibitors in all countries further explained the rôle Napoleon and his government had given the fine arts in the French national profile:

Considering that the improvement of manufactures is closely connected with that of fine arts; that however, all the exhibitions of industrial products which have been hitherto held, have admitted the works of artists in only very insufficient proportion; that it belongs to France, whose manufactures owe so much to the Fine Arts, to assign to them in the coming Universal Exhibition, the place which they merit.’<sup>23</sup>

The desire to see the fine arts as part of the French ethos led to a massive inclusion of it not only in 1855, but in all subsequent Paris Expositions Universelles. More than this, it guaranteed the fine arts would enjoy a heavy inclusion in all major international exhibitions around the world after 1855. The French had added the final ingredient to the newly established tradition.

Within months of the closing of the Great Exhibition other nations began planning their own along similar lines. In 1853 the aforementioned Great International Exhibition took place in Dublin and one was held in New York in the same year. Both followed the lines of the Great Exhibition closely, especially with regard to the building, Crystal Palaces being erected in like fashion and in consultation with the original architect, Joseph Paxton.<sup>24</sup> By the time the Exposition Universelle opened in Paris in 1855, a spirit of rivalry had inevitably surfaced, the competition to have the most impressive event becoming the critical factor. Into the 1880’s an atmosphere of meglomania came to surround the exhibitions, as nations struggled to better immediately preceding foreign shows. Initially a British-French story, the rivalry grew to its most reckless pitch between France and America, where extraordinary and spectacular excesses were perpetrated in the name of art, science and education. The Great Exhibition set the first standard by which organizers measured themselves, providing the statistics that had to be equalled or surpassed if an event was to function as an international centre-piece; but by 1867 it was to Paris all looked in order to gauge their success. From then until the eve of the Second World War, France stayed in the ascendent. American Fairs were often more monumental than any European equivalents, but it was Paris which bestowed the elements of flamboyance and lavishness on the tradition, dispensing with practicality and reserve in an attempt to sum up and transform the world. It was the French who broke with the notion of a single huge exposition building in favour of a site with numerous pavilions, including those erected by foreign participants. This, predictably enough, triggered a secondary tier of rivalry; not only did it become necessary to have vast exhibitions of ones own but one had to build the grandest pavilions on foreign sites. Between 1855 and 1914 an event involving more than twenty nations was held somewhere in the world on an average of every two years. After 1914 exhibitions were fewer but vaster than their predecessors. At the grand climax of the tradition, the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1937 erected buildings with a total interior space of two hundred and fifty acres, whilst the New York World’s Fair two years later sprawled over a 1,200 acre site.

By that time an international agreement had been signed to try and regulate and control these extraordinary events. Meeting in Paris in 1928, delegates from ninety-two nations signed a ‘Convention Relating to International Exhibitions’ designed to prevent anyone abusing the genre to political or commercial ends. Evidence existed to suggest some nations had deliberately boycotted exhibitions in the hope of spoiling them, or, still worse, that some had spontaneously organized an event to detract from another elsewhere. The huge cost of exhibitions could prove ruinous if competing nations deliberately detracted from attendances and publicity. The Convention first of all took it upon itself to define what was meant by an international exhibition, then it drew up a forty point directive stipulating their frequency and form:

The expression ‘official or officially recognised international exhibitions’ shall be deemed to include every display . . . to which foreign countries are invited through the diplomatic channel, which is not generally held periodically, of which the principal object is to demonstrate the progress of different countries in one or several branches of production, and in which, as regards admission, no distinction in principle is made between buyers and visitors . . . The duration of any international shall not exceed six months.’<sup>25</sup>

Exhibitions of three weeks or less were not included in the Convention, or specialist exhibitions of fine art or science. If an exhibition required foreign participants to build pavilions, then the host country was not permitted to hold such an event more than once every fifteen years; if foreign participants did not have to provide their own building, the host nation could stage an event once a decade. There was to be no exhibition anywhere with separate national pavilions more than once every six years; there was to be no exhibition without separate national pavilions more than once every two years. It was hoped these points would spread exhibitions evenly through the decennial calendar and prevent them from deteriorating into arenas for commercial or political propaganda. It was inevitable that the scale of the events would lead to attempts to harness them such as this, but sadly for the organizers of the Convention their efforts failed. Within a decade numerous nations flouted the agreement, as it was not binding by international law. Ultimately it was not the Convention that halted the continuing growth of international exhibitions but the Second World War.

At the same time the international exhibitions as physical phenomena came to maturity, a conceptual apparatus for the justification and explanation of them also appeared. A plethora of discussion congealed into a cohesive discourse concerning the merits of exhibitions and their benefits to humankind, this having a considerable effect on other disciplines in succeeding decades. Before vast sums could be lifted from public funds and charities for the construction of these epic cultural edifices, convincing criteria for their existence had to be provided. Whatever the real motives behind any particular show – some of these have already been described – the professed reasons had to be carefully constructed and profoundly ideal. Each event tended to have a celebratory circumstance peculiar to itself sanctioning its lavishness, followed by a secondary tier of more general motives. The Philadelphia Centennial (1876) celebrated a century of American independence, the 1889 Paris Universelle marked the centenary of the Revolution, the Chicago Columbian (1893) commemorated the landing of Columbus in the New World, the 1900 Paris show heralded the new century, the St Louis Fair (1904) celebrated the Louisiana Purchase, the Franco-British (London 1908) the Entente Cordiale and so on. Beyond these laudable excuses, standard moral justifications were made use of between 1851 and 1940 which remained constants through the period despite marked shifts in the societies they catered for. The most prominent perennials were: Peace amongst nations, Education (especially of the masses), Trade, and Progress.

Queen Victoria set the pattern for the first of these in her opening speech at the Crystal Palace: ‘It is my anxious desire to promote among nations the cultivation of all those arts which are fostered by peace, and which in their turn contribute to maintain the peace of the world.’<sup>26</sup> ‘Helix’, a critic writing on the prospective Great Exhibition in 1850, listed what he considered its aims to be. Despite a certain eccentricity, they are not untypical:

The grand objects of the Exhibition, as we regard them, may thus be summed up: 1. To promote brotherhood amongst mankind. 2. To make all cognisant of what we can do for others. 3. To diminish human drudgery by mechanism. 4. To promote art of the higher kind. 5. To show how clothing may best be made by machines without handicraftry. 6. New preparations for human food.’<sup>27</sup>

As with most others, peaceful concerns are at the top of his list. Brotherly love and understanding between nations was the single most laboured aspect of exhibition diatribe, the sentiment usually being ridiculed by displays of military technology, imperial conquest and abject racism on the sites themselves. Elsewhere in his article Helix revealed an extraordinary range of values, constructing for example in the same passage a defence of military conquest and a moral case for vegetarianism. His vision of the world in 1850 and the rôle of the Great Exhibition in it embodied values that in a later age would seem contradictory, not least his joint love of imperialism and universal peace. The London Exhibition of 1862 continued the theme of love amongst the peoples of the world, often using it to drag other issues into the public arena. Particularly interesting in this light are some of the odes and volumes of poetry produced specially for the exhibition. One, published by Hatchard and Company, managed as part of its plea for peace to praise the industrial age, attack socialism and make symbolic references to the army and empire, all in the space of eleven short lines:

Hissing engines – puffing, fuming —   
Palm-like from the hoarding risen   
All at once a Palace looming . . .   
More dream’d of universal love,   
And vow’d the Golden Age was come,   
Ignoring eagles for the dove,   
Prefering bagpipes to the drum.   
No ‘Red Republic’ ruled the town,   
No gaunt-eyed famine thinned our ranks,   
No plague-stroke cut the people down,   
Round father Thames’ crowded banks.<sup>28</sup>

Rhetoric on the theme of peace was much the same in other countries, though French and American angles on brotherly love usually stressed the freedom republicanism afforded and the opportunities all men had in the post-revolutionary world. One sentiment however was an apolitical constant, that whenever different peoples came together to show off the achievements of their respective cultures, this would result in a reduction of differences and the growth of fellowship. Sadly, instances when such understanding could be witnessed were extremely sparse in relation to the numerous occasions when exhibitions openly generated bitterness and hatred. The very raison d’etre of many exhibitions was envy, not love of other nations, or a manic desire to outdo them. The Exposition Universelle of 1900 was enflamed and expanded by the thought that the hated Germans might try to hold an exhibition in the same year, whilst inter-State rivalry in America provoked shockingly violent debates across the American continent. The tendency of white peoples to consciously denigrate other races likewise made fellowship an unlikely resultant of the events. For many exhibitors and politicians, the point of the international aspect was to emphasize national and racial difference, not similarity.

Peace between nations had another undercurrent during the nineteenth century, especially for the British; it helped maintain the status quo. A peaceful world in 1851 meant one thing alone to the British, that the empire was safe. In this one regard at least, the plea for peace was sincerely felt and remained so as long as imperial-economic interests were observed Less cynically, exhibitions up to 1914 were one of the favourite meeting places of religious organizations around the world, conventions being held where the idea of peace meant more than political rhetoric or economic advantage. Often these conventions would be on a huge scale, for example the two held at the Chicago Columbian Exhibition of 1893, the ‘Congress of World Religions’ and the ‘World’s Congress of Representative Women’, which both boasted thousands of delegates.<sup>29</sup> Within the ideological limits of the time, religious discourse at international exhibitions did attempt to resolve differences among peoples and foster a more wholesome rapport. Alongside the handful of idealists involved on central committees, the religious lobby represented a genuine plea for peace amongst men, that may have had some small positive effect. On the whole however, it is difficult to see the ‘peace-mongering’ of exhibition speech-makers as anything other than empty banter.

Unlike Peace, Education was more than a pleasant theme for shrewd politicians. Education was the fetish of exhibitions, especially the kind which sought to edify the masses. Beginning in embryonic form before 1851 as a feature of both the Society of Arts displays in London and the exhibitions organized by the Mechanics Institutes in the north of England, the educational principle at work was simple enough: if you exposed ideas to an ignorant audience in a language they could understand, you would have influence over them. These early exhibitions had various aims; they sought to improve the taste of the middle classes, to inform manufacturers about mechanical improvements and to morally educate the working classes. The French national exhibitions were also concerned with technical and aesthetic education, although here it was far from a rigorously considered element. By 1851 in Britain though, the educational resolve had firmly established itself, the curious visitor to the Great Exhibition being able to expect lessons in geography, physics, chemistry and art in the form of produce arranged and labelled with the instruction aspect in mind. Commentators in 1851 expressed particular surprise at the seriousness with which the artisan classes took the educational intention of the exhibition: ‘The fact is, the Great Exhibition is to them more of a school than a show . . . what was a matter of tedium, and became ultimately a mere lounge for gentlefolks, is used as a place of instruction by the people’.<sup>30</sup> The 1862 exhibition in London continued the policy of educational orchestration of display areas, often with a religious theme. One writer noted that the exhibits ’..show, from about the commencement of the second half of the nineteenth century, the progress civilization is making over the globe; and every educational phase in which this appears – religious, social and mental – declares the dependence of the creature upon the creator.’<sup>31</sup> At the 1874 exhibition at South Kensington, education was the professed rationale behind the whole event. The Official Guide made this clear by informing the visitor that ‘It must always be remembered that the main object of this series of exhibitions is not the bringing together of great masses of works, and the attraction of holiday-making crowds, but the instruction of the public in art, science and manufacture, by collections of selected specimens.’<sup>32</sup> Such motives remained close to organizer’s hearts through to the outbreak of the First World War, although by then entertainment facilities were given far greater consideration than those aimed specifically at education. The White City Exhibitions (London 1908–14) attempted to fuse the two elements, in order to give popular interest to one and respectability to the other. The Duke of Argyll, honorary president of the Imperial International (held on the site in 1909) expressed this duality in his opening speech, stressing ‘amusement without excess and knowledge without fatigue’ as the main aims of the exhibition.<sup>33</sup> This was not the stalwart voice of Victorian paternal morality but of the Edwardian profit-margin. The British had discovered education did not pay, but that entertainment did.

Having had an ambivalent attitude toward education at the national exhibitions, the French steadily developed it at the first four Expositions Universelles, to the point where the last of these was seen by many as a museum of global explanation. Frederic Le Play, the brilliant organizer of the 1867 show was more responsible than anyone else for this aspect, his influence remaining through to 1889. Le Play belonged to a small group of committed Saint-Simonians which included fellow organizers Michel Chevalier and Jules Simon, making his (and hence the exhibition’s) view of world history at once social and paternal. More than anything else the 1867 Exposition was intellectually rooted in communal ideas of family and work, the building itself being constructed so that these themes, especially work, would unfold as the visitor walked around. It was he and his confreres who developed the notion of the Encyclopaedia in relation to exhibitions in an attempt to present a vision of total knowledge. The crowds were to be educated not by selective instruction but by the presentation of every aspect of existence in one spectacular edifice. Individual sections of the Exposition revealed this intention. For example, advance information to potential exhibitors in the ‘History of Labour’ display outlined its aims as follows: ‘This exhibition will be held in a special gallery situated between the fine art gallery and the Central Garden. Works produced in different countries, from the most remote ages to the close of the eighteenth century will be received, including objects of rudimentary character made before the discovery of metals.’<sup>34</sup> The attempt to reveal work in its every aspect, in every nation, throughout time, provided the model for various ‘total displays’ in following expositions, in which a complete view of a topic would be presented. The most impressive of these was ‘The History of Human Habitation’ at the 1889 Exposition, conceived of and designed by Charles Garnier, architect of the Paris Opera. The exhibit was in the form of a street of thirty-nine houses, stretching from the Champ de Mars to the Trocadéro, each one representing a culture and a stage in world housing from prehistoric times to the present. The first houses were the Troglodyes, the Age of the Reindeer and the Irish Elk, the Stone Age, Polished Stone, Lake Dwellers, Bronze Age, and Iron Age. From these there unfolded an impressive list of world cultures, including Egypt, Assyria, Phoenician, Hebrew, Pelagian, Etruscan, Hindu, Persian, Germanic Races, Gauls, Greek, Roman Italian, Huns, Gallo-Roman, Scandinavia, Charlemagne, Mediaeval, Renaissance, Byzantine, Slav, Russian, Arab, Turkish, Sweden, Japan, China, Lapland, Eskimo, African Savage, Redskins and Aztec. . The houses were slightly smaller than full size, but were constructed in authentic materials and meticulously detailed inside and out. Le Play had thus established an attitude to education at French exhibitions which had outlasted him, an attitude having as its theoretical mainstay a daunting moral mission, to teach everything to everybody: ‘The very poorest student in the poorest school, the most incapable, the most ignorant, the least gifted, is, after all a man and since he is a man, he has the capacity to recognise the truth, to understand and to live by it.’<sup>36</sup>

Following this extraordinary lead, the organizers of the American World’s Fairs accepted the challenge of total education, and were largely responsible for the development of tableaux display techniques which sought to inform the bystander regardless of the knowledge he took to the exhibition with him. By 1880 exhibitions everywhere would have lengthy explanations on bill-boards accompanying most exhibits, and individuals would be on hand to explain displays to the visitor. By this date also academic conferences were staged as a normal part of exhibition practice, an aspect probably conceived of by Le Play in 1867. At the Chicago Columbian in 1893 the organizers successfully opened the site as a conference venue to academic, business and leisure groups. Into the twentieth century, conferences were among the least noticeable but most influential of elements at exhibitions. The Paris show of 1900 included conferences on fisheries, libraries, publishing, dentistry, education systems, hypnotism, philately, photography, public health, memismatics, ornithology and medicine. The medicine conference was the largest at six thousand delgates.<sup>37</sup>

The educational element at exhibitions can be seen to shift as the mass appeal of the events increased and as education became increasingly prioritised in society. A pattern is discernable whereby exhibition educationalists gradually moved their attention to areas of the population previously considered outside the educational realm. The early national exhibitions in Britain and France (excepting those of the Mechanic’s Institutes) had targeted the middle and upper middle classes as their subjects. This focus was discernable at the Great Exhibition, but already a more disinterested concern for the ‘provision of knowledge’ lower down the class structure had evolved. By 1867, and increasingly so until the end of the century, it was the lower middle and artisan classes who were the desired audience for educational exhibits. By 1900, the ‘masses’ proper were referred to as being the true beneficaries of learning, their intellectual development apparently being vital for the survival of Western civilization. The growth of working class consciousness in society – universal suffrage being the most overt resultant – had clearly fired exhibition organizers into action on the education front, for both good and bad reasons. After the First World War youth increasingly became the focus of educational displays and pavilions, especially in America, with adult education sliding as a priority. Young people were to be the citizens of tomorrow it was reasoned, and so should be as informed as possible today. Looking at the period as a whole it can be asserted that educationalists, consciously or otherwise, had continually shifted their emphases to those groups who had most recently come into the reckoning as socio-political forces.

The projection of education as a rationale for exhibitions was therefore not empty gesture, as considerable time and expense was used up on it. Unlike the theme of peace, education was a cause which could be forwarded without harm to the established status quo, in the shortterm at least. However, it also had a darker side that proved to be of use to various power groups within society. This was in its ability to misinform. Misinformation presented as education is one aspect of propaganda, a subject which will be dealt with in various later chapters; suffice it to say here that the honest efforts of educational idealists were frequently negated by the vulgar propaganda of government.

More than Peace or Education, the theme of Trade was at the theoretical core of exhibitions, perhaps because it was at the heart of European and American society. Trade had created Western power; the exhibitions were no more than an expression of that power. For the purposes of exhibitions, the idea of trade was transformed from the relatively simple exchange of goods for profit, to a concept having metaphysical dimensions. It was recognised by the literature surrounding the Great Exhibition, and at subsequent events, that all kinds of exhibiting had a rationale in trade, in sale by display. More than this, the literature explained the hegemony of the Europeans and their descendents in terms of their ability to control and manipulate trading systems. On its more mystical side, trade could unite peoples, solve the ills of the world and generate happiness. An eulogy on the Great Exhibition explained this:

The band of commerce was designed,

To associate all the branches of mankind;

And, if a boundless plenty be the robe,

Trade is the golden girdle of the globe.<sup>38</sup>

Trade, it was readily acknowledged, was the capitalist’s tool, his method of creating and controlling markets; for many writers on the Great Exhibition it was also a kind of ‘Everyman’s reply’ to the new political force opposing capital, socialism. ‘Helix’, in his introduction to the Great Exhibition, tied trade in with religion, imperialism and capitalism in order to explain the ‘naturalness’ of world order in 1851. The earth, he tells us, has areas of different climate, geography and peoples through divine inspiration,

. . . for the purpose of exchanging their various productions; thence grew up commerce, i.e. mutual buying and selling, with competition or mutual selfseeking following in its train, and much eschewed by surface-seeking socialists, whose vision cannot penetrate to the beyond, and who therefore entertain a decided conviction that buying and selling may be abolished over the whole world simultaneously, at any fine morning at exactly a quarter hour before six . . . As the wind carries winged seeds over the earth, so commerce carries arts, and civilization, and humanity as a consequence.’<sup>39</sup>

For Helix, there was nothing wrong in seeing the Great Exhibition as a shop, nor apparently in belonging to a nation of shop-keepers, for it was they who ultimately civilized the world. For him, the meaning of the Great Exhibition was clear: ‘Magnificent was the conception of this gathering together of the commercial travellers of the universal world, side by side with their employers and customers, and with a showroom for their goods that ought to be such as the world has never before beheld.’<sup>40</sup> For the Victorian mind the real beauty of trade as a source both of civilization in a wide sense and the exhibitions in an immediate one, was that it allowed the mystical and exotic to freely mingle with the practical and material. Trade was timeless, a uniting force meandering through all the lands of the earth; it also paid handsomely in hard cash if conducted shrewdly. Additionally, it was a convenient way of justifying or even disguising imperial exploitation, ‘trading’ being a far less unpleasant terminology than ‘conquering’ or ‘controlling’.

Of the themes discussed so far, Education and Trade could be seen to be present physically on exhibition sites, whereas Peace was little more than a rhetorical exercise. The final theme to be examined in this chapter, Progress, fell strangely between the rhetorical and the actual. The word itself appeared in more exhibition mottos and subtitles than any other in the century following the Great Exhibition. For most organizers, the point of an exhibition was to indicate civilization was advancing in some known direction. Especially for the host nation, the exhibition would invariably be a celebration of the past as a preparation for a better future. Therein lay the interest for government, for industry and the arts, that ‘things will get better’. There was a positivist dialectic present in the rationale of every exhibition – some British ones excepted – which dictated the certain glory of the future. Progress was the darling of the political left and right through the period; for Marxists and capitalists alike, the world had to be seen as being in some kind of advancing flux, with a stable – and inevitable – future of plenty on the horizon. It was in everyone’s interest therefore to keep the world moving, or at least appear to be moving, away from the grim actuality of contemporary life. The problem of course, was that few of the power groups could agree on the direction Utopia lay in, or on who should run it once the world had arrived there.

The most frequently suggested vehicle for achieving the goal of progress was technology. Technology would transform the world, bring plenty, peace, unity, all in the forseeable future. Such beliefs were stated in twentieth century exhibitions more often than their earlier counterparts, but from the Great Exhibition onwards the machine was consistently presented as the Messiah which would lead the human race to the Promised Land. Courtesy of new technology, the idea of progress determined the stylistic outlook of many exhibitions after the First World War, as designers attempted to show their audience how the world would be at some vaguely determined point in the future. The Chicago ‘Century of Progress’ exhibition of 1933 was typical in its summing up of technologies to date and in its dramatic suggestions for the future. The New York’s World Fair of 1939 appeared as a veritable ‘Futuropolis’, its insistence on the benefits of technical progress were so intense, whilst the more elite 1937 Paris Universelle put its faith in the mystical ability of abstract artforms, in conjunction with technology, to solve the world’s ills. Western obsession with the ability of the machine to control and improve the world had deep pyschological roots, reaching back to the very beginning of the industrial revolution. The machine had given the West world power, a certain degree of safety from the natural elements and, importantly, comfort. Life without the machine was inconceivable and so the future had to be invented in terms of it. Progress, when it was associated with technology, could be gauged, a quantifiable quality confirming the steady improvement of existence. Moral, cultural and social progress were likewise assumed to be measurable qualities, in an age when everything of worth was considered ultimately to be material and rational. Universal advance of civilization via the achievement of science was both a canon and an assumption at exhibitions. Thus it was reasoned, the bigger and more technologically determined exhibitions were, the more progress was being made. Few of them suggested the world was not making progress, and none hinted at a possible decline, even though as many of them opened the socio-economic situation certainly indicated this.

International exhibitions grew and matured in a way which in retrospect seems at once tentative but inevitable. The conditions allowing them to come into existence fell haphazardly into place, but once there they grew with startling rapidity. Between the two of them, the Great Exhibition of 1851 and the Exposition Universelle of 1855 established a form that was to go on to unbelievable heights of embellishment. As cultural manifestations, they revealed an expansive West in its most flamboyant and bombastic state; baroque, overblown expressions of societies that felt they ruled the material world absolutely. So far, only the bare bones of these events have been