9 Ibid.

examined, the following chapters will hopefully reveal the nature of the flesh which hung upon them.

## Notes

1 See Nikolaus Pevsner, Academies of Art Past and Present. Da Capo Press, New York 1973. Colbert organised the Salon under the directive of Louis XlV in 1667. It remained spasmodic until 1737 when it was finally stabilised and made into a permanent feature of the court calendar.

2 Quoted from R. Reilly and G. Savage Wedgwood – The Portrait Medallions, London 1973.

3 See J. Wines Quelle Exposition Universelle?, Connaissance des Arts July-August 1983 p.p. 35–43. This often-used quote appears in slightly different form in different texts (see for example Luckhurst, note 6.)

4 See Charles Robin, Histoire Illustrée de l’Exposition Universelle, par Categories d’lndustries avec Notes sur les Exposants, Paris 1955.

5 See Paul Dupays, Vie Prestigieuse des Expositions Historiques. Paris 1939, pub. Didier.

6 Figures taken from Kenneth Luckhurst, The Story of Exhibitions London 1951.

7 See Dupays, note 5.

Sir Henry Truman, The Official History of the Royal Society of Arts, London; see also G. K. Menzies The Story of the Royal Society of Arts. London 1934.

10 Ibid.

11 See note 6.

12 By far the best material on these can be found in Toshio Kusamitsu, Great Exhibitions before 1851’, History Workshop Journal Number 9, Spring 1980. 13 Ibid.

14 There is an amount of dispute as to when the Dublin exhibition took place. 1825, 1826 and 1829 have been forwarded by sources published as early as 1876. What is clear is that exhibitions were held on a triennial basis by the Royal Dublin Society from the mid 1820’s, with the largest occurring in 1850. After this it was decided that the one scheduled for 1853 should be international in scope. A large national exhibition was also held in Cork in 1852. See The Official Catalogue of the Great Industrial Exhibition, Dublin 1853 and A.C.Davies, The First Irish International Exhibition. Irish Economic and Social History, Vol.2 1975, p.p. 46–59. A substantial number of Fairs and Exhibitions were held after 1800, the ones listed here were amongst the most significant. The datings came from Richard D. Mandell, Paris 1900: The Great World’s Fair. Univ. of Toronto Press 1967, and Paul Dupays, see note 5.

15 Taken from The International Exhibition of 1862 Illustrated Catalogue of the Industrial Department. London, 1862, H.M.S.O.

16 Anonymous article Official Catalogue of the Great Exhibition, Edinburgh Review Vol. 94, No. 192 October 1851.

17 C.H. Gibbs-Smith. The Great Exhibition of 1851. London 1981, H.M.S.O.

18 The list was taken from The Great Exhibition 1851 Official Descriptive and Illustrated Catalogue, Part 1 (of 4), London 1851.

19 See Chapter 6.

20 See Chapter 8.

21 The Official Catalogue of the Great Industrial Exhibition, Dublin 1853, Dublin 1853.

22 Reports on the Paris Universal Exhibition, 3 Volumes, presented to both Houses of Parliament, 1856. The decrees are contained in appendices, translated and with notes by Henry Cole.

23 Ibid.

24 George F. Chadwick, The Works of Sir Joseph Paxton, 1803–1865. London 1965, Architectural Press. See also Chapter six.

25 Convention Relating to International Exhibitions, Paris 1928.

26 The Crystal Palace Exhibition, Illustrated Catalogue 1851. The Art Journal Special Issue. Reprinted by Dover Publications, New York 1970.

27 Helix, The Industrial Exhibition of 1851. Westminster and Foreign Quarterly Review, April 1850.

28 The World’s Palace, Old and New: An Ode. London 1862, Hatchard and Company.

29 See Chapter 7.

30 Henry Mayhew, The Shilling People, quoted from Humphrey Jennings (Ed.), Pandæmonium, London 1985, Andre Deutsch.

31 Anonymous, Educational Advantages of the International Exhibition. Sixpenny Magazine August 1862.

32 London International Exhibition 1874. Official Guide (Illustrated) Published by J.M.Johnson and Sons, London 1874.

33 Daily Mail May 15th.

34 Reports on the Paris Universal Exhibition, Volume One, 3 Vols. in total, London 1867.

35 There are countless references to the History of Human Habitation exhibit, the most available primary source is Paris and its Exhibition. Pall Mall Gazette Extra, Friday July 26th. 1889.

36 Quoted from Mandell, see note 14.

37 Ibid.

38 Quoted from Aaron Scharf, The Crystal Palace and the Great Exhibition, from Art and Industry, Open University Foundation Course Units 33 and 34, A100, Open University Press 1971.

39 See note 27.

40 Ibid.

# CHAPTER TWO

## Funding, politics and society

Exhibitions cost an enormous amount to stage. It would be inconceivable that events of the relative scale of those held at South Kensington, Chicago, St. Louis or Paris could happen now. No-one could afford them and more importantly, no-one has adequate reason to bother; the roles they fulfilled are now taken care of by various separate media. The vast sums expended on exhibitions up to 1939 are a testament to the power they were seen to hold for those involved in their organization. They were a principal means whereby government and private bodies presented their vision of the world to the masses; because of this, the funding behind them invariably involved political machination of one kind or another. Those who paid for the exhibitions normally had motives which went undiscussed in the official literature.

The exhibitions up to 1914 were saturated with Liberal ideology. The peculiar mixture of free trade, material progress, philanthropy, imperialism and capital that animated the more dramatic decades of the nineteenth century could be found everywhere on exhibition sites. These were the arenas where the grand entrepreneurs could justify, define and congratulate themselves; where imperial free trade could strut, temporarily in the absence of the profound contradictions it embodied. Thoroughly in the spirit of the first industrial age, the exhibitions illustrated the relation between money and power, and revelled in the belief that the uncontrolled expression of that power was the quintessence of freedom. Philanthropy, one of the humane spin-offs from the governing system, found its place on exhibition sites functioning as a conscience to the age, although even here morality was inextricably linked to economic efficiency and expansion. Ideologically and technologically, the exhibitions could not have happened in any other age, the politico-economic situation being crucial to their growth and the form they took.<sup>1</sup> Once the conditions were finally and irretrievably altered, after the Second World War, they ceased to occur in the way they had done before.

There were basically four types of source from which the money to initiate the events emerged; government, private sponsorship (including individuals, charities and companies), lotteries and exhibition companies founded specifically for the purpose of organization and funding. Some exhibitions made use of all four methods at the same time and almost all of them had at least two. It was normal to have conflict between the different funding bodies, this usually hinging on the awkward truth that some were not particularly concerned about the size of the profit margin whilst others very definitely were. The exhibits and site architecture were usually compromised by variant interests at funding level. Looked at collectively however, those who paid for the exhibitions did have common concerns, three of which over-rode all others: to maximise attendance; to publicise a socio-political position; to profit those who had proferred funds in the first instance. Organizers throughout the period regarded the most successful exhibitions as those which accomplished all three in the highest degree. The organizational models used everywhere were ones evolved separately in America, Britain and France, these coming to influence each other until they shared numerous aspects by 1900. Clear differences did remain however through to the Second World War, necessitating separate examinations of the three. The logical place to begin is with the Great Exhibition of 1851.

In organizational terms, the Great Exhibition provided the model for all Victorian exhibitions. A Royal Commission was established to control the whole enterprise, with Prince Albert as its Honorary President. The Commission was largely a result of lobbying by the Royal Society of Arts and particularly of pressure brought to bear by Henry Cole. The latter played a central rôle and can rightly be thought of as the founding father of British international exhibitions.<sup>2</sup> The Commission created committees to publicise its cause, making maximum use of the enthusiastic Prince to legitimise their quest. A body of willing sponsors was gathered to guarantee the initial funding, at which point the event became real enough to require the permission of Parliament to proceed. After receiving governmental approval, a site was provisionally rented and foreign governments were invited to participate through the various ambassadors. At home manufacturers in all industries were informed, regulations were issued and, once replies were received from potential exhibitors, calculations were made as to how much space would be needed to house everything. After this a competition was launched to find a design for the building. By then the path should have been smooth, as it was to be for most future shows, but unfortunately for the Prince and his team of workers, conservative opinion in Parliament turned against the notion of the exhibition and a series of debates ensued as to its worth. These were resolved after numerous compromises, not the least of which was to leave three elm trees standing inside the building itself. <sup>3</sup>

The total expenditure on the exhibition was £335, 742. Therefore a considerable sum had to be taken in entrance fees if sponsors were to be recompensed in any way and a profit made. Initially, Henry Cole had convinced a Mr. Fuller to advance £10, 000 as prize money, while Mr. Fuller himself had persuaded the firm Messrs. Munday to provide the total basic funding in return for a proportion of the eventual gatemoney. However, after touring the country to win support for the venture Cole realised that it would be possible to have hundreds of small sponsors. Deciding that this was preferable to a single private speculation, he bought Munday out within the terms of the agreement, compensating him £5,120. Sponsorship for the exhibition was then spread amongst thousands of contributors, almost on a share basis, giving the exhibition a public base even though government had itself contributed virtually nothing.<sup>4</sup> Over four hundred local committees were formed around Britain to gather the funds and organize local exhibitors. The sums contributed varied considerably, for example Ashburton sent £7 to the General Fund, Bolton £630, Exeter £90, Glasgow £2, 400, Maidstone £74-4s-6d, Manchester £4000, Oxford £150, Salisbury £70-19s, Staffordshire Potteries £247 and York £100. Ultimately the exhibition cleared £522,179 making a net profit of £186,437, providing all who participated with returns and leaving a sizable residue in the coffers of the Commission. As with most held in Britain after it, the exhibition had used the organs of government to legitimise its activities and to help with organization, but the money had come from the private sector.

The Great Exhibition was a result of an extraordinary set of circumstances. From a world perspective, it chose to be international in order to celebrate to the fullest extent Britain’s imperial and industrial lead. The free trade ethos demanded an international audience, as did British manufacturers eager to get foreign orders. From a national perspective, the exhibition was designed to show the indigenous population the extent of British power. This was not intended for celebratory purposes alone. Prince Albert, one of the central figures in the executive structure, was only too aware that his adopted nation was not united in its vision of the British way of life. Chartism and Trade Unionism had shown that the working populations of the north were not prepared to be continuously exploited and impoverished. Moreover, the year plans for the exhibition were begun, 1848, was marked by revolutionary activity all over Europe, revealing the instability of regimes previously assumed to be eternal. The Great Exhibition can thus be viewed as a giant counter-revolutionary measure; indeed, from its earliest days it was conceived of as an event to foster fear as well as pride in the minds of the British public, an immense show of strength designed to intimidate potential insurrectionists. The magazine Art Union said as much in 1849: ‘The loyalizing effect of such an exhibition is not the least of its moral recommendations. Every man who visited it would see in its treasures the result of social order and reverence for the majesty of the law.’<sup>5</sup> Early objectors to the idea of the exhibition equally understood its intended rôles as intimidator and social distractor, their opposition usually coming not out of disagreement with these aims, but simply out of the belief that it would not work. Rather than subduing and loyalising the population, they thought it would simply serve as a focal point for undesirables of every description. Some of these would undoubtedly be revolutionaries from both home and abroad, others mere vagabonds and rogues: ‘All the bad characters at present scattered over the country will be attracted to Hyde Park . . . that being the case, I would advise persons residing near the Park to keep a sharp look-out after their silver forks and spoons and servant maids’.<sup>6</sup> When the exhibition actually opened, the predicted hoards of thieves and revolutionaries did not arrive, as Lord Macaulay, a supporter of the exhibition throughout, noted with a hint of relief: ‘I was struck by the number of foreigners in the streets. All however, were respectable and decent people. I saw none of the men of action with whom the Socialists are threatening us . . . There is just as much chance of a revolution in England as of the falling of the moon’.<sup>7</sup> The awesome power on display at the Crystal Palace, even if it failed to convince revolutionaries of the futility of their task, certainly served to reassure their adversaries that all was far from lost.

The admission fees to the exhibition showed the eagerness of the organizers to attract the artisan classes; they also revealed the rigidity of English class structure. The most expensive tickets were for the season, at three guineas for men and two for women. Other prices varied depending on month and day, going from £1-00, to five shillings, two shillings and sixpence to one shilling. The shilling tickets functioned from Monday to Thursday after May 26th., twenty-six days after the opening. A Popular Guide cost two pence and the abridged catalogue a shilling. Thus by contemporary standards, admission was by no means cheap, the shilling fee being fixed so as to guarantee that the lower reaches of the working class would be absent. The audience for the Great Exhibition began at the lowest end with the more prosperous artisan and trades-people, these being treated by contemporary commentators as though they were a reflection of the condition of the whole of the labouring classes.<sup>8</sup> Although the entrance fees give no real indication of the number of this class present, it is a striking feature that out of

6,039,195 visitors, 4,439,419 were so-called ‘shilling people’. Even more striking was the mixture of incredulity and distain with which middle class commentators viewed their working class companions:

Vulgar, ignorant, country people: many dirty women with their infants were sitting on the seats giving suck with their breasts uncovered, beneath the lovely female figures of the sculptor. Oh! How I wish I had the power to petrify the living, and animate the marble: perhaps a time will come when this fantasy will be realised and the human breed be succeeded by finer forms and lovelier features, than the world now dreams of.<sup>9</sup>

For many days before the ‘shilling people’ were admitted to the building, the great topic of conversation was the probable behaviour of the people. Would they come sober? will thezy destroy things? will they want to cut their initials, or scratch their names on the panes of the glass lighthouses?<sup>10</sup>

If the main purpose of the exhibition with regard to these people was to educate them into acceptable modes of behaviour, it was a task many members of the middle and upper classes accepted with distinct reluctance. Philanthropy, regardless of its underlying motives, was far from an infectious condition in Victorian England.

The substantial profit the Great Exhibition made was used to organize display activities on land purchased at South Kensington. This would be the centre for British international exhibitions until the turn of the century, by which time a splendid array of permanent museums had been built on the site. The success of the Great Exhibition meant the problems faced in the setting up of exhibitions after 1851 were not of a fundamental kind, such as the generating of interest and funds, but of a legalistic, bureaucratic and political nature. The second event held, the South Kensington Exhibition of 1862, blossomed out of a plethora of paperwork rather than the flames of a vitriolic Parliamentary debate. Over two hundred and fifty official documents were drawn up during the course of the organization and over eighty-four thousand items of correspondence posted. 11

The finding of sponsors for the 1862 event was no problem after the success of 1851. Within weeks of issuing their statement the Commission was financially secure and had received nine thousand eight hundred applications for space, some eight thousand in the industrial sectors; the element of risk was no longer a feature of British exhibitions. The organization began with the Royal Commissioners of 1851 in conjunction with the Royal Society of Arts requesting permission from the Queen to dispose of the profits from the Crystal Palace. Victoria responded by issuing them with a Charter allowing for dispersal of the funds. In March 1861, the commissioners and Royal Society met and drew up a statement to publicise their intention of holding an exhibition at South Kensington from May 1st. 1862, with the possibility of further ones at ten year intervals:

It (the Queen’s Charter) gives us the power to dispose of the surplus in the furtherance of any plans that may be devised by us, to invest it in such manner as we may think fit . . . it also gives us power to purchase and hold lands in any part of Her Majesty’s dominions, and dispose of them in all respects as we may think fit.<sup>12</sup>

A ten point plan was issued concerning the exhibition specifically. Effectively this became the official charter specifying the type of building; it also allowed the Commission to include or exclude whichever exhibits it wished. The points, or variations of them, were taken up and used by future exhibition organizers around the world as basic legal stipulations for exhibitors. Specific items included: painting sections to be housed in brick facilities; no rents to be charged for space; no machinery made before 1850 to be exhibited; foreign exhibitors to be allowed subject to the approval of the commissioners; no fundamental veto to be issued on any exhibitor; every kind of produce to be admissible except those subject to deterioration through time, such as foodstuffs, live animals, plants, detonating and other dangerous substances; alcohol and inflammable liquids to be allowed on the site only with a license from the commissioners; all produce to be fitted into four main categories: Mineral and vegetable substances, Machinery and tools, Manufactures made by industrial and craft processes, Fine arts.<sup>13</sup>

After 1862 the principle of exhibitions at decennial intervals was officially adopted. However, by the time the planning for the 1871 exhibition began, policy shifted to the idea that future exhibitions should be held annually in the same, semi-permanent facilities. Thus exhibitions were projected for 1872, 1873 and 1874, each one having the essential features of an international exhibition, albeit with a reduced scope. Tied into the rapidity of the series was the notion of specialisation. Each event, apart from having the usual range of categories, would pick three or more additional areas to specialise in. These would be themes such as shipping, civil engineering, the building trade, lace-making, or any other clearly identifiable discipline. In short, the exhibitions were losing their interest in the state of popular political consciousness and were becoming increasingly concerned with the rate at which European and American industry were catching Britain up. The South Kensington exhibitions of the 1870’s were far less celebratory and ebullient, far more studious and unpretentious. Despite the position Britain still occupied in the world, the fact that industry and empire were perceivably no longer exclusive properties of the English visibly worried a culture grown used to being in the ascendant.

These exhibitions also revealed the haughty refusal of the organizers to move the same way as French and American events with regard to popular entertainment. South Kensington, it was affirmed, was to be a centre for the enhancement of science and trade, of research into the exploitation of empire and a place where the population could receive education and culture. Entertainment was a side issue and something not catered for in the general sense of the term. Indeed, care was taken to avoid allowing the cultural status of the exhibitions to deteriorate; in the minds of the organizers, the worst possible fate for the whole enterprise was that it might be taken for a fair. When applications for exhibiting space arrived in 1862, by far the most common ground for refusal involved the status of the objects. Rejected, for example, were the preserved remains of Julia Pastrana, half woman half baboon, the oldest loaf in the world and a man-powered flying machine. This was not particularly because of the dubious scientific validity of the objects (far more incredible items of Victorian genius were accepted) but because of their association with fairground side-shows. However, as foreign exhibitions had already begun to demonstrate, the key to material success lay in a blend of popular and high culture; the fact that the British ignored this lesson until the new century meant events up to then became increasingly unsuccessful.

The last significant international exhibitions held at South Kensington were based around particular commodities. Between 1883 and 1886 four were held, on Fisheries, Health, Inventions and Colonial and Indian produce, all of these having the feel of giant conferences or trade fairs except for the last, the exotic content of which made it more widely popular.<sup>14</sup> The intention behind these exhibitions was to examine the state of commerce and industry, profits from entrance fees taking second place to wider issues of national economy. Only the Colonial and Indian had an air of pageant about it, celebrating the one area Britain clearly led the world in. Not for the last time, empire was a focus for lavish indulgence. Coming at the beginning of the era of imperial propaganda, the Colonial and Indian served numerous political purposes for a British government increasingly aware of its fallibility.

In France, the first three Expositions Universelles were paid for exclusively out of public monies, namely the government and the Paris city council. As such they were virtually unique events within the tradition as a whole. The initial outlay was to be recouped, in theory at least, from entrance fees. Government participation at this level meant the selection of the site was considerably less of an issue than it was in London, the Champs de Mars being given over to the purpose, succeeding expositions gradually creeping along the banks of the Seine as far down as the Esplanade des Invalides and the Tuileries. From 1889 the Parc de Vincennes was used as an additional site. An Imperial Commission fulfilled most administrative roles, juries controlled the produce on display and the various organs of the city council took care of the massive practical problem of accomodating the numbers converging on the capital. Because the third exposition, of 1878, made a heavy loss, the funding system for events after it was changed. In 1889, of the 41, 500, 000 francs basic outlay, the State paid seventeen, the city council eight and the rest was guaranteed by banks. The latter recouped their investment by selling books of admission tickets, nicknamed ‘bons’. As a sales incentive, these also served as lottery tickets for draws projected as far forward as 1964.<sup>15</sup> The sale of lottery tickets had been common in French provincial Salons for some time, with paintings as prizes; it is to be assumed that this was where the idea came from. The use of lotteries to encourage sale of tickets remained very much a French ploy, although in Britain lottery competitions were occasionally organized in the early twentieth century with visits to the exhibition as prizes. In 1889 rent was charged for space given over to private pavilions, providing another source of income. The colonies were asked to contribute, Tunisia and Algeria giving the most at a half and a third of a million francs respectively. Thus the State was alleviated from what would have been considered a risky speculation without losing overall control. In the event these various measures allowed the Exposition to pay back the initial investment. The expositions held in the twentieth century followed the funding pattern of 1889.

By 1900, the advantages and disadvantages of close governmental participation became a subject of debate in France, especially among private manufacturing concerns. Here it was increasingly felt that State controls over the French exhibits, and the growing advantage foreign manufacturers took of the massive exposition audience, was working against French business. Much foreign produce for example was not subject to jury selection, whereas French sections were jury controlled. In essence though, the discontent of French firms came from an undying mistrust of free trade principles. In British and American exhibitions, where the majority of funding came from private enterprise, it would be fair to suggest that individual manufacturers tended to have a greater control over the display of their own goods. However, commentators in London throughout the twentieth century complained bitterly that because private enterprise controlled the exhibits, national displays invariably lacked a governing plan, were unorchestrated, piecemeal and confused. Thus, they suggested, sales were lost because the overall appearance was weak.<sup>16</sup> Nonetheless, French firms disliked the apparent lack of freedom they had in relation to their foreign competitors. They were also irritated by the less exhaustive interest the State showed toward many foreign exhibitions where orders might have been won. From this discontent came two developments in French expositions and in their contingents in overseas events. At home the government did not relax its hold on areas designated official, consequently there was a proliferation of private pavilions built by manufacturers who felt they could show off their produce better. Menier (chocolate) and Möet and Chandon (champagne) were amongst the first firms to create their own facilities. Abroad, French business interests collaborated to guarantee a fitting presence. In 1884, the ‘Comité Française des Expositions à l’Etranger’ was formed by a group of businessmen from Nice, headed by a Roger Sandoz. The Comité attempted to rectify what they saw as a lack of concern with commerce in relation to State interests. Between 1900 and 1925, when there was no major exposition in Paris, the Comité assumed a considerable importance, fronting French interests in all foreign exhibitions of any size. By the time of the Franco-British Exhibition (London 1908) it had been partly taken over by the government and was the envy of the rest of the world for the efficient way it molded French manufactures into cohesive displays.<sup>17</sup>

State policy dominated the first five Expositions Universelles. The first two were marked by Napoleon III’s determination to adopt Liberal and free trade policies and by his desire to generally streamline France into a progressive industrial state. England was the example perpetually on the Emperor’s mind as he attempted to urbanise French rural mentality; the 1855 Exposition was a direct response to the Great Exhibition, a progress report of a nation attempting to expand as rapidly as possible. By 1867 it was clear the social and economic fabric of France was dangerously thin, the bombast of the Second Empire’s public face superficial and meaningless. Raymond Isay: ‘. . . un régime fondé sur l’ambiguité, sur le compromis, sur l’equivogue – tout le malaise politique, sociale et economique, toute le crise industrielle et morale que dissimule une brilliante façade et dont la guerre et la commune ne tarderont pas a marquer le pathetique aboutissement’.<sup>18</sup> If the second exposition glowed brilliantly in ignorance of what was shortly to happen, in 1878 the third struggled to raise its head above the disasters of the previous decade. 1867 saw one of the most hopeful exhibitions ever staged, a strange mixture of imperial-economic ambition and of Saint-Simonian paternalism, it projected a notion of society as a beautifully tuned machine capable of resolving conflicts and harnessing the world to its own ends. The 1878 Exposition had no such idealism, much rather it was an attempt on the part of government to show the foreigner and its own population that recovery from the war and the commune were complete. Even though vast sums were spent on a lavish new building, the Palais de Trocadéro, too few believed in the myth of total recovery; attendance was insufficient to cover costs and the Exposition was a financial disaster.

The Exposition of 1889 celebrated the centenary of the Revolution, and as such virtually every European monarch declined to attend. Queen Victoria went as far as to recall her ambassador, Lord Lytton, so that no representative of the British government was in Paris on the day of the opening. Only Belgium sent representation. More interestingly perhaps, the French aristocracy was equally unready to celebrate an event which marked their own political eclipse. In his study of the period, Raymond Rudorff noted

For the enemies of the French Republic – and there were still many – the exhibition was simply a gigantic piece of political propaganda and to a certain extent they were righ t . . . They were the people who closed their shutters on the 14th. of July, who stayed away from the exposition, who refused to put out tricolour flags for the centenary celebrations and who remained aloof while the rest of Paris enjoyed itself in the open.<sup>19</sup>

The stigma 1889 carried for many of France’s most monied people caused political problems during the organization which threatened to disrupt the event itself. In like manner, splits within French society almost brought about the collapse of the 1900 show during the organizational phase. In 1900 however Dreyfus was the central issue, not republicanism. Even on the eve of the opening, Alfred Picard, Commissioner-general to the Exposition, was threatened with mass withdrawals, not only from domestic exhibitors but also from foreign ones:

Boycott here, boycott there, boycott everywhere! This repetition of the same word, somewhat obsessive, a catchword, is the perfectly natural consequence of the importance which a very topical question has assumed in the press. Certain foreign journalists, unhappy with the outcome of the Dreyfus affair, which they have made their concern, with a zeal as intemperate as it is indiscreet, have begun a campaign to have their fellow countrymen unite to punish France.<sup>20</sup>

The British, as opportunist as ever, used the affair to annoy the French because of their sympathy for the Boers in the South African War. Layered over both the 1889 and the 1900 shows was an altogether separate political issue which excited the foreign press and possibly reduced the number of visitors; this was anarchist activity in the city. Whilst no exposition ever suffered from the blight of anarchist bombs, and the total number of incidents over a ten year period was negligible, the anarchists had captured the popular imagination, much to the irritation of exposition organizers. It is impossible now to know whether the size of the audience was affected.

Attendances at the Paris expositions were astronomical by the standards of the time. Moving from a modest four million in 1855 to eleven in 1867 and sixteen in 1878, the 1889 and 1900 shows polled a staggering thirty-two and forty-eight million peoples respectively.<sup>21</sup> The fact that the population of France in 1900 was around thirty-five millions indicates two things; the Parisian events attracted far more foreign visitors than any other exhibitions, and there was a wider selection of the indigenous population present. Both these things were worked towards from 1867 onwards, especially the presence of the masses. Napoleon III should take credit more than anyone in this regard, as it was his policy in 1867 to open the turnstiles to as many people as possible at the base of the French class structure. His wariness of the urban masses led him to court the workers in an attempt to win their approval by consent rather than coercion. In 1864 he had allowed them the rights of association and strike action, in 1867 he encouraged the organizers in their choice of ‘work’ as a major theme at the Exposition. The placing of Saint-Simonians in executive positions was a calculated move to woo those left of centre. Some extraordinary concessions were given to encourage attendance; free travel was available to the peasantry from numerous provinces and free lodging was provided for sixty-seven thousand people on the site. This resulted in a flood of people into the capital who were without previous travelling experience and who would never have conceived of a visit to Paris. Whilst this show was exceptional for the generosity of its concessions, following ones did cater for the poor far more effectively than those of any other nation. Correspondingly, the expositions of 1889 and 1900 were infectiously popular; reports tell how families saved for years toward an exposition, selling furniture and anything else removable from the house to provide money for spending in Paris. Such eagerness to flood to the capital to see the glory of the French empire undoubtedly thrilled a government constantly aware of periodic outbursts of regional separatism.<sup>22</sup>

By 1889 the funding systems in both Britain and France had stabilised and become nationally standard. In America by 1893 an established order was also in operation. This was more complex than those of Europe however, due to the awkwardness of the relationship between State and Federal authorities, and to the more rigorous attitude the Americans had toward private enterprise. Most of the major Fairs made simultaneous use of disparate funding sources, including sponsorship, small amounts of Federal money, city and State council monies and monies generated by specially created companies. All of these were orchestrated into a single pool by the company and the executive of the central organizing committee. In the earlier Fairs, cash advances were also accepted from participating governments, probably in view of the fact that America could not ask for funds from colonies in the way European nations did. The exhibition tradition began in America with the New York World’s Fair of 1853, but this has to be regarded somewhat as a one-off private speculative venture, organized principally to profit from the stir caused by the Crystal Palace exhibition in London two years before. Despite its novelty – in a country without museums or academies of any kind – the venture was a financial failure. The real opening of the American Fair tradition came in 1876 with the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition. It was here that a proper organizational base for American World’s Fairs was worked out. Funding came from individual sponsors within the States, the Federal government and foreign participants. An Act was passed establishing a ‘Centennial Board of Finance’ to supervise the fund raising. The Board determined initially how much it would need and how it would collect it:

The conclusion reached fixed upon the sum of \$10, 000, 000 as adequate for all the purposes of the exhibition. In accordance with this estimate, and with a view to giving every citizen of every state an opportunity to become interested in and connected with this great national exhibition, a quota was now established of a ratio of subscription for the several states, and every effort was made, through the public press, special circulars, and selected agents, to bring about such an interest as would lead to a popular subscription sufficiently large to absorb the capital stock . . .<sup>23</sup>

In essence then, the bulk of the money came from States selling shares to its citizens. The established quota told each State how much it was to raise; for example New York was asked for (and actually paid) \$1,136,660, Pennsylvania \$913,410, Ohio \$691,230, Illinois \$658,710, Louisiana \$188, 520, Idaho \$3, 890, Nebraska \$31,000, Missouri \$446,410.<sup>24</sup> Of the foreign participants, Britain (including Australia and Canada) added \$250, 000, Japan \$600, 000, France (including Algeria) \$120,000, Germany \$171,000, Austria \$75,000, Spain \$150,000.<sup>25</sup> By the time the funds were surrendered up, the organizers believed they had gathered more than they needed.<sup>26</sup>

At the Chicago Columbian Fair seventeen years later, the nature of the private enterprise system had changed, from the inclusion of thousands of small investors to a handful of rich sponsors. Amongst those contributing, Marshall-Field, George Pullmann, Cyrus McCormick, Gustavus Swift and Philip Armour showed up prominently. The finances of the Columbian varied from the Centennial not only in this however, but also in its establishing of a company to handle matters pertaining to money. In so doing it moved the exhibition tradition emphatically into a commercial arena. More than any event before it, it espoused the ideology of the profit margin.

The Chicago Company, though constantly teetering on the edge of insolvency even up to 1893, conducted itself with a business-like zeal which had never been part of the European pattern up to that time. For example, a promotions department was established for publicity, printing up newsletters and formatted articles which could be slotted straight into newspapers around the world without additional editing.<sup>27</sup> Every communication system available was utilised to present the Fair, and once opened, every possible device was used to keep the site full. Needless to say, commercial concerns prevented government from controlling the event in the way Prince Albert dictated the atmosphere of the Great Exhibition or Napoleon III controlled the first Exposition Universelle. In fact the Chicago Company and the Federal body watching over the Fair, the National Commission, were far from seeing eye to eye on numerous issues. The Columbian, as with many of the World’s Fairs after it, whilst being riddled with social, political and ideological discourses, was nevertheless a multi-based and hence more confused affair than its European forerunners.

After 1893, most Fairs established a company to deal with State and Federal officials, to purchase the site and to establish committees for the selection of exhibits. The company would be founded on sponsorship money but would then proceed to generate funds through diverse campaign tactics. For example, the proliferation of exhibition ephemera, such as popular books and guides, exhibition trinkets, postcards, textiles and ceramics, whilst beginning in 1851, was brought to a new pitch in America. The material was produced by private firms with permission from the exhibition company. Perhaps the most emulated model was the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Company, created to administer the St. Louis Fair of 1904. The company took on every aspect of its job with an efficiency which probably saved the whole enterprise from financial insolvency. The State authorities had made the event into a high risk venture from the onset by committing themselves to a larger site than had ever been used before for an international exhibition. Ultimately the Fair made a loss, this being as small as it was mainly because of the shrewdness and tenacity of the company directors. Exhibition companies reached a definitive and final form in New York in 1939, where ‘New York World’s Fair Incorporated’ operated more independently of government than any before it. A subcompany was founded to deal with the printing side of the operation, ‘Expositions Publications’, leaving the mother company to develop what was the second largest site ever, the uninviting ‘Corona Dumps’ on the edge of the city.

The lack of direct control a government could bring to bear on American Fairs was a result of the funding and administrative systems employed. American sources tend to see this as the advantage of the system. Private enterprise however occasionally created problems that perhaps only central government could have resolved, the most difficult one being inter-State rivalry in the staging of Fairs. After the success of the Philadelphia Centennial in 1876, America’s growing cities began to countenance the idea of having similar events themselves. By 1890, when the celebration of the five hundredth anniversary of the discovery of America offered itself as the perfect reason for a Fair, the rivalry between States for the right to hold it became intense. Every city with pretensions to any level of sophistication focused on the year 1892 as being the one to show themselves off in. The cost and scale of international exhibitions however meant there could only be one, and whichever city it was in, it would require support from many other States and foreign nations if it was to stand alongside European equivalents. As early as 1876 the city fathers in Washington conceived of the idea of an exhibition to celebrate the landing of Columbus. By the early 1880’s New York, Cincinnati, St. Louis and Cumberland Gap also showed interest. It was Chicago however, via its political and social clubs, that made the first decisive moves, beginning a campaign on a nationwide basis for the right to hold the Columbian. By 1889, when Paris was enjoying the largest exposition to date, the race was crystallizing into a struggle between Chicago and New York, the press in both cities reaching a frenzied level of insult. The Chicago Tribune: ‘New York is not an American city – in its history, in its relations to the nation, in its attitudes toward the government during the War of the Revolution and Rebellion, or in its social characteristics.’<sup>28</sup> Furthermore it was claimed ‘Chicago slaughters and packs its hogs, New York puts them on committees.’<sup>29</sup> When it was finally apparent the issue could not be resolved the matter was made the subject of a debate and vote in Congress. On the first ballot, Chicago polled 115, New York 70, St. Louis 61, Washington 58 and Cumberland Gap 1.<sup>30</sup> After a second round of tactical voting, Chicago triumphed with three votes more than it needed for an overall majority. This was a victory for the growing lobby in America wishing to see cultural development encouraged and recognised away from the east coast. A decade after the Chicago Columbian, St. Louis would confirm the coming of age of the West by holding the largest ever Fair.

The company system used in American Fairs was never utilised in anything but a cosmetic way in Europe, apart from in one notable case, at the Franco-British exhibition of 1908. Here, entrepreneur Imre Kiralfy formed the ‘International and Commercial Company Ltd’.<sup>31</sup> He based his exhibitions completely on the American model, going as far as to christen his site the ‘White City’ in emulation of the Chicago

Columbian. The White City was re-used almost on a yearly basis through to 1914, ultimately proving to be the most consistently profitable exhibition concern throughout the tradition.<sup>32</sup> The money to create the site came from a wider spread of sources than any before it, including the City of London Council, the colonies, private sponsors, the French government, the exhibition company and site rents. Once the exhibition was open additional sources increased the revenue; advertising, gate-money, sale of a vast range of ephemera, company controlled restaurants and amusements. The Daily Mail and Daily Mirror newspapers worked in close harmony with the site organizers, guaranteeing the exhibitions a national audience on a regular basis.<sup>33</sup> Both Houses of Parliament, the Offices of the Lord Mayor of London and various political clubs gave support and administrative help. Thus the White City exhibitions developed to a fine pitch the combination of governmental participation and commercial sponsorship that typified British exhibitions. In the true spirit of liberal/imperial enterprise, government provided the ideological lead and the citizenry provided the funds. Never before in Europe had so many aspects of an exhibition been so carefully orchestrated to the cause of money-making. Kiralfy had learned the lesson of the American Fairs well, combining this knowledge with his European experience to create the definitive exhibition site.

Attendance was the critical factor for all the international exhibitions. Gate money was the economic basis of every event, the staple means whereby investments could be recouped. The financial side of exhibitions could be suspect unless a certain attendance could be achieved, the Vienna and Paris shows of 1873 and 1878, for example, making heavy losses when this did not materialise. The former almost bankrupted the city. Governmental support hinged on the fact that millions of people would see the exhibits on display. Without the promise of a large audience, no government would participate since, crudely speaking, propaganda was their concern and this was meaningless in the absence of a reasonable selection of the population. The exhibitions of 1851 and 1862 in London and of 1855 in Paris attracted millions mainly because of their novelty. The scale of technological advance was enough to mystify and enthrall the crowds. Into the 1870’s however, when exhibitions were becoming a norm throughout Europe, technology alone could no longer be relied upon to fill a site. In order to prevent disaster through non-attendance at these later events, organizers gave attention to popular entertainment. This grew as a dimension of exhibitions markedly during the 1880’s until it came to be the dominant socio-economic factor on the site. In 1851 the only real elements identifiable specifically as mass entertainment, apart from refreshment facilities, were concerts given by orchestras and brass bands. By 1890 the situation had dramatically changed.

After the embracing of the idea of entertainment, the cultural mixture available on exhibition sites became their single most extraordinary feature. From the exclusive heights of the fine arts, opera, haute couture, Royalty and the aristocracy, to the cheap and plentiful end of production, fairground stalls, joy-rides, trinket sellers, sport, bandstands, music hall and an infinity of buskers. Within the space of a few hundred metres one might engage in a debate between rationalists and historicists in architecture, view a collection of impressionist paintings, watch Olympian athletes compete, ride on a Ferris Wheel, drink coffee in a Turkish bar, examine a life-size elephant constructed entirely from walnuts, watch the Imperial Guard drill, attend a conference on chiropody, buy a suit, listen to a two hundred piece orchestra play Berlioz, go into an erotic dance show or purchase a steam engine. So-called high and popular cultures mixed freely in an environment where all rules appeared to have been temporarily suspended. The embracing of popular forms of culture by exhibition organizers enabled them to predict attendances optimistically and as a bi-product it allowed the rigidity of established class structure to thaw a little at the edges. By 1900 the entertainment side of the exhibitions had gained so much ground that education, commerce and propaganda had to be disguised as pleasurable activities, otherwise the masses they were targetted at would simply breeze by.

The first to realise the importance of entertainment as a crowdpuller were the French, who incorporated an amusement park and fairground into the plans of the Exposition Universelle of 1867. The idea was quickly understood and seized upon by the Americans at the Philadelphia Centennial, where traditional fairground stalls were dotted around the site. The Exposition Universelle of 1889 and the Chicago Columbian finally integrated entertainment fully into the conceptual fabric of the exhibition tradition, notably in the absence and disapproval of the English. This was done not simply by legitimising the fairground activity which normally existed on the edges of all exhibition sites, but by transforming hitherto ‘serious’ displays into vehicles for entertainment. Thus the Eiffel Tower was not only a symbol of the technological achievement of an age, it was also a pleasurable distraction. Displays of colonial peoples were not only of interest to anthropologists but were, once a backdrop was provided, something for everyone to gaze at. Here entertainment directly served as imperial/racial propaganda.<sup>34</sup> Refreshment areas became exotic restaurants and bars from far-off lands, serviced by equally exotic peoples. Facilities housing exhibits became fantastic edifices, on sites that came to appear as unreal, dream-like cities.

In Chicago the great entertainment entrepreneur P. T. Barnum was consulted with regard to the overall effect of the site and its facilities. The essence of his advice was to go for scale and opulence: ‘Make it bigger and better than any that have preceded it. Make it the greatest show on earth – greater than my own Great Moral Show if you can.’<sup>35</sup> Whether it was Barnum himself who bestowed the atmosphere of the circus on American events or some other factor, it was constantly an ingredient from 1893. He later produced shows with Imre Kiralfy in America before the latter became the impresario of British exhibitions, his influence thereby drifting indirectly over the Atlantic. In Chicago a whole area was unashamedly cordoned off and given over to leisure. This, the Midway Plaisance, contained various tribes of primitive people in their dwellings, troupes of actors and musicians, exotic bars, restaurants and a myriad of side-shows. The Chicagoans also applied engineering technology to joy-rides in a way no-one before had contemplated, giving the electrically-lit Midway a spectacular appearance at night; its success made it an essential part of all World’s Fairs after it. Larger and larger areas of sites were given over to entertainment through the twentieth century, reaching a grand climax in the 1930’s when exhibition guides were filled with publicity for sponsors and listings of the various rides available. The ‘Century of Progress’ exposition held in Chicago in 1933 called its pleasure area ‘the Midway’ in recognition of its illustrious forerunner. The Texas Centennial of 1936 in Dallas and the Golden Gate Exposition of 1939 in San Francisco presented profiles via their respective official literatures that seemed like uncomfortable mixtures of the Metropolitan Museum of New York and Disney Land. Perhaps such analogies are not too inaccurate.

New York provided the definitive Fair in terms of entertainment. Over a hundred shows or rides were mentioned in the Official Guide, including ‘Admiral Byrd’s Penguin Land’, ‘Ariel Joyride’, ‘Amazons in No-man’s Land’, ‘Arctic Girl’s Tomb of Ice’, ‘Auto Dodgem’, ‘Frank Buck’s Jungleland’, ‘Living Magazine Covers’, ‘Skyride’, ‘Snapper’, ‘Laff Land’, ‘World’s Fair Hall of Music’ and ‘Strange as it Seems’.<sup>36</sup> Interestingly, some displays listed as entertainment might have claimed higher status, or at least those who participated in them were normally associated with things of higher status. Amongst these were the ‘Artistic Village’, described as ‘a gigantic palette adorned with the proverbial daubs of paint and paint brush tops . . . in open booths that face each other a group of artists from many lands practice their art’<sup>37</sup>; or the ‘Crystal Palace of 1939’, ‘a tour through the American World’s Fairs 1853–1939’<sup>38</sup>; or ‘Bel Geddes Mirror Show’, ‘known the world over as an industrial designer of distinctly serious intent, Norman Bel

Geddes here takes a vacation and turns his talents to the brighter side of life’<sup>39</sup>; and most interestingly, ‘Salvador Dali’s Living Pictures’. Surrealism’s most commercial and cynical showman, Dali created a spectacle that probably confused would-be surrealists as much if not more than the average visitor: ‘Surrealism is the most modem form of French Art and is derived from a study of the secrets hidden in the subconscious mind. In a series of living pictures, executed in three dimensions, famed and lively Salvador Dali explains some of these secrets’.<sup>40</sup> A tank thirty feet long and filled with water contained erotically clad female divers (‘living liquid ladies’) swimming languidly amongst sculpted versions of some of Dali’s best known works.

Europe replied quickly to the initiatives taken by America in the entertainment area. The Paris Exposition Universelle of 1900 duplicated several of the features of the Columbian, including the famous Ferris Wheel and an electrically powered moving pavement. The Eiffel Tower remained and alongside it a huge ‘Celestial Globe’ thrilled the crowds. A myriad of side-shows, cafés and restaurants littered the site. In London, the White City Exhibitions introduced entertainments based on those the commissioner-general, Imre Kiralfy, had seen at Chicago and St. Louis. This was the first time large scale leisure facilities had been used in a British exhibition, marking out the White City as the first site to pay close attention to foreign events with regard to content and organization. The exhibitions staged there had far more in common with American and Parisian shows than they had with earlier British ones. Commentators at the Imperial International, held there in 1909, recognised the discernible shift from philanthropic involvement with education to mass entertainment, attributing this shift to the shrewdness of the commissioner-general: ‘The instructive part of the exhibition appears to be in rather an embryo condition, but Mr. Kiralfy knows his public. And his public prefer Biplanes, and Water-whirls, and Witching-waves, and Wiggle-woggles, and Flip-flaps to all the instruction in the world.’<sup>41</sup> By 1912 and the staging of the Latin-British Exhibition, the site boasted an impressive list of features, including the ‘Flip-Flap’, ‘Roly-poly’, ‘Screamers’, ‘The House of Troubles’, ‘Glacier glide’, ‘Mountain Railway’, ‘Great Bostock Jungle’, ‘Witching waves’, ‘Wiggle-woggle’, ‘Boomerang’, ‘Whirlpool’, ‘Daylight Cinema’, ‘Scenic Railway’, ‘Skating Palace’, ‘Spiral Chute’, ‘Bowlo’, ‘Caves of Laughter’, ‘Mouse trap’ and ‘Electric launches’. <sup>42</sup> Apart from these, numerous native villages were open for the pleasure of the public. British exhibitions had indeed changed since the days of Henry Cole and Prince Albert.

Probably the most important long term aspect of exhibition leisure activity came in the form of the revival of the Olympic Games. The first modern Olympiad was staged in Athens in 1896, not in conjunction with an exhibition, but the three following ones, all held on exhibition sites, established the pattern still in use today. The 1900 Olympiad in Paris was a somewhat half-hearted affair, winners having to pay for their own medals. The third at St. Louis was markedly better, boasting good facilities, a satisfactory range of events and a reasonable number of international competitors. The fourth Olympiad marked the rise of the modern tradition proper. Held in London at the Franco-British Exhibition, a superb stadium was built for the occasion – later known as the ‘White City’ – and the number of events increased further still.<sup>43</sup> The internationality of the competing body achieved an impressive spread courtesy of the British and French empires. The stadium was full throughout the Games, guaranteeing the organizers over one hundred thousand fee-paying customers. There can be no doubt that those who visited the Fine and Decorative Art Palaces during those hot July days had their pleasure subsidised by the crowds in the stadium cheering on the athletes, the latter blissfully ignorant of the high culture they were indirectly paying for.

The amount of popular culture available on exhibition sites by 1900 begs the question as to where the inspiration for the form it took came from in the first place. In fact the leisure side of the exhibitions had an impressively long pedigree. Sport, fairground stalls and rides, musical and comic troupes, sellers of food and ephemera all derived originally from the annual market-fairs held around Europe for centuries. Popular entertainment was therefore one of the few genuine links the exhibitions had with pre-industrial festivals and markets, this link surviving basically through economic expediency as suggested earlier.<sup>44</sup> Exhibitions contributed to these aged forms of entertainment by exaggeration through technology. That is, the modes already at work in society were simply made bigger. Sporting challenges, such as tests of strength or ball games between rival villages, were transmuted first into ordered sporting events and eventually into Olympiads. Freak shows, food-stalls, gambling, musical and comic troupes became amusement arcades, native villages, brass band concerts and joy-rides. The evolution in each case was due to the vast numbers using the facilities and the concern of the perpetrators to make profits well beyond the level of subsistence. The result was usually a cosmopolitan blandness as one site gradually came to resemble another. In a similar way to other artforms, the exhibitions heralded the end of vernacular entertainment and the beginning of mass international popular culture.

It would be a mistake to assume organizers carefully sought out traditional modes of popular enjoyment with a view to integrating them into the workings of the site. Much rather, in the first instance, it was the entertainers who sought out the exhibitions, setting up illicit booths and stalls outside the official areas. Indeed, at the first few international events legislation was passed to prevent entertainers of all kinds gaining access. It was only the realisation that the crowds came specifically to be entertained which led to the inclusion of amusement areas into overall plans. Before then, visitors would expect to walk through acres of fairground activity outside the exhibition perimeter, including everything from merry-go-rounds to gambling dens and brothels. The move from unofficial to official status naturally entailed the ‘cleaning up’ of entertainment and the re-presentation of it into acceptable forms for the bourgeoisie, since they comprised the largest single group visiting the sites. By 1889, the exhibition medium had created and institutionalised the notion of ‘family entertainment’, this aiming to harmlessly satisfy the curiosities and desires of all genders and ages. Thus it was from the last decade of the nineteenth century, the middle classes attended exhibitions to enjoy filtered versions of the types of entertainment preserved through peasant and working class culture. In this regard at least, the working classes had led the way. In sad contradiction to the Utopian dreams of educationalists, for the majority, cultural enlightenment with regard to fine art and science was infrequently sought after and more rarely achieved; in some cases the possibility of such enlightenment could well have been reduced not increased by the exhibitions.

By 1890 it was thoroughly understood that the appearance of site itself was the single greatest factor in entertaining the crowds, and hence generating a profit. The site became subject to complex landscaping plans and extraordinary pieces of fantasy architecture in order to delight and amaze the casual stroller. Again, the Chicago Columbian made the pace, with a neoclassical dreamland, artificial lake, monumental sculpture and its uniform, brilliant whiteness. This Fair took the accepted medium for site architecture, plaster (or staff) facings on wood or iron frames, to new heights of grandeur, which all successors sought to mimick or surpass. Buffalo in 1901 achieved an unearthly effect through the use of a bright colour scheme in conjunction with classical plan and monumental sculpture. In 1904 the Louisiana Purchase Exposition had the advantage of a vast 1,272 acre site to sprawl over, the effect being of a classical scheme loosened by a picturesque approach to garden design. Perhaps the two most aesthetically resolved American exhibitions were the Panama–Pacific (San Francisco 1915) and the Panama–California (San Diego 1915–1916). The former, by far the largest of the two, used a classicism tinged with a romantic nostalgia; the intention, as always, being to carry the spectator away from reality:

The most striking court, in its mysteriousness, is Mullgardt’s Court of Abundance, particularly so on a foggy night. Large volumes of vapor are lazily rising from huge bowls and torches, below, and in the tower, suggesting the early days of the cosmic All, cooling off from the turbulent period of its creation. The fogs sweeping from the bay add more mystery, and with the gorgeous perfume of the hyacinth carpet in the garden spaces, the effect is almost narcotic. The whole court, under these conditions, seems heavy with the atmosphere of abundance, of physical well-being, of slumbering natural powers . . . At the same time, it is truly religious in its effect of turning the mind away from the ordinary world into the realm of the mystic and the supernatural.<sup>45</sup>

At San Diego, the notion of the picturesque was at the forefront of the site planners minds, as they attempted to create something different from previous exhibitions:

As the Chicago, the St. Louis and the Buffalo expositions were a glorification of the monumental in city planning, so the San Diego Fair is the apotheosis of all those elements of charm and variety that we associate with the cities of Italy and Spain. It has the varied symmetry and underlying order of the Latin cities, without the squalor of the crowded quarters; it is the glorification of the romantic in city planning as the gothic cathedral was in building.<sup>46</sup>

In Europe, an intention from 1851 onwards had been to suspend the harshness of reality. Up to 1880, this had been brought into effect through promises of material progress for all. The visitor was encouraged to dream of an imminent better life. Toward the turn of the new century however, the exhibitions sought to escape reality not so much through the myth of progress as through the creation of a fantasy land. As with the theme of Education, ‘Progress’ was overtaken by the desire to entertain; there were fewer promises to the visitor about improving life off the site and a heightened insistence on having a good time whilst on it. The maleability of the plaster and the availability of new technologies, especially electric lighting, enabled designers to create spectacular effects. The Paris show of 1900 was the most developed example of the exhibition as an unreal paradise. It was the first in Europe to extensively use electric lighting to evoke a fairy-tale environment, invariably in conjunction with water cascades, glass and mirrors. A large number of the buildings had an Oriental feel to them:

On the right hand side of the Eiffel Tower, upon a rock overlooking a little lake, stands the Luminous Palace . . . An opium smoker might have conceived this fairy palace after reading the Arabian Nights. All the forms, aspects, and prisms of which glass is capable have been utilised in the design of this unique edifice, and its effect is crowned by a pretty cascade.<sup>47</sup>

The Franco-British Exhibition took its lead from American and French forerunners, combining water, electric lighting and oriental detailing to create its atmosphere. Even the driest commentator the Architectural Review could muster was forced to acknowledge the success of this pastichism: ‘. . . the waterways, catching the reflection of the buildings by day, and half a million lights by night, and throwing them back distorted and broken, adds not a little to the effect’.<sup>48</sup> Whatever grievances with the world the crowds had when they arrived, they cannot have left the sites in anything less than a state of confused euphoria.

Normally, the exhibitions managed to pay for themselves; overheads were more or less met, excessive loss or profit was quite unusual. In the sense of direct profit in relation to lay-out, the Great Exhibition of 1851 was the most successful, followed by the Paris 1867 and the London White City series 1908–1914. In terms of loss, the famous disasters were the Vienna 1873, Paris 1878, with the St. Louis 1904 Fair probably having the greatest deficit in the American tradition. These were the exceptions, the majority of shows making slight losses after gate receipts were counted. Debts were made good by subscribers and government.

Simplistic assessments however are deceptive, as the economic ambitions of exhibitions cannot be clearly discerned from the immediate takings. Government, for example, did not expect to profit from exhibitions as they were considered a source of publicity and propaganda which would have to be paid for whatever the medium. For the thousands of participating manufacturers, the winning of new orders was the economic rationale of exhibitions, not gate-money. As Henry Chardon explained in the Revue de Paris:

Expositions secure for the manufacturer, for the businessman, the most striking publicity. In one day they will bring before his machine, his display, his shop windows, more people than he would see in a lifetime in his factory or store. They seek out clients in all parts of the world, bring them at a set time, so that everything is ready to receive them and seduce them. That is why the number of exhibitions increases daily.<sup>49</sup>

The economic consequences of exhibitions in terms of custom won by manufacturers cannot be calculated but in many instances the good done to a national economy must have compensated handsomely for any immediate loss on the site itself. More than this, the service industries at work in the host city made profits regardless of the overall success of the event. Conservative estimates in 1908 suggested every million visits to the Franco-British Exhibition generated three million pounds business for the hotels, transport systems, restaurants and post offices of London.<sup>50</sup>

Most events left permanent features behind, such as galleries, museums, general exhibiting areas, railway stations, sports stadiums, parks and even mass-housing. Often these were counted as part of an overall expenditure, yet they continued to provide service to the city for decades after. For example, the audit figures for the Paris Expositions Universelles from 1867 onwards tend to reveal considerable short-falls – some forty million francs in the case of 1900 – yet buildings still giving service at the present time were part of that apparent loss; the expositions added substantially to the amenities of the metropolis.<sup>51</sup> The Palais de l’Industrie (1855 to 1900), the Palais de Trocadéro (1878 to 1937), the Eiffel Tower, the Galeries des Machines (1889 to 1910), the gardens of the Champs de Mars and the Parc de Vincennes,<sup>52</sup> the Grand Palais, the Petit Palais, the Pont Alexandre 111, the Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, the Palais de Tokyo, Palais de Chaillot, housing in Montmartre and the first Metro stations were all built for the expositions. When these permanent features are taken out of the deficit, losses in most instances become negligible. The same pattern repeats itself across America, where the Fairs resulted in the development of land into parks, where museums and galleries were built and roads and sewage systems were provided to accomodate the influx of people. In Britain, the whole of the museum complex surrounding Exhibition Road in South Kensington is in the debt of the temporary events staged there when the area was still an underdeveloped suburb. Until recently, the White City Stadium was a reminder of the events of 1908–1914 and Wembley Stadium remains the premier sporting venue of the English. Glasgow’s superb art gallery, Kelvingrove and Balahouston Parks continue to serve a public oblivious of the exhibitions they were developed for. Indeed, throughout Europe useful edifices remain. As the author writes, Barcelona has been chosen to host the 1992 Olympiad; apart from the debt the event itself owes to the exhibition tradition, Montjuic, the area of Barcelona where the Games will be sited, was the result of development undertaken for the 1929 International Exposition, including the main stadium itself. Looked at in this light, exhibitions were of considerable material worth to urban dwellers.

Due to the invisible earning capacity of exhibitions, they were seen as a remarkably efficient medium for the conducting of commercial, political, industrial, military and artistic business. Throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, they were the only events capable of bringing such a wide selection of people to the same place for the purpose of edification and entertainment. They were intended to distract, indoctrinate and unify a population; as the electorate swelled toward the turn of the century these three intentions swelled also, their