realisation being hoped for through concentration on particular themes. Perhaps the single most persistent of these was that of empire, as it contained all the political, commercial and social ingredients capable of preserving the progressive-liberal order of things. It is to this our attention turns next.

## Notes

1 The vast majority of histories put forward the idea that the exhibitions were part of a continuing phenomenon beginning with Roman markets or mediæval fairs. Such suggestions fundamentally misunderstand how and why they came into being.

2 I have not concentrated to any degree on the activities of Henry Cole as other histories of the Great Exhibition and virtually all design histories deal with him in depth. My ommission is not intended to suggest he was unimportant but is simply a recognition of the thoroughness of other secondary sources.

3 This was the famous Colonel Sibthorp incident. See chapter Six.

4 Sources vary on exactly what was contributed by government. It appears that one tenth of the initial cost was contributed in order to get the project underway, although this figure is disputed.

5 Quoted from Aaron Scharf, The Crystal Palace and the Great Exhibition in Art and Industry, Unit 33 of Course A100, Open University Press 1971.

6 Quoted from C. H. Gibbs-Smith, The Great Exhibition of 1851, London 1981, H. M.S.O. press.

7 Quoted from The Opening, in Humphrey Jennings (ed.) Pandæmonium, London 1985, pub. André Deutsch.

8 Surprisingly Henry Mayhew is also guilty of this error.

9 Gideon Mantell, quoted from Pandæmonium, see note 7.

10 Henry Mayhew, Ibid.

11 The International Exhibition of 1862: The Illustrated Catalogue of the Industrial Sections, London 1862.

12 Ibid.

13 Ibid.

14 See chapters 3 and 4.

15 By far the best source for the finances of the 1889 and 1900 Expositions Universelles is Richard D. Mandell, Paris 1900: The Great World’s Fair, University of Toronto Press 1967.

16 See, for example J.M. Richards, The Problem of a National Projection, Architectural Review 1937.

17 See, Paul Greenhalgh, Art, Politics and Society at the Franco-British Exhibition of 1908, Art History December 1985.

18 Raymond Isay, Panorama des Expositions Universelle, Paris 1937, Gallimard.

19 Raymond Rudorff, Belle Epoch: Paris in the 1890’s, London 1972, Hamish Hamilton.

20 Quoted from Mandell, see note 15.

21 Figures used are from Kenneth Luckhurst, The Story of Exhibitions, London 1951, Studio Publications.

22 See Chapter 5.

23 Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Historical Register of the Centennial Exposition 1876, Philadelphia 1876. Facsimile copy now available, New York 1974, Paddington Press.

24 Ibid.

25 Ibid. I am unsure as to what exactly these sums refer to. They were probably in part advances given to the Exposition to pay for the materials and labour for the national pavilions.

26 In fact this was an over optimistic belief, the exposition made a small loss.

27 The best account of this is in Reid-Badger, The Great American Fair: The World’s Columbian Exposition and American Culture, Chicago 1979, pub. Nelson Hall.

# FUNDING, POLITICS AND SOCIETY

30 Ibid.

31 The company later changed its name to Shepherd’s Bush Exhibitions Ltd. and finally the Great White City Ltd. See Donald Knight The Exhibitions, London 1978. I am grateful to Mr. Knight for the kind help he has given me with the White City exhibitions, his personal collection of catalogues and ephemera being a vital source. See also my own article on the Franco-British Exhibition, note 17.

32 Ibid.

33 Newspapers are the most informative source for these exhibitions, notably the Daily Mail, Daily Mirror, the Times, Manchester Guardian, Pall Mall Gazette and the Telegraph. The best French source on the Franco-British is Le Figaro.

34 See chapter 4.

35 Quoted from Reid-Badger, note 27.

36 Official Guide Book of the New York World’s Fair 1939, New York 1939, Exposition Publications Inc.

37 Ibid.

38 Ibid.

39 Ibid.

40 Ibid. Shortly after the New York World’s Fair Andre Breton, leader of the Surrealist organisation, invented the anagram Avida Dollars from Dali’s name, and permanently excommunicated him from the movement.

41 The Times, May 21st. 1909.

42 Latin–British Exhibition, Official Daily Programme, 1911

43 The White City was sadly demolished in 1985.

44 This obviously contradicts the view that the exhibitions had general roots going back to Roman or mediæval times. See note 1.

45 Eugen Neuhaus, The Art of the Exposition, San Francisco 1915, pub. Paul Elder.

46 C. Monroe-Winslow, The Panama–California International Exposition, San Francisco 1916, pub. Paul Elder.

47 Alex M. Thompson, Dangle’s Guide to Paris and the Exhibition, London 1900.

48 R. W. Carden, The Franco-British Exhibition 1, Architectural Review, Volume 24 1908.

49 Quoted from Rosalind Williams Dream Worlds: Mass Consumption in Late 19th. Century France. University of California Press.

50 Anon. Do Exhibitions Payl Some Surprising Facts and Figures, Answers Magazine, May 23rd. 1908.

51 See Mandell, note 15.

52 The Parc de Vincennes was used as the site for the Paris Internationale Coloniale Exposition of 1931, and was to be the site for the 1992 Olympiad had the French bid been successful, which it was not. Interestingly enough, the winning bid, from Barcelona, proposes to hold the event on a former exposition site.

## CHAPTER THREE

# Imperial display

When Eric Hobsbawm entitled his classic work on the modern British economy ‘Industry and Empire’, he brought together in a phrase the two forces which have most decisively divided off the modem world from previous history.<sup>1</sup> For whilst both of these existed long before 1760, it was after that date the face of the earth was dramatically changed by them. Industry in itself would have restructured European life, but harnessed to the cause of imperial conquest, it was destined to transform life everywhere by 1940. Imperial achievement was celebrated to the full at international exhibitions. Any study of them that would exclude or underplay this aspect would run the risk of misrepresenting their overall flavour. In their presentation of industry and empire, they reflected more profoundly than any other cultural institution the driving forces behind Western society up to the Second World War. It was both logical and inevitable when governments backed events attempting to reflect the contemporary achievement of mankind that empire would be an uppermost consideration. At some exhibitions the imperial theme was made to dominate to the exclusion of all others. Virtually every Western nation with overseas territories, however slight they might be, participated in imperial sections of exhibitions; even the Americans by the end of the century lauded the idea of empire at World’s Fairs, mimicking their European forebears with grim effectiveness. At later British exhibitions empire gushed out of those areas allocated to it, spilling over into every activity on the site. It was so pervasive at the White City Exhibitions for example, that the ‘Times’ indexed them not under the standard heading ‘Science, Art, Music and Drama’, or even ‘Politics and Home Affairs’ but under ‘Empire and Foreign Affairs’. The extent of participation by any one nation would normally be gauged by the political, economic and strategic importance of the colonies involved. In the first instance, Britain set the pace for imperial display, before the French took the genre to its extravagant peak in the closing decades of the nineteenth century. For other nations, the evolution of imperial displays quickened after the scramble for Africa. London would therefore seem the logical place to begin the discussion.

The empire the British had acquired affected the total wealth of the mother country far more than was the case with any other imperial nation. By 1849, when the Great Exhibition was in its planning phase, British life was already difficult to conceive of in the absence of overseas resources, the maintenance of these being at the core of foreign policy. On the domestic front, power groups within British society increasingly saw the need to educate the population on the merits of the empire and to encourage the idea of a ‘Greater Britain’ in terms of one which included imperial gains. Empire was to be ‘naturalised’ for the British public, settled into their way of life in order to make them feel comfortable with the thought of Africa, Asia and India. If the population at home could be swayed into believing Africa was theirs, the problem of sending troops and resources to defend it would be considerably reduced. Popular pride in empire must be viewed as an emotion that was, in the first instance, artificially generated to facilitate governmental policy abroad; the Great Exhibition can be seen as one of the earliest and most effective examples of this artificial generation.

Virtually the first organizational task that the Royal Commission controlling the Exhibition set itself was the orchestration of colonies, dominions and dependencies into a huge imperial display. The produce of every possession that could be economically transported was to be there; the final list of exhibited colonies was staggeringly impressive: the East Indies, Indian Archipelago, Jersey, Guernsey, Ceylon, Ionian Islands, Malta, Cape of Good Hope, Natal, West Coast of Africa, Canada, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, New Brunswick, St. Helena, Mauritius, the Seychelles, St. Domingo, Grenada, Montserrat, St. Kitt’s, Barbados, Antigua, British Guiana, the Bahamas, Trinidad, the Bermudas, South Australia, Western Australia, New Zealand, New South Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, Labuan and Borneo.<sup>2</sup> From the beginning the centrepiece of the imperial sections were to be the contributions of the East India Company. J. Forbes-Royle was appointed to conduct initial negotiations with the Company, which resulted in his ‘Papers referring to the proposed contributions from India for the Industrial Exhibition of 1851.’ (London 1849). These contained extracts from a report by Henry Cole to Prince Albert on the proposed contribution of India: ‘Before concluding this report, we would inform your Royal Highness that, . . . it appeared likely that the East Indies would be able to contribute very largely to the division of the Exhibition proposed to consist of raw materials.’ Cole’s conception was to present empire as a treasure-house, a vast reservoir of tappable wealth that in itself had little shape or sophistication – hence the label ‘raw materials’ – but one which could nevertheless stagger the visitor with its extent and opulence. With the Prince of Wales’ consent, Cole and his committee determined that the British empire, especially India, would appear as an Alladin’s cave to the general public, showing them the full extent of their national belongings.

A dual aim can be detected in the reasoning behind the imperial displays at the Great Exhibition. The grandeur of the material wealth of British possessions was to be made clear; and the necessarily alien nature of the empire was to be reduced and the whole melted into the average British consciousness. The exhibition was to simultaneously glorify and domesticate empire. These goals were potentially contradictory in terms of display, as overpowering exotic wealth was not easily presented so as to not alienate the average British artisan or office clerk. Consequently it was decided to separate out certain centrepieces for lavish treatment, most notably the Indian Court, and then to largely blend the rest of the empire into the plethora of national exhibits making up the British (western) side of the Crystal Palace. The effect must have been an extraordinary confusion, as the description in the Art Journal Illustrated Catalogue suggests:

Crossing the transept, and pursuing the course to the left, we enter the western division of the nave. We have here the Indian Court, Africa, Canada, the West Indies, the Cape of Good Hope, the Mediaeval Court, and the English Sculpture Court . . . To these succeed Birmingham, the woollen and mixed fabrics, shawls, flax, and linens, and printing and dyeing. The long avenue leading from the Mediaeval Court to the end of the building is devoted to the general hardware, brass and ironwork of all kinds, locks, gates etc . . .<sup>3</sup>

Unfortunately for the Royal Commission, this dispersal reduced the overall impact of the colonies; only the East Indies appear to have left lingering memories in the minds of visitors.

Like everything else at the Great Exhibition, Empire was a commodity, a thing more important than but not dissimilar to shawls, ironwork, flax, or indeed, sculpture. This point was reinforced by the way the countries within the empire were exhibited, as quantifiable batches of produce rather than as cultures. Only India was partly spared the dissection of its heritage into numbers and types of disposable wealth, but even here the crudely material outlook of the English mind toward its subject-nations manifested itself. India was divided along the lines of the four main categories of the whole exhibition, Raw Materials, Machinery, Manufactures and Fine Arts, with the first of these subdivided into three sections, the ‘Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms’. The types of produce on display included coal, petroleum earth oil, saltpetre, silex, various types of clay, jasper, marble, precious stones, all kinds of herbs, seed, grain, spices, fruits, ivory, medicines and various types of craftwork. The machinery and manufactures were strictly non-industrial and mainly concerned with agriculture; the catalogue to the Indian section noted the machines (ploughs, seed-drills etc.) were ‘of extremely rough workmanship’.<sup>4</sup> By many accounts the most impressive parts of the assemblage were the silks and the metalwork, although on the whole art received a far more generalised assessment than other areas of Indian production; an exception was the praise accorded to the pastichism of the Indian Court itself. Despite a quasi-educational slant, the overall attitude and feeling was one of stocktaking, of an accountant’s inventory of a company’s possessions. The full significance of ‘the jewel in the crown’ was being shown off to an awestruck British public and an envious Europe, with every aspect of the prize carefully itemised.

The imperial theme at the Great Exhibition, and most British events following it, was supported by national associations operating in conjunction with government. The earliest of these was the Royal Society of Arts, which had involved itself in colonial affairs from its inauguration in 1754. Its original areas of interest were America and the West Indies, a committee being formed to encourage trade and industry there. Benjamin Franklin was chairman of this committee when he was resident in Britain. Later in its history, the Society clarified its intentions in relation to empire:

In addition to offering rewards for encouraging the industries of the colonies, the Society rendered them valuable aid by the transmission of seeds, machinery and models, and supplying information. From the correspondence which has been preserved, it is clear that the colonial officials and others were eager to obtain information, and the Society was ready to collect and supply it . . . As the British Empire expanded it was considered advisable to establish a special section of the Society to deal with its varied interests. This is now known as the Dominions and Colonies section.<sup>5</sup>

In 1851 the central rôle the Society had in the organisation of the Great Exhibition guaranteed empire a high profile amid the acres of exhibits. Its continued interest in exhibitions through to the First World War ensured that effective use of imperial resources would always be a main topic of debate at every major international event. Up to the final demise of empire, the Journal of the Royal Society had a regular section on colonial affairs and would involve itself in exhibitions in different colonial centres. For example, exhibitions were supported (and partly sponsored) in Calcutta, Delhi, Victoria, New South Wales, New Zealand and Nova Scotia between 1880 and 1914. Its published reasons for supporting all forms of imperial displays at exhibitions were: ‘1) To show the resources of the colony off, 2) To awaken local interest and to encourage emulation, and 3) To enhance British trade there.’<sup>6</sup> Thus the

Society saw empire as essentially an economic affair and its own selfgenerated rôle as being one of helping the cause of industrial culture wherever it could be shown to pay the mother country. Throughout its reign as one of the foremost British art institutions, it saw empire, industry, art and design not as unrelated things but as united accoutrements of a powerful, centralised, imperial state.

At the turn of the century the power of the Royal Society began to wane with regard to exhibitions and a new set of institutions came to the fore as guiding spirits. Prominent among these were the various imperial associations, notably the ‘British Empire League’, the ‘Primrose League’ and the ‘Imperial Federation League’.<sup>7</sup> The first of these had a particularly strong grip on the organisation of the White City Exhibitions, having a power base in the House of Lords which ensured governmental support. The Earl of Derby and Viscount Selby for example, were President and Chairman respectively of both the Central Committee of the Franco–British Exhibition and the British Empire League. Thus imperialism acquired a cultural platform totally lacking a critical dimension.<sup>8</sup> In the decades before the Second World War, it was various bodies associated with the Board of Trade which took care of the British profile at exhibitions, as the age of empire crept unwillingly to its final close.

Following the precedent of 1851, the produce of colonies, dominions and protectorates was carried to exhibition sites all over the world in vast bulk, causing the amount of space afforded to imperial displays to increase from event to event. The key development after the Great Exhibition came when visiting nations as well as the host country insisted upon huge imperial sections. In 1851 the only colony on show outside the British areas was Algiers, taken there by France. By 1855, when the first Paris Exposition Universelle opened, every nation with possessions wished to show them off. The British took an enormous imperial display to Paris, including exhibits from the East India Company, the Bahamas, Barbados, British Guiana, Canada, Cape of Good Hope, Ceylon, Jamaica, Mauritius, New South Wales (Sydney), New Zealand, Van Diemen’s Land and Victoria (Melbourne).<sup>10</sup> Nor were they the only ones, for the Dutch exhibits were generally noted to be as impressive. Naturally enough the French, as hosts, outstripped all others both in size and exotic flavour. A precedent was set at this exposition in the form of an ‘Imperial Pavilion’, a government-built structure separate from the rest of the exhibition housing much of the imperial produce, as well as providing a centre for dignitories to gather. The idea of wholly separate structures for the housing of colonial produce gathered pace from this; by 1876 lavish Colonial Palaces began to appear and larger colonies began to merit their own buildings. By

1890 one would normally expect to find individual palaces to India, Tunisia, Algeria, Canada etc. on the site. Into the twentieth century dominion and colonial palaces became standard features of most exhibitions, occasionally the genre being pushed to extreme proportions until the site resembled a bizarre city of exotic edifices. Amongst the most stunning of the earlier examples were the extraordinary palaces erected by the French to house their Algerian and Tunisian exhibits at the Exposition Universelle of 1889. Built in authentic materials in hybrid North African styles, their apparent grace overcame even the bigotry of English critics reporting on the Exposition. The largest example of the exhibition as an imperial city came in 1924 at the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley, where every colony and dominion able to afford it built a palace to house its exhibits. Some of these covered several acres and cost enormous sums to erect, transforming what had been a drab London suburb into an imperialist’s dreamland. Amongst the nations erecting palaces were Canada, India, Australia, New Zealand, Malaya, Burma, Newfoundland, South Africa, West Africa, East Africa, Palestine and Cyprus, Fiji, West Indies, Hong Kong, Ceylon and Sarawak.<sup>11</sup>

Examining British exhibitions from 1851 to 1940, the type and shape of imperialism at work in them can be seen to alter qualitatively much in the way empire changed in the world in general. Because of this, exhibitions can be used as a socio-political gauge for attitudes toward empire throughout the period. A major debate within British imperial studies concerns the nature of continuum in empire. Following the lead of Sir John Seeley, working at the end of the nineteenth century, many historians have depicted the development of the empire as phasal, whereby three discernable periods can be seen to straddle the imperial age: the ‘mercantile’ (up to the 1830’s), the ‘anti-imperial’ (to the early 1870’s) and the ‘new imperial’ (1870 onwards).<sup>12</sup> The new imperial period, inaugurated by Disraeli’s famous Crystal Palace speech of 1872, was the aggressive sequel to a supposed period of ‘acquisition by accident’ when, in Seeley’s words, Britain seemed ‘. . . as it were, to have conquered and peopled half the world in a fit of absence of mind’.<sup>13</sup> This view came under increasing attack in the 1950’s from historians who detected a far more continuous development of empire than the antiimperial phase would suggest. These historians stressed the economically abrasive edge to British imperial policy through the second half of the nineteenth century and attacked the idea that empire was received as an unwanted burden at that time.<sup>14</sup> The major function of such a view, it has been suggested, was to humanise and underplay the real nature of British imperial ambition and to deny the essentially economic rôle of British policy. Within the debate, the exhibitions become interesting indicators of the real intent behind empire, for they reveal the extent of the value government and major economic forces placed on it through the period.

Most importantly, the unfolding of the exhibition tradition from 1851 does not support the idea of an ‘anti-imperial’ phase as being anything more than a fluctuating Parliamentary debate. From 1851 onwards empire was proudly and exhaustively displayed. In 1862 at the London South Kensington exhibition thirty-five colonies and dominions were shown; a similar number appeared in 1871, 1872, 1873 and 1874 at the International Exhibitions also in South Kensington. Parliament, Crown and private enterprise lent support to all these events, the last two of which should have evidenced the beginnings of a shift from ‘anti’ to ‘new’ imperialism, which they did not. They simply showed the proud bombast with which the British regarded their empire, a bombast that did not fade into the twentieth century. Neither was there anything in British exhibits in foreign exhibitions showing an antiimperial stance from government or the private sector at any time. Anti-imperial speeches in Parliament carried far less weight in the outside world it would appear, than many future historians accorded them. Into the 1880’s however there was a distinct shift in emphasis at exhibitions. The aftermath of the scramble for Africa left the British wary of the imperial ambitions of her European rivals and worried for the safety of her own empire. The Colonial and Indian Exhibition (London 1886) revealed a move from complacent pride in empire to a propagandistic defence of it. Empire became proportionately more a topic for abrasive forms of entertainment and less one for quasieducational displays. By the time of the ‘Greater Britain Exhibition’ (London 1899), a climate of jingoism had evolved, with most exhibitions both reflecting and fueling this. After the Boer War, into the twentieth century, exhibitions became increasingly vocal about empire, as its permanence was for the first time at issue. Imperial propaganda grew as Britain declined, the vulgarity and violence of exhibitions in this regard becoming markedly more noticeable. What had always been assumed in the nineteenth century now had to be justified and defended in the twentieth, as the demise of British industry made empire all the more vital for the maintenance of her position. Literally dozens of substantial National Imperial exhibitions were held in different cities in the British Isles after 1900, presenting empire to the public in the form of museum-like displays, constructed environments and popular entertainment. Among the most impressive of these were at Edinburgh (1886), Bradford (1904), Wolverhampton (1907) and Newcastle (1929).<sup>15</sup> Larger shows at the White City (London 1908–1914), Wembley (London 1924–5) and Glasgow (1901, 1911 and 1938) carried the imperial theme onto an epic scale. This activity brought an irony to the exhibition tradition, in that the century which saw the disappearance of empire was also the one that lauded it most lavishly.

From 1851 to 1940 then, committment to empire at exhibitions never slackened or lost its fervour, it merely changed emphasis. This could be said of British concern for empire in general; during the brief period between the scramble for Africa and the Boer War, the calm expansiveness of British imperial policy foundered and an attitude of ‘benevolent’ appropriation became one of increasingly paranoic defence. The ambition to consume as much as possible became a frenzied desire to hold on to what had already been won. Exhibitions became a propaganda ground for imperial justification, attempting to reinforce the unity of empire and to imbue the British public with an imperial pride. In the second of these, they undoubtedly succeeded.<sup>16</sup>

The British imperial policy at exhibitions was most clearly demonstrated with regard to India. India was the most carefully displayed possession at the Great Exhibition and continued to be so throughout the period under discussion at home and abroad. The Indian Court in 1851 filled 30,000 square feet; the South Kensington Exhibition of 1862 was a smaller but more extravagant affair than its predecessor, covering a total floor space of 10,000 square feet. At the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1867, 8,700 sq. ft. were filled at a cost of £4,562; in London again, at the four events in South Kensington between 1871–1874, 8, 000 square feet were filled at a total cost of £7,351. At Vienna in 1873, 10,000 square feet cost £12,342 and at the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1878 an Indian Court covering 20,000 square feet cost £3,278. From 1880 the trend was an upward one both in cost and size. In 1886 Indian exhibits at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition filled 103,000 sq. ft. at an expenditure of £22,000.<sup>17</sup> At least twenty-four further Indian Palaces and Courts were erected in foreign exhibitions between 1886 and 1939. Large teams of administrators and skilled workmen were constantly employed all over the world to build and fill these expensive temporary buildings. No evidence has emerged so far to indicate whether the buildings were ever taken from one exhibition site to another, the usual pattern being to demolish and dispense with them completely and start afresh at the succeeding event. The funding for the Palaces normally came from three sources, the Indian government, the British government and private enterprise. Of the three, the Indian government paid the lion’s share, normally about half to two thirds the total cost. The usual branch of private enterprise to fund the Indian exhibits were the tea companies, notably the Calcutta Tea Syndicate. There were exceptions to this pattern, for example the Colonial and Indian Exhibition, where the total bill of £22,000 was divided as follows: Indian Government £10,000, Royal

Commission (effectively the British Government) £3,000, Bombay Exhibition Grant £6,850 and the Royal Commission Screen Grant £2,500. The origin of these last two authorities is unclear, but it does appear that they were officially appointed, indicating that on this occasion all the money came from governmental sources. 18

The exhibiting of India developed onto its grandest scale in the twentieth century, beginning with a grand palace at the Paris Universelle of 1900. Following the established pattern this was a treasurehouse full of opulent produce, complete with beautifully dressed Indians serving as exhibition attendants. For one of the first times in recent imperial history however, some were prepared to criticise what they saw as a gross distortion of the Indian story. The revelling in conquest which had seemingly undergone no public challenge during the previous century now had its detractors. Maurice Talmeyr, a catholic writer reviewing the Exposition for the ‘Revue des Deux Mondes’ attacked what he saw as an India presented by British overlords:

. . . why is starving India incarnated in well-coiffed, well nourished, well clothed Indians? Because famine is not and never can be an Exposition attraction . . . The notion . . . of an India warehouse, so magnificent and so partially true as it may be, is true only partially, so partially as to be false, and these overflowing rooms . . . speak to me only of an incomplete and truncated India, that of the cashiers. And the other? That of the famine? For this land of enormous and sumptuous trade is equally that of a frightening local degeneracy, of a horrifying indigenous misery. A whole phantom race dies there and suffers in famine. India is not only a warehouse, it is a cemetery. 19

Impervious to such criticism, British organisers continued to expand the scope of Indian displays. At the Franco-British Exhibition of 1908, a splendid building, complete with minarets, towers and domes housed a huge selection of produce which undoubtedly had an effect on popular taste at the time. In addition to this, various entertainments were provided to explain Indian life since British rule to an inquisitive audience.<sup>20</sup> Perhaps more interesting than these latter pieces of jingoism was the centrepiece of the exhibition, the Court of Honour. This was to remain virtually unchanged through all the exhibitions held at the White City up to 1914.<sup>21</sup> A critic at the time remarked that the style of the Court appeared not to reflect the theme of the exhibition, the Entente Cordiale of 1904:

Here we have a village of steel and stucco palaces raised to commemorate the falling on each others necks of two great nations, and, the last thing the architect seems to have thought of was to make his buildings reflect the situation. The Court of Honour is neither French or English, but

Mohamedan-Hindoo, and the other buildings have more in common with the architecture of Spanish America or of an ununited Germany than with anything in the two countries involved.<sup>22</sup>

In actuality, the Court of Honour intentionally had little to do with France, but was a bizarre mixture of India and Britain, a mingling of minarets, onion domes and Indian tracery with the then fashionable ‘Edwardian baroque’ style. The architect, Commissioner-general Imre Kiralfy, had achieved in architecture what the British government sought to achieve in other spheres of British life, the irretrievable fusion of Britain with India. Eastern exoticism gave drama and excitement to facades composed in a staid English classicism. In the architectural fabric of the Court of Honour, empire was displayed to fulfill its two essential rôles at exhibitions. It showed off the epic scale of the wealth India brought to Britain, and it settled India into the English scene, harmonizing it into English vision in a way which felt natural, even permanent.

The last significant Indian Palace to be built in Britain was also the most impressive, in 1924 at the Empire Exhibition at Wembley. As with many of the exhibitions held in Britain after 1880, the Wembley show was international only by virtue of its empire, as other countries were not invited to participate. Thus the imperial theme saturated the whole site in a fashion rivalled only by the last great imperial exhibition, in Glasgow in 1938.<sup>23</sup> At Wembley, the Indian site covered five acres, the Palace itself three acres, with a total expenditure of £180,000. The Official Guide described the apparent effect of the Palace, which was the second most expensive and by far the largest present:

An Anglo-Indian who has devoted many years of his life to the civil service, said as he came from the Indian Pavilion one afternoon in May that he had now seen India for the first time . . . He had travelled upwards of thirty years along the main roads of Indian administration, seeing much, but inevitably missing more, while at Wembley all India swam into his gaze . . 24

One of the main functions of the building was to show all that Britain had done for India since her arrival there. This had been a rôle of Indian Palaces since the ‘Colonial and Indian’ exhibition, the theme often meriting an area of its own by the turn of the century. At the Festival of Empire of 1911 (London, Crystal Palace), for example, the Official Guide pointed out that ‘a small section has been arranged to show the progress which has been made in India under British rule in the past sixty years.’ At Wembley, British help to India was assessed more passionately,

. . . we must realise, even if we have no more than a little imagination, how ceaselessly Britain has wrought for India, how much has been accomplished, how much remains yet to do . . . To understand the resources and variety of India as set out in the Pavilion, and to grasp the part Great Britain has played in developing one and unifying the other, is to understand why the title of King Emperor is the first of all titles throughout the world.<sup>25</sup>

Obsession with India obviously had its basis in economic dependence, the extraordinary attention given to the Indian continent at exhibitions exposing both a pride in possession and a terror at the thought of loss. As has already been suggested, India was widely thought of as a reservoir which could be drained into the British economy, an inanimate ‘thing’ to be used as one used coal or flax. In varying degrees the analogy could be made across all British territories. It was no coincidence that the Indian and Colonial Exhibition of 1886 came at the end of a sequence of four annual international exhibitions, the others of which, Fisheries, Health and Inventions, were not cultures but types of produce.<sup>26</sup> The sequence revealed a good deal about British attitudes to empire; it was variously considered as a resource, as a commodity, as something the British had created, as an abstract concept; it could be many things in fact, except people with lives and traditions of their own. Such an admission raised the issue of exploitation, a topic which never emerged throughout the history of British exhibitions.

The approach to dominions and colonies other than India was usually below this intense level, depending upon the status and value of the nation involved. The standard format in Britain and in British contributions to foreign exhibitions from 1893 onwards was one whereby colonies and dominions were displayed according to their economic usefulness. A total colonial section would usually involve the creation of a single composite display of lesser territories and a small number of separate pavilions and palaces to larger ones. Thus, in 1938 at the Glasgow International, a ‘Colonial Avenue’ was built, containing within it individual national pavilions and a multi-nation Colonial Court, described in the official catalogue:

Represented in the Colonial Court are Malaya, the West Indies, and a composite group of Colonies, Protectorates and Dependencies, including Cyprus and Malta, Ceylon, British North Borneo and Sarawak, Hong Kong, the Falkland Islands, Somaliland, Bechuanaland, and others. They are grouped around a central exhibit which illustrates their trade with Britain. In the background are tropical forests, fields of rice with maize, and a strip of yellow sand, with caravans winding down toward the sea which occupies most of the foreground. In the immediate foreground are the ports of Britain, and between them and the distant tropics, fleets of ships sail.<sup>27</sup>

A ‘diorama’ such as this was a normal display method, two central themes being evident. First the ‘lesser’ territories were to be seen as a single concern, a grouped resource fused together as an economic unit with Britain as the common factor to link them. Despite their very different geographic locations and traditions, they were fused into the proverbial ‘over there’, with Britain at the centre of their world focus. Second, Britain was depicted as being in close physical proximity to its possessions in order to make them ‘feel’ British in popular consciousness. The message to the average British person visiting Colonial Court was clear, ‘this is yours, see how naturally it fits into your own way of life.

The major white dominions, colonies and commonwealth territories were normally separate from other nations of the empire after 1870; increasingly from the opening of the new century they showed a willingness to build substantial pavilions to house their exhibits. The economic motives behind this willingness were trade, which could receive noticeable stimulation from a good showing, and emigration. By 1908, a spirit of rivalry had grown between these nations, revealing itself in an eagerness to rent the best areas of sites and to erect the largest building. Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa were the principal rivals, newspaper reports showing that exhibition jealousies could become openly aggressive. At the Franco-British Exhibition for example, the Australian organisers took the Commissioner-General to court because he had allowed a building to be erected partly across the frontal facade of their building. The claim was that they had paid an exceptionally large rent on the understanding that the view of the Pavilion facade would be completely unobstructed. The Commissioner, Imre Kiralfy, failed to appear to explain his position, the case being settled out of court by a refund of part of the Australian rent.<sup>28</sup> At many of the twentieth-century events the urgency of the new nations to excel came out of a desire to show Europe they had achieved a cultural respectability to match their more utilitarian accomplishments. Splendid classical pavilions from New Zealand, Canada, Australia and South Africa stood as confirmation that the colonial stage had been transcended, and independence had been gained not only materially but culturally also.<sup>29</sup>

British imperialism, as a vital force at the centre of the British way of life, was bound to appear at exhibitions in a more thoroughly conceived way than the imperialism of her major European rivals. This is not to say other nations cared less about the presentation of their foreign acquisitions but that the range of messages they carried were not so extensive or so subtly constructed. As late as 1925 many European displays carried a ‘spoils of war’ flavour with them, an implicit glorying in the rich pickings of foreign campaigns and a revelling in military power. The only consistent exception to this pattern were the Dutch, who concentrated almost exclusively on the history of their empire and its raison d’être in trade. Whilst the approach of Portugal, Belgium or France to the acquisition of territory was no more or less brutal or even tactically different from that of the English, there was a tendency to be more ‘matter-of-fact’ about it at exhibitions. The British had a longterm concern to tie empire into the national economic fabric using means other than the force which initially acquired it. Domestication and reconciliation were persistent elements in her exhibitions from 1851. These were less important to most other nations, who, despite the vicious way they tended to hang onto their gains, regarded empire more as an economic bonus or as a symbolic indicator of power than as an economic life’s-blood. Only into the third decade of this century did reconciliation and harmony within colonies become a major concern of European powers at exhibitions, when economic depression made empire all the more important. The pattern for most nations was set by the French, who gloried in empire at the Expositions Universelles more brilliantly but in a less deeply constructed way than the British.

It was the French in fact who first displayed imperial gains at exhibitions when they brought produce from Antilles to the 1839 National Exhibition at the Champs Elysées. In 1844 at the tenth National event, also held at the Champs Elysées, Réunion, Pondichery and Guadeloupe appeared. At the Exhibition of 1849, these three were once more presented and for the first time Algeria was shown to the French public as one of their national possessions. Whilst the very first national displays had carried Napoleonic imperialism within their scope, with the showing, for example, of art objects taken from Italy, the displays of 1839, 1844 and 1849 were the real forerunners, probably providing the English with food for thought as they prepared their own imperial sections for the Great Exhibition.<sup>30</sup> When the first Exposition Universelle opened in 1855 the imperial theme was immediately evident from two sources. As has already been noted, an Imperial Pavilion marked French gains, but more than this, foreign nations had by now grasped the imperial potential of exhibitions after the Great Exhibition, where only the host country was fully aware of its intended rôle. Virtually every imperial possession in the world was represented on the site, making the event an appropriate show piece for its main sponsor, Napoleon the Third. Algeria was the centre-piece of French efforts, effectively being the equivalent of India for the English. The scale and opulence of the displays and the heavy presence of the French imperial armies led historian Raymond Isay to comment ‘L’Exposition Universelle, d’abord envisagée comme une fête de la paix, devint, du fait des circonstances, une manifestation de guerre’.<sup>31</sup> The French sense of rivalry with the English had a direct bearing on the imperial sphere, in the care and expense they went to in the presentation of their empire; from this point in time the two nations were to persistently attempt to out-do each other in their imperial exhibits until the outbreak of the Second World War. The statistical inferiority of the French territories did not prevent them from spending vast sums on display, and the undoubted excellence of the pavilions they erected did not prevent the English from indulging in snide comments upon them. The exhibitions came, by 1889, to expose both countries as spoiled children attempting to out-boast each other with their vast and priceless toys.

In the Exposition Universelle of 1867 the French empire received considerably more space than in 1855, as Napoleon III attempted to give full meaning to his title. Tunisia and Morocco joined Algeria as the main centre-pieces, these three meriting their own sections and organising juries. The Exposition was untypically systematic in its presentation of empire. Following the British pattern, displays went well beyond the finer end of the cultural spectrum, providing exhaustive economic and demographic information. Morocco for example was divided into the following sections: geography, population, government, imports, the military, principal towns, agriculture, commerce abroad, commerce at home, industry, science and art. 32 Whilst statistical analysis was always a part of French display, organisers normally preferred to put these elements in side rooms or annexes in order to leave the central spaces for large splashes of exotic produce and decor. In 1878 this was the case, the emphasis being more on oriental romance than on learning. Here the imperial displays were put in facilities on the Chaillot Hill leading up to the Palais de Trocadéro, the French taking half the space with other nations filling the rest. The larger French colonies had their own buildings, the rest being in a single colonial palace; other nations had national buildings to house their possessions. This was the largest space so far given up to empire at any exhibition anywhere and was the beginning of the genre whereby imperial sections were presented as exotic cities of pavilions and palaces. The sloping site in front of the Palais de Trocadéro was kept for the imperial sections at the two following Expositions Universelles, when the scene blossomed into a baroque exhuberance of different cultures.

Despite the care taken by French organisers to show overseas territories as exciting and viable additions to French holdings, empire was not always popularly acknowledged with the unrelenting awe it received in Britain. After the Franco-Prussian War many Frenchmen had come to regard African and Asian gains as being minor side issues compared with the real European loss. Indeed, there can be no doubt the government in 1878, and in the following Exposition of 1889, used the empire to detract from widespread desire to regain Alsace-Lorraine. Celebrating the gains in Africa, it was vainly hoped, would compensate for losses nearer home and help rebuild French national confidence. With this rationale, vast sums were spent in 1889 on displays that were to provide the model for all imperial exhibitions which followed, including those held in Britain.

Several sources indicate that it was the London Colonial and Indian Exhibition of 1886 which inspired the massively enhanced imperial Parisian display in 1889;<sup>33</sup> this may be the case but the decision to build a town of pavilions and palaces remains a wholly French one. The pavilions sprawled over one hundred acres between the Champs de Mars and the Trocadéro and were so positioned as to form the core of the Exposition. A reporter working on the site for the English publication the ‘Pall Mall Gazette’ was particularly enlightening on the display, not only for his eloquent description but for his pronounced sense of envy and rivalry:

As you pass palace after palace and pagoda after pagoda, you seem to gain a continually increasing conception of the grandeur of France outre mer, which contrasts curiously with the impression produced by studying the colonial question before a map. The French chef who produced a dainty banquet out of the sole of an old boot has been out done by the genius who conjured up this phantasmagoria of a colonial empire out of the few out-ofthe-way-bits of territory over which, Algeria excepted, the Tricolour is flying . . . Palace succeeds palace each reproducing the salient features of the architecture of the country represented: gay and gorgeous pagodas, like architectural parrots, add vivid outlandish colour to the scene, while native temples and colonial pavilions create a pleasing sense of bewilderment and magnificence.<sup>34</sup>

Such a report did more than simply confirm the continuing existence of competition between the two nations – soon to be exacerbated by the Fashoda crisis – it also highlighted the disproportionate emphasis the French placed upon empire at that time, an emphasis welling out of political expediency rather than economic reality. As large as French gains had been up to 1889, this imperial weighting betrayed politically motivated exaggeration. Predictably, the most impressive palaces according to newspaper reports were those of Algeria and Tunis, the latter being described as ‘a graceful oriental edifice’.<sup>35</sup> French Indo-China also provided French pastiche architects with rich source material. A Colonial Palace was filled with surplus produce, where those territories too small to erect a building for could be found. French India was heavily presented here, mainly in the form of Pondichery, while other notable exhibits came from Senegal (mainly skins), New

Caledonia (nickel and other mined produce), Cayenne (mostly the manufactures of convicts), the French West Indies (sugar and rum) and miscellaneous raw materials from Obock, Nossi-Bé, Mayotte, Tahitti and others. Statistical information could be found in the side-rooms of this building. Adjacent to the imperial pavilions in the Palais de Trocadéro itself there was an extensive ethnological exhibition. Aboriginal, African and Oceanic objects of various types and periods were present in quantity and pre-Columbian artefacts were shown in Europe for the first time. The Trocadéro was soon to become associated with non-Western art and was to be the venue for many important exhibitions up to its demolition in 1937. The site is still the main centre for anthropological exhibitions in Paris, the successor to the Trocadéro, the Palais de Chaillot, now housing the Musée de l’Homme.

At the Exposition Universelle of 1900 the colonial area was expanded still further, becoming the most impressive aspect of the site. This was indeed a feat for the show as a whole has commonly thought to have been the most spectacular ever held. The Hachette Guide described the scene as it appeared looking west from the first stage of the Eiffel Tower:

The Trocadéro, with its symetrical fan-shape, envelops the mass of pavilions. To the left, recalling the Byzantium of the empresses and the Moscow of Ivan the Terrible, rise the gilded ridges of the Siberian Pavilion. At the top a large heraldic bird begins its flight of conquest over Asia, which lies out at its feet like a tame leopard . . . Lower down, the sculptured structures of the Dutch Indies display their red and blue masses. Sumatra, Borneo and Java . . . Roofs, curved at the corners in the form of ships prows, cover the sanctuary with elaborate freizes where Buddha, with eight arms and eight legs, rests on the immortal lotus. Nearby, to the right, rises the graceful spire of the pavilion of the Transvaal and in the background, beyond the masses of greenery, the inextricable entanglement of the Chinese roofs bears witness to the active presence of the children of the Celestial Empire.<sup>36</sup>

A bristling panoply of steel, stone and plaster structures, curiously resembling a massive set for an epic silent film, the colonial sections at the 1900 Exposition saw Europe at its presumptuous, confident peak, long before the nightmare of the First World War brought the curtain down on the era. Empire here was transformed from military and commercial conquest, from the brutal control of other peoples for cynical economic purposes, to propagandistic entertainment, to a fair. The gaiety of the pavilions was purposely meant to hide the darker side of the gloried conquest, the near genocide which had at different times occurred all over the imperial world, the destruction of cultures, the appropriation of wealth on an unprecedented and greed-ridden scale. The Exposition was in every way a harlequin’s mask hiding brutish, heavy features beneath. This of course did not prevent it from transfixing its audience. Across the cultural range this swirling mass of minarets, palm trees and pagodas exerted an influence and provoked admiration.

After 1900 there was a gap of twenty-five years before Paris staged an event of comparable stature, but successive French governments took great care to maintain an imperial stance at all major foreign events, usually providing a lavish publication for their imperial sections, separate from the main catalogue. The beautifully produced guide to the French Empire on sale at the New York World’s Fair in 1939 was testament to the fact that interest had by no means slackened, even with the German war looming.<sup>37</sup> Pride in the African empire, in part generated to detract from the loss of Alsace-Lorraine, would eventually lead France into one of the last and bloodiest of imperial conflicts. The expositions played their part in convincing Frenchmen that possession of Algeria was worth dying for. French displays in foreign exhibitions, as with the English, became distinctly more propagandistic as the twentieth century progressed. One of the more interesting efforts came in London in 1908, at the Franco-British Exhibition, when French and British empires appeared head on, with no other nations present. The British felt themselves able to revel in the statistical side of things:

In no other country do the theory and practice of colonization receive more careful attention than in France. The French colonies, dependencies and spheres of influence, second in number only to those of Great Britain, have an area of over four million square miles and a population of over sixty million.<sup>38</sup>

It was generally acknowledged however, despite the competitiveness of the English, that the Palaces erected to Tunisia and Algeria comfortably equalled the one built for India, making the significance of the two empires indistinguishable in the eyes of the exhibition visitor.<sup>39</sup>

The Expositions Universelles of 1925 and 1937 maintained the colonial element despite the insistence both had on positive aspects of modern life, although it had shrunk back somewhat from the excesses of 1889 and 1900. The 1925 show was more centrally based around the visual (decorative) arts than any international exhibition before or after, and so understandably a main issue was the definition of ‘colonial art’ as a type. The main catalogue provided a definition which was surprisingly wide:

There are three types of colonial art. The first, in the exact meaning of the word, is the indigenous art; another is the art practiced by the colonials of European origin, who incorporate or juxtapose their own needs, their own science and aesthetic with the primitive civilizations. Lastly the same name is convenient for works of Europeans influenced by exoticism. The three types of art figure in the exhibition.<sup>40</sup>

The third type was not shown with the indigenous forms it was inspired by but was with other European art-forms spread through the public and private pavilions. In retrospect the categorization of it as ‘colonial’ does seem to be a bizarre eccentricity.<sup>41</sup> Having defined colonial art, the catalogue asked another potentially interesting question, ‘Comment peut-il être moderne?’, but for this there was no immediate answer.

In 1937 an extensive French colonial section was located west of the Champs de Mars in pavilions built on huge pontoons floating on the Seine. There were separate buildings to Morocco, Tunisia, Guadaloupe, Indochina, Martinique, Madagascar, Algeria, Réunion and Corsica. Foreign nations had their colonial exhibits within their own pavilions. Whilst the overall imperial flavour was perceivably not as strong as it had been at the turn of the century, this was not particularly due to a slackening interest in empire. On the contrary, the drift from excessive imperialism at the last two Expositions Universelles was caused by the growth of alternative expositions based entirely on the imperial theme. Huge colonial expositions were held in Marseilles in 1906 and 1922, where the usual bias of French events toward the arts was virtually forgotten. Marseilles staged these expositions because ‘In Marseilles, everybody – high and low, big and little – thinks colonially. Very few of France’s overseas possessions are not linked directly with this port . . . Marseilles . . . owed a duty to itself to call attention to its efforts and its results in the colonial sense.’ <sup>42</sup> More spectacular than the Marseilles shows was the Paris Exposition Internationale Coloniale of 1931, held in the Parc de Vincennes.<sup>43</sup> Appearing in some ways to be a response to the British Empire show at Wembley six years previous, Vincennes bristled with dozens of flamboyant pavilions in the form of temples, pagodas and mosques. A permanent Musée des Colonies and large botanical gardens were also built on the site. Unlike the Wembley show the empires of other nations were included, Britain being the only major absentee.<sup>44</sup> The French contribution included separate buildings to Madagascar, Indochina, St. Pierre-et-Miquelon, French Guiana, the French Indies, Oceania, New Caledonia, Martinique, Réunion, Guadeloupe, French Equatorial Africa, North Africa, West Africa, Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria.<sup>45</sup> This was the most spectacular of French imperial displays since 1900. In comparison, the floating pavilions of 1937 seemed noncommittal and ephemeral; for the French the Internationale Coloniale was the climax of their colonial displays. As with the empire itself, every effort after then seemed to hint at decline.

Vincennes focused Western imperialism more dramatically than any exhibition before or after it; only the absence of the British prevented it from being the most comprehensive event of its type in the tradition. Large pavilions were erected by Belgium, Holland, Portugal, Italy, Denmark and the U.S.A.. The desire to have an imperial profile was such it seems, that any claim was worth display space. Denmark exhibited Greenland; Italy, whose empire was diminutive at the time, played heavily on her glorious imperial tradition as established by the Romans. The other nations had more significant contributions to make, their appearance in the Internationale Coloniale being part of well established policies by 1931. Belgium, Holland and Portugal had been active displayers of empire since the last decade of the nineteenth century, when the scramble for Africa brought empires to those least expecting them.

Portugal had been surprisingly prominent as an imperial exhibitor throughout the twentieth century. A lavish display in her national pavilion at the Paris Exposition of 1900 and a further one at the Imperial International Exhibition of 1909 in London established a trend which developed to a high pitch in the 1930’s. At the Paris Coloniale Internationale no less than three separate buildings were erected, designed to reflect her long standing as a colonizing power. The Guide explained:

The first two pavilions of Portugal evoke this glorious past. The first, in its architecture, follows the inspiration of Portuguese constructions of the fifteenth century, where the influence of the Moors lingers, mixed with the austere ruggedness of Henry the Navigator, initiator of so many overseas enterprises. This pavilion contains evidence of the oldest Portuguese expeditions . . . The second pavilion is devoted to Alphonso of Albuquerque, who died at the beginning of the sixteenth century, after having given to his country, among other marvellous lands, Ormuz, Goa, Malacca . . . Such men are the vital force of a nation . . . And now, dear Visitor, let us return to the Grand Pavilion, which houses the exposition of the two African territories; Angola and Mozambique. These two territories are the most important from the territorial viewpoint; within them are to be found the greatest possibilities for economic development. 46

The Guide also noted other Portuguese possessions on display, including the Cape Green Islands, Portuguese Guiana, the islands of San Tomé and Principe, Goa in India, Macoa in China and Timor in Oceania. In its completeness it represented the high-point of Portuguese imperial exhibits, although there were significant displays to follow before the outbreak of the Second World War. At the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1937, for example, a ‘Salle Outre-Mer’ was created in the national pavilion, centring on Angola and Mozambique.<sup>47</sup> A large photomontage display explained the economy of the two territories, alongside examples of the extensive range of raw produce extracted from them. In 1940 a Colonial Exhibition was held in Lisbon itself.<sup>48</sup>

Holland and Belgium were the most consistent European exhibitors of empire throughout the exhibition tradition after Britain and France. Both sent colonial exhibits to major events and occasionally had exhibitions of their own with an imperial dimension. The Dutch was one of the oldest and most lucrative of all world empires, a fact they themselves were keen to acknowledge in international company. Displays were taken to all the Paris Expositions Universelles, to the South Kensington Exhibition of 1862, the Imperial International Exhibition of 1909 (both in London) and to numerous other exhibitions in Europe. Quite surprisingly, they still exuded a proud imperial spirit in 1931, at the Internationale Coloniale:

Today, the Netherlands consider that they belong, not only to countries with overseas possessions, but that the Dutch West Indies are so important in world economics that they can be considered as a great colonial power. The Netherlands are not wrong. We must rank them among the first colonizers of the world.<sup>49</sup>

Belgian imperialism was a more recent phenomenon, belonging almost entirely to the last decades of the nineteenth century when Leopold the Second benefitted his country out of the scramble for Africa. At the Internationale Coloniale his rôle was heavily emphasised in the official literature, which gave an overall impression of the Belgian Congo as a giant business speculation. Three pavilions sheltered exhibits on the history, economy, demography and geography of the single possession.

Perhaps a better guide to Belgian imperial consciousness is provided by their own events; after the French, British and Americans they had the most consistent policy for the holding of international exhibitions. It was here the Belgian empire received its greatest embellishment. Expositions Universelles in Brussels in 1897 and 1910, in Liége in 1905 and 1930, and Antwerp in 1894 and 1930 all had extensive imperial sections. The last two in Liége and Antwerp in 1930 were held simultaneously as a joint celebration of the centenary of independence. Antwerp had Colonial, Maritime and Flemish Art displays, Liége had Science, Industry, Social Economy, Agriculture and Music; between them, as it were, they made up one large Exposition. The colonial display in Antwerp was the most ambitious Belgian effort ever and the largest held outside Britain or France. It is deserving of more historical attention than it has hitherto received. The major European Empires could be found on the Avenue de la Colonie, including Britain, France, Holland, Portugal, Italy and, in pride of place, Belgium. The main Belgian building, named the ‘Palais du Congo’, had a curiously hybrid appearance the General Report of the Exhibition felt itself bound to explain:

Externally, the pavilion has a more oriental than Congolese character. One could not find in Congolese art the inspiration for the great architectural forms of this palace, the artist has used very advantageously, in the ornament, engravings certain populations indigenous to the Belgian Congo use on their weapons and utensils, and characteristic geometric drawings one can find on the mats of certain tribes in our colony. 50

In his ethnocentricity the architect decided the Congo could not provide a suitable form for the pavilion housing its produce, it could only aspire to provide decorative trimmings. In exhibition architecture, African building forms were only used when the designer sought an authentic setting. It would then serve in the manner of a stage set in an attempt to mentally transport the visitor away from northern Europe.<sup>51</sup> In 1924 at Wembley and 1931 at Vincennes for example, the British, French and Belgians all constructed mock African fortresses and meeting houses, in the absence of any serious architectural considerations. If a permanent or significant building were needed, the furthest move from a European construction one could expect would be a pastiche of Indian, Arabic or Eastern architecture. The architect in charge of the Palais du Congo at Antwerp went as far as racially determined stylistic conventions would allow him.<sup>51</sup>

The Antwerp Exposition took a more rigorously rational approach to display of empire than many before it, having a long list of categories for exhibits which visiting nations were requested to adhere to. This was out of character with most exhibitions held after the First World War, being reminiscent of British Victorian events and the Paris show of 1867. The categories were: the history of colonization, geography and cartography, indigenous population, indigenous politics, government and administration, the judiciary, medicine, hygiene, medical assistance to the colonies, missions, development in labour, civil engineering, transport, commerce, financial organisation, agriculture including breeding, hunting and fishing, agricultural industry, heavy industry, mining, and diverse products. It is not recorded as to whether the other nations followed this pattern with any exactitude but it is likely they did, as prizes were awarded for the best displays in any one subject area.

Everything indicates the participants considered Antwerp an important imperial event. The French, Dutch and British all built substantial structures, the Dutch one being the most unusual of these in that it was designed in what was a late and eccentric version of art nouveau, which must have seemed strangely uncomfortable in surroundings of such pomp. Aware they were not going to participate in the Paris Internationale Coloniale, Britain made a special effort at the Antwerp Exposition.<sup>52</sup> The General Report recognised this, and acknowledged also the progressive display techniques used:

Great Britain has supplied us, with great success, with a model of the new style exhibition . . . more than a fair intended to entertain the crowds who come to idly stroll: a parade of dioramas, models and electrically lit maps are put under the eyes of the curious, without requiring on their part any effort to understand, a suite of images at once concise and living of her history, her navy, her aviation, of her dominions, a striking synthesis of her imperial strength.<sup>53</sup>

It is difficult to ascertain who exactly applied these technologically enhanced display methods to imperial exhibits first, but by 1930 they were widely used. The British appear to have been early masters of the techniques, showing a progressiveness strangely out of step with retrogressive attitudes evident elsewhere in their design practices. French and Portuguese efforts in Antwerp were less exciting than the British. In the case of the former the decision to participate at all was taken mainly as a courtesy to the Belgians, as the Internationale Coloniale was less than a year away. For the latter the General Report tells us the decision to take part was made late, preventing anything but the meagrest of buildings to be erected. Even so, the colonial sections as a whole bulked large, proudly showing to the Belgian population the riches that European imperial exploits had brought.

There were a number of European nations which did not take part in any committed way in the imperial sections of exhibitions. Most notable amongst these were Spain, Germany, Russia and Austria. In the case of the first two, explanations are simple enough. Spain lost much of her South American territory by 1900, just as the temperature of imperial propaganda rose generally, and her other holdings were negligible. For her, imperial displays could do little more than remind her of a former glory that could never return. Germany had won a reasonable slice of the African cake as it was divided at the end of the century but still had only a tiny overseas empire compared to her two major rivals, Britain and France. By her own standards there was little to gain in terms of prestige from an imperial display. A small nation could enhance its world image by displaying its empire, no matter how small, but a nation already believing itself great stood to gain nothing by drawing attention to its meagre foreign possessions. In any case, neither Spain nor Germany had much of an exhibition tradition and so the idiom had little opportunity or real need to evolve. This latter point holds for Russia and Austria. Both held large events in the nineteenth century, in Moscow (1872) and Vienna (1873), but there was no consistent policy after that date. Moreover, the nature of their respective empires rendered them generally unsuitable for most exhibitions. The flavour of imperial displays was non-European, that is, in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries empire usually suggested overseas conquest. Imperialism referred to the colonization of the non-Western world through trade and technology, which tended to exclude the old European based empires, epitomised by the type of control Austria and Russia exercised over their territories.<sup>54</sup> Particularly in the case of Austria, most of her empire was on the European land-mass and was of a different type from the progressive and voracious exploitation practiced by other nations. The notion of empire at the exhibitions was not linked so much with feudal domination as with scientific and economic progress. At the end of the nineteenth century industrial hardware and political shrewdness counted for much in the race to carve up the undeveloped portions of the globe. The ‘new’ empires were a result of free trade, industry, speculation and mobile, unoccupied armies. Relatively few European nations possessed all or even any of these resources at any one time. The time was therefore ripe for some but not others to claim an empire overseas.

Outside Europe there were forces progressively active in world politics at the end of the nineteenth century that had all the necessary resources for expansion. Of these, Japan and the United States of America were most powerful, and also most eager to show off their gains at international exhibitions. Japan’s modern imperialism came strikingly to the attention of Europe after the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–5, when Russia’s humiliating defeat made the rest of the world thoroughly aware of the strength of the Japanese war machine. Japan had been a major exhibitor in European and American exhibitions since 1862, but it was only after 1905 that empire was a properly discernable feature. At the Japan-British Exhibition of 1910 at the White City, the full weight of her imperial pride was brought to bear. The Official Guide acknowledged there was ‘sufficient to justify the Eastern empire’s claim to respect as a colonising power’.<sup>55</sup> A sizable display in the Japanese Colonial Palace was eloquently described:

The whole of this building has been taken by the Japanese government to show what they have accomplished in their colonies and in Formosa, Korea and Manchuria . . . We pass into the Palace under a Drum Tower, typical of those erected on the South Manchuria Railway on the Trans-Siberian Line. We can ascend the tower and glance down at the magnificent array of stalls, exhibits, tableaux and pictures which have been gathered here for our inspection . . . Korea, of course, is not, strictly speaking, a Japanese possession, but there is such a strong affinity of interests . . . that this attempt to portray Japan as a colonizing power would not be complete if Korea were not represented . . . Formosa . . . is, of course, a possession of Japan in every sense of the word, and secured by her in 1895 as a fruit of the Chinese War . . . the natives were savages, . . . whom the Chinese had been unable to subdue. It was naturally with no little misgiving that Japan assumed control over the new possession and started to colonize it.<sup>56</sup>

The Japanese Imperial Army was also subject of a sizable display at the exhibition, a spectacle which must have aroused the anxiety of those worried by the possibility of further Japanese expansion.

The socio-political structure of Japan was conducive to the ambitions of an imperial power. This was not the case with the United States, whose imperial yearnings were constantly challenged by the democratic process. There was always an amount of principled opposition to the establishment of an American empire. As Democrats pointed out, the nation had fought to escape one imperial regimé, making the voluntary creation of another a morally perverse act. Nevertheless, by 1900, an empire had come into being. Awareness of itself as a nation with an international rôle to play dated from 1823 when the Monroe Doctrine was issued, this effectively sending Europe a directive to recognise the hegemony of the United States of America over the whole American continent. It was soon to imply also much of the Pacific region, although it was not until the last decade of the nineteenth century that the United States could count themselves thoroughly able to back their demands with real military force. In 1880 the American navy ranked only twelfth in the world, by 1900 it was third. Such an escalation of arms, as history has often demonstrated, usually breeds a desire to use them. It was quite natural that the growth in military hardware was accompanied by one of imperial ambition:

How did it happen that the destiny which necessitated American control of the Caribbean in the eighteen-nineties was not manifest in the eighteensixties? The Americans of the eighteen-nineties had come to share with the British, Germans and French a willingness to take up the ‘white man’s burden 57

In 1898, on the eve of the war the Americans fought to drive the Spanish out of Cuba, the ‘Washington Post’ commented: ‘We are face to face with a strange destiny. The taste of Empire is in the mouth of the people even as the taste of blood in the jungle.’<sup>58</sup> Islands in the Pacific had come under the control of America with regularity from the mid-century, but by 1900 an expansive imperial policy was to regulate and speed the process. By 1898, the Hawaiian Islands, part of the Samoan group, the Philippines and many other smaller island territories had come into the American sphere. In South America, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Nicaragua, and Panama became either possessions or protectorates. By the opening of the First World War, the supremacy of the United States over the Pacific, Caribbean and the South American continent was undisputed.

The first evidence at an exhibition of a desire to be part of the imperial world-scheme came in 1893 at the Chicago Columbian. As part of the Fair’s celebrations, a naval review was organised to take place in New York harbour. All the great naval powers were asked to send ships of war to this, which was presided over by the President. Contemporary accounts leave no doubt that America wished to see itself as being in league with the other imperial powers:

. . . thirty-five vessels of war . . . from the caravels of Columbus to the swiftest and most powerful of steel-plated cruisers. Other reviews there have been on a larger scale, as at Spithead in the Jubilee year of England’s queen; but never before had the squadrons of England and France, of Russia and Germany, of Italy and Spain, in line with those of other empires and monarchies, passed in parade before a President of the United States.<sup>59</sup>

Additionally, a full entourage of American military hardware and manpower was at the Columbian as evidence of America’s physical abilities. In 1893 however, there was little empire to celebrate. It was not until the turn of the century the World’s Fairs acquired an imperial element proper, when actual possessions could be brought to the site for popular appraisal. This was when the idea of a ‘Pan-American’ Fair was born, beginning with the Buffalo Pan-American of 1901 and coming to a rapid maturity at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition of 1904. Essentially, ‘Pan-American’ stood for empire in the sense that America possessed some but not all of what was displayed, but could simulate imperial control via her economic and military position. Power relations became increasingly clear through the World’s Fairs, the treatment of some nations being tantamount to a recognition of colonial status. The American public was thus informed of the position the Republic occupied in relation to its geographical neighbours. It was much the same with the so-called Pan American Conferences, an international forum formed in 1889 to discuss trade relations between the Northern and Southern continents. Often held to co-incide with World’s Fairs, the conferences had the merest semblance of equality, as America flexed her imperial muscles on a global stage. In all her dealings with the Southern American nations, the United States talked from a position of absolute power.

In 1901 at the Buffalo Pan American World’s Fair, for the first time there were worthwhile possessions to display. In 1899 the organisers had written to the Federal Government suggesting ‘the desirability of a special governmental display of exhibits from Cuba, Puerto Rico, Alaska, the Hawaiian and Philippine Islands, showing not only products, resources and possibilities of these possessions, but also . . . the ethnological features available.’<sup>60</sup> This, the organisers believed, would satisfy the ‘intense interest felt by our people to learn all about the peoples and territories which have come under our charge and there has not been so good an opportunity as will present itself to reach the many millions expected to visit us, as will be afforded at our exposition’.<sup>61</sup> It was proposed that the centre of the display should be the Philippines. F. P. Hilder, an English ex-India soldier, was sent there to gather exhibits once the principle of the display was accepted. Ultimately the imperial sections covered a large area of the site, taking the form of a landscaped town of pavilions much in the fashion of its Parisian forerunners.

At the St. Louis Fair in 1904 the Buffalo experience was dramatically expanded as America settled into its imperial rôle. It was decided by statute at the onset to make the most of initiatives already taken. Once again the Philippines were chosen for centrepiece of America’s empire. The Official Report on the Fair noted that a ‘Philippine exposition board was created by Act 514 of the Philippine Commission, passed for the purposes of collecting and installing a distinctively Philippine exhibit at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition of 1904 at St. Louis.’<sup>62</sup> \$125,000 were put to one side for the exhibit immediately by the Louisiana Purchase Company (the controlling body of the Fair), with a further \$250,000 to follow from sponsorship. The appointed board had numerous full-time members, two of whom were Philippinos. For reasons as yet unknown, one of the two, a Dr. Pedro Paterno, resigned in 1904 before the Fair opened. Forty-seven acres were given over to the Philippine display, south-west of the main exhibition, the whole virtually constituting an independent exhibition. The ‘Committee on Industrial Exhibitions Report’ of 1906 described the site:

The work of construction consisted of building a miniature city, with streets and parks complete with sewerage, water and electric light, and fire alarm systems. The ground plan included a central park or plaza, the sides of the quadrangle being occupied, respectively, by the Cathedral or Education building, the typical Manila house, the Commerce building and the Government Administration building, each of these beautiful structures being filled with appropriate exhibits.<sup>63</sup>

There were separate buildings to forestry, mines and metallurgy, agriculture and horticulture, fish and game and ethnology, whilst the arts and crafts of the Philippines were in the Government building. There were reproductions of the ‘Ancient Walls of Manila’ and the ‘Bridge of Spain’, which straddles the river Pasig in Manila. The whole display constituted one of the most lavish manifestations of its type ever devoted to one territory, outdoing in size and scope anything the British produced on India or the French on Algeria. Apart from the Philippines, Cuba received special attention, meriting total expenditure of \$ 130,000. The architecture of the building was described as being a porticoed pavilion covering 7000 square feet. Most other possessions were absorbed in various ways into the site, usually being presented thematically amongst the entertainment sections.

Unlike its British and French equivalents, American Imperialism at World’s Fairs did not particularly grow as the century progressed, rather it maintained a constant, unfluctuating presence. This is possibly explained by the general nature of imperial propaganda. In Europe, the twentieth century saw the British and French empires come under increasing tension and attack, necessitating a constant expansion of the propaganda and publicity rôles of the exhibitions. In America, the steady increase in real power made the propaganda element far less vital. It was enough to recognise Pan-American control, it did not need to be artificially inflated or justified. In 1904 at St. Louis, America felt it important the world saw her imperial potential; after that date imperialism remained but the urgency to present it was less intense. Nevertheless, most World’s Fairs maintained an imperial element and out of this, as the next chapter will show, blossomed a vibrant racism. Perhaps only the New York World’s Fair was free of overt American imperialism, as the theme of the Fair, ‘Democracity’, simply did not allow for it. Elsewhere in the 1930’s the imperial idea emerged in varying degrees. America took part in the Paris Exposition Internationale Coloniale in 1931, showing Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Hawaiian Islands, the Philippines and the Samoan Islands. The Golden Gate International Exposition (San Francisco) of 1939 separated the various regions coming under the military and economic aegis of America into a Latin-American Court and a Pacific Basin Area. A third area was designated ‘Foreign Pavilions’, implying that the Latin-American and Pacific areas were not foreign to the United States. For some reason Brazil and Argentina were located amongst the foreign pavilions and not the Latin-American ones. Included in the Latin-American Court were Mexico, El Salvador, Panama, Chile, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru and Guatemala, all heavily bound to the American economy via loans or investment.<sup>65</sup> In the Pacific Basin section, the Philippines and Hawaii were the main areas of American interest to be shown.

A unique twist was put upon the imperial theme at the Texas Centennial Exposition of 1936, held in Dallas, for here an imperial show was presented by a power with no empire. Texas chose to present itself at its celebration of a hundred years in the Union as a separate nation inside the United States with an imperial past. Governor James V. Allred explained in the Official Guidebook: