# CHAPTER FOUR

## Human showcases

The international exhibitions are normally given a place in history because of the range of objects they assembled on a single site. The art and design historian cannot afford to exclude them from detailed study on this ground alone, because they brought together disparate types of produce in a way that no cultural manifestation before them could ever contemplate. Thus they reflected and influenced taste and attitudes in their respective times. The focus on objects however has tended to detract from a feature of central importance to the exhibitions held from the closing decade of the last century. This was the displaying of peoples. Between 1889 and 1914, the exhibitions became a human showcase, when people from all over the world were brought to sites in order to be seen by others for their gratification and education. The normal method of display was to create a backdrop in a more or less authentic tableau-vivant fashion and situate the people in it, going about what was thought to be their daily business. An audience would pay to come and stare. Through this twenty-five year period it would be no exaggeration to say that as items of display, objects were seen to be less interesting than human beings, and through the medium of display, human beings were transformed into objects.

When the specific discourses which surround and justify this extraordinary genre are examined they usually reveal an imperial rationale at base. However, it would be incorrect to assume imperialism was always an underlying motive behind human exhibits, or that these displays were always in some sense immoral. Looking at the exhibitions as a whole, human exhibits fell into types, two of which were not necessarily imperial or immoral. For the purpose of analysis, I shall identify four types, and label them the Imperial, the Educational, the Commercial and the Ambassadorial. Having chosen these headings, and having shown reserve on the imperial aspect, it must immediately be made clear that some displays had the features of all four types, that most had pretensions to the first two, and those which escaped the influence of the first were often afflicted with a dubiously abrasive nationalism.

Imperial displays of people were the most numerous and lavish at exhibitions; perhaps this type, as the single most significant one, should be discussed first.

Alex M. Thompson, a visitor to the Exposition Universelle of 1900, noted as he sat in a café in the middle of the colonial sections, that ‘here are shown not so much specimens of produce, as of humanity brought from the colonies to be exhibited . . . .’<sup>1</sup> In making such an observation he was merely recognising what had come to be a prominent feature of French expositions by that date, the ‘native village’. Brought from all areas of the French empire, groups of people would be settled into an appropriate surrounding where they would live, night and day, for the six months of the exposition. Often they were given the materials to build their own dwellings and invariably they were supplied with foodstuffs and raw material to prepare their own meals and make their own clothes. They would usually be situated near other ‘native villages’ on the site, they would be expected to perform religious rituals at set times each day for the visitors and to give demonstrations of their various arts and crafts. After the first month or so, the majority of the people in the villages adapted to their extraordinary situation, developing a mode of existence which was manageable for themselves and showy enough for the visitors. Often whole families were transported to an exhibition site, including cousins, uncles and aunts; occasionally the social mix was more random. Anything up to two hundred people might be resident in a single village although the likely number was fifty. Some villages were moved from exhibition to exhibition due to their popularity, eventually being able to boast appearances all over the world. Non-Western people would also be brought to exhibitions to work in ethnic restaurants and theatre facilities. At the Expositions Universelles of 1889 and 1900, the atmosphere in this area of the site could only be described as utterly bizarre, as the noises, sights and smells of dozens of totally different cultures vied for attention. Alex Thompson described the scene he saw before him in 1900:

Here are the multi-coloured dwellings of the various Asiatic and African natives subject to the dominion of France . . . Here one may sit and take tea or coffee, served by men of strange tropical nationalities, whose faces look as polished as your fire-grate at home, while for music there is the monotonous chant which accompanies the ‘Danse du Ventre’ droning from the closed jalousies of the Algerian palace, and the gruesome dirge, which usually accompanies the wallopping of the earnest but misguided tom-tom . . . Some of these people have never before worn clothes, and even now wear them much against their will. Amongst the many different villages of huts or Kraals built here by each tribe according to its native custom, that of the French dependency of Senegal is probably the one that attracts most visitors. In this little village of jet-black negroes are men and youths of different ages, several women, and even children.<sup>2</sup>

A chaos of colour, a riot of superficial jollity, with crowds bustling to stare at people who only weeks before had been sitting in real villages with the sound of nature around and no conception of what was about to happen to them. One can only speculate on what the Senegalese man thought, as he looked back at the gaping expressions of the Parisian crowd, a pale and unhealthy looking mob shrouded in their gaudy dresses and frock-coats, laughing and sneering at what they undoubtedly considered the just spoils of war. Perhaps the culture gap was to wide for him to ponder upon anything more than the eccentricity of the garb, the dullness of the climate and the predictability of the crowd’s response to him. He may even have enjoyed the attention he was given – there are instances where this is known to have been the case – in probability unaware that even as he stood there, the fabric of the culture he belonged to was being torn apart.

For the European nations who controlled an empire, the showing of native villages had several aims. It placed hitherto unrelated peoples of different parts of the empire together, physically and psychologically, and it centred the empire on the controlling imperial nation. The public could see at a glance the extent of the imperial pickings and feel in a real sense that they belonged to them. More importantly, it ‘revealed’ the apparently degenerate state the conquered peoples lived in, making the conquest not only more acceptable but necessary for their moral rescue. The Senegalese or Dahomayan man became less than human, a pitiable part of an untamed environment who had not yet begun to ascend the ladder of civilization. The village he had built for himself and his companions in Paris was proof not only of his intellectual inability but of his proximity to nature. He lived so as to be more comparable, in the eye of the visitor, to animals rather than European man. His animal state made him a fair subject for development, as one might develop crops, livestock or land.

Few who visited these exhibits intellectualised what they saw in order to fully comprehend the exploitative nature of the enterprise. More usually a romantic vision of another world was all the visitor could or chose to see, an exotic explosion of peoples and dwellings, a vehicle to transport the mind from routine and hardship. Indeed, the mingling of Chinese, African and Asian peoples in colourful ethnic dwellings, against a backdrop of the grand imperial pavilions, aided many to rise to hitherto unachieved heights of literary eloquence:

I made a thousand extraordinary journeys almost without moving; under the Eiffel Tower, near the little lake, was hidden the Tonkinese village with its junks and its women chewing betel; sometimes I watched the old Cambodian elephant sent by Doumer and called ‘Chérie’ drinking there. The Indo-Chinese theatre adjoined the reproduction of the strange temple which had just been discovered and was called Angkor . . . The entire hill was nothing but perfumes, incense, vanilla, the aromatic fumes of the seraglio; one could hear the scraping of the Chinese violins, the sounds of the castanets, the wailing flutes of the Arab bands, the mystical howling of the Aissawas more heavily painted than De Max, the cries of the Ouled Nail with their mobile bellies; I followed this opiate mixture, this perfume of Javanese dancing girls, sherbets and rahat-lakoum, as far as the Dahomean village.<sup>3</sup>

As an experience of the senses, the whole was undoubtedly a delight, certain to influence artists and writers of a symbolic, romantic or escapist bent. Lodged peculiarly between high and popular culture, displays of colonial peoples legitimized imperial conquest across a remarkably broad spectrum, justifying European expansion without troubling the minds of the spectators with economic or military factors. Urchins from the streets of Paris went to stare alongside the nation’s leading intellectuals; on the Champs de Mars shop-girls, stevedores and clerks revelled, as Gauguin and Debussy formulated new art-forms from their discovery of the Orient and Oceania.

The actual presence of peoples of empire at exhibitions went back to 1851, when representatives of most nations of the British empire were constantly in attendance at the Crystal Palace. The first time people could properly be called part of the exhibit though was in 1867, at the Paris Exposition Universelle, when various North African exhibits were presented as tableaux-vivants. An Egyptian Bazaar contained crafts people and vendors, a camel stable had real camels and Arabic attendants, an authentic Tunisian Barber Shop was open for business. Various Egyptian, Tunisian and Algerian Cafés were staffed with specially imported waiters and chefs. It was also noted at the time that visitors to the site were more fascinated by foreign workmen finishing off incomplete pavilions than they were by the pavilions themselves. In Philadelphia in 1876 the novel success of the Paris show was capitalised on by the installation of Chinese, Arabic and Japanese craftsmen in facilities on the site and the creation of a Turkish Bazaar and Café.<sup>5</sup> After this the genre blossomed. Back in Paris in 1878 an Algerian Bazaar and a Cairo Street formed the core of extensive peopled displays on North African and Arabic themes. From the early 1880’s the British set up Ceylonese and Indian Tea-houses with Asian waiters in their own and foreign exhibitions. It was the Paris Exposition of 1889 however which inaugurated the practice in a more specific sense, whereby colonial peoples were not brought to serve as exotic vendors, waiters and servants, but simply to be looked at. This Exposition was unprecedented in its presentation of colonial peoples, setting the pattern for the ensuing twenty-five years.

The 1889 Exposition had a different approach to peopled exhibits not explicable merely in terms of expanded scale. An intellectual shift had occurred which changed the emphasis of the event. This was largely due to the rise of anthropology as a discipline in Paris between 1878 and 1889. In tandem with imperial expansion – and frequently as a justification of it – anthropology had gained its first foot-hold on the slopes of academia during the 1870’s, the foci of attention being primitive cultures of Africa, Oceania and Australasia. Imperial institutions and the general public were invited to take part in (and hence fund) anthropological research by visiting exhibitions of various kinds. The most important of these were the ones held at the Jardin d’Acclimatation in Paris. The Jardin was established in 1859 as a centre for the study and popularization of botany and zoology, with permanent displays of animals and plants being open to the public throughout the year.<sup>6</sup> In 1867 due to the Exposition Universelle there was a marked rise in public attendance at the Jardin, though this was curtailed in the 1870’s by the slaughtering of livestock during the Commune and the loss of public funding. The search for patronage led to an expansion of the exhibiting programme, until it occurred to the curators in 1877 to include people amongst the exhibits of plants and animals. At first this appears to have been an after-thought, most certainly inspired by the 1867 Exposition and by the generally known intention of bringing foreign peoples to the one of 1878. Girard de Rialle, a member of the Paris Anthropology Society, reported of the first peopled display at the Jardin that:

The convoy belongs to a foreign merchant whose speciality is furnishing interesting specimens to the zoological gardens of Europe and who is supplied in these countries from which he draws his animals by paying local hunters. This time, instead of leaving them in Africa, he wanted to bring them to Europe, and if we can believe those who say so, he will not be poorly rewarded.<sup>7</sup>

The scheme had the backing of the Parisian academic community. Fourteen Nubians were presented to a fascinated Parisian public, whereupon attendance increased markedly, guaranteeing the Jardin’s future. Later in the same year six Eskimos were shown and from then onwards peoples were brought from all over the world to be displayed alongside the animals. Between 1877 and 1887 Lapps, Gauchos, Fuegians (Tierra del Fuego), Galibis (Guyana), Kalmouks (Siberia), American Indians, Ceylonese and Ashanti were taken to the Jardin. Scientific acumen soon began to give way to financial considerations and the anthropological worth of the displays became questionable. Into the 1880’s, scholars who had initially welcomed the displays began to voice misgivings about them, as the atmosphere around began to change from one of learning to a circus parade. Leonce Manouvrier, an early supporter, was not untypical:

At the Jardin d’Acclimatation what information can we obtain? These individuals, in effect, are transported to an environment where they can no longer, so to speak, be themselves. Everything is changed in their way of life; they must contend on the one side with the administration of the Jardin, on another with those who brought them, on another with the crowds of the curious, and on another side with a committee that comes out to examine and measure them by means of little trinkets.<sup>9</sup>

Such misgivings fell mainly on deaf ears as the Jardin went from success to success. In 1889 when the largest Exposition Universelle to date opened, it became apparent that the organisers had taken careful note of it and had expanded its activities onto a grand scale. For the first time before an international audience people were degraded to the level of zoological exhibits. Regardless of its motives, the anthropological community had invented a genre at the Jardin d’Acclimatation destined to debase and defile non-Western cultures in a way barely conceived of before.

The importance of the 1889 Exposition for its imperial exhibits was noted in the last chapter, but only when the display of native villages erected on the Chaillot Hill amongst the imperial pavilions is taken into account, is its significance fully recognised. For innovation in the presentation of all aspects of empire it was unequalled. It created the prototypes for imperial sections of all international events following it, including those in Britain. As with other areas of the show, the imperial dimension was underpinned by the belief that it was possible to present a complete knowledge, to create a physical encyclopædia capable of capturing and explaining a total world view.<sup>10</sup> Thus every aspect of empire had to be portrayed, as realistically as possible, making the presence of the conquered peoples imperative. The nineteenth century had added a material dimension to the rationalism of the Encyclopédie, giving scientific credence to the idea that everything on the face of the earth was measurable and knowable. Faith in the idea of a finite world led to a quest for empirical totality at the Exposition, in the belief this could simulate absolute truth. The native tribes were there not only to reveal the extent of French territories but also to show the human race in its every aspect, so that human life could be instantly understood through all its evolutionary stages. The native villages therefore answered to imperial, scientific, philosophical and moral discourses all at once, making their emergence as a phenomenon at that time understandable if not predictable.

The main attractions at the 1889 show were the Senegalese, the Congolese, New Caledonians, Gaboonese, Dahomeyans, a Cochin-China and a Kampong-Javanese settlement. A visitor described it in colourful terms:

A popular feature of the show is the street, not of an ancient civilised city, but of aboriginal savages. In the back settlements behind all the gorgeous finery of the pagodas and the palaces of the further East the ingenious French have established colonies of savages whom they are attempting to civilize. They are the genuine article and make no mistake, living and working and amusing themselves as they and their kinfolk do in their country. Some day an enthusiast promises us we shall have a great anthropological exhibition of living samples of all nations and tribes and peoples that on earth do dwell. That may be the next Universal Exhibition. That it will not be without deep interest and instruction this street of colonies of natives suffices to prove. Each village is built in its own grounds, enclosed by a fence, and inhabited by its own natives . . . All these natives have been specially imported for the exhibition. They have brought with them the materials for their huts, their tools, and everything necessary for them to reproduce in the capital of the civilised world the everyday life of Africa, the Pacific, and the Further East. To add to the attractiveness of this anthropological collection there is close to the street of aborigines an Annamite restaurant. The garrison consists of one hundred and eight men, drawn from all special corps serving in the colonies – namely ten Indian Sepoys, . . . ten Senegal tirailleurs – coal black negroes. Six Senegal Spahis, seventy-six Sakalava, Annamite, Tonkinois tirailleurs.<sup>11</sup>

The concern of the writer that these were the ‘genuine article’, in conjunction with constant reference to anthropology, reveals an attitude of mind which indicates the age of the museum was well underway. The obsession with the authenticity of the object and the rationale for its collection in science, not in plunder, would soon encourage and justifify the acquiring of objects from all over the world by Western museums. More powerful than anything else in this passage however, is the dismissive arrogance of the writer, whose confidence in the inferiority of the people on display has an aura of absolute unshakability. These ‘articles’, ‘savages’ or ‘samples’ as he variously refers to them, are the stuff of good exhibitions, fodder for scientific, philosophical enquiry and, as a biproduct, entertainment. They emerge in his total discussion of the exposition as less serious or interesting than the fine arts, machine technology or the Eiffel tower, having the status for him of a fascinating distraction.

The composition of the displays was, as far as possible, based around the family unit. The Senegal village had eight families, the

Congolese seven, the new Caledonian six, and the Kampong-Javanese a larger but unspecified number. If the intention was to create a socially harmonious unit however, this most certainly did not occur in the case of the Senegal village, as the families came from several distinct regions, meaning that they had no common language. The three races, the Peulps, Goloffs and Bambaras, also had independent cultural and religious traditions. Whatever the performances they were asked to execute for the crowds were, they certainly did not represent the customs of the majority of the people in the village itself.

Most of the villages were part of the French empire, but not all. The Belgians funded the Congolese one; the Kampong-Javanese, recognised as the most impressive on the site, was a private undertaking. The subtitle of this village was ‘Life in the Dutch Indies’, implying perhaps that the Dutch government had some interest in it, but so far evidence to prove this has not emerged. The manager of the village was a M. Bernard, who had lived in Java for seventeen years. He was responsible for selecting the villagers, who consisted of four nationalities, Javanese, Sundanese, Malays and Batavians. There were twenty-two houses on the site, built with bamboo and covered with palm leaves. M. Bernard was largely responsible for a little booklet of explanation containing his own prosiac anecdotes on the setting up of the exhibit; ‘. . . they like the climate now . . . but when we arrived in April last, they almost revolted and cried master, master, take us home, you have brought us to a country where there are no leaves on the trees. I had to explain to them how the leaves would come by and by, and gave them a lesson in botany’.<sup>12</sup> He also gave guided tours of the site, during which he would inform the crowd of the cultural and personal habits of his exotic wards:

They are a very clean people, and bathe twice a day. That thickset, powerful fellow, making bamboo hats with his little son, is a Malay. The Malays are stronger than the others. These women in the next house are Batavians. Their skin is lighter than the Malays. That man sitting running paint onto a piece of cloth is from Java. That is how they paint their dress and napkins.. Sometimes it is done with wax, sometimes with paint. It takes nineteen months to finish one robe . . . These are the dancing girls . . . they are lent by the emperor Solo, who has twenty-six at his court. I have telegraphed for three more. The jewelry they wear is real, and belongs to the emperor.<sup>13</sup>

The attitude of M. Bernard toward the people in his village fell somewhere between how one might normally regard animals or children. Simplistic but strong, he casts them collectively as pleasant buffoons, incapable of looking after themselves, in awe of their white governor, but strangely capable of making art objects. In effect, he sees them as a mixture of animal and human, his text giving off a feeling that he is describing the bahaviour of well trained dogs.

As has already been noted, the 1900 Exposition Universelle maintained the native village element, if anything expanding it slightly. In 1906 at the Exposition Coloniale in Marseilles the villages were an important part of the whole event, by this time being a natural and essential ingredient in any exposition even of modest size. At the second Exposition Coloniale in Marseilles in 1922 villages from most of the African territories were erected, at a time when the genre was beginning to lose popularity elsewhere in Europe. In 1931 at the Paris Exposition Internationale Coloniale in the Parc de Vincennes, for the last time anywhere, a large area of villages appeared specifically within an imperial context. By this time such things began to attract widespread criticism, as opposition to both imperialism and racism grew.<sup>14</sup>

In Britain, the idea of the native village only became attractive to exhibition organisers after they had seen its potential at the 1889 Paris Exposition. From that date it became a regular feature, reaching a highpoint in terms of frequency at the White City (1908-1914). The popularity of the genre after 1890 is largely due to one man, Imre Kiralfy, who was Britain’s premier exhibition organiser from the closing years of the nineteenth century until his death in 1919. Kiralfy was the driving force behind the White City Exhibitions and before that he was responsible for numerous events at the Earl’s Court and Olympia arenas in London. Born in Budapest in 1845 of Jewish parentage, he had a colourful career as an entertainer before becoming the premier entrepreneur of his generation. He started life as a music hall prodigy, appearing on stage as a musician at the age of four and having some of his music published at thirteen. Through the first thirty-five years of his life he toured Europe and America as an all-round entertainer, apparently entering a new sphere as an organiser of events by chance. The move took place when he was asked to take over the organisation of a pageant he was appearing in in Brussels, because the manager had been taken ill. He subsequently went on to set up countless grand events in different cities around the world, making himself famous in the process. His first major success was ‘Nero, or the Fall of Rome’, an extravaganza held at London’s Olympia arena in 1889. Vast sets which collapsed to order, hundreds of actors, extras and animals were orchestrated into what was essentially a tableau-vivant of special effects. In 1891 and 1892 he staged ‘Venice, Bride of the Sea’ again at Olympia, touring it then to Paris. This event was partly on water, partly amongst exact copies of famous Venetian buildings, with a choir of one thousand Italians. In 1894 in Chicago, a year after the Columbian Exposition, he produced a ‘Grand History of America’ and in New York in 1895 he was once again on water, with ‘Our Naval Victories, an

American Naval Spectacle.’ From 1890 he often worked in conjunction with Barnum Circus Enterprises, it probably being Barnum’s advisory rôle at the Columbian which first made him aware of the exhibition as a medium for entertainment and money making. He returned to London after the New York naval show and settled there more or less permanently to the end of his life. It was then that he developed the two obsessions which occupied him through to his death: exhibitions and empire. His last extravaganza show in 1895 at Olympia was significant in its move toward imperial concerns, ‘India, a Grand Historical Spectacle.’ In the same year, he formed ‘London Exhibitions Ltd.’ and staged the ‘Empire of India’ Exhibition at the Earl’s Court arena. In 1896 he organised the ‘India, Ceylon, Borneo and Burma Show’, in 1897 a ‘Jubilee Exhibition’, in 1899 the ‘Greater Britain Exhibition’ and most notably the ‘Savage South Africa Spectacle’. By 1905, when he started plans for the White City Exhibition site in Shepherd’s Bush, he was acknowledged as the foremost authority on large international exhibitions in Britain and was constantly employed as a government advisor on British exhibits in foreign shows.<sup>15</sup>

Kiralfy’s rise to pre-eminence in Britain meant several things for the exhibition genre. It meant empire would be a constant source of subject matter for events and that the tableau-vivant format would be in regular use. Under his influence, international exhibitions in Britain changed emphasis, the educational and philanthropic flavours of the earlier South Kensington shows being decisively replaced by those of theatre and fairground. Kiralfy did not seek particularly to educate or improve his audience so much as entertain and propagandise them with his special effects. Many sections in his exhibitions were virtual replicas of the extravaganzas he had staged in the first part of his career. Once he had realised its potential, the native village as an idea came to suit him perfectly as a dramatic medium to express his imperial beliefs through. The Savage South Africa and Greater Britain events prepared the ground for his first international exhibition, the Franco-British of 1908, in this regard. Far more like huge fairground spectacles than exhibitions, they brought African and Asian peoples to Britain explicitly as exhibits for the first time. Reconstructions of the African Wars, tableaux-vivants of life in Africa and Asia and crude parodies of other cultural activity were presented with real Africans and Asians acting out various rôles.<sup>16</sup> In 1908 at the Franco-British, he organised a Ceylonese Village and booked the Senegalese one from the French empire. The Official Guide to the Senegal exhibit left the visitor in no doubt as to the considered cultural and intellectual status of the Senegalese people:

In a cruel-looking stockade over a hundred men and women from the borders of the desert are now living exactly as they do in their native Africa

. . . Take a hasty glance at the interior of this hut . . . and make a rapid   
inventory of the contents. That will not be difficult. Inside you will see a   
bed of straw and nothing more. These people have not yet adopted all the 17   
fashions and utensils of the luxurious life.

The Ceylonese Village had a number of jugglers, magicians and other entertainers amongst its residents, Kiralfy obviously feeling that in itself ethnographic curiosity might not guarantee good attendance figures. Most impressive at the Franco-British though was an open air theatre capable of holding three thousand spectators, where an ‘Alfresco Spectacular’ entitled ‘Our Indian Empire’ was staged. Hundreds of Indians and Ceylonese and a wide range of wild animals were brought to London for this show, which took just two hours (on a twice daily basis) to explain how the British civilized India.

At following shows on the White City site the native village remained a constant feature. The Official Daily Programme of the second, the Imperial International of 1909, was at pains to reassure the public that the natives were being well catered for, following questions in the House of Commons about unsatisfactory conditions the year before:

A number of typical native villages are being set up, for the pleasure side of the Imperial is to possess as distinctly an international scope as the commercial sections. There are many little-known peoples dotted about in distant latitudes, whose customs and habits would undoubtedly prove of boundless interest to their more civilised brothers and sisters. Where it is possible, the lives of these people will be shown by miniature villages, built in the same manner as the originals and occupied by the natives, who are being brought over for the purpose . . . Here will be represented the daily life and excitement of the natives, including the War Dances, Ceremonies, Forms of Worship, etc., etc., Their introduction to the West will take place under favourable auspices, those who have charge of them taking every care that they do not suffer by their altered circumstances.<sup>18</sup>

The full number of villages at this exhibition has still not been ascertained, or the identity of funding sources which brought them, as the official literature contained no detailed catalogue. In probability Kiralfy booked some from foreign governments, notably the French, Dutch and Belgians, and paid for those from the British empire out of his company funds. It is to be assumed that the peoples in the exhibits were paid something for appearing, although at this time in no instance anywhere is it known what these payments consisted of or how they were made.

The villages attracting most attention at the Imperial International were the Dahomeyan, Irish, Scottish and a Kalmuck Camp. The latter was brought by the Russians as part of their imperial display and soon became a most popular exhibit. It polled by far the heaviest numbers on the day of the largest ever attendance on the site, May 21st. 1909. The ‘Camp’ was peopled by (very bemused) nomadic Tartars from the Kalmuck region, described romantically in the Official Guide: ‘Here, within the borders of civilization, you may find a tribe of Kalmuck Tartars, actually encamped, with their tents and their camels, their women and children, their priests and their praying wheels.<sup>19</sup> The year after at the Japan-British Exhibition on the same site, the last village ever to be brought to Britain by a foreign power as part of an imperial display arrived, when the Japanese brought a ‘Formosa Hamlet’;<sup>20</sup> one other village appeared, this being a repeat of the Irish one. The relative lack of villages was probably due to the fact that Kiralfy was planning a dramatic expansion of his peopled displays for the year after, at the Coronation Exhibition. This was to have more native villages and related displays than any before or after it in Britain.

1911 was the year Kiralfy chose as the most fitting for his largest celebration yet of empire, with the British monarchy the subject of attention everywhere due to the crowning of George V. His personal obsession with the imperial achievement of his adopted country rose to new heights of epic melo-drama at the Coronation Exhibition, as this strange man continued his quest for national acceptance. It was as though his Jewish origins, in a country which was part of an unstable empire, had filtered through to the very core of his pyschological makeup, to surface in a manic involvement with the empire of his adopted home. He had made himself part of a stable, powerful nation by lauding it in a way it had never been lauded before. By 1914, he was more responsible perhaps than anyone for the vivid and vulgar understanding the British population had of its foreign territories. The Coronation Exhibition was, in imperial terms, his greatest achievement.

The native villages present in 1911 were not as numerous as those at the larger events in France or America, but the range was unusually exotic. A Somali Village featured, having already been to the Bradford Exhibition of 1904 and Dublin in 1907. It appeared for the last time in Britain as a holiday resort attraction in Douglas (Isle of Man) in 1912.<sup>21</sup> Apart from this well travelled group there was a tribe of Iroquois Indians from Canada, a Burmese village and theatre, a Ceylon Village with entertainers, an unspecified ‘African’ village, and a Hindoo Settlement with a Temple of Magic. By far the most popular and unusual attraction though was a Maori Village and theatre. The Official Daily Programme felt it needed to provide some historical background to this exhibit:

The Maoris are a most interesting race, they being the original inhabitants of New Zealand where they arrived from the island of Hawaiki, in the Pacific, more than seven hundred years ago. Since the occupation of New Zealand by Great Britain in 1814, there have been many Maori outbreaks, the most serious of which started in 1868, under a chief named Te Kooti, and was not finally quelled until 1875. There have been minor insurrections since, but the Maoris are now a most peaceful race, and among the most loyal subjects of King George. Their population has diminished since 1846, when they numbered 100,000, to about 45,000, but is now stationary. The party consists of fifty warriors and maidens of the Arawa tribe . . . and it also includes Mita Taupopoki, the veteran chief who fought for the British against Te Kooti in 1873.<sup>22</sup>

A fascinating passage, treating clinically and lightly the genocide of the Maori’s and the desperate struggle for freedom they had fought in their own country, merely in the hope of a right to share it. Displayed with pride was a chief who turned against his own nation to side with the British; even he, despite the service he rendered his conquerors, was presented as an anthropological exhibit. The willingness to accept imperial violence as a natural order remains perhaps the most disturbing factor in the whole of these barbaric celebrations of conquest.

By 1908 by far the most famous of the native villages were the Senegalese and the Dahomeyan, both from the French empire but both operating in a quasi-independent way from the French government by that time. Both groups decided to take their fates into their own hands by placing themselves under the control of various entrepreneurs, leasing out their services to exhibitions and holiday resorts, although they still appeared in a more official rôle as part of French imperial sections. Little is known about the entrepreneurs in question. An Xavier Pené organised Dayomeyan villages, notably the one at the Chicago Columbian, and Messrs. Bouvier and Fleury-Tarnier ran the Senegalese Village at the Franco-British Exhibition.<sup>23</sup> They were independent of government but clearly controlled by them in certain ways. It is not known either whether the same group of Dahomeyans and Senegalese moved around Europe and America or whether different people took over from venue to venue. It does seem likely that the composition of the group operating in America was different from the one in Europe. Within the two continents personnel appears to have remained reasonably stable. Dayomeyan and Senegalese villages featured in the most unlikely of places between 1889 and 1931. The Senegalese were in Paris in 1889, 1900 and 1931, in Marseilles in 1906 and 1922, in Edinburgh in 1908, in London in the same year and in Newcastle for the North-East Coast Exhibition in 1929. They also toured resorts in France. The Dayomeyan’s most impressive appearances were at Paris (1889, 1891, 1893 and 1900), Chicago in 1893, and London in 1909.<sup>24</sup> The latter appearance, at the Imperial International Exhibition, produced a Guide which painted a familiar picture of how the Dahomeyans had benefitted from French conquest:

Order and decency, trade and civilization, have taken the place of rule by fear of the sword. France has placed its hand on the blackest spot in West Africa, and wiped out some of the red stain that made Dahomey a by-word in the world. Today Dahomey is a self governing colony of France, with a revenue which exceeds its expenditure, a line of railway, rubber and cotton plantations, exporting palm oil and copra, maize, nuts, dried fish, cattle, sheep, pigs and fowls. The days of savagery are passing away . . . one day the European tourist will go to far Dahomey as he now goes to Egypt in search of sunshine and merriment in the winter months. Until that time comes he must seek his amusement, instruction, and entertainment in this Dahomey Village.<sup>25</sup>

Exhibitions insisted upon the advantages of empire for those who were conquered, it being common to find in official literature a scenario suggesting the peoples on show had been violent not only toward their white overlords but also toward other African peoples, and that the ‘civilizing’ process they had been subjected to was welcomed by Africa as well as Europe. There was an additional implication that psychologically they had found peace from their barbaric past. The Dahomeyans were particularly popular at exhibitions because of their reputation as warriors, the village revealing at the same time their ‘savagery’ and the extent to which they had been broken by the victorious French army. The Maoris were seen in a similar light, as a docile people who had once been savage. Moreover, John MacKenzie has pointed out the tendency of organisers to seek out recently conquered peoples for village displays in order to make their appearance topical; undoubtedly this was a source of morbid pride for the crowd.<sup>26</sup>

After the decline of the White City as an exhibition ground in 1914, the displaying of peoples in British exhibitions became something of a rarity. Perhaps the only exhibition to come anything near the exotic excesses of the 1908–14 period was the Wembley British Empire Exhibition in 1924, although the way it presented these sections was markedly subdued. The inherent racism of the displays was becoming difficult to justify, with an empire on the edge of becoming a commonwealth. A single mention at the back of the Official Guide expressed the sober mood:

Races in Residence. Every section of the empire is represented at Wembley. Many of the colonies have representatives of their local inhabitants at work in local conditions. The following list gives the name of the races and the approximate numbers actually living in the exhibition: Malays 20, Burmans 30, Hong Kong Chinese 160, West Africans 60, Palestinians 3. In addition there are Indians, Singhalese, West Indians, and natives of British Guiana, who live outside the exhibition, but attend their respective pavilions daily. 27

It would be a mistake of course to suggest this implied a generally less racist approach by Britons to their colonies and dominions, rather, it revealed a shrewd reluctance to parade racism as openly. Whilst the inhabitants of exhibition villages were no longer referred to as ‘samples’, ‘articles’ or ‘savages’, scant evidence existed throughout the exhibition to suggest economic or cultural attitudes toward the empire had shifted any.

The educational motive behind the displaying of peoples shaded into the imperial one, often to the extent that the two were indistinguishable. Whilst the professed aim was to teach the curious crowds about the peoples of the world, the net result was normally a biased, racist degrading of all peoples who were effectively outside the canons of white, Western culture. The popularity in academic and popular circles of social Darwinism led to its continuous presence as an idea at exhibitions from the 1870’s onwards. Essentially, followers of social Darwinian theory subscribed to the existence of a human evolutionary chain which placed some races nearer to the animals than others. Obviously, Aryan races derived from Western stock represented the pinnacle of development, Aborigine and African tribesman the nadir, with the various Indo-Eurasian races filling the intermediary stages. Measured on the sacred yardstick of Progress, all races showed themselves hopelessly behind the white man:

Everywhere the keen, bright, energetic Aryan race excited other races to a higher civilization, and only the races in which the Aryan element is pure or predominant have proved progressive; those in which it was overwhelmed by the Turanian races having always been unprogressive, as in India, Egypt and Assyria.<sup>28</sup>

In this way, predominant attitudes in educational circles facilitated themselves nicely to the imperial cause. Recent work on the history of British anthropology has shown, as with the French, that in order to acquire establishment recognition, research often strayed a long way from any objective basis in order to support predominant views in imperial circles on the degeneracy of non-white races.<sup>29</sup> Between 1878 and 1914, anthropological displays at exhibitions used a variety of means, including the use of phrenology, in order to ‘prove’ white superiority. The popularity of phrenology outside academic circles, as a source for party games, enabled organisers to feign scientific objectivity whilst courting the crowds.<sup>30</sup> Occasionally there were awkward moments; for example, when the Japanese rose to respectability as an imperial power, the British had to carefully adjust previous anthropological and phrenological calculations when they organized the Japan-British Exhibition in 1910:

One curious similarity runs through the whole, that is, the striking similitude between Japs and our own people. This resemblance manifests itself in manner, physical stamp and shape of head. To anyone acquainted with the principles of phrenology the resemblance is very marked. This last point is indicated by the large proportion of the brain in front and above the ear. The structural conditions are distinctive indications of considerable mental power, and are emphasised by the portraits of some of the most highly placed representatives. Taken as a whole, they constitute a good augury for the growth of sympathy between east and west.<sup>31</sup>

With most Asian and all of the African races though, the ‘scientific evidence’ was overwhelming. The white man’s burden would have to be endured for a considerable time into the future, until the inferior strands of humanity evolved into races capable of ruling themselves.

The insistence upon the proximity of African and Asian peoples to the animal state was given weight by the character and arrangement of exhibitions themselves. Paris provided the classic example of the abrupt contrast evident on sites everywhere. The Eiffel Tower leaned over the site of the native villages, casting its shadow over them like a giant Triumphal monument. A culture/nature juxtaposition of terrifying simplicity, the vast, gaunt tower represented the power that had enabled the imperial take-over of the lands the villages stood for. Struts, pillars and cables of iron begged comparison with the mud, sticks and leaves the people of the villages had constructed their dwellings with. The whole can be seen as an exercise designed to show that there existed not only differences in qualities of life, but differences in type. The Tower was contextualised so as to be a yardstick to measure Western supremacy by. The unyielding linearity of the philosophy of ‘progress through science’ condemned the peoples of Africa and Asia in advance, the Exposition serving as evidence in the judgment.

After France and Britain, the exhibiting of peoples occurred most frequently in America. These displays had all the dimensions the European ones had, but the essential make-up of American culture meant there were additional factors at work which were absent in Europe. The Chicago Columbian began the genre there, in what was most certainly a response to the Paris Exposition of 1889. No less than seventeen villages were built altogether, eight of which were associated with empires, the Dahomey, Chinese, Javanese, Soudanese, Alaskan, Arab, South Sea Islanders and Algerian. Although the literature of the Fair suggested the motive of all the villages and associated ethnic displays was educational, their proximity on the site itself to the Midway Plaisance, the entertainments area, immediately transformed any atmosphere of learning into a fairground side-show. Indeed, the villages were the closest in spirit to ‘freak shows’ that the genre had yet been, probably because pleasure was the main rationale behind most exhibits. In Chicago displays of people suffered more than ever before from exaggeration and caricature. Each day, the people from the villages, accompanied by various Arab groups from other exhibits, were paraded up and down the Midway Plaisance before returning to their display areas to commence their day of public living. The humiliating racism of this spectacle, apart from fulfilling a propaganda rôle for co-operating foreign nations, had a distinct purpose for reactionary elements within American society.

At virtually all of the great World’s Fairs, America experienced racial tensions of a kind at that time insignificant in Europe, caused by large indigenous populations of coloured peoples. These tensions were not reduced by an insistence on the primacy of white culture over all others, or the ingrained belief that white Americans alone had been responsible for the success of the nation. In his opening speech as Chairman of the National Committee for the Chicago Fair, J. T. Harris actually named the specific racial strand which had ‘created’ America, citing it as the one being celebrated at the Columbian: ‘. . . it remained for the Saxon race to people this new land, to redeem it from barbarism, to dedicate its virgin soil to freedom, and in less than four centuries to make of it the most powerful and prosperous country on which God’s sunshine falls.’<sup>32</sup> The very title of the exhibition, evoking the name of the explorer sponsored by Spain, was thus rendered a nonsense, in this festival of ‘American Saxons’. Identification of Anglo-Saxons by Harris at the onset was not however intended to alienate the Spanish speaking minorities; they were the least of the organisers worries. The reference was really made in relation to the Negroid and American Indian peoples. In most European events nonwhite races had normally been the subject of exhibits and had never been afforded any kind of equality in the creating of them; America decided to follow suit. Nevertheless, the American Negro and Indian presented grave problems to the organisers, who pushed freedom and democracy as the ideals of the Fair, yet who had no wish to give either race a position of equality at any level. The plan from early phases of the organisation had been to ignore the black population altogether, allowing them a rôle only as menials in the construction work on the site, and to exhibit the Indians much in the way the Dahomeyans were displayed, as a primitive foreign race. In the end, this did in fact happen, but not before both races fought for a better representation on committees. After a congressional struggle, blacks were denied any places on the two hundred and eight person national commission for the exhibition and black women were denied any part in the Women’s Building. The Lady Board of Managers refused to acknowledge any representation from them, an irony, since the Women’s Building actually contained a fine collection of craft work from women of all races. Appeals for a separate Negro Building were refused, the only concession in the end being the declaration of a ‘Coloured Peoples Day’ on August 25th. Against such a background of racial intrigue, the Dahomey Village suddenly acquired a significance it had had nowhere else in the world, as contemporary commentator Frederick Douglass recognised: ‘. . . to the coloured people of America, morally speaking, the World’s Fair in progress is . . . a white sepulchre . . . as if to shame the Negro, the Dahomeyans are also here to exhibit the Negro as a repulsive savage.’<sup>33</sup> The degradation the Dahomey Village brought upon its own race was thus expanded to degrade all coloured peoples.

After the Columbian, several World’s Fairs did come to acknowledge the existence of the American negro in cultural terms, although obviously this did not imply a recognition of equality. At the Buffalo Pan-American just the opposite was strongly suggested. Amongst the various native villages an exhibit called ‘The Old Plantation’ could be found, showing the life of the black populations in the South. A keynote was the difference between Southern and Northern Negroes:

It is easy to pick up coloured people of the North and draft them into show business . . . but the darkies of the South do not take so kindly to the rogue box . . . the Southern Negro is a stay-at-home darkey, not so much through the dislike of publicity as through the inherent laziness that will not run the risk of a nomadic life.<sup>34</sup>

Many of the Fairs in the South erected Negro Buildings, integrating the black population into the structure of Southern life and economy. The Atlanta Cotton States and International Exposition (1895), the Tennessee Centennial (1897), the Trans-Mississippi and International Exposition (1898), the South Carolina Inter-State and West Indian Exposition (1901-2) and the Jamestown Tercentenary Exposition (1907) all included Negro sections.<sup>35</sup> At Jamestown an impressive building was erected, but the emphasis was on segregation, not recognition. Dedicatory remarks predicted that ‘The showing we will make in this building will startle the world, it will astonish those who are unfamiliar with the condition of the Negro and it will be stimulating to our race.’<sup>36</sup> A public relations exercise funded and controlled by the Federal Government, the Negro Building avoided the issues which most concerned America’s black population at the time. The building, designed by one of America’s first black architects, W. Sidney Pittman, was, ironically, reminiscent of the classicism of the Southern plantation mansions belonging to those in America who had kept the black population so cruelly repressed. Included or excluded, the black populations of America were never considered as more than a socioeconomic issue by their fellow Americans. Later in the century the situation had changed little. At the Texas Centennial of 1936 a ‘Hall of

Negro Life’ was built which treated coloured people as a useful economic resource rather than as a culture with a part to play in the future development of the American continent.<sup>37</sup> The vulgar presumptiveness of the racism in this pavilion was in keeping with the regressive spirit to be found everywhere at the Centennial. This was never likely to be an arena for debate about equal rights; if anything, it was just the opposite.

The American Indians first featured at a World’s Fair in Philadelphia in 1876, where extensive displays in the Government Building attempted to assess the progress of their assimilation into white American culture. Some Indians were actually part of the exhibition, but preference was for mannequins. The overwhelming effect of the Government Building was to cast the Indian as an immoral savage, one observer even seeing the superb examples of Indian art as indicating ‘most conclusively that the moral standard of the aboriginals must have been at the lowest possible grade’.<sup>38</sup> The portrayal seventeen years later at Chicago showed that if anything, attitudes toward the Indian had deteriorated. Here they were widely treated by white Americans as the ‘enemy within’, a primitive, amorphous race defying Western ideas of decency and civilization. At Chicago the decision was taken to present the American Indian as a savage who had only recently encountered the rudiments of humanity. Henry Pratt, founder of the Carlisle Indian School, was asked to organise the exhibit. A humanitarian and worker for the Indian, he quickly realised the intent behind the display and refused to have anything to do with it, going as far as to object altogether to the inclusion of the Indian unless the context were right.<sup>39</sup> He was ignored, and various Indian races were settled into tepees, given canoes to row on a man-made lake and obliged to perform various famous ritual ceremonies.<sup>40</sup> They were a long way indeed from realising their rights as equal citizens. Adjacent to the tepees was the Buffalo Bill Show, an entertainment which outlined the standing of the Indian in American life in the most crude and derogatory of ways. In its vision of the Indian as a broken race best suited to serve as entertainment, the Columbian outlined the pattern for Fairs to come. At Buffalo an ‘Indian Congress’ served up the Indians to the American public as a type of animal rather than human life: ‘No such lesson in history can be gleaned from books as is here shown by ‘Native Americans’ – long haired painted savages in all their barbaric splendour’.<sup>41</sup> The animal analogy was often directly made: ‘A wild west Indian, at the Exposition, was observed absorbed in contemplation of a wolf. It was like meeting an old friend in the strange east. The wolf’s howl too seemed to carry with it a note of recognition’.<sup>42</sup> At succeeding events in the twentieth century, up to and including the New York World’s Fair, the Indian continued to fulfill the rôle of entertainment, a spectacular but expendable extra in a world conducting itself as though it believed the narratives of cowboy films then enjoying popularity. The reality of genocide and land sequestration were hidden by the pastiche of carefully arranged tepees, totem poles and trinket sellers.

Buffalo followed the Chicago pattern and presented an impressive range of exotic villages from different areas of the world. Japanese, African and Eskimo villages all proved popular with the crowds. Xavier Pené won the commission to build the African settlement, which most probably comprised of Dahomeyans. Most interesting at Buffalo though was the presence for the first time of villages from the American empire. Cuban, Hawaiian and Philippino villages celebrated American gains, the Philippino display being the largest with one hundred people on an eleven acre site. <sup>43</sup> A living display of peoples from all over the American continent was also presented. Its aim according to its organiser A. L. Benedict was to make ‘an exposition of the living natives of Pan-America’ containing ‘only the aboriginal races of the Western continent and the islands geographically or politically associated with it’. Benedict’s main problem was in keeping ‘discipline and sanitation in a large population of uncivilised tribes, each possessing its own pecularities and religious prejudices’. <sup>44</sup> Describing his function as a farmer or zoo keeper would, he showed fully the extent to which anthropolgy itself was a victim of prejudice and misconception. Indeed, the major fascination for us now is not found in the types of life non-Western peoples created for themselves, but in the collective psychological condition of those who felt justified in creating displays of other peoples, in order to try and prove they were less than human.

Three years later at the St. Louis Fair the Philippines were the main part of the ethnographic display, villages of various different tribes being intended to show human development ‘from the lowest grade to the better class’.<sup>45</sup> The committee reports described the arrangement:

Vast quantities of bamboo and ripa brought from the archipelago, were used in the construction of the native villages . . . The exhibit was an honest one. There were the least civilized people in the Negritos and the Igorrotes; the semi-civilized in the Bagobos and the Moros, and the civilized and cultured in the Visayans . . . In all respects the exhibit was a faithful portrayal.<sup>46</sup>

In this particular exhibition, the authenticity of the exhibits could hardly be doubted, the Igorrotes causing a scandal by spearing and cooking the pet dogs of some of the local inhabitants. To complicate the anthropological picture, it was discovered that some of the dogs they ate were brought to them by local boys for a small fee. The organisers had taken the wrong advice on the dietary preferences of some of its most notable guests. 47

The social, economic and political situation of the indigenous coloured populations of America gave social Darwinian theory added significance. ‘Proof’ of the degeneracy and genetic underdevelopment of the Negroid and American Indian populations gave justification to the status they were accorded. The first Fairs in the twentieth century became obsessed with evolutionary theory in an attempt to give scientific credence to the legalised racism present everywhere in American society. Buffalo was the extreme case, where the layout of the whole site was intended to show the visitor the shift from low levels of humanity to higher ones. It was hoped the visitor would sense the evolutionary flow of mankind as he/she walked through the Fair. The sculptural decoration and colour scheme of the buildings was intended to suggest a pattern of human development. The artistic directors of the Fair arranged its formal characteristics to illustrate social Darwinian theory: ‘an ethical significance is aimed at, in the chromatic arrangement as in the architectural plan; the whole symbolising progression from a less civilized age to a higher. Thus the strongest, crudest colours are nearest the entrances. ‘<sup>48</sup> As the visitors entered the grounds through the Triumphal bridge, they ‘would come upon the elementary conditions, that is, the earliest state of man suggested on one side and primitive nature on the other. . . The strongest primary colours should be applied here’; further along ‘the colours should be applied refined and less contrasting, and the Tower which is to suggest the triumph of man’s achievement, should be the lightest and most delicate in colour’.<sup>49</sup> Thus pure colour was natural, simple and brutal, mixed colour, particularly pastel shades, was synthetic, complex and hence civilized. Nowhere else in the history of international exhibitions – or in any other sphere – was there a more carefully constructed contrivance with the specific aim of high-lighting differences between racial types. The Buffalo Fair and many which followed it was intended to reinforce the racial structure of American society by driving wedges between the various ethnic groups.

The native village was only one form of human display common to exhibitions, there were several others, these normally being reserved for races considered higher up the evolutionary ladder. The foreign ‘street’ was a regular feature of exhibitions after 1880, the most famous one of all being the ‘Rue de Caire’. The first Rue de Caire appeared at the Exposition Universelle of 1878, a modest affair with shops, a bazaar and a liberal number of North Africans. In 1889, as with all peopled displays, the scale was dramatically increased, making the street into a long, winding passageway full of shops, bartering Egyptians and irate camels. Visitors could buy artefacts made on the spot or consumables such as tobacco, perfume and spices brought from Arabic countries. Initially appearing when the French had strong interest in Egypt, the ‘Rue’ out-grew the imperial dimension to become more an exotic piece of entertainment. It would be a mistake however to suggest that at any time that was all it was, as European interest in Egypt and the Near East remained intense until well after the Second World War. After 1889 it was a feature of various exhibitions including the Chicago Columbian, the Greater Britain (1899), Paris 1900 and St. Louis. Of all of these, the Chicago and Paris 1900 ones were thought to be the most complete. In both the Cairo theme was made vague in order to allow most Arabic cultures some space, in what became genuinely thriving commercial centres. Dozens of craft shops, food stores, shoe shops and barbers lined the street, which gained an authentic feel from the sheer numbers of Arabic people present. At Paris an estimated thousand people worked on the Rue de Caire through the six month period. It became a place where one might while away a whole day, the pleasures available going well beyond those of simple sight-seeing. Restaurants and drinking shops were crowded, usually with men, as were the small theatres where one could see erotic belly-dancers perform in a way Paris was not normally accustomed to. Contemporary accounts hint at pleasures to be had even beyond these:

In the Egyptian theatre the derboukhas purr; reed-flutes whine, the harsh and strident flute of the Arabs already heard in the Sahara, on the fringe of oases, mingled with cries, guttural and rhythmic, in a chant which tries to be gay and which hums sadly, so sadly and monotonously, so desperately . . . At the Cairo café where we are seated in front of steaming cups, a delicate, frail Egyptian girl, barely fourteen years old, with a finely modelled face of light amber, smiles at us with all her enamel teeth and her large, green eyes; she is sheathed in reddish-brown silk which makes her look like a gleaming serpent. She stands beside us, immobile and silent, having been brought by a negro at our request . . . A horrible matron, of a thoroughly Levantine puffiness, with swarthy eyes and sunken cheeks, watches her from the counter, wrapped in an ill-fitting coat of a sapphire-blue plush of a vulgar modernity.<sup>50</sup>

Achieving a realism the organisers could not have anticipated, the Rue de Caire seemed to escape all intended categories to become an independent force in itself. Hardly a celebration of imperial success, it could not be described either as an educational exhibit even in the most liberal of senses, though doubtless many learned things there they certainly did not know about before. Perhaps the only real way it justified its existence and earned its continued reappearance was through its commercial potential. Not only was a large amount of produce sold from the Street but it also brought thousands through the turnstiles who would otherwise not have bothered. This was certainly the case with the Cairo Street in the Chicago Columbian where, though the sensual delights of Paris seemed to be absent, the money-making angle certainly was not. This Street contained sixty shops, all commercially viable and competitive. Apart from this, one could buy a donkey or camel ride or pay to go into a Muslim Mosque.

The financial aspect of human displays was important. They guaranteed attendances, they often produced a useful spin-off in sales of craft and food produce and they proved perfect venues for Western firms to advertise their goods. Maurice Talmeyr, in exasperated tone, questioned the ethics of a French manufacturer in connection with an ‘Andalusia at the time of the Moors’ display at the Paris 1900 show:

Why does Andalusia – at the time of the Moors – recommend Menier Chocolate to us? Because the authentic Moors and the authentic Andalusia do not, according to all appearances, sufficiently allow for advertisements, and an exposition is not going, and never has gone, and never will go without advertisements.<sup>51</sup>

The most commercially considered presentation of peoples were the Indian and Ceylonese Teahouses erected by the British at countless exhibitions from 1880. Paid for mainly by the Indian Tea Syndicate, the whole point was to popularise tea among the Europeans; in order to do that dozens of Indians and Ceylonese people were brought to Europe to work in authentically styled Teahouses. Up to 1900, the British government took an active part in the Teahouses with the Syndicate, often subsidizing them so heavily that the tea could be served free. The bulk sales which might emerge if tea became fashionable in Europe were the incentive, there being sufficient evidence to suggest the ploy was a success.<sup>52</sup> The free Teahouse at the Amsterdam International of 1883 caused a stir amongst the suspicious Dutch gentry:

The mere idea of any refreshment being given without charge appeared so strange to Dutch notions that visitors crowded the tea-room daily, and could scarcely believe that no charge would be made. Some of the better class of visitors at first objected to placing themselves under any obligation by drinking tea without payment; but this feeling soon wore off, and the tea-room was thronged.<sup>53</sup>

The commercial side of human displays reached a peak of variety at the American World’s Fairs, edging the whole tradition close to a fusion of departmental store and fairground side-show. The Chicago Columbian boasted the widest range of peopled displays shown anywhere up to that time, the trend moving continuously upward from then. Apart from the seventeen villages and the Cairo Street, there were Chinese and Japanese Teahouses, a Moorish Palace, an Indian School, a Persian Coffee House, a Japanese Bazaar, a Parisian Café, a French Cider Press, an English Pub (the White Horse Inn), a South Sea Islanders canoeing Lake, Highland Pipers, a Hunter’s Cabin and the Buffalo Bill Show. A large proportion of these were sponsored by individual companies, whose names would feature prominently in the display. At Buffalo, St. Louis and San Francisco the entertainment and selling aspects of human display were equally evident. After the First World War however, alternative forms tended to replace human displays; in particular the use of non-Westem peoples declined, the tableau-vivant aspect surviving mainly in the form of white Americans advertising new products. At the Chicago Century of Progress Exposition in 1933, the number of foreign peoples of any kind was drastically reduced, this event boasting only Moroccan, Chinese and Belgian Villages, an Old Heidleberg Inn and a Maya Temple.<sup>54</sup> The New York World’s Fair three years later had only Cuban, Seminole and English Villages, an English Pub and the Bendix Lama Temple.<sup>55</sup> As in Britain, the Great War was a watershed for peopled exhibits.

There were not always racial, imperial or commercial motives behind human exhibits. Some were engaged in what could be termed an ambassadorial rôle. That is, they were there to illustrate an issue, usually to do with the type of life led in the country they were from. Most governments participating in international exhibitions wished to give off a pleasant notion of what life was like in the country they ruled over, exhibits often being geared specifically to this end. To give off a pleasant idea of ones country had the dual purpose of creating an image of national stability before an international audience and of encouraging foreign visitors. By the start of the twentieth century, tourism was an ever-growing phenomenon, the exhibitions being used to sell the beauty of the homeland to prospective visitors. From the Paris 1900 show onwards, tourism displays featured prominently at exhibitions, usually in the form of tableaux-vivants with charming people in national costume explaining the advantages of their ethnic regions. A Portuguese Street, for example, was part of a display of the holiday resorts of Europe in the Machine Hall at the London Imperial International in 1909. At the Barcelona Exposition of 1929 a huge Spanish Village was built, complete with Spanish inhabitants producing local craft objects. The aim was to sell a particular vision of the Spanish nation to a Europe which appeared reluctant to visit. The village had examples of Spanish vernacular architecture from earliest times to the present, constructed entirely in authentic materials. Its success led to its retention after the exposition closed, and it remains today, on the Montjuïc hillside on the edge of the city-centre, the only surviving village from the whole exhibition tradition.<sup>56</sup> The Exposition of 1937 countered the resentment much of France felt at the constant location in Paris of all major cultural events, by featuring the different regions in individual tableaux-vivants. Most of these were village settings, created not only to serve as ethnic appeasement but also as a stimulant to tourism. Included were Marseille-Provence, Loire-Ardèche, Languedoc, Franche-Comté, Gascogne, Poitou, Massif Central, Nivernais-Berry, Vallée Moyenne de la Loire, Dauphiné et Hautes Alpes, Bretagne, Languedoc-Pyrenées, Rousillon, Champagne, Normandie, Picardie and Bigorre. It is not known whether this show quietened the grumblings of the rest of France but it certainly succeeded in creating a feeling of rurality which ran against the flavour of the rest of the site.

A considerable number of ‘white’ villages were built from 1900 onwards, usually performing public relations rôles for the countries they came from. English villages were particularly popular in America, appearing at regular intervals up to 1939. There were German, Austrian, Belgian, Swedish, and Dutch villages erected on several occasions, again mainly in America. The image the English invariably went for was one of Tudor bliss, complete with May-pole and village green, in direct contradiction of the reality of English life as lived by the majority.<sup>57</sup> Similarly, realism was a low priority across the range of white villages, the normal format being one of an exaggerated vernacular, emphasising rural values rooted in tradition, language and local custom. Most nations showed themselves as residing in pleasant holiday-camps, where everybody had plenty, everyone was content, and everyone knew his or her folk-tunes by heart. The distortion of the truth could become a sinister form of propaganda, depending on the country and the time, but usually, the visual rhetoric of an industrialised Europe pretending it was still operating with mediaeval technologies and power relations was harmless enough. Essentially, these villages were a dream of the bourgeoisie, a grand version of the suburbs they were busily building for themselves. The retreat to pre-industrial life was an attempt to suspend the knowledge that the industrial age gave them their power, and that the ugliness of the urban environment was their doing.

Interesting anomalies amongst the white villages were those of Ireland and Scotland. The first to appear was the Irish village of BallyMaclinton in 1908 at the Franco-British, this being retained for the following three White City exhibitions due to its popularity. The Scottish Village joined the Irish one in 1909 at the Imperial International, making sporadic appearances after that, notably at the Cornonation Exhibition of 1911, the Scottish National Exhibition, Glasgow 1911, and the Glasgow Empire Exhibition of 1938. These were ideologically difficult villages for the British to create, especially the ones staged in London, as they raised issues as to the status of Ireland and Scotland in relation to the colonies of the empire. Moreover, BallyMaclinton was conceived of at a time when the high Tories Bonar-Law and Carson were stirring Ulster to revolt, against a Liberal government desperately attempting to find a solution to the Irish issue.<sup>58</sup> BallyMaclinton presented Ireland as ancient and rural, with thatched cottages, peat-burners, traditional dancing and the Gaelic language; all was wrapped in a self-sufficiency scarcely less complete than that of the Senegalese Village next to it. The Times (May 14th.) listed Irish industries as handloom-weaving, lacemaking, embroidery, carpets and soaps, implying that Ireland’s industrial revolution was as distant as Africa’s. The reality of Ireland in 1908 – a nation which had staged its own international exhibitions since 1853 and which was struggling for independence both inside and outside of Parliament – could hardly have been less appropriately depicted. Scotland was treated in a similar manner, with cottage dwellers singing Highland melodies, ambling around the green in their tartan kilts. In this case, the image was little more than a farcical misrepresentation of a nation boasting one of the largest docks and industrial conurbations in the world. The Highland idyll was lifted from its context and made to stand as the essence of Scottish culture.

The presentations though were less to do with accuracy or with the encouragement of tourism than with the relationship they were in with the English. Colin McArthur has discussed this in terms of a core-periphery structure,

whereby economically strong core countries draw weaker contiguous countries (or more accurately regions) into a satellite relationship across the entire range of the forms of social life . . . In the very act of equipping themselves ideologically to be core countries, and to sustain the undoubted strains of so becoming, the core countries at the same time defined the Other, the regions they themselves were not – i.e., the peripheral countries.<sup>59</sup>

Ireland had to be different, as did Scotland, in order for the English to be able to differentiate themselves and rule. The core-periphery phenomenon can be applied to the whole empire, and can be found throughout the exhibitions in the tendency to emphasize rurality, backwardness and nature when discussing subject-nations, and the city, industry and culture when discussing the imperial ones. Power was achieved and maintained through industrial technology, and it was through demonstration of it that core countries maintained their hold. To juxtapose a Machine Hall with a native village was to provide the clearest possible illustration of power relations in the world. For those who wished to see it that way, it also indicated relative positions on the social Darwinian scale. By showing Ireland and Scotland as nations of hand-loom weavers and Gaelic singers, organisers at the exhibitions were relating to them as periphery nations, as part of the empire. A time-worn attitude toward the Celtic races facilitated this, an attitude which has had its derogatory nature obscured by a quasi-romanticism. Malcolm Chapman:

Since the eighteenth century, the Celtic fringe has posed for the urban intellectual as a location of the wild, the natural, the creative and the insecure. We can often find it said, with warm approval, that the Celts are impetuous, natural, spiritual and naïve . . . Such an approval is drawing on the same system of structural oppositions as is the accusation that the Celt is violent (impetuous), animal (natural), devoid of any sense of property (spiritual) or without manners (naïve), the bracketed terms being effective synonyms of the words that precede them, that they would be used to praise rather than to deride.<sup>60</sup>

The emphasis on the Celtic and Gaelic languages in some exhibitions had the effect of further emphasising their ‘otherness’, melting them into the foreign contingent.<sup>61</sup> When the English presented their own Tudor village, as they often did in America, an entirely different set of values were brought to bear; their rurality was not to do with backwardness or indolence, but with tradition and stability in the face of industrial change. The English village was an historical suburbia, where humility and respect for aristocratic privilege was a part of the daily lives of the synthetic inhabitants. This was an ‘olde worlde’ created under the comforting wing of temporarily invisible industry. Ironically however, by 1939 when an English village appeared at the New York World’s Fair, the core/periphery formation was once again in operation, but this time with the Americans at the core.<sup>62</sup>

Often as part of a national exhibit, a building would be erected to be filled with people acting out some aspect of their culture on a continuous basis. The most common examples of this entertaining exercise in international public relations was the ‘old city’. The Austrians were the first to create an old city when they peopled a reconstructed eighteenth century Vienna in 1873. After that date, an ‘Old Paris’, ‘Old London’ and ‘Old New York’ made regular appearances around the world. In the ‘Old Paris’ of 1900 in Paris, superbly authentic streets from the mediæval period were filled with hundreds of paid individuals, who simply walked around in mediæval garb for the six months of the Exposition. Less expensive and probably more common were international concerts by performers brought to exhibitions to work either in national or communal theatres on the site. Imre Kiralfy was the acknowledged master of this form, often bringing singers and dancers from all over the world to perform in continuous spectaculars at the White City. The Latin-British Exhibition of 1912 contained, he informed his visitors in the Daily Programme, ‘troupes of male and female singers and musicians giving their national and popular songs from Naples, Venice, Sicily, Aragon, Seville, Madrid, Oporto, Brittany, Normandy, Brazil, Mexico, Argentine and other Latin-American countries, thus giving the exhibition an aspect of realism, life, light and gaiety.’<sup>63</sup> This was surpassed by an extraordinary parade in and around the Grand Palais at the 1925 Paris show. After a banquet, a privileged few saw a performance with over two thousand participants. Loïe Fuller and her troupe, models from leading haute couture houses, the troupe of the Casino de Paris, Eva La Galienne and her company, the Paris Opera Company, the Comédie-Française, all the clowns from circuses in and around Paris, the Hoffman girls from the Moulin Rouge, the Tiller girls from the Folies Bergère, the ‘Queens of the Theatre’ (sixty of the best known actresses of the day) and three hundred dancers from various Parisian ballet companies took part in this flamboyant extravaganza. The show ran from late afternoon to the early hours of the morning.<sup>64</sup>

The presence of thousands of people at international exhibtions as exhibits had dramatic cultural and social spin-offs. This was particularly the case with those contained within imperial displays. Many of the Senegalese, Somalis and Dahomeyans who toured the world became Westernised in some degree, could conceivably have married into local populations, and most certainly affected their own people if and when they returned home. It is known that several of the Irish girls who were exhibited as inhabitants of BallyMaclinton in London stayed there and married; it is known also that many who went over to America as part of villages from Africa, Asia and Europe stayed there. The social effect of the transformation of the individual circumstances of these human exhibits is negligible however compared with the effect it had on the masses who visited the exhibitions. The millions of artisans, clerks, shop attendants, road-diggers, miners, businessmen, bankers, writers and teachers who filed past the African and Asian villages, amazed at what they saw and openly encouraged to regard it as a lower form of life. One of the few levels where European society operated in the absence of class was in the domain of racial prejudice; messages phrased in consistent manner to all levels of society affirmed the inferiority of coloured peoples. One can only guess at the extent of the harm caused by these human show-cases, but within the bounds of speculation it can be asserted that an immense amount of damage was caused, with little good coming out of them in social, moral or intellectual terms. Fifty years after their demise, the damage remains unrepaired.