the quintessence of civilization, as an integrated and sweeping force linking all Frenchmen. Avoiding the identification of individual components, the national profile was to be an amalgamation of vital elements in the civilizing process; as a blended whole this was a uniquely elevating force, a quality capable of transforming all it encountered into something of higher value. In 1832 Edgar Quinet wrote that only Frenchmen had

the instinct of civilization, the need to take the initiative in a general way to bring about progress in modern society . . . It is this disinterested though imperious need . . . which makes French unity, which gives sense to its history and a soul to the country. This civilising force, this desire for internal influence is the best part of France, its art, its genius, its happiness. 3

## Similarly F. Guizot had affirmed in 1828:

. . . civilising ideas and institutions born in other lands have been in some way forced to undergo a further development in France whenever they wanted to transplant themselves, to become fruitful and general, to act for the common benefit of European civilization . . . There has been hardly any great idea, any great principle of civilization, which, seeking to spread everywhere, has not first passed through France. 4

The idea of France as civilizer allowed one of the strongest elements within French culture to come into play, the arts. Undoubtedly one of the highest expressions of civilization and of disinterested human achievement, the arts were particularly important for France, as she could with reasonable accuracy claim to be European leader in most of the major disciplines. Thus, when Napoleon III issued the decree for the organization of the first Exposition Universelle, his insistance on the primacy of the fine arts carried a strong nationalist sentiment.<sup>5</sup> France was to realise itself through its arts, to show the world that the complex synthesis of regions and races had given birth to a unified and glorious culture. At all the Expositions Universelles, Frenchness was to be seen as an essence capable of constantly producing cultural artefacts of the first rank. Music, Poetry, Painting, sculpture, architecture, ceramic, furniture, textiles, manufactured objects, graphics, fashion, food and drink, in fact every type of object carrying the least cultural significance was presented as being at its best in its French form. Louis XIV, having realised the importance of the arts as indicators of power and civilization, had embarked on policies of encouragement which had made French art dominant in Europe; in the nineteenth century the legacy was fully capitalized on, until sections of French society utterly unfamiliar with art in any form were nonetheless aware they were the masters of it. Likewise the foreigner, on the whole, accepted French artistic primacy. The vast sums French government put into the expositions were expected to pay back through the stimulation of cultural unity and confidence; as such, they were not simply displays of produce, they were a physical manifestation of the French national character. Moreover, the exercise was meaningless when constricted to national boundaries. The proof of Frenchness only emerged when it was recognised by others, when it exerted influence – directly and indirectly – outside France. Victor Hugo made this clear when he wrote in the guidebook of the 1867 Exposition:

O France, adieu! You are too great to be merely a country. People are becoming separated from their mother, and she is becoming a goddess. A little while more, and you will vanish in the transfiguration. You are so great that you will soon no longer be. You will cease to be France, you will be Humanity; you will cease to be a nation, you will be ubiquity. You are destined to dissolve into radiance and nothing at this hour is so majestic as the visible obliteration of your frontier. Resign yourself to your immensity. Goodbye, people! Hail, man! Submit to your inevitable and sublime aggrandizement, O my country, and, as Athens became Greece, as Rome became Christendom, you, France, become the world!<sup>6</sup>

Attitudes toward empire at the 1867 Exposition revealed an expansive frame of mind, humanised by an insistence upon the civilizing powers of the French nation. The Notary of the Tunisian consulat for example, lauded European intervention in his country, seeing the ‘benefits of their civilization’, which he defined as a combination of knowledge, international understanding, industry and trade. He also cast the French as the ‘enemies of isolation’, a nation who saw the international perspective as the only one capable of overcoming ‘hatred, ancient prejudices and war, the plague of man and the ruin of the land’.<sup>7</sup> More than anything else for this writer, the French were bringing a way of life. The core of his discussion begged comparison with discourses on the benefits of Roman occupation of uncivilized corners of the ancient world, so confident was his vision of his overlords.

After the shock of 1871 the material basis of French claims to world significance was severely damaged, the national profile being forced in the years after Sedan into more abstract terrain than ever before. Only seven years after defeat an Exposition Universelle was held with the express purpose of showing the world that France had recovered fully from the disaster. Here the visual arts were brought heavily to the fore as the central device for the presentation of national character. The actual appearance of the Exposition, both inside and out, was to be the basis of French claims to nationhood. A splendid semi-permanent building, the Palais du Trocadéro, was placed on the crest of the Chaillot Hill facing the Champs de Mars, to serve as the main part of the French contribution. The facade of the central core comprised of a semi-circle of giant arches, surmounted by a massive second storey in the form of a buttressed octagonal drum and cupola. Two Venetian towers flanked this and vast arcaded wings described a concave arc either side. The wings framed a garden and stepped fountain on the slope of the hill. The whole was intended to suggest the splendour of the French baroque, a previous age of power and confidence. In true conservative manner the creators of the Trocadéro reassured themselves of French standing by resorting to a distant and glorious past. It did its job well, for no innocent by-stander on the Chaillot Hill could have doubted they were in a country of importance and wealth. The literature surrounding the building dwelt on the ancient pedigree of the site: ‘le Trocadéro, comme on l’a dit plus haute, fait partie du sol de l’ancien village de Chaillot, dont la première trace date du Xe siècle. Ce village appartenait à une région qui au Vile s’etendait jusqu’a Boulogne, le bois compris, et portait le nom de Nimio’. <sup>8</sup> Inside the building the main vestibule was filled with an exhibition of ‘Les Antiquités des Gaules’, the centre of which was a tomb presented exactly as found with its treasure and bones. This was in fact a controversial display in such a context, as it implied French origins in Gallic culture, something the millions of non-Gallic French resented.

As the appointed media to suggest France was a civilization in the ascendant, architecture, the decorative and fine arts were given a tremendous responsibility in 1878. It would be too crude to suggest nationalism as a sole stimulus behind French cultural policy, but a maxim of logical progression was undoubtedly everpresent, confirming the notion that France reigned supreme in art, that art dominated culture, culture evoked civilization, and hence civilization meant France. The Exposition of 1889 saw the most complete rendering so far of France as the supreme example of civilized humanity, leading the Official American Report to recognise art as a French national characteristic: ‘In France there is no quality more clearly apparent than respect for the arts and works of all kinds connected with them. This trait belongs to no condition or class, but pervades alike all ranks of society’.<sup>10</sup> Additionally, the same report tied art not only into the French nation but also into the genetic make-up of French men:

That there is in the human race such an intangible quality as the art instinct there can be no reasonable doubt; and that it has been more marked and strongly developed among the Latin races than among the northern people, is also indisputable. If the history of art proves one thing more than another, it is the value of this instinct in the development of painting, sculpture, and architecture among the southern races. To the influence of the Greeks, and, in later times, the great era of the Italian

Renaissance, is the northern part of the civilized world indebted for much that is good in its achievement. But in no country has that double influence taken such deep root and retained such vigorous life as in France; in no other has it produced such far reaching and beneficial results. In that country it has kept alive a natural love for the artistic, when even in these materialistic days of steam and iron, adorns every phase of national life. 11

Thus France was the protector of Western classical culture; the organizers could not have wished for a better response from a foreign power.

By 1900 the creation of a vast expensive exposition needed little justification in government circles beyond the belief that ‘France owes it to herself as the Queen of Civilization to hold a great exhibition which will become one of her many claims to glory’.<sup>12</sup> The organizers stated their aim as being to ‘reflect the refulgent genius of France and show that, as in the past, we now stand in the van-garde of progress’.<sup>13</sup> When Exposition director Alfred Picard addressed the Chamber of Deputies to win support for the show, his central argument was for the need to confirm the French image of itself as a spiritual leader of humanity:

In voting for this draft bill, the Chambers will perform an act of high patriotism . . .(the exposition) will demonstrate once again the growth of the nation’s prosperity and, what is more important, add to its glory and import abroad. Paris and all of France will emerge from this solemn meeting yet more splendid. The Republic will close the nineteenth century with a suitable dignity and will attest to its desire to remain at the vanguard of civilization.<sup>14</sup>

The amount spent in 1900 and on the two other Expositions Universelles held in the twentieth century guaranteed their status; the sizes of the sites were steadily increased and governmental involvement was maintained at an intense level. All this testified to the fact that at international exhibitions commerical profit was never the highest priority for the French.<sup>15</sup>

The obsession with the civilizing aspects of ‘Frenchness’ led to a concentration of resources on events in Paris. From the Revolution onwards, the hegemony of Paris over the rest of France became a recognised part of French cultural strategy. Paris was to be built up into the centre of European and hence world civilization. The national exhibitions from 1798 and the expositions universelles from 1855 were inevitably and naturally held there, the capital receiving the lion’s share of all government funding for cultural activities. Understandably, the jealousy of the regions became a major stumbling block for exposition organizers to overcome, a jealousy that existed in many spheres of life and revealed the tenuous nature of French national unity. Centralization, a political move begun by Richelieu and completed by the Revolution, at times proved counter-productive in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, as proud regions campaigned to reduce the control Paris exercised over French national life. The 1900 show was plagued in its early organizational phases by committed decentralists who wanted to abandon the concept of the international exhibition altogether, especially ones held in Paris. Maurice Barrés, predictably, led a fierce assault in ‘Le Figaro’, but the most vigorous anti-exposition campaign was led by the editor of ‘L’Est Republique’, Leon Goulette.<sup>16</sup> He headed a school of thought in Nancy, in existence since the first exposition in 1855, which challenged the cultural primacy of Paris and the rôle it had assumed as spiritual leader in French affairs. More than a provincial resentment at the dominance of the capital, the antipathy felt was a result of general discomfort with the national profile created for France by authorities in Paris. It was obvious to regionalists that in order to create a vision of a superior culture, money had to be concentrated into specific areas and projects, as the wealth simply did not exist to enhance every area of France equally. Thus Paris was the show-piece which drained resources in order to tell the world what it was to be French, much to the annoyance of many other French cities and areas. A lot of the anger focussed on the expositions universelles, directed mainly by middle-class business people who had a stake in promoting the regions they lived in. Thus the nationalist rôle of the expositions, whilst undoubtedly useful for impressing the foreigner with the glory of French culture, had the unfortunate back-lash of alienating the provincial bourgeoisie. The holding of State funded expositions in Marseille in 1906 and 1922 were almost certainly a result of agitation from the South. In 1937, as the last Exposition Universelle opened its gates, the problem remained unresolved despite a substantial area of the site being given over to the regions.<sup>17</sup>

There were theoretical problems with the identifying of the arts as a national characteristic. The most important of these was the matching of artistic traditions with other values thought to be important in the make-up of a modern industrial state. The concept of Progress for example, was a vital one to all expansive imperial economies, the motivation behind industry and capital, yet it sat very uncomfortably with long-standing ideas of artistic excellence. The arts, especially those generated by the French academies, could suggest a certain standing, sophistication, tradition and power, but they were unable to characterize with ease the voracious advance of a government committed to industrial and imperial growth. As a raison d’être behind the actual creation of art objects, the notion of progress was even more awkward. For example, in design and architecture, it implied experimentation with style and use of new materials, yet in these areas

the French were reknown for classical and baroque form. In furniture the most favoured styles were those of Louis Quinze and Seize, especially amongst foreign buyers, yet adherence to these implied not progress, but regression. French cultural authorities throughout the nineteenth century were extremely reticent to even contemplate the idea of a style to represent the present or future, showing a reluctance to advance beyond artistic approaches evolved under the Louis’. Such attitudes ran against progressive industrialists, economists and imperialists, and led to awkward aesthetic and symbolic clashes, both in the arrangement and the final appearance of the exposition sites.<sup>18</sup>

The Revolution had forced the French into national self-consciousness at a very early date. Across the Channel, nationalist propaganda became noticeable far later, a specific vision of ‘Englishness’ being constructed and presented at exhibitions only after 1880. After then however, it was to be the dominant element in virtually all British contributions to international exhibitions. English nationalism, as the exhibitions exposed it, appears to have grown as a propaganda phenomenon in an inverse ratio with the decline of British power. That is to say, there is little real evidence of concern with the national profile in 1851 when industry and empire guaranteed Britain’s position as most powerful country, but toward the end of the century as Europe and America caught up, the definition of Englishness had become of distinct importance. The difficulties the French encountered with the relative disunity of their regions was far less of a problem to the English, who had forged a cohesive unit long before the industrial revolution began. This is not to say England was in any real sense happily united, but merely to affirm that the state machinery had long been in place, making organised dissent along racial or regional lines inconceivable by the time Victoria’s reign began. The problem for the English government lay not here but in the continuous class agitation, which showed itself capable of putting the country on the edge of revolution several times during the arduous first phase of industrialization.

At the South Kensington exhibitions of 1851, 1862 and 1871 to 1874, the national profile was so assumed it was a non-issue. In broad cultural terms there was no attempt to theoretically determine the nature of the English national character. In the arts for example there was an almost blasé acceptance of the achievement of others. The cultural produce of various European nations was widely and casually acknowledged as superior to that of Britain even in establishment circles. At the Crystal Palace exhibition it was observed that ‘while in the solidity of their manufactures our countrymen were unrivalled, in the matter of adornment they were easily outstripped’.<sup>19</sup> In 1855, whilst in Paris for the Exposition, Victoria made plain her preference for French furniture, buying two cabinets and a table.<sup>20</sup> Such admissions, innocent and petty as they may appear, reveal at the highest level a lack of worry about English cultural standing which would later be unacceptable. The reality of British power between 1850 and 1880 it seems required little embellishment. Whatever other political rôles the exhibitions had, the bolstering of a national image did not need to be one of them, beyond demonstrating an awesome, intimidating power.

Englishmen identified themselves through loyalty to crown and the empire; the legendary ‘stiff upper-lip’ was already firmly in place by 1851, referring to the extent to which one unflinchingly did ones duty to the nation in the absence of self-interest. Empire was the vehicle for nationalism, royalty the focus, making royal and imperial presences at the exhibitions imperative for them to have any real meaning.<sup>21</sup> Thus, every major international exhibition held in Britain through to the First World War had extensive imperial sections and a member of the monarchy involved in the organisation. The most celebrated example of the latter was Prince Albert’s activity in 1851. As personifications of nation the monarchy served a vital consolidatory rôle, rendering unnecessary any constructed profile of Englishness beyond themselves. A pamphlet written on the 1851 exhibition, entitled ‘Love and Loyalty’, explained English worldly success not as a result of industry, but as the natural consequence of the people’s love of the monarch. Furthermore, the union of royalty with God, in the form of the Church of England, gave an eternal value to this love. Christ Himself, apparently, with Love and Loyalty at His feet, made an ‘appeal to Britain to spread TRUE civilisation through the veins of the whole world through the medium of the Holy Writ’.<sup>22</sup> The spread of civilization for the British had little to do with the French ideal, rather it implied trade, backed by diplomacy, the force of arms and the Mission. Royalty was a sufficient unifying factor in a country which had all the evidence of its success before it. When the success began to run dry at the end of the century however, it had to be bolstered with other visions of Englishness in order to remind the population who they were.

The problem by 1900 was one of neglect. For almost a century, the monarchy, industry, the navy and the empire had said all that needed to be said about Britain. But by then this was no longer enough in a world which began to boast nations with all of these, some of them in vast excess of the English. As the new century dawned, alternative English values not only had to be highlighted at home and abroad, first of all they had to be invented. The exhibitions from 1900 onward were harbingers of this invented Englishness, until by 1939, the vision of England they put forward was so dominant that it became the mainstay of war-time propaganda.

In essence, the English national profile fabricated in the closing decades of the nineteenth century was derived from the pre-industrial world. The Tudor and Elizabethan eras were most popular for the identification of Englishness, due to their historical location at the start of English imperial history. The establishment of the Church of England, the maturing of the arts, the growth of the navy, of overseas trade and conquest, made them the perfect periods to hark back to for nationalists. After these, the later seventeenth century, and in certain instances the mediæval world, were used. At exhibitions, in the visual arts and in literature, ‘Olde Englande’ came to stand for a range of traditional virtues Englishmen were supposedly ingrained with. Simple, solid, quaint, reliable, unchanging and hardy were the type of adjectives used to describe the English population; more than this, they were applied to English culture in general. The sentiment was perfectly described by Chesterton:

St. George he was for England,

And before he killed the dragon,

He drank a pint of English ale,

Out of an English flagon.<sup>23</sup>

Higher up the class structure, more elite constructions leaned on what might be described as the Shakespearean and Royalist tradition, stressing chivalry and poetry as the characteristics of a higher kind of English gentleman. Regardless of class however, the period was marked by a widespread insistence that English power derived not from the success of industry but from innate English characteristics forged in pre-Enlightenment days. In 1900 when the organisers came to decide upon the style of the British pavilion for the Paris exposition, all these factors were taken into account. Sir Isidore Spielman, chairman of the Royal Commission over the pavilion explained:

The Royal Pavilion on the Quai d’Orsay afforded us our only opportunity of making a distinctive national display . . . Our intention was to provide an example of the most characteristic style of English domestic architecture, fitted up and furnished in such a way as to give, as far as possible, an idea of a well appointed English house . . . The choice of architecture for the British Royal Pavilion was no easy matter, since the problem to be solved consisted in covering a space of given dimensions with a characteristic English building . . . it was finally decided . . . to take as a model the principal facade of a famous Jacobean Manor House, known as ‘The Hall’, Bradford on Avon.<sup>24</sup>

The interior of this early seventeenth century house was filled with furniture by William Morris and Company, with stained-glass windows by Edward Burne-Jones. The choice of architectural style and interior decor guaranteed a vision of aristocratic England in existence long before the industrial revolution.<sup>25</sup>

The return to ‘Olde Englande’ had long and diverse theoretical roots, giving an amount of respectability to what was in some ways an absurd vision of one of the largest and oldest industrial nations. The gothic revival in the arts had begun with the onset of romanticism at the end of the eighteenth century and had blossomed into the most significant British artistic movement in the nineteenth. The PreRaphaelites and William Morris continued the mediæval thrust through to the 1880’s, from whence various revival movements in the decorative arts and architecture carried it forward into this century. Most notable amongst these was the Arts and Crafts movement. The first evidence of revivalism being used to project a national profile in exhibitions came in the Philadelphia Centennial in 1876, when Thomas Harris’s two buildings for the British contingent had a haughty, halftimbered look which reminded the new nation of the age and standing of their English forebears.<sup>26</sup> In 1878 in Paris the English chose a heavy black and white Tudor palace style for the national pavilion along the first ‘Rue des Nations’. At that stage, almost thirty years after the demise of the original preRaphaelite group and the death of Augustus Pugin, momentum was maintained in the ‘pre-industry’ camp largely through the exertions of the William Morris circle. By 1900, though no longer a progressive or socially aware force, arts and crafts mediævalism had become a major factor in British art and design.<sup>27</sup> Appropriated by conservative imperialists within the art establishment, it was reinterpreted into a national domestic style; the 1900 Paris show pavilion – designed by Lutyens – was the vision of English life as sanctioned by national propagandists. Eight years later at the Franco-British Exhibition the debate on English national style appeared to reach some kind of resolution, with an Arts and Crafts based vernacular coming into absolute ascendancy in the decorative arts and domestic architecture. In public architecture the ‘Edwardian baroque’ came to the fore, a dry and pompous classicism based on the work of Wren, Hawksmoor and Vanbrugh. Thus the private and public domains were divided out, Edwardian baroque being the preferred style for imperial monuments.<sup>28</sup> It would be a mistake therefore to associate Tudor and mediæval revivalism too closely with imperialism, rather it was a nationalist movement intended to project an image of the indigenous English population. The pattern of classical for public and vernacular for private building was repeated later in the twentieth century by most totalitarian states.

The idea that England had a better, truer and nobler past before the industrial revolution, was put forward by factions on both right and left of the political spectrum, normally in the absence of any factual backup. On the one side, pre-industrial England appeared as an age of unalienated labour, a land of clean air and full bellies; on the other it was the time of a ‘purer’ Englishman, simple, obedient and untainted by the corruptions of urban life. The truth or falsehood in these positions is less important than the effect they had on mass consciousness. The image of Olde Englande came to infect British popular culture into the twentieth century from exhibition sites to fairgrounds, from graphic design to the cinema; most emphatically, it has survived to the present in the mock-Tudor trimmings of middle class housing estates.<sup>29</sup> In reality the worship of the ancient and rural, as opposed to the contemporary and urban, was largely explicable in terms of economic and political shifts through the period. The voracious growth which saw the expansion of cities, industries, science and empire was coming to an end; the trick after 1900, especially with the worrying outcome of the Boer War, was to hang on to what had been won .<sup>30</sup> George Beak, employed by the British government to produce propaganda during the First World War, emphasised this point: ‘: ‘ . . . the spirit of British propaganda would differ wholly and entirely from the German, in that it would not be aggressive in character. Germany’s aim was to secure an empire and dominate Europe; our aim is, presumably, to preserve and develop what we already have.’ <sup>31</sup> The vibrant, progressive liberalism which had created a monument to itself in the original Great Exhibition was tattered and tired, as was the Crystal Palace itself, languishing in Sydenham and soon to be burnt to the ground.<sup>32</sup> Britain no longer had the power to play its former rôle with conviction. Now, comfortable, stolid values, an aristocratic quaintness, a saturation in tradition and folklore, masked the desperate struggle they were engaged in to remain a world leader. There was little to be gained in identifying English consciousness with things slipping from grasp, much rather, it was best to continue to struggle for position and deny the struggle even existed. The millions of city-dwellers whose labour had created industry and empire were bypassed in an attempt to hide the fact of English decline. In 1900 the national profile was a fabrication made by those who had enjoyed the fruits of empire and were now shocked at their own vunerability. Moreover, creation of an Olde Englande was a relatively easy task for exhibition organisers and government propagandists, as they themselves tended to emerge from the villages and suburbs of England to be educated in the most ancient of schools and universities. For them the vision felt natural and desirable. It was they who extended the national profile after the First World War to include the paraphernalia of contemporary aristocratic life.

After the rather esoteric presentation of English heritage and character at Paris in 1900, exhibition features emerged which made the point more simply. The Guide to the Texas Centennial described a typical effort. Past an English Village the visitor met with a paradigm of British cultural heritage:

Now comes the last feature on your ticket book, the Old Globe Theatre and its Shakespearean players. Near the General Motors Auditorium, this bit of Merry Old England recalls the days of Shakespeare, Kit Marlowe, Ben Jonson and the gallant Walter Raleigh. Here, in a setting that brings back the times of Good Queen Bess, you will find a complete reproduction of the Old Globe Theatre in which the plays of Shakespeare were first produced, in London, during his lifetime. In this playhouse, typical of the Elizabethan period, the best known Shakespearean Company in the country presents the plays of the Bard of Avon exactly as he wrote them.<sup>33</sup>

Likewise, at the New York World’s Fair ‘Englishness’ spilled out of the officially designated areas into the entertainment facilities. Merrie England (a reproduction village) was at the centre of a cluster of features, including Shakespeare’s House, Old English Pubs, a Pageant, a Village Green and the Globe Theatre.<sup>34</sup>

It would be wrong to suggest that industry was wholly excluded as part of the national profile, rather, it was given a new emphasis, as a character trait of the English. ‘Industrious’, ‘productive’, ‘resourceful’ were the psychological attributes of the English crowd, whilst industry in the physical sense was given an historical dimension, as something the English had invented during the industrial revolution. The Machine Halls remained but they were no longer the material foci of events, their significance being continuously reduced in relation to empire, which was correspondingly raised. Occasionally a symbolic hybrid was formed; at the White City exhibitions for example, industry and Olde Englande were fused in the personage of John Bull, a figure frequently used in publicity to represent England. This comfortable, portly Englishman was at once a shrewd northern mill owner, the Lord Mayor of London, a merry wood-chopper and Sir Toby Belch; he was relatively uncultured in the highest sense, but he had the type of attitude to life that made him the perfect representative of English bourgeois values. At the Franco–British exhibition the French counterpoise to John Bull was ‘La Parisienne’, the two figures appearing together on much of the whilst John Bull was simplicity, industry and stalwartness. Commentator Sir John Cockburn, consciously or otherwise, recognised the intent of the two projections. Speaking on the way the national characteristics of the two harmonised for the purpose of exhibitions, he affirmed ‘France and Britain possess distinguishing characteristics which admirably blend together. Each abounds in those qualities which form the complement of the other; British solidity, adorned with French grace yields a result that no other combination of nations can approach.’<sup>36</sup> ‘Solidity’ implied simple, bold, stout, honest, industrious; ‘grace’ implied charm, eloquence, delicacy, lightness, artistry. Whether a true or false reflection of Franco-British life and economy in 1908 – and overwhelming evidence suggests it was false – it was a vision of the two races afforded much credence on both sides of the Channel. For English propagandists, the association of honesty, simplicity and solidity with pre-industrial values stemmed from mistrust and fear of the urban working classes, the spawn of industry. Socialism and trade unionism went naturally with the city and the factory; whilst the British middle classes were quick to laud the economic value of these latter things, they preferred to escape from the social consequences of the former.

From the end of the First World War, the principle was established that there should be British propaganda produced for consumption in Europe and America, various bodies succeeding each other in the task of maintaining a particular image of Britain for the foreigner. The News and Political Intelligence Department, the Department of Overseas Trade, the Travel Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Overseas Propaganda Committee and the British Council all had specific involvement in projecting an image of Britain, this mostly corresponding with the picture created before the First World War in international exhibitions. In 1932, Stephen Tallents, working for the Department of Overseas Trade, drew up a list of subjects deemed suitable for national projection. Included were many of the eccentricities of British life Europeans would find amusing and amenable, such as London Buses, the Derby and Punch; other things were designed to emphasize British fairplay and democracy, such as the Parliamentary institutions, the Underground system and the Manchester Guardian. The majority though stressed the pre-industrial past, particularly with an accent on the aristocratic life-style and the public school ethos: the monarchy, the English Bible, the works of Shakespeare, Henley and the Boat Race, test matches, the trooping of the colour, the Lord Mayor of London, Oxford and Edinburgh, the Times, the English countryside and villages, foxhunting, English servants, English bloodstock and pedigree stock, gardening and tailoring.<sup>37</sup> The British masses were easily forgotten in a move to make the English the aristocracy of the world. What they lacked in real power they hoped to win back in a simulation of hereditary right. Into the 1930’s, many of the items on Tallents’ list were included as exhibits in British sections in international events all over the world, as the Department of Overseas Trade had taken responsibility for exhibitions in 1918. The final triumph of ‘Lordly’ and ‘Hearts of Oak’ Englishness came in the Paris Exposition of 1937 and the New York World’s Fair of 1939, to be discussed later in the chapter.

Of all the Western powers, the problem of national self-identification was most awkward for America. In 1876 when the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition opened the new republic was celebrating a century of independence and, more discreetly, a decade of unity. With the Exposition the debate on the nature of American culture became collectively audible for the first time, and the first suggestions as to what it might be were profferred. The debate had polarised before 1876 around the relationship with Europe, this remaining a controversial element at the Fair. Questions of immense complexity had to be faced. At what point did the population, political institutions and culture cease to be European and become American? Was American culture wholly borrowed and if so, did this matter? Should there be new cultural forms to go with the new continent, if so what should they look like? The mixture of peoples in America made the issues all the more complex. Wilbur Zelinsky has referred to the myth of the ‘melting pot’, or the idea that European origins were left behind or blended once in America. The ‘melting pot’, he tells us ‘contains a lumpy stew; . . . although ethnic groups may have thickened and enriched the All-American broth – except in the south-eastern quadrant of the pot – the lumps will not cook away, at least not for a good many years.’<sup>38</sup> The new continent contained not one or two races, as with most former colonies, but dozens, many of these fiercely proud of their origins. Others, by contrast, were refugees from hostile homelands. The quest for American national identity clearly did not lie in race or tradition, or even in any genuine spirit of co-operation; unity had to be sought elsewhere.

’American-ness’, as it were, was formulated out of the economicpolitical conditions surrounding the creation of America. By the opening of the exhibition tradition three ideas had already been identified with the national character: the Pioneer Spirit, Republicanism (incorporating democracy) and Progress. All three were implied in the official literature of the Philadelphia Centennial, the exhibition having ‘connected a national celebration with an international exhibition, thus identifying the Independence and history of America with the Industrial Art and progress of the world’.<sup>39</sup> The pioneer spirit was evident in all the World’s Fairs up to and including the New York show of 1939. Exhibits where it was suggested could range widely, from tableaux-vivants showing how the land was transformed by early settlers, such as log cabins, pilgrims and old villages, to elements in the sculptural and mural decoration of the site. The Chicago Columbian was noted for its living displays of pioneers, cowboys and Indians, effectively beginning the genre at

World’s Fairs. The Buffalo Bill Show there gave a crude and commercialised version of ‘how the west was won’, particularly with regard to the American Indian.<sup>40</sup> Most Fairs after this had similar spectacles, usually in the entertainment areas. In terms of sculpture and mural work, the Panama-Pacific Exposition (San Francisco, 1915) provided the most famous edifice of the whole American tradition, ‘The End of the Trail’. Made by sculptor James Earl Fraser, this depicted an exhausted Indian on horseback, slumped forward as if on the edge of collapse. At the Exposition it was juxtaposed against Solon Borglum’s sculpture ‘The Pioneer’, in what was a clear indication to the visitor of the way America had gone and would continue to go. Eugen Neuhaus wrote at the time,

The symbolism of the ‘Pioneer’ and ‘The End of the Trail’ is, first of all, a very fine expression of the destinies of two great races so important in our historical development. The erect, energetic, powerful man, head high, with a challenge in his face, looking out into early morning, is very typical of the white man and the victorious march of his civilization. His horse steps lightly, prancingly, and there is admirable expression of physical vigor and hopeful expectation. The gun and axe on his arm are suggestive of his preparedness for any task the day and future may bring.

Contrast this picture of life with the overwhelming expression of physical fatigue, almost exhaustion, that Fraser gives to his Indian in ‘The End of the Trail’. It is embodied in rider and horse. Man and beast seem both to have reached the end of their resources and both are ready to give up the task they are not ready to meet.<sup>41</sup>

At this Fair the pioneer spirit was closely associated with the notion of progress, with strong hints that the two combined would see Americans advance beyond their own shores: ‘the greatest adventure is before us, the gigantic adventures of an advancing democracy – strong, virile, kindly – and in that advance we shall be true to the indestructible spirit of the American pioneer’.<sup>42</sup>

Republicanism and democracy were seen as the traits which most convincingly separated America from Europe. Into the twentieth century this vision was expanded to make America the ‘home of democracy’. American republicanism was presented as more complete and pure than its French counterpart, Eugen Neuhaus typically commenting on ‘our mighty nation, which carried to a successful ending a gigantic task abandoned by another great republic.’<sup>43</sup> From the Chicago Columbian onward, the American republican spirit tended to be symbolised through classicism. Classicism had the perfect historical pedigree. It had been handed down by the original democratic and republican peoples, the Greeks and Romans, it was used by the French Revolutionaries as an appropriate form and it had stood for democratic values 0in American architecture from the time of Jefferson. It was almost inevitable it would be used in the palaces, pavilions and site planning of the world’s fairs. Between 1893 and 1915 exceptions to the classical rule were few and far between, perhaps the multi-coloured extravaganza at Buffalo (1901) being the furthest away in mood. The American pavilion at the Paris Exposition of 1900 stood austerely out on the Rue des Nations, a sober classical monument covered by a heavy dome and topped by a gilded eagle.

The move to classical form in Fairs between 1876 and 1893 did not go unquestioned, progressive architects pointing out that America was choosing to represent itself with a regressive European style when it might have been better off with new forms. <sup>44</sup> However, classicism fitted the requirements of the new country too closely to allow deviance. Classical form gave a look of power, solidity and permanence; it suggested a certain stature, yet its symbolism allowed it to be interpreted differently from parallels employed by European monarchies. More important than any of these in 1893 it implied, following the Roman model, not only republicanism but imperialism also. It was only in the 1930’s, when European fascist states employed classicism to very different ends, that policies switched to representing America with various modernist forms. Republicanism was then more closely identified with progress of the free world, making forwardlooking constructions more appropriate than classical ones. The Chicago Century of Progress Exposition of 1933 exuded a futuristic Utopian republicanism, followed emphatically by the New York World’s Fair, where the extraordinary space-age centre-piece to the show was entitled ‘Democracity’.

The immense size of the American World’s Fairs owed a great deal to the disposition of the various authorities responsible for them, this emerging out of intense national self-consciousness. Zelinsky characterised the American race as being one obsessed with measurable achievement, arguing

It would be difficult to imagine a culture more efficiently programmed for expediting progress towards the most advanced technologies and socioeconomic organisations . . . There is an irrestistible urge to achieve – and proclaim – the quantifiably superlative – the biggest, highest, costliest, loudest or fastest, frequently without any dollar and cents justification.<sup>45</sup>

The Fairs celebrated the rise of America as a phenomenon; the size and expense were part and parcel of their American-ness. It was necessary for the themes carrying the national message to be expressed on an epic scale, larger than the efforts of other nations if possible. Because the French also used size and opulence at expositions to express their national identity, albeit in a different way and for different reasons, the two powers entered into a bizarre contest. The whole exhibition tradition owed its spectacular scale and lavishness to the two of them, as they persisted in expanding their efforts from the mid-nineteenth to mid-twentieth centuries. That a rivalry came to exist between them was evidenced by the attempt of the Chicagoans to out-do the Paris show of 1889, and the Parisians in 1900 to better the Columbian.<sup>46</sup> Likewise the organisers both at Buffalo and St. Louis, accepting the inter-state rivalry, saw the preceding Paris show as the event to measure themselves by. The effort to establish a national profile cost both dearly, as they used the exhibition medium to struggle for what they saw as a necessary supremacy. Everything came to a grand climax on the eve of the Second World War.

The French held what would be their last Exposition Universelle in 1937, in a Europe hardly conducive to an expression of international fellowship. Much of the publicity literature was so purposely unaware of the political climate as to constitute lies: ‘Forty-five states responded to the appeal of France and, without jealousy or bickering, took up the task of epitomizing their culture and their individual resources. They offer, in a splendid array, the outcome of a generation’s progress in the field of art, science and industry, symbolising at the same time a universal will to peace’.<sup>47</sup> In retrospect, such passages have a certain sad desperation about them, of hopeful pleas dressed in rhetoric and doomed to failure. Even though the organisers attempted to imbue the site with an optimistic modernism, the Exposition was saturated with an abrasive nationalism which served only to confirm the irreconcilability of major European states.<sup>48</sup> It was to be the cultural equivalent of the military engagement shortly to follow. The steady policies of France and Britain with regard to national profile were made to seem ambiguous and feeble compared with the confident excesses of other states. Present on the site were Germany, Italy, the U.S.S.R. and Spain, all of whom had explicit cultural visions inspired by internal political ideals. The bulwark of republicanism, America, decided not to participate.<sup>49</sup>

The German pavilion set the pace for all the others. Designed by Hitler’s architect-in-chief Albert Speer, it was an archetypal piece of National Socialist monumental architecture. A vertical pile dominated by a tower fifty-four metres high and surmounted by an eagle on a swastica, the pavilion proclaimed loudly the presence of fascism on the site. The stripped, oversize classicism invariably used by Speer expressed fully the authoritarian power of the state; it was an architecture designed to frighten and belittle the onlooker, and it succeeded admirably. Having mounted a steep staircase under the tower the visitor crossed a