# THE NATIONAL PROFILE

projecting platform and came into a vast hall, described in the catalogue as a ‘salle de fêtes’. Here was the bulk of the German exhibit:

It is magnificently decorated with mosaic, tapestries, pictures, stained glass that, as with the groups of monumental bronze statues, were the work of the best contemporary German artists. This hall, which has no subdivision, first floor or other construction, is exclusively lit, the long walls having no windows, by the large window in the ceiling and from numerous chandeliers.<sup>50</sup>

Important parts of the whole were contained on a mezzanine floor at the end of the hall, the bureau of information and the cinema. Virtually every pavilion had this last item, the power of the film to project a national profile by then being fully realised. German contemporary artists did not include any of those who been declared degenerate by the party and so the great generation of practitioners who had created the German modern tradition were wholly absent. The heavy-handed, clichéd, crass classicism of those favoured by the Third Reich dominated the sculpture and painting, whilst a more Gothic flavour surfaced in the carpets, tapestries and glass. Propaganda films and information revealed fully what it meant to be a National Socialist, presumably with explanations of the State position on race.<sup>51</sup>

Staring across at the German pavilion was that of the U.S.S.R., an unfortunate oversight by the organisers in the siting arrangement if peace was the theme they sought to emphasize. The Soviet pavilion was the most extrovert at the Exposition, being again a building of vertical emphasis: ‘The great achievement is the tower, made partly in concrete, partly in metal and covered in a rare marble from Gazan completely unknown in Western Europe. A monumental statue of a young worker and kolkhoz holding a hammer and sickle, equal in height to a six storey building, dominates the whole’.<sup>52</sup> Highlighted in the entrance way of this extraordinary structure were the dates 1917 and 1937, a reminder to all of how young the post-revolutionary Russia was. The pavilion had five rooms, the first containing tableau displays explaining the nature and extent of Soviet territories, natural resources, industry and the constitution of the State. At the centre of the room monumental sculptures of Lenin and Stalin cast their shadows over large electrically powered maps. The second room dealt with science and the reading habits of the Soviet populations. Large diagrams showed the authors in biggest demand by the workers; stands were dedicated to Gorky and Pouchkine. Spread between the second and third rooms were displays concerning the popular theatre, painting, sculpture and applied art, children, the peasantry and the Red Army. The fourth room dealt with all forms of transport, the fifth the architectural environment and the transformation of Moscow and Leningrad. It was clear from the pavilion that the development of an industrial economy was at the core of Soviet thinking. It was also evident that a crude and arid form of social-realism had finally swept experimentation in the arts to one side. The progressive building the Soviets had erected in 1925 at the previous Paris exposition was long forgotten, as were the heady days of the Revolution, when Suprematism and Constructivism were officially recognised movements in the arts and the avant-garde was accepted as part of the revolutionary process.<sup>53</sup> The struggles against capitalism and individualism were visible everywhere in the pavilion, but the embracing of Taylorism in industry and social-realism in public artforms inevitably meant that the more fundamental problem of alienation was left totally unresolved. Stalin had made his mark, the dreams of 1917 had woken into a brutal reality. At night, the German and Soviet pavilions faced each other, flood-lit against the gloom, with the great icon of all exhibitions, the Eiffel Tower, dividing the space between them. The Parisian sight-seer might still not suspect that the builders of the one pavilion had plans for a grand return to the French capital, or that the builders of the other would be more responsible than anyone for ensuring the return would be a short one.

If anything, the Italian pavilion was more spectacular than either the German or Soviet one, reflecting Mussolini’s vision of himself as a Roman emperor:

On a grand pedestal rising from the river stands an imposing equestrian statue of Georges Gori, the genius of fascism, before a tower of forty-two metres with stacked porticoes and architraves, around which twenty-four pillars support statues. This tower, dominating the central pavilion is adjoined to the smaller construction next to it in which there is a court of honour with an Italian marble ceiling, the gardens are paved with porphyry and decorated with four ceramic fountains. Sheltered under the court portico are paintings about the various achievements of the fascist regime, and on an inner wall stands a winged Victory.<sup>54</sup>

The interior differed from most of the other European nations in the lack of emphasis on science and industry. The major part of the space was taken up by the various art-forms, including a whole floor of furniture and a fascinating ‘ideal home of 1937, which presumably showed how the design-conscious fascist chose to live. Stands for the ministries of the press and propaganda took up a sizable area, these being combined with a ‘Galerie du Tourisme’. The minister for public works organised a section on the achievements of the regime in employment and public building. On the third floor, the ‘Salon d’Honneur’ was most impressive, having a mosaic floor one hundred metres square and marble walls. The liberal use of mosaic, marble and bronze probably made this pavilion the costliest on the site.

Against these expressions of totalitarian might the British pavilion looked faintly ridiculous, but no less propagandistic. J. M. Richards, writing in the Architectural Review, Described the entrance.

Beside the principal entrance in fact is a hunting scene, the riders of the stuffed horses dressed, we are told, in pink coats arranged with the advice of a real master of foxhounds, and on the other side, an autumn woodland scene, with tweed clad figures on shooting sticks . . . with the exception of a shop window displaying the coronation robes this is the only exhibition of our daily life and habits.<sup>55</sup>

Kingsley Martin also noticed the distinct flavour of the British section,

When you went in, the first thing you saw was a cardboard Chamberlain fishing in rubber waders and, beyond, an elegant pattern of golf-balls, a frieze of tennis raquets, polo sets, riding equipment, natty dinner jackets and, by pleasant transition, agreeable pottery and textiles, books finely printed and photographs of the English countryside. I stared in bewilderment. Could this be England?<sup>56</sup>

Still refusing to portray the real Britain, the propagandists of the Department of Overseas Trade had created their best effort to date; a collage of English upper class values and habits pretending to represent the whole of British life and culture. Its flavour was different from the propaganda of Italy, Germany and the Soviet Union, in that it was vision of regression rather than progression. Britain wanted to believe that everything in 1937 was as it had been in 1837, whereas the totalitarian states were looking forward to 2037. But in its superficial falsehoods, its attempt to twist the truth in front of an international audience, the British pavilion was no less extreme than any other on the site.

The grandeur and the tragedy of the Exposition were both to be located in the Spanish pavilion, where one of the greatest works of art of all time emerged in an atmosphere of violence and anguish. Here the national profile was subject to the stress of civil war, fascist forces under Franco gradually eating into republican Spain and bringing it to its knees. The Spanish had been left to their fate by the governments of Europe and America, while Franco enjoyed the patronage of Mussolini and Hitler, in one of the more hypocritical episodes in recent European history. The cheap neutrality France, Britain and America bought themselves would soon be to no avail however, as the forces of fascism pushed them along the road the Spanish republic had been made to follow. The Spanish government attempted to twinge the conscience of Europe by taking a generally enlightened internationalist line. As part of the strategy Spain’s modem artists were asked to join the struggle against Franco to help publicise the cause. Thus, the national pavilion contained monumental works by some of the greatest figures in twentieth century art, giving a remarkable profile to the Spanish nation. The pavilion itself was modernist, designed by architects J. L. Sert and L. La Casa; the sculpture was by Alberto, Julio Gonzalez, Pablo Picasso and, surprisingly, the leading American sculptor Alexander Calder. As a personal friend of many Spanish artists involved in the Surrealist movement, Calder felt strongly about the civil war and European neutrality. Inside, Joan Miró and Picasso painted large murals for the pavilion. Miró produced ‘Le Faucheur’ (The Reaper), the title of a Catalan nationalist song, later banned by Franco, which was a symbol of the resistance of the Catalan peoples. He also printed up small posters, sold for a franc each, which had the image of the Reaper and ‘Aidez Espagne’ on them. The money went toward the cause.<sup>57</sup> Picasso’s mural caused the real stir however.

As the most famous living artist Picasso was the ideal figure to publicise any cause, and also the artist most capable of producing a masterpiece under what were extremely pressured circumstances. The dimensions of the canvas were fixed by the shape of the space it was to fill, twenty-three feet long by eleven and a half feet high; it was to be the artist’s largest work to date. With three months to go to the opening of the Exposition, it appears the form and theme of the painting had not been decided, but on April 19th 1937, an event took place which shook the world, sending Picasso into a frenzy of activity. This was the saturation bombing of the town of Guernica by planes flying for Franco. The Times described the scene:

Guernica, the most ancient town of the Basques and the centre of their cultural tradition, was completely destroyed yesterday afternoon by insurgent air-raiders. The bombardment of this open town far behind the lines occupied precisely three hours and a quarter, during which a powerful fleet of aeroplanes consisting of three German types, Junkers and Heinkel bombers and Heinkel fighters, did not cease unloading on the town bombs weighing from 1000 pounds downwards, and, it is calculated, more than 3000 two pounder aluminium incendiary projectiles . . . At two a. m. today when I visited the town the whole of it was a terrible sight, flaming from end to end. The reflection of the flames could be seen in the clouds of smoke above the mountains from ten miles away. Throughout the night houses were falling until the streets became long heaps of red impenetrable debris . . . In the form of its execution and the scale of the destruction it wrought, no less in the selection of the objective, the raid on Guernica is unparalleled in military history.<sup>58</sup>

The wanton destruction of a civilian population shocked the world, though by 1945 the world had seen so many things it might well have assumed the aspect of simply one more disaster of war had Picasso not chosen to paint it. The painting, from the initial sketches to completion, took around two months, a remarkable feat of energy, as hundreds of related works were produced alongside. Worked exclusively in black, white and greys, the massive swathing forms depict the horror of the town as the planes struck. Five dying women, one suckling a child, a dying warrior with a broken sword, a bull, a horse, a bird; the life of old Spain and of humanity being snuffed out by a power they could neither see or understand. No planes or bombs appear in the painting, the only symbol of the technology that destroyed the town is a light-bulb, appearing in the centre of an explosive flash (top, left of centre). The innocent, incomprehending fear of the figures is welded into a composition which, while it is violent, is also firmly held in place by a structure based around a central compositional triangle. The full flow of Picasso’s cubism meets here with his classicism, both orchestrated masterfully to express his politics and his humanity. Guernica remains one of the greatest comments on the tragedy of war ever made in Western art; it is also the greatest work of art ever 59 produced specifically for an international exhibition.

The attempt of the Spanish republic to oppose fascism on a cultural level by supporting liberal and modernist art-forms won little sympathy from most European powers, the war itself causing much diplomatic embarrassment. As Sarah Wilson has observed, greater care was taken to accomodate the fascists, ‘the Spanish civil war was left out of the visitors book of the exposition . . . whilst it offered to Germany a large space to lay out its social and economic performances . . . the immense nude statues of Thorak . . . gave weight to the real message of fascism’.<sup>60</sup> Regardless of the intentions of the organisers, the show of 1937 will remain memorable not for the French contribution but for the excesses of the Hitler and Mussolini, the crudity of Stalin and the tragedy of Guernica.

Germany was absent from the last great international exhibition in New York in 1939, as was Spain. In the case of the former, this was almost certainly due to the theme of the Fair, although by 1939 it can be assumed they were occupied with international appearances of another kind. The motto of the Fair was ‘Building the World of Tomorrow’, that world being epitomised by ‘Democracity’, a huge model of the Utopian city of the future. By 1939 the German government had made it clear they did not wish to live in Democracity. The Fair was staged ostensibly to celebrate the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the inauguration of George Washington as first President of the United States, democracy being central to the whole event. The classical form used to symbolise the republican ideal in earlier shows gave way to modernism, the notion of progress through technology tying into the overall ideological vision. This was not a modernism inspired by the Bauhaus or Le Corbusier however, but rather by the sets for ‘Metropolis’ or ‘Flash Gordon’. At the centre of the site stood two structures representing the spirit of the Fair, the Trylon and the Perisphere. The former was a three-sided obelisk seven hundred feet high, the latter a sphere with a diameter of two hundred feet. The Official Guide Book proudly pointed out that this was the largest globe in the world, ‘eighteen stories high, it is as broad as a city block, its interior more than twice the size of Radio City Music Hall’.<sup>61</sup> Democracity was inside the Perisphere, the visitor being lifted into the globe by an electrically powered staircase, onto a moving balcony fifty feet above the vast model. A spectacular light-show was projected onto the inside of the sphere over the heads of the viewers, further explaining the workings of what was essentially a garden city for a million people. The whole was enhanced by electrical effects and working models, reducing the seriousness of the conception as an exercise in city planning. It would be a mistake though to see it merely as science-fiction fantasy; Democracity was a political statement made by an America grown confident in the vision of itself as the leader of world democracy. The pioneer spirit had entered the space age, the frontier having expanded well beyond American shores. The contents of the Perisphere were a direct challenge to the totalitarian powers of Europe. The political message was hammered home as crudely and abrasively as any made by Germany, Italy or Russia; the creators of the national profile had found the perfect vehicle for the expression and projection of their American-ness, and the means to explain its intentions for the future.

Italy and the U.S.S.R. were in New York in style, with remarkably similar messages to those imparted two years before. The Official Guide described the Italian pavilion as ‘an ingenious synthesis of the architecture of classical Rome and modern Italy’.<sup>62</sup> A colonnaded front surrounded a huge tower surmounted by a statue of Roma, behind which water cascaded down a flight of marble steps. The main features of the interior were displays on social welfare, sport and recreation, the reclamation of land, the decorative and fine arts. A ‘Hall of Nations’ at the Fair had been built to show the international activities of participants. Here the Italians placed a statue of II Duce and huge maps in black marble with the Italian empire outlined in copper. The Russians used the same format as in 1937, a giant statue of a worker, this time seventy-nine feet high in stainless steel and holding a star over his head. Inside were exhibits on the daily lives of the Soviet people, transportation systems, arts and crafts. A model of the Palace of the Soviets in semi-precious stones attracted a lot of attention.

The French pavilion was naturally concerned with French culture, although the modernism so prevalent in Paris two years before was far less prominent. The organisers of the French pavilions in foreign shows adjusted the flavour of ‘Frenchness’ to suit different audiences; here it was felt the Americans would like something a little traditional. Even though the theme of the show expressly went against historicism, once inside the swishly modern walls of the pavilion (designed by Patout), the visitor was whisked back through five hundred years of French culture. The main displays were ‘French Thought’, ‘Five Centuries of French Art’ and ‘The Scenic Beauties of France’. Industry was pushed back onto a mezzanine floor and even there the largest areas went to Sevres and Gobelins. The New Yorkers were thus given one of the richest samples of French art ever to cross the Atlantic, French insistence on itself as a civilizing force remaining consistent right up to the eve of the Second World War.

Britain had a problem in New York. The Americans were distinctly unenthusiastic about the British empire, as they were conscious they had been a part of it. Empire was usually the most important part of British exhibits, the counterpoise to the presented image of the English as a tradition-bound race of aristocrats. Whilst the American organisers could not stop the displaying of empire – most other European powers showed theirs – the British government was particularly anxious not to antagonise the American authorities or undermine the image of England for the American public. Good relations with America were crucial to British interests and they were keen not to appear as an imperial nation at a Fair where democracy was the central theme. In the end a compromise was reached by the British organisers. Empire remained a feature in the Hall of Nations, and a bizarrely complex explanation as to Britain’s rôle as a raiser of democratic consciousness was provided in the national pavilion. The theme there was the Magna Carta, a copy of which was installed in ‘Magna Carta Hall’. The Magna Carta it was stated, ‘holds a unique position in the unending and worldwide struggle for liberty and freedom . . . It was a struggle through which and by which the Anglo-Saxon painfully learned the necessity of liberty and how to win and hold it.’<sup>63</sup> The English barons’ imposition of controls over King John suddenly became a justification of empire, an example to freedom fighters everywhere and a cause for universal celebration. This ancient document ‘proved’ as it were that democracy was at the core of Englishness and that humanity reigned wherever the Englishman went. Empire was portrayed as a friendly co-operative venture amongst the peoples of the world from which all benefitted. The American War of Independence was explained in a marvellous twist of logic, again with the Magna Carta as the explicatory element:

Without this hard-won knowledge, as a solid foundation beneath them, the American colonies would have blundered hopelessly in their fight for independence and freedom . . . The Englishman’s understanding of liberty had been woven into his being by the struggle through the centuries; it was the most precious possession brought to America by the first English colonists . . . it is not claiming too much to ascribe to the heritage from the generations of struggle waged in England, the speed with which the Americans consolidated their ideas of liberty and entered upon a war to maintain their freedom.<sup>64</sup>

So the Americans fought successfully against the English because of their own ingrained Englishness. One may wonder why the ‘Englishman’s understanding of liberty’ did not lead him to give the Americans their independence before they were forced to fight for it; one may wonder also what was supposedly going through the minds of Englishmen as they struggled to hold onto an empire which increasingly made vocal a desire to be free. No matter; the use of the Magna Carta to combine the theme of Olde Englande with that of democracy was clever propaganda. The rest of the exhibit was almost exclusively dedicated to monarchy. Replicas of the crown jewels were on show, amid displays showing ‘how Britain’s history has centred around her kings’.<sup>65</sup> The contradictory twists of such propaganda belonged to an age of imperial decline. These machinations would have been unnecessary and meaningless in 1851 when the national profile expressed itself in material terms.

The remarkable diplomacy of international exhibitions had allowed events to be staged in the most extraordinary of circumstances, sometimes whilst wars were being fought, often when participating nations were at political logger-heads. The Exposition Universelle of 1937 was the most extreme example of opposing ideologies coming together with the apparent motive of peaceful display, its abrasive oppositions signalling the effective end of the tradition. After the Second World War nations increasingly refused to participate in events where opposing regimes were to be present. Equally, the events themselves became muted, ambivalent affairs, where smaller budgets and rigid insistence upon diplomatic neutrality leveled out the whole into anonymity. The boycotting of sporting and cultural events has become a weapon of disruption used by most governments, ensuring there will never be a repetition of the situation like the one at Paris in 1937. Indeed, it would be patently absurd to suggest anything good came of that Exposition in social or political terms. No international understanding, no growth of human fellowship, no reconciliation of peoples or nations. The show simply highlighted the violent climax of the nationalism which had grown within the exhibition tradition since 1851. From the beginning, the contours of the national profile stood out