starkly, destroying any real chance for the medium to be used to more peaceable ends. The tradition did have isolated individuals, nations and associations which genuinely attempted to foster peace and friendship. Sadly, these were all too often swamped by those with quite different motives.

## Notes

1 J. A. Hobson, The Pyschology of Jingoism, London 1901, Grant Richards.

2 Eugen Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen: The modernisation of Rural France 1870–1914. London 1979, Chatto and Windus.

Theodore Zeldin, Intellect and Pride, from France 1848–1940, (5 volumes) Oxford University Press 1980.

4 Zeldin. See note 3.

5 See chapters 1 and 8.

6 Quoted from Philippe Julian, The Triumph of Art Nouveau: The Paris Exhibition 1900. London, 1974, Phaidon.

7 Soliman Al-Haraïri, Exposition Universelle de Paris, Paris 1867.

8 Anon, Le Palais de Trocadéro: Le Coteau de Chaillot, Le Nouveau Palais, Paris 1878, V. A. Morel.

9 See Eduard Fourdrignier, Antiquités des Gaules: Exposition Historique du Palais de Trocadéro, Paris 1878, Henri Menn.

10 Universal Exposition 1889: Reports of the United States Commissioners, Volume Two (of five), Washington 1890.

11 Ibid.

12 Quoted from Raymond Rudorff, Belle Epoque – Paris in the Nineties., London 1972, Hamish Hamilton.

13 Ibid.

14 Quoted from R. D. Mandell, Paris 1900: The Great World’s Fair. University of Toronto Press 1967.

15 Founding members of the Comité Français des Expositions à l’Etranger went as far as to suggest that the expositions made no money at all for French businesses, foreign exhibitions being far better in this regard.

16 See Mandell, note 14.

17 See Chapter four. Exactly the same type of national debate arose when the Centre Georges Pompidou was in its planning stages in the early 1970’s

18 See chapters 6 and 8.

19 Handy Book to the International Exhibition 1862. London 1862.

20 G. de Bellaigue, Queen Victoria buys French in 1855, Antique Collector, April 1975, Volume 46, Part 4.

21 See chapter 3.

22 Love and Loyalty, London 1851.

23 Quoted from John Gloag, The English Tradition in Design, London 1947, Penguin. Gloag makes use of several strategies for defining English design, one of which is the Olde Englande or Hearts of Oak argument.

24 Sir Isidore Spielmann, Royal Commission Paris International Exhibition 1900: The Royal Pavilion. Issued by the Royal Commission, St. Stephens House, Westminster, London 1900. Also see Chapter eight

25 The interiors were commissioned before Morris’ death, leaving us unsure as to whether Morris himself accepted the commission or whether he understood the logic behind the choice of his firm.

26 See Vincent Scully, The Shingle Style and the Stick Style: Architectural theory and design from Daring to the Origins of Wright. Yale University Préss 1977.

27 The move from left to right at the end of the nineteenth century of the various British revivalist movements was a critical factor in the reception later given to European modernism. Adequate research still has to be done in this area.

28 See Paul Greenhalgh, Art, Politics and Society at the Franco-British Exhibition of 1908 Art History, December 1985.

29 See Duncan Simpson, Architectural Review 1977.

30 The significance of the Boer War as a watershed of British power is convincingly brought out in Thomas Pakenham’s The Boer War London, 1982, Futura.

31 Quoted from P. M. Taylor’s exemplary work The Projection of Britain: British Overseas Publicity and Propaganda 1919–1939. Cambridge University Press 1981.

32 The Crystal Palace was a probable victim of arsen in 1936.

33 Texas Centennial Exposition, Official Souvenir Guide Dallas 1936.

34 Official Guidebook to the New York World’s Fair New York 1939.

35 For example see the cover of the Official Souvenir Guide, Franco British Exhibition., London 1908 Bembrose and Son.

36 Sir John Cockburn, The Franco-British Exhibition, Journal for the Royal Society of Arts, Volume 56, 1907.

37 See Taylor, note 31.

38 Wilbur Zelinsky, The Cultural Geography of the United States, New Jersey 1973, Prentice-Hall. Quoted from U.S.A. 1890–1939, Units 7–8, Course A305, History of Architecture and Design 1890–1939. Open University Press 1975.

39 J. S. Ingram, The Centennial Exposition, Described and Illustrated, Philadelphia 1876, Hubbard Brothers.

40 See Chapter 4.

41 Eugen Neuhaus, The Art of the Exposition., San Fransisco 1915, Paul Elder and Company.

42 Quoted from Elizabeth N. Armstrong, Hercules and the Muses: Public art and the Fair, in The Anthropology of World’s Fairs: San Fransisco’s Panama Pacific International Exposition of 1915. Ed. Benedict Burton, Scolar Press 1983.

43 Neuhaus see note 41.

44 Louis Sullivan put up one of the most celebrated arguments against classicism at the Fair, see, for example Carl Condit The Chicago School of Architecture: A History of Commercial and Public Building in the Chicago Area, 1875–1925, University of Chicago Press 1975. See also Chapter six.

45 Zelinsky, see note 38.

46 Many of the features of 1889 were repeated and enlarged in 1893, and many from 1893 were likewise duplicated, without acknowledgement, in 1900.

47 Paris 1937, Wagons-Lits/Cook, Publicity for the Exposition by major tour-operators.

48 The literature surrounding the Exposition, both official and unofficial, conducted what can only be described as a conspiracy of silence concerning the real flavour of the event. Quite rarely is the vibrant propaganda element dealt with, when it does emerge it is usually in some oblique manner.

49 I am unsure at this time as to whether there was political intent behind America’s absence. It could simply have been to do with the expense involved, with their own Fair being scheduled to take place only two years later.

50 Exposition Internationale Arts et Techniques, Paris 1937, Guide Officiel, Paris 1937.

51 The content of the German films has not yet come to light.

52 Offical Guide, note 50.

53 See Chapter 6.

54 Official Guide, note 50.

55 J. M. Richards, The International Exhibition, Architectural Review 1937.

56 Quoted from Taylor, see note 31.

57 Most monographs on Miró have useful references on this topic. For a colour illustration of the Aidez Espagne poster see Paris 1937–1957 catalogue for an exhibition held at the Centre Georges Pompidou, 28th. May to 2nd. November 1981. This also has a photograph of Miró working on site. By co-incidence, the Miró Foundation in Barcelona has been built on what was part of the site for the 1929 Exposition held there.

58 Quoted from Guernica, Catalogue to an exhibition held in Stockholm, 1956. The literature on Guernica is vast; monographs on the painting have been written by Antony Blount, Max Raphael and Frank Russell, and substantial sections of most monographs on Picasso are devoted to it. Particularly recommended are Roland Penrose, Picasso, His Life and Work Penguin 1971, Dore Ashton (Ed) Picasso on Art Thames and Hudson 1972, John Berger, The

## THE NATIONAL PROFILE

Success and Failure of Picasso Penguin 1965, Marilyn McCully (Ed), A Picasso Anthology: Documents, Criticisms, Reminiscences. Arts Council/Thames and Hudson 1981.

59 Having been cared for by the Museum of Modern Art New York for four decades while Franco reigned, the painting is now back in Spain, in the Casón del Buen Retiro, an annex of the Prado.

60 Sarah Wilson, Problèmes de la Peinture en Marge de l’Exposition Internationale, from Paris 1937–1957, see note 57.

61 Official Guide Book of the New York World’s Fair, 1939. New York 1939, Exposition Publications.

62 Ibid.

63 J. C. Fitzpatrick, Magna Carta Hall: The British Pavilion New York World’s Fair, 1939, Published 1939.

64 Ibid.

65 Ibid.

## CHAPTER SIX

## The prefabricated and the mass-produced

Four things dictated the shape of the Great Exhibition and of every exhibition which followed it: mass-production, prefabrication, mass communications and urbanisation. All of these relate to the industrial revolution and in each case Britain experienced the force of them first. The number of man-made objects in circulation increased dramatically, the travelling speed of ideas and peoples multiplied beyond recognition and cities grew at a freak rate. The physical abundance allowed empire to expand at an unprecedented pace, until most of the known world was brought under the yoke of the industrialised nations. The Crystal Palace exhibition was nothing more than a recognition and celebration of these developments.

The economic and social jolt caused by the industrial revolution had its cultural equivalent, as practitioners in every sphere struggled to cope with new values which seemed to question the traditional basis of the disciplines they were involved with. Nowhere was the crisis more acute than in the so-called functional arts of architecture and design, simply because no factor in the whole creative process had remained a constant. The means of production, the types of material used to create objects, the numbers of objects produced, the speed of production, and the audience produced for, had all been subject to change. Moreover, the facility other arts had to challenge or comment upon developments in society was not easily duplicated in the design process. The great generation of English romantic poets could question the value of industrial and scientific advance using the same types of prose and verse they had grown up with. For them, the content of their art had changed but not the premiss of its creation or the audience who received it. Poetry had the ability to criticise, it had a basis for evolution, critique and comment without having to face the problem of transforming itself. For the designer there were no such luxuries. The mass-produced objects he or she created could not embody a critique of the world they were bom into without at the same time challenging their own right to existence. Designed objects had to be positively responsive, even if the response was a pretence that industrialisation was not actually happening. Denied the luxury of negative critique, buildings and products were condemned to smilingly stare into the dark chasm of industry, picking out aesthetic and moral benefits wherever they could be found.

Design virtually invented itself in the industrial age. The very word changed its meaning through the industrial era, moving from something implying a drawing or study, to a process whereby a prototype was made for mass-production. It would be into the 1930’s before the design profession existed as we now know it but most of the inherent formal and moral problems associated with it were present by the time Victoria came to power. The Great Exhibition, as a massive gathering of mass-produced objects from Europe and of crafted objects from all over the known world, gave designers, artists and critics the best opportunity to date to assess the state of the art. For this reason 1851 is often used as a starting point for the history of design. Perhaps it would be more appropriate to regard it as a starting point for the history of design criticism, for whilst relatively little in the way of innovation took place amongst the objects, a good deal of what was said was refreshingly new. Indeed, the contribution of the exhibitions in general to the development of design was mainly one of assessment and critque; they tended, with notable exceptions, not to offer design solutions but to sum up what had gone so far. They could bluntly reveal what was right and what was wrong with a generation of objects, making whole what was previously a partial vision of the profession at large.

The designed objects at the Great Exhibition caused a good deal of confusion. The critic’s fraternity found little to lighten the hearts of the thousands of companies who had space in the Manufactures section of the building. A concensus of opinion seemed to believe that form and style had not developed at the same rate as production technique. Richard Redgrave, Royal Academician, summed up the situation by suggesting machinery gave the manufacturer ‘the ability to produce the florid and overloaded as cheaply as simple forms, and then to satisfy the larger market for the multitude, who desire quantity, rather than quality, and value a thing the more it is ornamented’.<sup>1</sup> A cutlery set might take a single silversmith months to make, the time and cost growing with the complexity of the individual pieces. However, electroplated, mold-made cutlery did not take longer or cost more in a ratio with the detailing it carried. In fact, cutlery covered with impressed detailing might cost less than a plain set, as the weight of metal used could be reduced. The social-symbolism of the detailing however continued to imply value. To the generation of upper-working and lower middle classes who had entered the market for the first time, overloaded decoration, a wide range of colour and a clearly stated narrative carried the idea of affluence and so were absolute requirements. The semblance of detailed craftwork was thus applied to machine-pressed objects not because of a failing in taste on the part of producers and public, but because both had symbolic, not aesthetic, criteria. Little thought went into what things looked like in any disinterested way, but rather into what they represented. The failure to understand this led many commentators to simply blame the production process. Critics well after the Crystal Palace exhibition continued to illogically blame industrial methods for what they believed to be a mass failure in taste. A critic at the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1867 reported: ‘where manufacture has wholly triumphed in rapidity, certainty, and cheapness of production, the results are usually astonishing examples of the power of making common and really useful objects hideous’.<sup>2</sup> The correlation between machine production and ugliness became an assumed truth in many circles after 1851, usually in the absence of proper analysis of the motives of consumers.

The issue of style, especially an appropriate style to represent the age, was everywhere at the Great Exhibition. Style was understood as a symbolic additive emanating from accepted conventions, rendering an object meaningful to its audience. Thus, in his award winning essay ‘The Exhibition as a Lesson in Taste’, Ralph Nicholson Wornum found himself able to list the exact number of styles available to the designer for use, and position them in history:

There are, of course, many varieties of very great style; but so long as the chief characteristics remain unchanged, the style is the same. From this point of view, therefore, the styles become comparatively few. We shall find that nine will comprise the whole number of the great characteristic developments which have had any influence on European civilization: namely three ancient, the Egyptian, the Greek and the Roman; three middle age, the Byzantine, the Saracenic, and the Gothic; and three modern, the Renaissance, the Cinquecento and the Louis Quatorze.<sup>3</sup>

All style was a copy or combination of these, Wornum posited. Furthermore, he argued that whilst all styles ultimately derived from nature, in all of them nature had been rigorously abstracted and conventionalised so that ‘in no popular style of ornament have natural details ever yet prevailed’.<sup>4</sup> European style, therefore, transcended nature with culture and found its sources in previously credited cultural developments. It was possible to combine sources, imposing Roman on Egyptian and framing it with Saracenic; it was preferable however, for the gentleman of taste, to merely ‘modernise’ a single style, by neutralising its more distinctive aspects and possibly adding one or two contemporary details.

Wornum’s position was the most common one of the time and can be labelled eclectic or historicist. Opposition to historicism on aesthetic and social grounds was quite common in Europe and America after 1850, though it would be wrong on the whole to see anti-historicist movements as more than isolated incidents until after the First World War. The retrospectively discernable shift from historicist to modernist forms through the period was not the logical and linear movement most histories have chosen to make it. The exhibitions reveal most historicist styles as disappearing slowly, some remaining in the marketplace long after they had supposedly died. Others were not acknowledged by critics and so have tended to disappear from history altogether. For example, Wornum casually identified the most successful style in furniture in 1851 as being ‘Louis Quatorze’. Accompanied by ‘Louis Quinze’ and ‘Louis Seize’ at the South Kensington Exhibition of 1862 it dominated the French Court, which was widely praised as the best in the building: ‘the French Court and its approaches form a perfect exhibition by themselves . . . everything that human ingenuity, money and taste can produce is exhibited in this court, and it will be from no want of energy if they fail to carry off the first prizes’.<sup>5</sup> In London, Paris and America the Louis styles maintained a presence at exhibitions throughout the century, were still thought to be a major European style in 1908 at the Franco–British Exhibition, and remained, in yet another revived form, a force at the Paris Show of 1925. This particular historicist thread therefore remained unbroken for seventy years, outlasting most of the styles dominating design histories produced to date.

Not every area containing designed produce at the Great Exhibition was concerned with style. One display concentrated on the problem of housing for the poor, this being a fully appointed ‘Model house for the Working Classes’ sponsored by Prince Albert. The model, designed by Henry Roberts, was constructed actual size in the proper materials and hoped to show how the masses would eventually be housed. Resembling a large cottage with gothic detailing, it featured new developments in plumbing, insulation and kitchen amenities. The ingenious part of the design was its modular format, this allowing the complete unit to be extended into rows or piled into blocks. It is not absolutely clear exactly what involvement the Prince himself had with the project,<sup>6</sup> but his name publicised it and so gave rise to successive philanthropic enterprises at later exhibitions. Design sections emphasising economy and efficiency were included in most events after 1851, often in conjunction with conferences on sewage disposal and household plumbing.

The exhibition to deal most comprehensively with design for poverty was the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1867. Section Ten was devoted entirely to the welfare of the poor, with new designs for a wide range of produce, including the houses themselves, furniture, fittings, kitchen implements, clothes, books and tools. The subtitle to the section, ‘Dwellings for the poor, constructed on sanitary principles and at small cost, and articles exhibited with the special object of improving the physical and moral condition of the people’, indicated the organisers’ belief in the relationship between environment and behaviour. The English report on the section affirmed, ‘it is needless to repeat here the trite conclusions – which are not the least important for their triteness – as to the moral effect of such advantages upon the humbler classes of any population’.<sup>8</sup> An idea of the Exposition director Raymond Le Play, it was the clearest realisation of his Saint-Simonianism on the site. Somewhat surprisingly, the fittings, utensils and furniture of Europe in the section were disparagingly compared to other nations:

It is notable that the absence of art-beauty in these homely objects is most conspicuous among nations claiming to be the highest according to the present scale of civilization. The people whom we are content to regard as semi-civilised – Oriental nations, tribes of North Africa, races from the distant part of the Russian empire – show an understanding of colour, at least, which renders their otherwise rude household goods models for the skilful European to study and strive to imitate.<sup>9</sup>

In this instance criticism was not being levelled at British manufacturers, as they chose not to participate in the section, but at the five hundred French firms present and assorted ones from Belgium, Austria, Spain, Italy and Portugal. The English report, apart from its slight on European exhibitors, had a prophetic warning for British producers of cheap household goods,

. . . it is obvious that if Great Britain is to continue competing successfully with her continental rivals in the supply of articles which surround daily life of millions and which represent a trade encompassing the whole globe, her manufactures must bring to bear on her business higher qualities than are commonly deemed necessary for money making; qualifications, some of which at least must necessarily be sought beyond their own body – inventive capacity, knowledge and practice of art, wide acquaintance with new materials, and scientific skill to make them available.<sup>10</sup>

Six model dwellings were erected by France in Section Ten, one by Prussia and one by Austria. Reporting enthusiastically on these was English utilitarian reformer Edwin Chadwick:

On the whole, viewing collectively the various models and collateral appliances presented for examination in the present Exhibition, there will be found in it the means of very important advances in the improvement of dwellings of the great masses of the people – in the means of relieving them from the cesspool smell, or bad drain, or sewer emanations, . . . from the foul wall smell and from wall vermin; from the damp hall; from the smoke nuisance; and from a great proportion of the waste of fuel and from loss of heat; from stagnant and vitiated air; from the deterioration of good water supplies; from much exclusion from sunlight . . . and that too, not only without any increase but with a very material reduction of direct expense. I say of direct expense, because . . . a great proportion of the common dwellings of the wage classes, though they be cheap to construct, are indirectly and eventually dear to use. 11

Chadwick’s study talks with enthusiasum about model estates in the northern French town of Mulhouse, which were largely the work of philanthropist Jean Dolfus. Prince Albert’s Model House of 1851 had been adapted and widely used there. Chadwick concludes by affirming his lifelong conviction that ‘moral and social advancement is dependent on physical improvement, and that on the sanitary improvement of dwellings’.<sup>12</sup>

Section Ten of the 1867 Exposition was important for design and architecture because of the way it shifted emphasis from the battle of the styles toward social and moral issues. Ultimately, this would be a main debating ground for both arts. Every French exposition after 1867 had an equivalent section, albeit far smaller, raising the issue as to whether some of the pioneer architects and designers of the international modern movement were influenced by them.<sup>13</sup> In 1889 the Peabody Trust proudly displayed housing in Paris, and in 1900 the theme of ‘the life of the worker’ was almost as strong as it had been in 1867, although admittedly in the later event the emphasis was on the prosaic rather than the practical.

The non-Western contingent at the exhibitions probably had a bigger impact on design than anything else. For many of the colonies these were the only places their decorative and design arts could be seen in large quantities in the West; the impact this must have had on manufacturing trades has still not been the subject of thorough research. The arrival of non-Western countries as exhibitors of designed produce had the immediate effect of making the design of European nations look remarkably similar in the eyes of critics. When discussing Asian, Arabic or African design, commentators had little difficulty in comparing them to European design as though the latter were an amorphous whole, the individual nuances of the national styles apparently being less important than the numerous qualities they had in common.<sup>14</sup> Moreover, a significant number of writers found non-Western forms superior to the familiar overcrowded historicism dominating European produce:

The absence of fixed principles in ornamental design is most apparent in the exhibition, not among ourselves only, but throughout all European nations. Many other nations show better faith and better practice in design than those of Europe. Does the progress of civilization and the increased value put on knowledge and labour destroy principles of taste?<sup>15</sup>

In Paris in 1867, after perusal of the produce, a writer concluded:

Art is thus not instinctive among Western nations. The objects that minister to the daily needs and conveniences of common life are for the most part wholly wanting – and it is a lamentable want – in every quality that can give pleasure to the eye. The entire household furniture, carpets, fittings, articles of daily use, complete clothing for young and old, . . . and yet not one object found which ministers in the smallest degree to that art instinct which is gratified by the commonest productions of Oriental workmanship . . . Among Oriental nations what may be called an instinct of art-feeling guides their work conspicuously in colour, and to a lesser degree in other sources of beauty. It is not so among the most civilised of Western nations – not so in France, anymore than elsewhere.<sup>16</sup>

Striking confessions by peoples considering themselves superior beings and the carriers of civilized ideas. The sad confusion European aesthetes experienced at the realisation of the superiority of non-Western design was resolved, however, without upsetting the sacrosanct imperial-racial order. Art, it will be noted from the last quotation, did not emerge from intelligence or the ability to make progress, it was an essence, a feeling, an instinct. Like the non-Europeans who made it, it was mysterious, untamed, an unknown quantity. Theories that were developed during the romantic era could allow artefacts to be made well by otherwise ‘under-evolved’ peoples, because art was irrational and unquantifiable, defiant of control or direction.<sup>17</sup>

The discovery of Japanese art by the West occurred largely because of its constant presence in exhibitions from 1862 onwards. In that year it had a marked impact in London, in 1867 it took Paris by storm, likewise in 1876 in Philadelphia, in Paris again in 1878 and 1889 and in Chicago in 1893. By that time it had had a clear effect on all the arts and had become one of the most important sources for proto-modernist developments across the board. Utter restraint in the use of decoration, an absence of illusory devices such as perspective, and an insistence upon the dignity of the simple, rather than complex, were the hallmarks of Japanese style. Architecture based on the frame rather than the wall, minimal interior decoration, open-plan and screen walling, unembellished form in furniture, flat colour and bold line in the print and screen, ran against virtually everything practiced in Europe at the time. It was seized upon by the impressionists, the aesthetic movement, by those involved with art nouveau, and it became fashionable enough to have shops specialising in it.<sup>18</sup> In America the best architects and designers made use of it after the Philadelphia

Centennial, so that it came to be an important stylistic ingredient in ‘stick’ and ‘shingle’ domestic building. After the Columbian exhibition, Frank Lloyd Wright began to experiment with open-plan and screenwall systems similar to the one he had seen in the Japanese pavilion there.<sup>19</sup> His furniture for houses and offices, which was to become vital for the European modern movement, also revealed a Japanese rigour and simplicity. Japan gave the West a mature alternative to historicism and eclecticism, and a stylistic approach which could potentially be adapted to machine production without causing awkward aesthetic and philosophical problems. Unlike his Western counterpart, the Japanese craftsman appeared to have no difficulty in making content co-operate with the necessities of form.

Architecture revealed itself in two distinct ways at exhibitions, in the actual buildings on the site and in the architecture sections of the Fine Arts Pavilions. In the case of the former, the central committee in control of the site would commission individuals to design pavilions, stipulating the dimensions, materials and even the colour of the structures. In the case of the latter, a jury connected to the fine art section would select suitable exhibits comprising of plans, elevations and models. Often the two manifestations were so different from each other it was difficult to perceive of them as belonging to the same discipline, and indeed, those controlling the exhibits on display in the fine art pavilions often expressed the view that they did not. Normally these sections were dominated by official bodies of the profession, in the case of France this was the Ecole des Beaux Arts, in Britain the Royal Academy and the Royal Institute of British Architects, in America by whichever State Academy presiding over the region the Fair was in.<sup>20</sup> To a considerable extent the displays would simply tell the visitor what the official preferred styles in commercial, public and domestic building were and who were the best known producers of those styles. Occasionally topical oddities would appear but this was far less common than with other areas of the fine arts, architecture being far more conservative than these. By contrast the site architecture, even though it was often built by the same types of architect, was frequently more innovative. This was partly because the buildings were temporary and therefore less serious, partly because the crowds had to be entertained with more dramatic edifices than one would normally associate with a model of a town hall or a bank, and partly because people from outside of the architectural establishment had influence. In the first exhibitions these outsiders were invariably engineers or those with engineering connections. Engineers were responsible for many of the most spectacular conceptions ever to be built on exhibition sites, some of them having marked implications for architectural practice long after they were dismantled. Ironically, much of the site at an average exhibition might be designed and built by nonarchitects, while the architects themselves were represented inside by plaster and wood models.

Whilst new technologies often accounted for the appearance of the sites, especially in the earlier exhibitions, it would be a mistake to suggest engineering as an architectural phenomenon owed them a great deal in any inventive or innovatory sense. With notable exceptions most of the buildings erected at exhibitions during the period used technologies which had already been tested on bridges and railway sheds. Rather, it was the publicity exhibitions brought to the issue of engineering structures as livable spaces that was the source of their importance. The ability of iron and glass to shelter, to span enormous spaces, to admit light and to be assembled quickly by semi-skilled men suggested a new method of architecture was at hand. The sheer scale of many of the buildings rendered them famous and made the technologies responsible for their erection all the more exciting in the public eye. Indeed, the need to solve awkward architectural problems with temporary structures, in tandem with the desire to impress an ignorant public, led to the creation of some of the most dramatic buildings of the nineteenth century. The first and perhaps the greatest of these was the Crystal Palace.

The Crystal Palace was the great icon of exhibition architecture, setting the pace for all that followed. It has been seen as prophetic of the modern movement and as one of the most important architectural edifices of the nineteenth century. F.T Kihlstedt:

The Crystal Palace, as a product of Victorian England, was one of the most influential buildings ever erected. Innovative in structure, completely new in its function, unusual in form and significant in the associations it embodied, it takes its place with a handful of other pre-eminent buildings such as the Pantheon, Hagia Sophia and Abbot Sugar’s St. Denis. As with these earlier constructions, the extraordinary functional demands made on the Crystal Palace stimulated a design that refined and extended the structural practices of the time, resulting in an architecture novel in its form and aesthetic.<sup>21</sup>

The building for the Great Exhibition had to fulfill a number of tasks which even thirty years previous would have seemed preposterous. It had to enclose a space so big that several of the world’s largest existing buildings could fit inside it, side by side. It had to cost, in terms of square feet, proportionately less than the cheapest building imaginable. It had to be erected in months, not years, and it had to be dismantled once the exhibition was over. To add a comic element to these extraordinary demands, it had to be built over four mature elm trees without harming them and leave the ground it stood upon in good order.<sup>22</sup> In some ways the brief defined the building, in that it automatically excluded materials traditionally associated with public works, on grounds of expense and speed. So when the design was opened to competition in 1850 it surprised no-one when quite a few of the two hundred and forty-five entrants suggested the use of iron and glass. None of them however in the opinion of the Building Committee had a suitable solution and the competition was declared void. The Building Committee itself then attempted to design a building, producing a strange edifice in brick topped by a glass dome which was wholly unsatisfactory by their own standards. A potential crisis was only averted by the dramatic arrival on the scene of Joseph Paxton, who produced a plan that was accepted after much arguing and string-pulling on all sides.

More than simply the designer, Paxton’s vision of the building led him to be involved at every level of its construction and decoration. Along with the Prince of Wales and Henry Cole, his name was to be long remembered as one of the guiding spirits of the exhibition. In many ways he was the epitomy of the Victorian self-made man. Antony Bird, in his monograph on the Crystal Palace, rightly observes that ‘if Joseph Paxton had not existed it would have been necessary for Samuel Smiles to invent him’.<sup>23</sup> The son of a farmer born in 1803, he had made his way as an horticulturalist until he was ‘discovered’ by the Duke of Devonshire, who employed him at his estate at Chatsworth. As head gardener Paxton remodelled the estate over several decades, acquiring a reputation as a capable man in every area of garden design. It was his building of hot-houses, notably the Great Stove (1836-1841) and the house for a Victoria Regia Lily (1849) which inspired him in his design for the Crystal Palace, the former of these having a wider span than any railway station of the time.<sup>24</sup> Essentially, his exhibition building was to be a gigantic greenhouse made from iron, glass and wood, and as such it attracted much derision between its conception and its opening, from lampoonists, cartoonists, and, predictably, art-critics. It was no less a figure than John Ruskin who christened it the ‘giant cucumber-frame’.

The key to Paxton’s success however was not in the materials themselves, but in the ingenious modular base he developed, whereby standardised components of glass, iron and wood were used throughout. Thus the two major contracting firms, the Chance brothers (glass) and Fox and Henderson (ironwork) could quickly manufacture the parts at their Birmingham foundries and despatch the building in millions of parts to the Hyde Park site. Then supervised teams of men could bolt, weld and slot the building together. The whole conception was a master-piece of prefabrication; it instantaneously became a symbol of its age and an awesome indication of the capabilities of industry. The plan was as simple as possible; a long horizontal block was divided in the centre by a tall vaulted transept, this serving as the grand entrance. It also created an internal space which effectively divided the building into distinct halves. A vast mezzanine added over a third to the total floor space. In every direction the iron ribs framed the vision and gave a perspectival effect which mimicked infinity, the sensation of light outstripping any architectural experience before it. Covering approximately nineteen acres and enclosing thirty-three million cubic feet, the building was the marvel of the exhibition, out-doing every object brought to reside under its transparent skin.

From 1851 to the turn of the century, the idea of the Crystal Palace recurred at virtually every major international exhibition in the form of giant structures produced by engineering technology. Iron and glass were used at Dublin and New York in 1853 and an impressive Palais de l’Industrie was built for the first Exposition Universelle in 1855. The organisers in New York went as far as to ask Paxton to provide a design for their building.<sup>25</sup> Unfortunately his plan proved unsuitable for the site and they were forced to open the commission to competition. The eventual winners, Messrs. Carstensen and Gildemeister, produced an unfortunate pastiche of the London prototype, using brick and wood infill to disguise the awkwardness of the building’s profile. <sup>26</sup> The French building, although a self-conscious reply to the Crystal Palace even from the earliest planning stages, was a marked improvement on the one in New York. Unfortunately, it was compromised all along by the unhappy relationship between the architect contracted to design it, J. M. V. Viel (with help from Tony Desjardins) and the engineers brought in to supervise the structural aspects, Alexis Barrault and Georges Bridel. Viel designed a rectangular space forty-eight by one hundred and ninety-two metres, flanked by six adjoining pavilions. As part of his scheme for the interior he planned to put a masonry skin over the iron columns and supports, in order to mask the contemporary nature of the structure. Barrault and Bridel objected to this and forced him to make a modification to his original plans. Their reasons were strikingly in tune with the kind of thinking that would be common amongst progressive architects seventy years later:

We do not want to try and create in metal a manner of construction that was invented for stone, and we don’t wish to hide the material we are working with by use of devices in bad taste. In a word, we have almost everywhere exposed the cast iron and the nature of the material . . . thinking that the simpicity of the forms and the internal grandeur of the building is enough to give it a style suitable for its purpose.<sup>27</sup>

The tension between new technologies and old forms was already making itself very apparent. Viel, committed to an idea of public architecture which revealed itself through richness of material and evidence of craft skill, felt himself obliged to mask the impermanent nature of his structure. To him, stone was an indicator of status, the weight and opacity of the wall an emblem of the training he had received. Iron columns and glass walls by-passed the methodology and status of his profession, making it difficult for him to cope. This was exacerbated by his brief. The Palais de l’lndustrie was not to be a temporary structure as the Crystal Palace had been, Napoleon Ill’s government having decided it should remain for an indefinite period to function as an exhibition and events centre. Thus as a cultural edifice of some importance it had to carry the weight of national profile. The stone casings around the columns were an attempt to guarantee a certain standing for the building, a standing which naked iron seemed to lack. The Palais de l’lndustrie, like numerous exposition buildings after it, was compromised between the functional reality of engineering science and the vision of France as the traditional harbinger of high culture. A time-honoured symbolism had clashed with an alternative means of construction. The Palais remained in place until 1900, when it was demolished to make way for the Grand and Petit Palais’.

Back in London in 1862 the South Kensington Exhibition was housed in a structure by a Captain Francis Fowke, who decided to use brick curtain walls and an iron and glass roof. His building was basically a long nave cut by two end transepts, with domes at the intersections. It boasted three open courts on the north end of the nave and over one and a half miles of upper gallery space. Despite its more traditional appearance than the Crystal Palace it was pilloried in the press and by the architectural fraternity:

The building recently erected at Kensington has probably awakened more criticism than any structure of our time. Viewed from without, its general characteristic is that of simple ugliness; and it is only when considered in connection with the purpose for which it was designed, does it in any sense come up to our idea of a Great Exhibition.<sup>28</sup>

The intention of the organisers was that the building should remain intact after the show and possibly be reused for succeeding exhibitions. Noting this, most assessments of it looked forward to a healthier future, ‘the exterior of the building, . . . must be viewed as a skeleton to be clothed and decorated after the exhibition closes.’ <sup>29</sup> Even an official publication like the ‘Illustrated Catalogue of the Industrial Department’ could not raise excessive enthusiasm, although it did provide excuses:

The building can be viewed only as a utilitarian structure for the present. Although it thoroughly provides for the wants of the exhibition, much remains to be done to render it complete and perfect. Perhaps no building in the world, twenty-four and a half acres in extent, has ever been erected at so low a liability . . . (after the exhibition) we may venture to hope that the Society will be proud of its property, and have the means, as well as the desire, to render it, both inside and outside, a complete building, worthy of being the home of industrial exhibitions.<sup>30</sup>

The building was clearly inferior in design to the Crystal Palace, though in itself this was not the reason for its popular failure. By 1862 gargantuan engineering structures were commonplace in railway stations and bridges, scale alone holding little interest for the general public. The miracles of science were less exciting than they had been; size was the only real feature of the 1862 building, this failing to compensate for its lack of creative adventure. In fact the age of experimental exhibition buildings was temporarily over in Britain only a decade after it had begun; it would be into the new century before a spark of life would return to British sites. By that time the Crystal Palace remained, standing on a new site in Sydenham, a great architectural achievement in a welter of mediocrity.

In the second half of the nineteenth century the initiative swung heavily to France, where a line of successes highlighted the leading position French engineers had taken. The building for the 1867 Exposition was a brilliant conception, the main themes of the show being integrated into the total plan:

The Paris Exhibition building, which throughout is of a single storey only in height, is composed of a series of vast concentric ovals, the innermost of the series enclosing a central garden open to the air and encircled by an open colonnade. Each one of the oval compartments, as it is continued around the entire plan, contains one separate class or group of exhibits, as they are exhibited by all nations. A walk completely round any one oval compartment of the building, therefore, conducts the spectator from the representatives of one country to those of another; all of them, however, representing the same art or industry or product; . . . Again: lines drawn from the exterior of the building to the central garden, and cutting through the whole of the concentric ovals, form a second set of compartments, of which each one is assigned to the various works or productions of one and the same country. These compartments, having a plan somewhat resembling a wedge, necessarily vary considerably in extent, while they all preserve the same general form 31

A superb organizational conceit, the building made the Exposition the most logical of the whole tradition. Contemporary accounts also recognised the lightness and subtlety of the interior spaces, set off by the beautifully crafted ironwork profiled against the glass. As a purpose built exhibition building this had no rivals, the Crystal Palace included.

At the 1878 show a Machine Hall was built by a M. de Dion, although overall the trend was temporarily away from the established notion of iron and glass. The Palais de Trocadéro, a flamboyant piece of eclectic styling in brick and stone, was the new centre-piece, this surviving more or less intact until 1937 when it was finally removed to make room for the Palais de Chaillot.<sup>32</sup> 1 889 saw the dramatic return of engineering to centre-stage with what became two of the most famous structures of the century, the Eiffel Tower and the Galerie des Machines. The Tower, designed by Gustav Eiffel, was to remain the highest manmade structure for forty years. Constructed from 15,000 wrought iron sections, it was an icon to the power of technology, a giant with unlimited strength and endless capabilities. Conceived of in 1885, partly as a spin-off from the work Eiffel had done on the Statue of Liberty,<sup>33</sup>.the tower was not by any means universally welcomed as an addition to the Paris skyline. Eiffel in fact drew up a list of useful purposes it would serve if it were to remain intact after the Exposition, an extraordinary exercise in the light of the tower’s splendidly functionless raison d’être. Included amongst these were strategical operations if Paris were under siege, meteorological observations, astromonical experimentation and general scientific use. Whilst all of these were performed through the tower’s unexpectedly long life, its real use has remained as a beautiful climbingframe for energetic tourists. It also made a personal fortune for Eiffel, who owned four-fifths of the shares in it and who continued to make a profit from entrance fees into the new century, when it finally became state property. It remains, the most popular tourist site in the world and the symbol of the city.

The Galerie des Machines was the last great engineering experiment to appear at an exhibition; it occupies a place of real importance in architectural history. It impressed laymen and experts alike with its combination of gargantuan scale and sinuous delicacy:

If the Eiffel Tower was an unexpected surprise, a triumph of originality and of daring skill, the machinery hall was found to be only one degree less marvellous; and this because the progress of modern architecture and of the science of engineering had, from one decade to another, led us up to this superb realisation of the unexplored possibilities of both. Never before, in the opinion of engineers of all countries who have visited it, has a building, proportionately to its vast dimensions, been constructed with such a wondrous combination of solidity, lightness, and grace, the general effect being enhanced by the flood of light freely admitted to all parts of the palace.<sup>34</sup>

The building was designed by architect Dutert, with engineer Contamin calculating the sizes and stresses of the ironwork. The span of the arches across the central space was one hundred and fifteen metres, a distance achieved through use of a system employed by Oudry in his swinging bridge at Brest, and by several German engineers in railway stations. This allowed for the elimination of tie-rods or other intermediary supports. John Allwood: ‘Cotamin . . . was to balance his gigantic roof, like an elephantine ballet dancer on points, on huge hinged supports in the concrete foundation raft. The roof was also pivoted on a gigantic pin at the apex of each arch, thus allowing the great structure to take up the necessary amount of structural movement within itself’.<sup>35</sup> The Galerie was awarded the prestigious Osiris prize, of one hundred thousand francs, twenty thousand going to Dutert, fifteen to Cotamin, three each to the five assistant architects and engineers, and fifty amongst the workforce who erected it.<sup>36</sup>

The 1900 Exposition revealed a confusion in the site architecture that was reflected in the state of practice in general. Only the remnants of the previous exposition, the Eiffel tower and the Galerie des Machines, appeared to have any confidence in themselves, much of the rest being an aimless and eclectic explosion of overblown and tired formulae. The Grand Palais, one of two permanent buildings erected, exemplified this confusion, embodying in its cumbersome body tensions going well beyond the limits of architecture. The internal structure of the building was a wrought iron frame and the roof was of iron and glass. This was encased in a massive masonry shell, giving the whole edifice a feeling of compromise: ‘What can one say about the Grand Palais, a sort of railway station where masses of stone have been piled up to support what? – A high, thin roof of glass. A bizarre contrast of materials. It is as if a giant were flexing its muscles, stiffening his arms and making a tremendous effort to raise a simple head-dress of lace above his head.’<sup>37</sup> The unresolved tension between architect and engineer, between earlier and recent methodologies and between two quite distinct visions of the world had met in one building, giving rise to a formal disaster. There were pronounced symbolic tensions; the monumental hulk of masonry was evocative of an insecure France, unsure as to how to project its national profile, its rôle as the bringer of high culture and civilization. It stood for an architectural profession which still saw itself as an elite, divided from the world of utility and social purpose. More generally it stood for regressive forces in society who wished to benefit from the material advances capital and technology had brought, without accepting their consequences in other spheres. The iron and glass which the masonry shell surrounded was the symbol of progressive liberalism, of those who had invented and championed industry, empire and free trade, who had generated the wealth and power that held the world in balance. Adaptability, lightness, strength and aggressive advance from the traditional status quo were the hallmarks of this approach. In 1889 iron and glass had no real rivals. In 1900, as the march of capital faltered and the European nations increasingly undermined one another, forces that had previously been unstoppable began to fail, and older power mechanisms regained a hold. Regression seemed a sensible course; stone enveloped iron and glass, not to destroy it, but simply to slow and disguise it. The Galerie des Machines had embodied industry and empire, the Grand Palais represented in stone the confused slide to the First World War.

The stunning success of some of the European engineering structures had no real equivalents in America. Whilst iron and glass were used in the first American Fairs, usually in tandem with brick and wood, little in the way of novel or innovative architecture emerged. Following Carstensen and Gildemeister’s inauspicuous start in New York in 1853, the organizers of the Philadelphia Centennial had much ground to make up on their European counterparts. Despite the enormous amount of building carried out on the Centennial grounds however, it was the landscaping of the site which proved its finest feature. Five large pavilions were built, these casting their shadows over the dozens of State, national and private pavilions surrounding them. The Main Building (1880 by 464 feet), the Machinery Hall (1402 by 360 feet), the Agricultural Hall (540 by 820 feet) and the Horticultural Hall (383 by 193 feet) were all iron frame buildings with glass roofing, brick and wood screen walls. The Memorial Hall was to be a permanent museum after the Fair closed and so was built mainly in granite. None of these was of real interest though, being unsure expressions of a culture still lacking an independent architectural voice in public building.<sup>38</sup> The only work to cause a stir for its innovative qualities was the New Jersey State Pavilion. This was a clever exercise in timber beam construction, making use of a balloon frame, which allowed for variation in both the interior and exterior space. Vincent Scully has recognised the pavilion as one of the earliest examples of an architectural form he christened the ‘stick style’, the first truly indigenous American style in architecture.<sup>39</sup>

Seventeen years later at the Chicago Columbian Exposition, the condition of American architecture was very different. In 1885 William Le Baron Jenney had built in Chicago what was later to be acknowledged as the first sky-scraper, the Home Insurance building. Best defined as tall buildings, hung on steel frames, with modern amenities like elevators, central heating and incandescent lighting, sky-scraper office blocks were to be the back-bone of the Chicago School, a progressive movement which altered the course of architecture between 1880 and 1914. The School also transformed the shape of the house and can rightly be thought of as an important ingredient in the rise of international modernism in Europe.<sup>40</sup> Thus in 1893, the organisers of the Columbian had a great deal of acclaimed expertise to tap for the construction of their site. Daniel Burnham, a leading light in the Chicago school, was made chairman of the executive committee in charge of the architecture, and other figures of note were involved. It might well have been expected that the Fair would combine engineering and architectural design much in the way the Chicago School had in the city’s commercial buildings. Somewhat surprisingly however, this did not occur. A classical format was chosen for the plan and for almost all the major buildings, in apparent contradiction to the recognised architectural situation of Chicago. Looking at the Fair in a wider cultural context though, the choice was more understandable. The ideological climate had dictated the style of the show, classicism satisfying the symbolic requirements of the new republic far better than the decorative functionalism the new generation was famous for.<sup>41</sup> Only Louis Sullivan’s Transportation Building showed a little of the spirit that had been the inspiration behind some of the most beautiful buildings in the nineteenth century. The greatest in the school, he objected to classicism as a suitable vehicle, claiming ‘the damage wrought by the World’s Fair will last for half a century from its date, if not longer’.<sup>42</sup> Frank Lloyd-Wright also saw the classicism of the Columbian as harmfully regressive, believing 1893 to be a ‘fateful year in the culture of these United States. They are about to go pseudo-classic in Architecture.’<sup>43</sup> The very city which might have presented the ultimate combination of engineering and architecture at an exhibition had determined not to do so, for reasons that had little to do with either discipline. It would be forty years before Americans chose to represent themselves with modern forms in a Fair, leaving us simply to wonder at what the Chicago Columbian might have been.

Engineering faded as an architectural device at exhibitions between 1890 and 1930, stone and plaster facings being seen to be preferable to express the spirit of the age with. As noted with the Grand Palais, the shift back to historicism, eclecticism and escapism in Europe indicated faltering confidence in the forces which had created the power and wealth the West enjoyed. In tandem with the growth of imperial propaganda, as opposed to imperial celebration, the verbose, overblown melodrama of twentieth century sites revealed a gaggle of shouting nations, who grew louder by the year, yet who were far less sure of what they were shouting about. The difference between the dynamic simplicity of the Crystal Palace, and the pompous acres of plaster and stone at Wembley seventy-three years later, was the difference between a nation in the ascendant and one in decline.

The only real rôle engineering openly had on sites through this later period was in the entertainment areas, where spectacular structures were erected for the express purpose of pleasure. Indeed, symbolic significance accepted, pleasure was the central principle behind the building of the Eiffel tower; it can be seen as the first in an impressive line of engineering feats specifically designed to send shivers of excitement up the spines of expectant visitors. In 1893 the Chicagoans built the first, now legendary, Ferris Wheel. Two giant wheels, two hundred and sixty feet in diameter, were clamped together, holding on their perimeters carriages which could hold sixty people each. Over two thousand people at a time could be hoisted into the air, on an axle claiming to be the largest single piece of steel ever forged. Chicago also had a moving pavement capable of carrying thousands around the site by electronic power. In 1900 at Paris these were copied, the ‘trottoir roulant’ there having three lanes at varying speeds to accomodate visitors with different needs. An electronically powered overhead railway also featured here and a gigantic ‘Dome of Discovery’, a spherical structure containing under its curved facade a plantetarium. Sites came increasingly to resemble fairgrounds, although it would be inaccurate to suggest that this is what they became, as an established code of sobriety always prevented excess. Nonetheless, the part engineering had come to play was bizarrely different from the one it had between 1851 and 1889. In 1908 at the Franco–British Exhibition, a massive continous steel framework was devised and constructed by the Commissioner-General, Imre Kiralfy, to function as the structural support system for the whole site. Once this was in place, everything was covered by architect-designed fibrous-plaster facades, completely disguising what lay underneath. The only pieces of openly exposed engineering prowess were the Flip-flap, a giant pincer-like device which swung visitors across the grounds at great height, and the Stadium, built to stage the fourth modern Olympiad. Thus the public functions on the site were allocated; the plaster facings stood for culture and seriousness, the steel for recreation and frivolity. Whichever way it was viewed, the physical and visual make-up of the exhibition revealed a culture that had gotten its value systems perversely inverted. The spartan simplicity of the stadium, subsequently known as the White City, was commented on at the time by architectural observers who, whilst they recognised value in the integration of structure into the total design, still found difficulty in seeing engineering as a real ally to architecture: ‘It boasts no architectural features, the steel is still gaunt and unclothed; but there are few who will deny that it runs some of our architectural conceptions very close. It is vast, splendid, monumental . . . It is the great achievement of the Franco–British Exhibition, and of the engineering profession. 44

The bias against engineering in architectural circles was a result not only of general, ideological discomfort with a new order, but also of a fear that the profession itself was under threat. Methods of training, modes of practice, traditional skills, approaches and forms were all potential victims of iron and glass. Nevertheless, the acceptance of engineering principles by the architectural profession and by influential elements within the lay public was vital before architecture could advance into the new century in any meaningful way. The needs of a mobile mass-population demanded a maleable architecture to cope with endless variables, and architects capable of satisfying diverse social needs. Whilst it may well be argued we are still waiting for the architectural profession to understand its rôle in our society, it is quite clear in retrospect that the exhibitions did help to promote and naturalise new ideas in building, smoothing the path for progressive builders from the end of the nineteenth century.

As suggested earlier, the history of design can be seen as one of recurring tension between historical eclecticism and those ideologies which sought to replace it. Between 1851 and 1939 most exhibitions harboured at least one historical style, and from 1876 there was usually an opposition to it somewhere on the site. Thus at Paris in 1889, classicism and neobaroque dominated the site architecture, the decorative and design arts, yet the rationalism of followers of Viollet-le-Duc was conspicuous amongst architectural exhibits; the Gallerie des Machines proudly offered a new vision of building, and Emile Gallé was already formulating his version of art nouveau in glass and furniture. In Chicago in 1893, the new approach to decoration and technology forged by the Chicago School fought an isolated but lively battle against the dominant classicism. In the 1900 Paris show, art nouveau had arrived in real force even though the generally preferred styles were still neobaroque and neorococo; in 1925, the same struggle continued, if anything more violently than ever before. Opponents of historicism, whatever their theoretical position might collectively have been, were invariably in the minority but invariably present also. Up to and including the First World War, illustrated catalogues of exhibitions held throughout Europe and America reveal remarkable similarities in the way design was presented and understood. Historicism was the norm, designers feeding mainly off revival forms emanating from classical, baroque, rococo, gothic and vernacular styles, the first three being by far the most durable. Into the post-War era, despite the more eclectic use of sources, it remained firmly the preferred approach of the core of the design profession. Few exhibitions managed to exclude historical styles even when an exhibition brief was sent to manufacturers actively discouraging them, as with Paris in 1925, 1937 and New York in 1939. Indeed, the ability of historicism to survive the attacks of generations of designers, critics and historians can be witnessed by a visit to any departmental store at the present time, where classical, baroque and rococo details remain in furnishings, defiant and popular as ever. ‘Modernism’ has always been only a small part of the story of design, but it has been the one told most often. Undoubtedly this is because of the more engaging theoretical and formal position taken up by progressives, as well as their remarkable ability to publicise themselves and hence win a place in history.

The first and in the author’s opinion the most important antihistoricist movement to gain an international audience via the exhibition medium was Art Nouveau, a style, attitude and methodology which effected visual art-forms in most nations between 1895 and 1925. Art nouveau practitioners were the first to self-consciously pursue the Wagnerian notion of ‘gesamtkunstwerk’, or total work of art, whereby a complete environment, unified in its aesthetic and symbolic content, could surround and infiltrate the viewer. Every aspect of the made environment was subject to art nouveau styling; buildings, fittings, furniture, wallpaper, paintings, sculpture, graphic illustration, carpets and street furniture. Historicism was replaced by an organic, sinew-like decoration derived from nature. Curving, whip-lash line infiltrated the fabric of the building and fittings, becoming part of the structure, in what was usually an exercise in frame, as opposed to wall, construction. The most impressive collections of art nouveau to be brought together in exhibitions were those in Paris (1900), Turin (1902) and London (1908).

The Paris show had the largest gathering of art nouveau artists ever to assemble on one site. The movement, having different names and stylistic tendencies from nation to nation, appeared mainly in the Decorative Arts Palace, inside the national pavilions, and in various structures built by private groups. Amongst the French, furniture, glass, ceramic and metal by De Feure, Gaillard, Guimard, Gallé, Charpentier, Majorelle, Grasset, Lalique, Carriès and Lachenal were spread through the Pavilion de la Union Centrale des Arts Decoratifs, the Pavilion Bing and those built by the stores Le Printemps, Le Louvre and Le Bon Marché. Amongst foreign exhibitors some of the greatest exponents were present, including Riemerschmidt, Mucha, Obrist, Olbrich, and Hoffmann. The last two designed fully fitted interiors. The internal exhibiting spaces in the Union Centrale and Bing pavilions were also set up as furnished rooms, making available an array of complete environments to the visitor. Perhaps the only serious omissions in the representation were the Glasgow school, especially the work of C. R. Macintosh, and the work of Victor Horta, the architect-designer from Brussels who could easily have claimed to have invented the style.

The site boasted one or two examples of art nouveau architecture, in particular the Pavilion Bleu, a restaurant adjacent to the Pont d’lena.

Essentially a space-frame with glass and wood in-fill, its beauty was in its curving departure from the linear grid of the structure. The building hung in tension between engineering and nature, holding the appearance both of a cube and a pod. Samuel Bing’s pavilion was decoratively flamboyant but architecturally banal. The only real pieces of art nouveau to achieve excellence on an architectural scale apart from the Pavilion Bleu were the station entrances designed by Hector Guimard for the new Métropolitain underground railway. Opened to coincide with the Exposition, they remain today as taut and sensuous as ever, amongst the best pieces of urban decoration ever designed.<sup>45</sup>

Critical reception given to art nouveau at the exposition tended to concentrate on its claims to being an appropriate modern style, and the wisdom of its insistence on rejecting the past: ‘We appreciate the very legitimate wish to put the furniture arts, as with all the others, into intimate accord with our habits, our tastes and our thoughts. But it is advisable not to make modernism a simple mania and reject systematically all that was made by our fathers, unique because they made it.’<sup>46</sup> The same writer, as professor of aesthetics and art history at the Ecole des Beaux Arts, was also worried by the movement’s foreign origins and the doubtful implications for French art:

The style, very composite, is a mixture of gothic and Japanese, of rustic and super-refined, which came from England having passed through Belgium . . . It was already modified and muted; one could not see, in spite of everything, that it responded to our needs, to our social temperament . . . Simple and complicated at the same time, it contains, contradictorily, light open-work and a structure of a strange weight, an unfortunate rigidity, bad proportion and a pretence of convenience which is in reality inconvenience. I’d ignore all this if in the future, by a series of transformations, it would achieve a French appearance.<sup>47</sup>

For the French, the desire to remain in the artistic ascendent made the break with the successes of the past a difficult one to make, especially for those working in the established academies.

At Turin in 1902 the new style was in evidence everywhere, appearing by that time to have become an established and legitimate mode of practice. A large number of the designers who were in Paris showed there, with the welcome addition of the Glasgow school, the international reputation of which was already well in excess of its domestic one. Ironically for Macintosh and his colleagues, the Turin show proved far more successful than the Glasgow International of the previous year, where they had not featured with any force. Turin is probably best remembered though for its architecture rather than any designer exhibiting indoors. The Central Rotunda and the Pavilion of the Decorative Arts, both by Raimondo D’Aronco, were spectacular examples of the style on a grand scale. Covered in stylised figurines and plant-forms, the rotunda appears as though ready to explode, with only thin strips of wrought iron, like vines, holding it from bursting forth.<sup>48</sup>

The largest single collection of art nouveau objects ever to be in a British exhibition appeared in 1908 at the Franco–British. Here entrepreneur André Delieux organised a group display of designers and crafts-people from all over France, with particular emphasis on the school of Nancy. Five hundred individuals and firms exhibited in the Collectivité Delieux, including the best practitioners of the day. Guimard, Bigaux, Taxile-Doat, Gaillard, Sauvage, Franz Jourdain and Selmersheim were members of a seventeen-strong jury headed by Delieux himself. Such a selection panel guaranteed the dominance of new ideas, much to the discomfort of a British art press deeply entrenched in a regressive support of what they considered indigenous national styles.<sup>49</sup> Most members of the jury were heavily represented in the pavilion which, following the pattern established in Paris, was a series of domestic interiors. Each one was fitted and decorated with the produce of many firms but with a single firm controlling the overall flavour of each. Rooms by Sauvage, Lambert, Galleray, Dufrenè, Bigaux and Croix-Marie were picked out as particularly satisfactory, whilst dozens of craftspeople, their names now shrouded in obscurity, received favourable mentions. The Collectivité was seen by its supporters as a challenge to the accepted norm of historicism. Gabriel Mourey:

Modernity in respect of architecture, decorative art, and applied art is sadly hard to find at Shepherd’s Bush. The general aspect of the Franco–British Exhibition produces a deceptive feeling of things one has seen before, and is chiefly remarkable in this respect for an almost total absence of novelty. The explanation of this would take too long to discuss; the fact is incontestable . . . Possibly the time is not so far off as one might imagine when people will tire of living among these no doubt seductive but anachronistic styles . . . It is time that a great collective effort was set on foot amongst us, with daring, and above all, with method, so that the public should be made aware of the results of a movement which, despite the obstacles and shortcomings that have given many people an impression that so much good effort had come to naught, will not fail in the end to succeed.<sup>50</sup>

Delieux believed ‘notre génie français était devenu sterile’ and that the French tradition would die if it did not align itself with the new century. His modernism thus tinged with patriotism, he called for the renovation of the decorative arts, which he believed could be achieved through the acceptance of industry and the use of new techniques and materials. In an after dinner speech he asserted:

I believe, sirs, that it is a fault to think in too traditionalist a way that science and art have said their last word, and that for us it is best to copy the masterpieces of our predecessors. What! everything changes, all progresses, and you, in powerlessness, reduce your rôle to copyists! No sirs, this is against history, against the laws that rule the destiny of humanity.<sup>51</sup>

His idealism was not untypical of the movement as a whole. Art nouveau, whilst it maintained an exclusive craft-based mode of production in many areas, had shown itself willing to apply the forces responsible for the shape of the modern world to the art of the modern world. Historicism had to be dispensed with because it represented a previous phase of human evolution, the past, the unindustrialised world. Using social-Darwinian logic, art nouveau was presented as a result of more advanced, more civilized minds. In its theoretical obsession with progress, it had two distinct sides. It stood for democracy, the undermining of traditional hierarchies and the general advancement of creativity; it also matched perfectly the progressive liberalism that had given rise to the voracious expansion of industry, capital and empire. In this respect it harboured within its twining metallic tendrils a symbolism which could in our own age be perceived as contradictory. In Brussels for example, where it was used to superb formal ends, it stood simultaneously for socialism, capitalism and imperialism.<sup>52</sup> In Glasgow also, its stunningly free and lyrical application to urban architecture appears in retrospect to run against the otherwise grandiose grain of that most imperial of cities. In its symbolic pluralism the style reflected on the one hand the confused state of the fin de siécle world, and on the other the perenial multiplicity of the human condition. Nonetheless, in its social awareness, in its synthesis of material and form, of narrative and function and of means and ends, art nouveau left many of the modernisms which succeeded it far behind.

In 1925 after a period of unsureness which lingered well after the War, the exhibition tradition had its first real taste of full-blooded modernism, at the Paris Exposition des Arts Decoratifs et Industriels Modernes. Here the French guaranteed innovation in one form or another by demanding it in the exhibition brief:

The Exposition . . . is open to all manufacturers whose produce is artistic in character and shows clearly modern tendencies . . . That is to say that all copies or counterfeits of historical styles will be banned; that is to say also that any manufacturer is eligible since everyday objects are as capable of being beautiful as the most exclusive objects.

All industrialists, artists and artisans, in whatever material they specialize . . . in whatever form they use it, and for whatever purpose, can and should be modern.<sup>53</sup>

The result was an exhibition in which designers who had never previously wrestled with the problem of contemporaneity abruptly formulated styles for the new century and applied them to objects of all kinds. These shared certain common features, allowing them to be defined as a single style, later named Art Deco after the Exposition itself. Art Deco was to grow in scope, becoming the characteristic look of the later twenties and thirties. Accepting that the rudiments of it existed well before 1925, it would be reasonable to suggest this as a unique instance, where an exhibition gave birth to and then publicised a style.<sup>54</sup>

Despite its basic intentions, art deco was both eclectic and historicist, being little more than a peculiar amalgamation of many earlier styles. The essential ingredients were Aztec, ancient Egyptian, African (West and North), Oceanic, neo-classical, Louis Quatorze, Quinze and Seize, art nouveau, cubism and abstract art. Some items had three or four of these sources clinging simultaneously to their surfaces in unhappy rivalry. Many of the designers and architects had recently been involved with art nouveau, which had lingered on into the early twenties as the only real ‘modern look’. By then however it was recognised as being tired. It was attacked in the official literature of the Exposition, presumably in the hope of dissuading designers from using it: ‘Copier la nature . . . était une erreur aussi lourde que pasticher les formes du passé sans regarder à quoi elles appliquaient. Ce ne fut qu’une mode: la mode n’est pas le modernisme’.<sup>55</sup> Like all eclectic forms before it, art deco was to be a synthetic style, self-consciously avoiding one to one relations with nature.

The exotic and ancient inspiration behind art deco at first appears to contradict its struggle for modernity, as does its persistence with neoclassical and baroque profiles. The use of the last two came simply from a reluctance and inability to give them up. There were three basic reasons for the fashionability of the ancient and exotic: first, modern artists since Gauguin had made use of primitive and ancient art. They had been a vital ingredient in avant-garde movements up to and including 1925. Thus, in order to modernise their own practice, designers followed what they believed were the methods of the acknowledged progressives in the fine arts. Second, these sources were popular because of their distance from everyday experience; their ‘otherness’ made them new and unexpected. The fact that they were not part of the European historical tradition enabled their look to be translated into something appearing to have no precedent. Finally, the ability of all these forms to be abstracted and subjected to geometry made them suitable for furniture, architecture and product-casings. They could be adapted easily to mass-production processes. It would be far from easy to style an art nouveau radio, with its insistence on sinewy, asymetrical line, far easier to box it into a smoothed-off, ziggerat art deco format.

In the first instance, French art deco was dominated by fashionable and exclusive craft firms. Designers like Ruhlmann, Pierre Legrain, Edgar Brandt, Jean Dunand, the Jallot Brothers, Clement Rousseau, Sue and Mare, Eileen Gray and Rene Lalique had little to do with industry as such. The movement as presented at the Exposition can be seen as an attempt by the French to put their produce back into the forefront of the world market by bringing their traditional areas of strength up to date. What they came up with was basically a Louis XIV methodology hidden under a machine age veneer.<sup>56</sup> After this exclusive inauguration however, the style rapidly filtered down to everyday objects, from cutlery, ceramic and glass to fireplaces, radios and cinema facades.

Art deco, and many of the modernist ‘isms’ which have followed it down to the present time, was a symbolic solution to a problem that needed methodological answers. It was involved in the manipulation of appearances by adjusting the superficial elements in the object to suggest the contemporary world, and, by implication, the future. It attempted to carry the consumer away from the immediate world, hinting at a universe he or she had not yet experienced; more than anything else, it was about disguise. As such, it largely conformed to the idea of style put forward by R. N. Wornum at the Great Exhibition, failing to integrate the narratives it contained with the modes of production it used.

Elsewhere on the site there were small quantities of design and architecture which rejected the notion of style as a cosmetic additive. These were to be found in areas controlled by members of the pioneer modern movement often collectively labelled the International Style. For these propounders of modernism, the break with historical eclecticism was to be achieved by an absolute elimination of all extraneous symbolism. Decoration of any kind was thus dispensed with, the beauty of the building or object being arrived at through the creative and functional manipulation of the spaces. International style designers also saw their practice as being firmly in a moral context, as a means of transforming the lives of the population. There were two pavilions uncompromisingly within this category, the Pavillon de l’Esprit Nouveau by Le Corbusier and the pavilion of the U.S.S.R.. The former, largely ignored at the time, had all the features of the style ultimately to be seen by many as the absolute and inevitable architecture of our century. It was an icon of international modernism; white walls, flat roof, emphasis on fenestration, an internal space which was not so much an organisation of rooms as a partitioning of a single open area, and an absence of surface decoration. Planned as a module which could be stacked into flats or left as a small detached dwelling, it was a brilliant exercise in the use of prefabrication, in an attempt to show how mass-housing could be built well and cheaply.<sup>57</sup> The furniture and fittings were utterly utilitarian, being mostly ‘ready-made’ pieces intended for industry and offices, and the walls were decorated with paintings by Fernand Léger.<sup>58</sup> The pavilion was named after ‘L’Esprit Nouveau’, the modernist journal controlled by Le Corbusier and Amedée Ozenfant. The Russian pavilion appears to have been formally more interesting, though surviving photographs of it give little indication as to how it functioned as a building. It confronted the visitor in its main facade with a huge bank of windows, like a transparent billboard; to the side, a staircase covered by a criss-cross arrangement of iron beams led up to the principal entrance, tucked away inauspiciously. The only element containing a narrative was the emblem of the hammer and sickle hung above the stair-well. The pavilion was a severe denial of the rôle of the wall, an exercise in space and light as opposed to volume and mass.

These two pavilions were isolated incidents. The majority of the architecture on the site fitted into the art deco category and as such it opposed itself firmly to the proletarian moralism they espoused. Perhaps the extreme opposite of Le Corbusier’s vision, in both a moral and a formal sense, was provided by the Ruhlmann Group, whose building, designed by Pierre Patout, was unambiguously called ‘Pavilion of a Rich Collector’. This had all the features of the art deco style; the ziggerat stepping toward the summit, a suggestion of classicism in stripped pilasters and use of a frieze, decorative motifs taken from subcubist painting, sculptural elements that were strange, mannered abrieviations of Roman relief carving. There was also an insistence upon the use of the wall to create a volumetric (as opposed to spatial) feel to the building. The pavilion was an altogether odd combination of ancient, exotic and modern formal strategies, and as such it reflected perfectly the flavour of the objects inside it. Patout designed several more buildings on the site, including the Porte de la Concorde, one of the six monumental entrances. This comprised of an arrangement of eight giant free-standing square pillars with a sculpture of a nude woman in the centre. Despite the obscurity now surrounding his name, he was one of the best known and most favoured of French architects through to the Second World War. His ‘deco-classicism’ was still in evidence at the Paris Exposition of 193 7, his style appearing to have some influence over the design of the Musée d’Art Moderne, which still stands across the Seine from the Eiffel tower. He also won the commission to build the French Pavilion at the New York World’s Fair, a choice on the part of the organisers which would seem to indicate his version of modernism was for them preferable to Le Corbusier’s.

Art deco styling was apparent in most of the official structures in 1925 but it was probably at its most flamboyant in the pavilions built by Parisian stores and fashion houses. The feeling of exclusivity and opulence was everywhere, this brand of modernism having decidedly not left traditions of French craftmanship behind in order to embrace the age of mass-production. Between the extremes of the Pavilion of a Rich Collector and the Pavilion L’Esprit Nouveau, however, there were some interesting works which later exerted influence, the most notable of these being the Tourist Pavilion by Robert Mallet-Stevens. The interslotting of vertical and horizontal planes was clearly in the knowledge of works produced by the De Stijl architects, and possibly Walter Gropius’ Chicago Tribune Tower of 1922,<sup>59</sup> yet here the extreme austerity is softened, the pavilion quietly acknowledging earlier forms without sliding into the turgid eclecticism evident elsewhere on the site. It was a prototype for much exhibition architecture after it, notably at the Chicago Century of Progress (1933) and the Glasgow Empire (1938). At the latter, the Scottish Pavilion and the central Tower in particular seem to owe a lot to Mallet-Stevens.<sup>60</sup>

The Paris and New York exhibitions in 1937 and 1939 were totally committed to modernism.<sup>61</sup> However, they had very different ideas as to what modern architecture and design should be. The Paris show exuded the international style whilst New York was dominated by a symbolic modernism coming largely out of Art Deco and Streamform. Paris determined its position partly through pressure from intellectuals and the substantial number of unemployed French artists and designers, some of whom had representation on key committees.<sup>62</sup> The modernist lobby, although by no means totally victorious, managed to guarantee stylistic predominance over much of the site. New York appears to have been more random in that relatively few of the buildings were subjected to committee judgment, and few architectural theorists gained access to discussions on site planning. The only rigour the styles were subjected to came from the natural selection of commercial enterprise; streamform, art deco and futuropolis were the leading popular forms, so they were used to design the Fair. They also fitted neatly into the overall theme, ‘Democracity’, in so far as they appeared to be the ones the masses preferred. In a world of high capital, the styles, it seems, selected themselves. As with all consumable goods, the Fair had to be purchased by its public before it could be counted a success, and the look of the pavilions helped to sell it. More than anything it showed that design was essentially a part of the marketing world.

Commenting on the Paris show, Serge Chermayeff complained that the Eiffel tower was the best piece of architecture on the site. He openly attacked the Palais de Chaillot, the replacement for the Palais de

Trocadéro, as being retrogressive. The classicism of the new Musee d’Art Moderne also displeased him: ‘Both the new Trocadéro and the Museum of Modern Art – Vieux Pompiers renderings of Renaissance up to date – are worthy to stand with the Peace Palace at Geneva among the the most dismal architectural failures of any size.’<sup>63</sup> There were however plenty of buildings of a type a modernist like Chermayeff could approve of, in principle at least. Denmark, Holland, Spain, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland, Czechoslovakia and Finland were all rigorously spatial and functional, Alvar Aalto’s Finnish pavillon probably being the best work on the site. More than this, the Palais de l’Aeronautique, the Porte d’Aliamentation, the Pavilion de la Paix (excluding the tower) and the Pavilion by Le Corbusier devoted to C.I.A.M. ( Congrès Internationale d’Architectes Moderne) all celebrated international, abstract modernism.<sup>64</sup> In its white facade and generous fenestration, even the British pavilion had the superficial trappings of the new order.<sup>65</sup>

The contrast with New York could hardly have been more dramatic. Pavilions by major American industries dominated the site; the accent was on the commercial, temporal aspect of design. As in Paris in 1925, a stipulation of the show was modernity: ‘no imitations either of historic architecture or imitations of permanent materials were permitted, with one exception only, namely the sector devoted to the states’.<sup>66</sup> The organisers claimed to have a vision of design that went beyond the commercial function, ‘the true poets of the twentieth century are the designers, the architects and the engineers who glimpse some inner vision, create some beautiful figment of the imagination, and then translate it into valid actuality for the world to enjoy’.<sup>67</sup> The new generation of American industrial designers dominated the site in a confident affirmation of the strength of indigenous American styles. Raymond Loewy, Norman Bel Geddes, Walter Dorwin Teague and Henry Dreyfuss were all present in force, Dreyfuss producing the design for the massive interior of the Perisphere. ‘Streamform’, the style they made famous, was everywhere. Its main ingredient was the tear-drop form, whereby an object, regardless of its function, was smoothed down into an aerodynamic shape resemblant of an aeroplane.<sup>68</sup> Contemporaneity was thus represented through the appearance of speed much in the way of the Italian Futurists, although the Americans answered to very different social, intellectual and economic forces. Streamform was emblematic of the pace at which modern society moved. In theoretical terms, it was part of the same ideology as art deco; not historicist but certainly eclectic, it was a stylistic additive, a narrative to tell the consumer what the aspirations of the object were. Once art deco became a style for mass-production it joined with streamform in celebrating the marketing virtues of expendability and mass-consumerism.

The difference between the Paris 1937 and New York 1939 shows lay not in good or bad taste – both had quantitities of each – or in functionability of plans and buildings, but in the socio-political situations they were created in. Those in Paris who espoused the international style had an in-built belief that design and architecture were social arts and were capable of helping in the drive toward Utopia. Architecture, it was argued, had a past, a present and a future which revealed the existence of a stylistic dialectic, one which would ultimately transform architecture completely and society with it. For them, the idea of style in the absence of morality was meaningless, for style symbolized the wellbeing of society, not the taste of individuals. It was not a superficial additive. In New York, no such dialectic was recognised as existing, the stylistic unity of the site came largely out of economic factors. A style was popularised through advertising, it was then demanded by the population and would remain in demand by them until such time as it became commercially redundant. The Corporations of America needed no dialectic, no Utopia.

The tragedy of modern design and architecture was epitomised by these two exhibitions. As versions of modernism they had both failed to provide an architectural environment fit for people to live in, and would continue to fail because both, in the vastness of their material and intellectual conceptions, had managed to lose sight of the actual problems of human, urban existence. Alienation, the state whereby one ceases to recognise oneself in the products and objects in the madeenvironment, and ultimately whereby one ceases to recognise oneself in oneself, was ignored as an issue and left unresolved through the century. Cities planned by the few for the many, in the absence of the needs of particular communities, and ignorant of local memories, were bound to alienate. Likewise the anonymity of corporate design, constructed from corporate decisions, could only exclude and in turn alienate. The one approach failed to recognise individual consciousness, the other generated a false one. The elimination of trade skills and the embracing of assembly-line modes of production – accepted unquestioningly by both approaches – meant that on the ground level, design and architecture were foreign intruders. The ‘honest’ exposure of structure, or ‘stylish’ addition of futuristic and historicist features, could have little effect on practices which had failed at a fundamental level. Indeed, by the 1950’s, the superficial features of both approaches were readily used by builders across the socio-political spectrum, as it was obviously recognisable by then that all forms of modernism had come to mean the same thing. Exacerbating the decline, prefabrication