and mass-production, instead of developing from the undoubted benefit of quantity, had come to stand for shoddiness and emotional poverty. Cheapness of materials, anonymity of design, lack of trade skills at appropriate levels, and the utter dominance of economic not human factors, have seen architecture continue to spiral downwards. The failing of international modernism was not in its vision of design and architecture as social arts, indeed, this was its glory, but in its methodologies. Its vision of the architect as an artist aside from society, not as an orchestrator of available ideas and skills from within society, rendered many of its solutions inappropriate and alien. The insistence upon non-objective abstraction and on the elimination of narratives shut it off from language, reducing drastically the ability of the viewer to gain access and interpret its spaces, surfaces and facades. By the time the Paris show opened in 1937, the modern movement had still failed to produce works as meaningful and resolved as gothic revival or art nouveau forerunners, as a cursory glimpse at exhibition sites from 1851 to 1900 demonstrates. One can only muse that if the lessons of some of the earlier exhibitions had been heeded, those of 1937 and 1939 might have been the confirmation of a century of realised, not missed opportunities.

## Notes

1 Quoted from The Crystal Palace and the Great Exhibition, in Art and Industry, Open University A100 course material by Aaron Scharf, Open University Press 1971.

2 R. H. Soden Smith, Dwellings for the Poor, taken from Reports on the Paris Universal Exhibition 1867, Volume 3, London 1867.

R. N. Wornum, The Exhibition as a Lesson in Taste, taken from The Crystal Palace Exhibition, Art Journal Issue, London 1851. Facsimile reprint, New York 1970, DOVER Publications.

4 Ibid.

5 The International Exhibition of 1862: The Illustrated Catalogue of the Industrial Department, 2 Volumes, London 1862.

6 There are various useful references to this. Recommended is Eric de Maré London 1851: The Year of the Great Exhibition London 1972, The Folio Society. As with other aspects of the Great Exhibition, the rôle of the Prince is confusing because of the way he has been mythologised by historians. Obviously he was politically significant in the exhibition as a whole (see Chapter Two) but his honorary position often made him figure-head to enterprises he knew little about. As Honorary President of the Society for Improving the Condition of the Labouring Classes, his name would be attached to the Model House whether he played a real part in it or not.

7 The publication The Plumber and Decorator and Journal of Heating, Ventilating, Gas and Sanitary Engineering for example ran lengthy articles on the White City Exhibitions and took part in conferences there.

8 Soden-Smith, see note 2.

9 Ibid.

10 Ibid.

11 Edwin Chadwick, Dwellings Characterised by Cheapness Combined with Conditions Necessary for Health and Comfort, from Reports on the Paris Universal Exhibition 1867 London 1867.

26 Ibid.

12 Ibid.

13 It would seem inconceivable that exhibitions after 1889 did not play a rôle in the rise of moral consciousness in architectural theory in France and the Netherlands.

14 The imperial implications of the grouping of European produce are also evident, even though it was being criticised. It was of obvious importance to most critics to stress the different character of non-Western art, even if it was to acknowledge its superiority.

15 William Dyce, quoted from The Great Exhibition and the Crystal Palace, see note 1.

16 Soden-Smith, see note 2.

17 The relationship between romanticism and orientalism would tend to support this position throughout the visual arts.

18 Samuel Bing’s shop L’Art Nouveau is perhaps the best known example. Of course, there were trends of Japonaiserie and Chinoiserie that chose to use the complex figuration of those countries as an additive to the weighty historicist decoration already available. Japan had more than one style, and more than one effect on the West.

19 This is a controversial point, Wright himself refuting claims that Japan influenced him, years later in his diaries. Sadly, little of what he said can be taken at face value; for example, in his obsession with his own genius, he tended to disown his Shingle and Stick forerunners, an ommission which is quite preposterous.

20 Occasionally the situation was more confusing in America, as the first architectural academy was only founded in 1865 (Massachusetts) and the second in 1869 (Illinois). Prior to this, the handful of formally trained architects had been taught in Paris. In New York in 1853 the organisers initially asked Joseph Paxton to design their building, in Philadelphia in 1876 relatively few of the American structures were architect built.

21 Folke T. Kihlstedt, The Crystal Palace, Scientific American, 1982.

22 The famous Elms Affair was provoked by the infamous Colonel Sibthorp and various Times journalists. It was claimed the park would suffer unacceptably if the trees were felled. Paxton built the Palace over them. This left the nuisance of the sparrows in the trees soiling exhibits. The Duke of Wellington apparently suggested the solution to this latter problem, sparrow-hawks. Also, see Chapter 2.

23 Antony Bird, Paxton’s Palace, London 1976, Cassell and Company.

24 G.F. Chadwick, The Works of Sir Joseph Paxton, London, 1961, Architectural Press. Also Bird and Kihlstedt, see notes 21 and 23.

25 Ibid, and Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Historical Register of the Centennial Exposition 1876, facsimile copy available, New York 1974, Paddington Press.

27 Quoted from Caroline Mathieu, Le Palais de l’Industrie: à Propos de Deux Dessins de Max Berthelin, Revue du Louvre, Part 5-6, Volume 31, Pages 373–80, 1982.

28 The Penny Guide to the International Exhibition 1862, London 1862.

29 Prospects of the International Exhibition 1862, Comhill Magazine July 1861.

30 The Illustrated Catalogue of the Industrial Department, Volume Two, London 1862.

31 Reverend Charles Boutell, The Illustrated Catalogue of the Universal Exhibition, Published with the Art Journal, London 1867.

32 See Chapter 5.

33 See Charles Mercer, Statue of Liberty, New York 1979, G. P. Putnams.

34 Reports of the United States Commissioners to the Universal Exposition of 1889 at Paris, Volume 3 (of five), Washington 1891.

35 John Allwood, The Great Exhibitions, London 1977, Studio Vista.

36 See American Reports, note 36, for further details.

37 Quoted from Philippe Julian, The Triumph of Art Nouveau: The Paris Exhibition of 1900, London 1974, Phaidon.

38 For images and discussion of the Centennial architecture see J. S. Ingram, The Centennial Exhibition, described and Illustrated, Philadelphia 1876; R.C. Post, 1876: A Centennial Exhibition, Washington 1976, Smithsonian Institution.

39 Vincent Scully, The Shingle Style and the Stick Style: Architectural Theory and Design from Downing to the Origins of Wright, New Haven 1955, Yale University Press.

40 See M. L. Peisch, The Chicago School of Architecture – Early Followers of Sullivan and Wright.; Carl Condit, The Chicago School of Architecture Chicago University Press 1964; H.R. Hitchcock, The Pelican History of Art: Architecture, Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries, London, 1978.

41 See Chapter 5.

42 See Condit, note 40.

43 F.L. Wright, Autobiography

44 R.W. Carden, The Franco–British Exhibition, Part 1, Architectural Review Volume 24, 1908.

45 For a complete list of the remaining stations, and all of Guimard’s other works in Paris, see Gillian Naylor, Hector Guimard, London 1978, Academy Editions.

46 Louis de Fourcaud, Le Bois, in L’Art à l’Exposition Universelle de 1900, Paris 1900, Libraire de l’Art Ancien et Moderne.

47 Ibid.

48 See Maurice Rheims, The Age of Art Nouveau, London, 1966, Thames and Hudson, and Frank Russell (Ed.) Art Nouveau Architecture, London 1979, Academy Editions.

49 See Paul Greenhalgh, Art, Politics and Society at the Franco–British Exhibiton of 1908, Art History December 1985.

50 Gabriel Mourey, The Collectivite André Delieux, in F. G. Dumas, The Franco–British Exhibition Illustrated Review, London 1909, Chatto and Windus.

51 Collectivite André Delieux – Exposition Franco-Britannique 1908, Paris 1908.

52 See Maurice Culot on Belgian art nouveau in Frank Russell, see note 48.

53 Quoted from Tim Benton, Charlotte Benton, Aaron Scharf, Design 1920’s, from History of Architecture and Design 1890–1939, Open University course material, Open University Press 1975. This remains the best analysis of modernism in architecture.

54 Art deco was already evident in American architecture, and was present in quantities at the London (Wembley) Exhibition of 1924.

55 Encyclopaedie des Arts Decoratifs et Industriels Modernes au XX Siècle Paris 1925, twelve Volumes.

56 For further discussion on these lines see P. Garner, The Birth of Art Deco: Paris Exhibition of 1925., Country Life, December 1975, Volume 158, Part 4095.

57 It does seem akin to the Model House for the Working Classes built by Henry Roberts for the Great Exhibition. The concept was used by Dolfus at Mulhouse, possibly providing a continental link to Le Corbusier’s L’Esprit Nouveau pavilion. I do not know at this time what knowledge Le Corbusier had of these nineteenth century developments

58 See John Golding and Christopher Green, Léger and Purist Paris, London, 1970 Exhibition catalogue, Tate Gallery, and Fernand Léger, Fonctions de la Peinture, Paris 1965, ditions Gonthier.

59 Gropius’ building was not built, but the drawings for it were widely known at the time.

60 Both these exhibitions are in need of further work by architectural historians. The modernism employed at Glasgow is particularly intriguing.

61 However, nationalism ultimately dominated, see Chapter 5.

62 See Patrick Weiser, L’Exposition Internationale, L’etat et les Beaux Arts, in Paris 1937– 1957 Paris 1981, Exhibition catalogue, Centre Georges Pompidou.

63 Serge Chermayeff, in a special edition of the Architectural Review, 1937.

64 Ibid.

65 Designed by Oliver Hill. Ibid.

66 New York World’s Fair 1939: Official Guide Book New York 1939, Exposition Publications.

67 Ibid.

68 See Penny Sparke, An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century, London 1986, Allen and Unwm.

# CHAPTER SEVEN

# Women: exhibiting and exhibited

International exhibitions were one of the first and most effective cultural arenas in which women expressed their misgivings with established patriarchy. They provided one of the few places where women could exert influence, due mainly to the fact that they comprised fifty percent of the audience. Their inevitable inclusion as consumers meant they had a certain power of veto which afforded them consideration. Moreover, because of their claims to encyclopaedic coverage of world culture, exhibitions could not easily exclude women in the way other institutions continually did. As feminist activity grew in scope toward the end of the nineteenth century the exhibitions increasingly became a focus of interest as centres of possible activity for women.

The main contribution of women to exhibitions was in the form of specially erected pavilions for the display of women’s art, industry and work. The first and one of the most impressive was the Woman’s Pavilion at the Philadelphia Centennial of 1876. After this there was a Women’s Section at the New Orleans Exposition in 1886 and, somewhat surprisingly, a Pavilion of Women’s Industries at the Glasgow International in 1888. These were strange, rather idiosyncratic affairs however, the real follow-up to Philadelphia coming in 1893 at the Chicago Columbian. This exhibition firmly established the idea of the women’s building or section in the minds of future organizers, setting a precedent which led to the acceptance of it as a necessary part of events all over the world.

So far evidence has not emerged to show exactly where the pressure came from to allocate women a rôle in the Philadelphia Centennial. Certainly there was no precedent within the European exhibition tradition and little indication of enlightenment in major American cultural institutions during the period. It can only be assumed there was lobbying from women’s groups and that this proved successful in gaining recognition from the Centennial Board. Such an assumption is made all the more plausible by abundant evidence of increasing vocality of American women across the political-cultural spectrum. Whatever the cause, in 1873 the Centennial Board appointed thirteen women from

Philadelphia to form a Women’s Centennial Executive Committee, with a Mrs. E. D. Gillespie as president. The Women’s Committee was to advance the representation and activity of women at the Centennial and to generally lobby and support the efforts of the Board. It was decided early in 1874 that there would also be a women’s section in the Main Building. Mrs. Gillespie proved to be an admirable campaigner for the whole exhibition, organizing fund-raising events, speaking at rallies and gathering signatures for various petitions to Congress. Despite this, in June 1875 the Board renegued on its promise to provide a space for women in the Main Building, advising the Women’s Committee that the only way they would be able to have separate representation would be in their own building, paid for by themselves. Within months, led passionately by Mrs. Gillespie, the committee had raised \$30,000 and had reserved a space on the site for the first ever Women’s Building.

Due to the shortage of time, a design for the one acre building was commissioned from H. J. Schwarzmann, architect-in-chief to the site. Mrs. Gillespie later regretted the employment of a man in what was the key artistic rôle:

Weary and longing for rest, we never thought of employing a woman architect! and thus made our first great mistake . . . I left home, promising to return early in September, when the plans would be ready for inspection. I had not been gone many days before I heard the praises sung of a woman architect in Boston, and I wished I could annul the contract with Mr. Schwarzmann. To this hour I feel pained, because I fear we hindered this legitimate branch of women’s work instead of helping it.<sup>1</sup>

Inside the building everything was by women. All disciplines within the arts, sciences and humanities were represented, with particular emphasis on those activities generally acknowledged to be within the women’s sphere. Thus an overriding accent was on domestic produce and on crafts such as lace-making and embroidery. This tended to breed commentary which was an uncomfortable mixture of admiration and condescension:

(The building) was a very neat and tasteful edifice, in the form of a Maltese cross 208 by 208 feet. It was emphatically what its name implied – a woman’s pavilion – originated and paid for by the women of America, and devoted to the exclusive exhibition of the products of womens art, skill and industry . . . To the ladies, the Women’s Pavilion was one of the chief points of attraction, while the ruder sex could not but admire the many beautiful and artistic specimens of women’s handiwork with which the place was adorned. Fine needlework, laces as light as gossamer and as delicate in design as any ever spun by Arachne herself . . . paper and wax flowers, and wax fruits that were works of art . . . productions of women’s skill and genius were displayed on every side, to the glory of womanhood and the delight of feminine eyes. All sorts of curious little boots and slippers, and caps and baby dresses, and frills and tucks, and plaits and flounces, were there without number.<sup>2</sup>

Whilst the immense skills of various textile artists were recognised, reportage tended to concentrate on the plentiful ephemera in the pavilion. For example, there were a pair of mittens knitted by a woman one hundred years old, flowers made from fish-scales, a head of ‘Sleeping Iolanthe’ sculpted in butter, shells with painted marine views, imitation tiger-skin, wax roses and a whistle made from a pigs tail. In actuality the total collection was far weightier than this list suggests. One section concentrated on women inventors, containing seventy-four models of patented inventions by women. Notable were Martha Coston’s Pyrotechnic Night-Signal (at that time being used by the Federal Government), a sewing machine to be operated entirely by hand by G. L. Townscend, a model house made from interlocking bricks by Mary Nolan, electric therapy equipment by Dr. Elizabeth French and a lifepreserving mattress for steam-boats by Hannah Mountain. Most other inventions were involved with domestic technology, such as a blanketwasher, a mangle, a travelling bag, an iron, a dress-elevator, a foodheater, a bedstead, a bureau and a window fastener.<sup>3</sup> The building had working machinery operated by women engineers, the main power source coming from a six horse-power steam engine tended by Canadian Emma Allison. A section on education demonstrated the Froebel System using sixteen children from a local orphanage,<sup>4</sup> another on clothing raised the controversial issue of dress reform and proposed alternatives to the murderous girdle demanded by current convention. In the decorative arts section two institutions stood out as pioneers, the Lowell and Cincinnati Schools of Design. The former excelled in textiles, the latter in furniture. Particularly interesting were examples of woodcarving by F. M. Boats, Agnes Pitman and a Miss Johnson.<sup>5</sup> There was little in the way of significant painting or sculpture as the practitioners in these fields, few as they were, had opted to show in the Fine Art Pavilions. There Emily Sartain, Anna Lea, Cornelia Fassett and Mary Anna Hallock won medals. Writers were given a high profile, celebrating the fact that some of America’s most popular novelists were women. Indeed, the first American book to sell a million copies was Susan Bogart Warner’s ‘Wide, wide world’, a statistic proudly flaunted in the literature section. On the whole the sciences were less well represented than the arts and crafts, even though there were probably more successful women in the sciences than in any other sphere at that time. The exception was medicine, which had a sizable area devoted to it.

The response the Women’s Building received was mixed. The majority of indigenous comment was patronisingly pleasant; by contrast, some European writers found the assertiveness which brought the building into existence disturbing, and correspondingly focused upon the women themselves rather than their work. American women were, according to Henryk Sienkiewicz, ‘despotic . . . aggressive . . . superficial . . . lacking the qualities of mind and hear $\therefore ^ { 6 } _ { ; }$ Catharina Migerka of Vienna admired American women but feared they were ‘domineering wives and poor home-makers’.<sup>7</sup> Swiss reporter Eduard Guyer was worried by social and political implications of the building:

Some individuals want to extend women’s rights to unnatural and insane extremes . . . (An) important question, in my opinion, is this: in what way has the exhibition in the Women’s pavilion proved that American family life . . . is based upon right, natural and moral principles? Is it perhaps impoverished by ambitions for emancipation which go too far? The wife who dispels from the husband’s brow outside influences and money worries, and who keeps him receptive to everything noble and good – the mother whose economy, order and loving child care lay the foundation for solid development of character and spirit – of these most beautiful and noble feminine professions there was little to see in the Women’s Pavilion.<sup>8</sup>

Blind to the obvious emphasis upon the domestic sphere, he was obsessed with the building as a manifestation of female assertiveness. Conventional and unaggressive as it was, the Women’s Building was far too radical for Guyer and for others like him.

The response from contemporary activists was ambivalent. Some features of the pavilion could easily be seen as progressive and feminist. For example, the building housed the fourth annual conference of the ‘Association for the Advancement of Women’, chaired by noted astronomer Maria Mitchell. This was concerned with the advancement of professional women, making it topical and controversial. In 1876 twenty percent of the total American workforce were women, giving them a direct economic significance rarely acknowledged. The conference, and many of the exhibits in the Women’s Building, made the American public physically aware of the rôle women fulfilled in the industrial world. This emphasis must have satisfied feminists. Recognition of women’s work however was only one issue they were concerned with at that time; another was suffrage and in this area the pavilion was far less distinguished. Any suffragettes involved in the exhibition were arrogantly compromised by the naming of November 7th. – polling day – as ‘Women’s Day’. J. S. Ingram explained the reasoning behind the choice: ‘November 7th. had been set apart as Women’s Day at the exhibition, and the thought was happily conceived in the choice; for while the men were doing their duty at the polls the women would have the day all to themselves’.<sup>9</sup> The divisive use of polling day served to reinforce views of suffragette groups who refused to take part in the exhibition, that no good could come of participation in male-controlled, institutionalised events. On fuly 4th., ‘Women’s Building Day’, leading suffragettes Elizabeth Stanton, Susan Antony and M. J. Gage organised demonstrations to show the extent of their opposition to the whole enterprise. The Women’s Building therefore displeased elements both for and against in the debate over women’s rights.

Seventeen years later at the Chicago Columbian, the organizers of the Women’s Building were in a more radical mood. The Board of Lady Managers established grander aims than their forerunners in Philadelphia, seeing their building as a focus of international attention. Bertha Palmer, president of the Board, identified global aims at the onset; the building was planned to ‘clear away any misconceptions as to the value of inventions and industries of women . . . (and to) present a complete picture of the condition of women in every country of the world . . . particularly of those women who are breadwinners’.<sup>10</sup> One of the ways this aim was achieved was through a genuinely international selection of exhibits; another was the location at the centre of the building of a library of seven thousand volumes on the culture, lifestyle and working conditions of women all over the world. Twenty-five nations and twenty languages were represented by authoresses practising from as early as 1587.<sup>11</sup>

Substantial displays came from virtually all of the European contingent, the contributions of Belgium, Britain, France, Italy, Russia and Scandinavia receiving critical acclaim. In contrast to the Philadelphia Centennial the painting and sculpture sections were large, equalling in size the decorative and craft arts, although textile related crafts probably still constituted the single largest category. Indeed, this area of female practice most certainly enjoyed its best showing ever, with a range including Italian and Belgian Renaissance lace, Irish and Welsh weaving, American patchwork, Mexican embroidery and Sioux and Navajo blanket-work. The art-status of the various types of needlework was undoubtedly raised by the exhibition, the general vision of it as domesticated, lowly ‘women’s work’ being shattered by the global and chronological presentation of it. Similarly, the presence of women ceramicists, metal-workers, furniture-makers, engravers and industrial designers undermined established notions of gender in relation to all artforms. Female practices previously hidden were now visible.

The interior decor of the building, rather than being completed piecemeal, was unified by the appointment of an interior designer to oversee the total work. This was Alice Rideout of San Francisco.<sup>12</sup> The successive series of open and covered spaces were co-ordinated by her into cohesive themes, the decoration largely consisting of murals and sculptures. The fact that enough professional painters and sculptresses could be found at short notice was a testament to the ground American women had gained in the visual arts. In this area American feminism had overtaken almost all of the European nations. Perhaps the masterpiece of the decorative ensemble was a mural entitled ‘Modern Woman’, in the north tympanum of the main court, by Mary Cassatt.<sup>13</sup> Forty years later at the Chicago ‘Century of Progress’ exposition on the same site, the official catalogue acknowledged Mary Cassatt as ‘the only American woman singled out by the French as ranking with Manet and Degas’ <sup>14</sup>; in fact she was the only American of either sex to rank such status amongst the impressionists. Sadly, her mural is now lost.

The Board of Lady Managers did more than gather the produce and organise it, they also constructed a theoretical position to justify and promote their position. This made aggressive use of historical evidence as to the rôle women had played in the creation of the modern world:

It will be shown that women, among all the primitive peoples, were originators of most of the industrial arts, and that it was not until these became lucrative that they were appropriated by men, and women pushed aside. While man, the protector, was engaged in fighting or the chase, woman constructed the rude semblance of a home. She dressed and cooked the game, and later ground the grain between the stones, and prepared it for bread. She cured and dressed the skins of animals, and fashioned them awkwardly into garments. Impelled by the necessity for its use, she invented the needle, and twisted the fibres of plants into threads. She invented the shuttle . . . She was the first potter . . . She originated basketmaking . . . She learned to ornament these articles of primitive construction.<sup>15</sup>

An ethnological display was set up in the building to illustrate the idea of woman as originator of human industry. The significance of such assertions lies not in whether they represented the truth or not – indeed a very dubious gender rôle allocation was embedded in them – but in the determination to see women as absolute equals if not superiors in the construction of Western civilization. Those involved in the Women’s Building wanted to prove their equality beyond any doubt to detractors still insisting upon the genetic and spiritual inferiority of women. In this regard the building was an effective weapon in the struggle toward parity.

To further demonstrate the standing of women there were retrospective exhibitions showing the achievement of womankind since the Renaissance. Status was also won for the pavilion through the involvement of titled women from all over the world. Included in honorary positions on various committees were, for example, the

Duchess de Veragua, Countess di Brazza, Baroness Burdett-Coutts, Lady Aberdeen, Princess Shahovsky and the wife of President Diaz. The glamour and power of these dignitaries dissipated the atmosphere of domesticity normally accompanying displays for and about women; apart from this they guaranteed the funding of the pavilion.

Bertha Palmer did not make the fundamental error Mrs. Gillespie had made in Philadelphia; it was decided from the onset that a woman architect would design the building. The commission was opened to competition, to women only, with a brief limiting the scope of the design to fit in with surrounding buildings. The Board required:

A simple light-colored classic type of building . . . The extreme dimensions not exceeding 200 by 400 feet; exterior to be of some simple and definite style, classic lines preferred; the general effect of the color to be in light tints. First storey eighteen feet high; the second storey twenty-five feet high . . . the plans should follow the outline desired leaving all detail to the ingenuity of the competing architect.<sup>16</sup>

The first prize of \$1000 went to Sophia Hayden, a twenty-one year old graduate of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the second of \$500 to Lois Home and the third of \$250 to Laura Hayes. Hayden’s building was based on Italian Renaissance models. The frontal facade had a double-arcade with a central portico, the emphasis of the whole being toward the use of the arch as a repetitive unit. The novel feature of the structure was a roof garden, this proving to be a popular spot for socialising and relaxation. In relation to many others on the site the building was small, giving rise to awkward formal problems. Hayden herself recognised the difficulty of using classicism in close proximity to other classical structures of greater size and opulence, and so she determined not to compete in terms of scale, but to concentrate on the detailing of her building: ‘Details are modelled after classic and Italian Renaissance types, and on account of the relatively small size and scale of the building, are more delicate and refined than those of the other main structures of the fair.’<sup>17</sup> Size necessitated a reduction in the scale of detail and a heightening of profile. Critics unable or unwilling to see the building in a disinterested light believed this revealed the gender of its maker. In praise or vilification, most felt impelled to comment upon its apparent womanliness; Henry Van Brunt,

It is eminently proper that the exposition of woman’s work should be housed in a building in which a certain delicacy and elegance of general treatment, a smaller limit of dimension, a finer scale of detail, a certain quality of sentiment, which might be designated in no derogatory sense as graceful timidity or gentleness, combined however, with evident technical knowledge, at once differentiate it from its colossal neighbours, and reveals the sex of its author.<sup>18</sup>

Others were less generous. The journal ‘American Architect and Building News’ for example had been opposed to the principle of an exclusively female competition in the first place, and determined to attack the completed structure mercilessly. The foci of its attention, naturally enough, were women in general and Sophia Hayden in particular, rather than the building itself:

As a woman’s work it goes of course; fortunately it was conceived in a proper vein and does not make a discordant note; it is simply weak and commonplace . . . (the building) is neither worse nor better than might be achieved by either a boy or a girl who had two or three years in an architectural school . . . (The roof garden) is a hen coop for petticoated hens, old and young . . .<sup>19</sup>

Under severe pressure from the architectural world to produce something of note, and over-worked throughout what was her first major commission, Sophia Hayden suffered a nervous breakdown before the building was completed. It was finished and opened in her absence. The strain she had been subjected to by being put into competition with leading practitioners working elsewhere on the site proved too much, as indeed it would have for any twenty-one year old graduate. Nevertheless, the ‘American Architect and Building News’ felt a duty to comment even further:

It seems a question not yet answered how successfully a woman with her physical limitations can enter and engage in . . . a profession which is a very wearing one. If the building of which the women seem so proud is to mark the physical ruin of the architect, it will be a much more telling argument against the wisdom of women entering this especial profession than anything else could be.<sup>20</sup>

Sophia Hayden never saw another building to completion.

More than sixty associations were represented in the Women’s Building, many of them having space to campaign for their causes from the administrative offices. Prominent amongst these was the National Council for Women, formed in 1888 after an international women’s assembly in Washington. Interestingly enough, Susan Antony and Elizabeth Stanton, suffragettes who had demonstrated against the Women’s Pavilion in Philadelphia, were present in Chicago as leading figures in the Council. This reveals two things: the growing influence feminists were enjoying in establishment circles, and the more radical nature of the Women’s Building at the Columbian. The National Council held a conference on issues of interest to activist women. By far the most contentious of these related to dress reform, a subject which had increasingly attracted attention from the early 1870’s. Although the Board of Lady Managers showed little direct commitment in this area, several of the more vocal organisations specifically concerned with it were given exhibiting space in the building, for example the ‘Physical Culture and Correct Dress Society’ of Chicago. Dress reform had taken an urgent turn, with publications by leading women doctors confirming that the tight girdle, demanded socially for many decades, was harmful to health and could even lead to premature death. Apart from this, long flowing skirts impaired the ability to walk, sit and generally manoeuvre. In short, the clothing women were forced to wear by convention harmed their physical, practical and professional well-being. The conference held at the Columbian thus attracted attention for more than one reason. Many women were worried by the health implications of current garb; fashionable magazines and department stores looked with interest at the alternative costumes recommended; reactionary newspapers and journals were keen to sneer at the new clothing.

Over two hundred thousand women attended the conference, ambitiously entitled the ‘Worlds Congress of Representative Women’.<sup>21</sup> Three hundred and thirty speakers gave papers on topics revolving around suffrage and work, but the dress reform section was the real crowd-puller. Here fiery doctors spoke of girdles as a health risk, often wearing alternative costumes to speak in. Outfits on show included the ‘American’, the ‘Gymnasium’ and, most controversial of all, the ‘Syrian’. The Chicago Tribune, following the conference closely for the basest of motives, could think of only one thing in favour of the ‘Syrian’: ‘it is so irredeemably and appallingly ugly that no woman with proper regard for her duty towards man will yield to it’.<sup>22</sup> In fact it was far less exotic than its name, its major features being the elimination of the tight girdle, underlying bloomers and a hem-line two inches above the ground. Within twenty years such clothing would be common-place, leaving behind the cruellest aspects of Victorian establishment prudery.

It would be a mistake to regard the Women’s Building as a theoretically faultless presentation of women from a feminist viewpoint, as it obviously was not. The acceptance of reactionary values as to women’s rôle within the family, acknowledgement of her apparent physiological and psychological limitations, and the specific labelling of certain practices as ‘feminine’, all reduced the intellectual credibility of the exhibits. Nevertheless, as a manifestation of the extent and importance of women’s work and as propaganda for claims to suffrage, it was a powerful symbol. Sadly, in these latter regards it was to stand out markedly from virtually all of the Women’s Buildings succeeding it.

The Columbian made the Women’s Building into an established feature of exhibitions; after 1893 it was usual even at modest events to find a section or building dedicated to women’s produce. It was far less usual however to find the socio-political debate that had accompanied the Columbian, women’s sections being rapidly appropriated by antisuffrage forces to construct a vision of womanhood exclusive of the vote. This was the case in the Cotton States Exposition in Atlanta in 1895, in Buffalo in 1901, St. Louis in 1904 and San Francisco in 1915. Nonpolitical women’s organisations, especially those connected with the church, transformed Women’s Buildings from arenas for the discussion of rights to comfortable bazaars, where the unequal status quo was accepted and even lauded. The trend continued in America even after the vote was won, being particularly evident in Fairs in the 1930’s. The Women’s Section at the Golden Gate Exposition (San Francisco 1939) for example was controlled by a Women’s Board comprising mainly of officials from the Girl Scouts of America and the Women’s Almanac. The rôle of the Board was to be a macrocosm of the housewife, taking on those tasks at the Exposition which equated to female jobs in the domestic setting. The Official Guide acknowledged this function:

Women have played an important rôle in the planning and subsequent activities of the exposition. Appointed to act in an advisory capacity to the exposition’s Board of Managers and to the California Commission representing the State, the Women’s Board has been instrumental in establishing many of the feminine features of the Fair . . . Assuming a hospitality rôle typical of the California hostess, the Women’s Board has directed the beautification of San Francisco, its suburbs and the State in preparation for the Fair.<sup>23</sup>

The American housewife was also a feature of the New York World’s Fair in the same year. Here industrial design was firmly harnessed to the cause of domestic appliances, the housewife being the centre of technological attention. In one tableau-vivant, ‘Mrs. Modern’ easily outstripped ‘Mrs. Drudge’ in a dish washing race with the help of her new washing-machine. Additionally, New York presented the other side of this vision of womanhood, woman as sex object. A significant proportion of the entertainments at the Fair were of voyeuristic intention, including ‘Amazons in No-mans Land’, ‘Congress of World Beauties’, ‘Arctic Girl’s Tomb of Ice’ and ‘Living Magazine Covers’. A long distance indeed from the struggle for dress reform.

Europe followed the American pattern at some distance, the most important Woman’s Buildings being erected in the early part of the twentieth century. By far the most considered and impressive of these was the ‘Palace of Women’s Work’ at the Franco–British Exhibition (London 1908). Staged at a time when the suffragettes were violently active, the exhibition organisers decided to recognise the new consciousness of women by giving them their own committee and building. The Liberal government in control of Britain at that time was heavily involved and probably encouraged the Commissioner-General of the site to include a Women’s Building. The flavour was not to be one of antagonism or protest but of appeasement, much in the way the Liberals had dealt with women’s pleas for the vote, never quite rejecting them, but never quite accepting them either. This Women’s Building was planned to neutralise in a non-violent way female forces who were beginning to make life distinctly uncomfortable both inside and outside of Parliament. The issue of votes for women was one of several Liberal leader Asquith faced in 1908 on the eve of the opening of the exhibition, and a major contributor to the constitutional crisis he would have to face from 1910. To give women the vote would have meant changing the shape of the world the Liberals had become accustomed to living in, yet to keep it from them would be to deny the most central of Liberal principles, the right to individual freedom. Such dilemmas would soon tear Liberalism apart. The Franco-British Exhibition was perhaps the last cultural manifestation of Liberal Britain, an odd mixture of values, a patchwork quilt of moral contradictions and social crises.<sup>24</sup>

An anonymous writer in the Times of May 29th. 1908 noted an intended theme of the Franco-British as being women’s work and achievement: ‘Women’s interests, or, perhaps under the stress of modern circumstances it is safer to say subjects which are supposed to be of paramount interest to women, play a prominent part in the Franco-British Exhibition’.<sup>25</sup> The ‘Palace of Women’s Work’ was to be the focus of these interests and consequently it was persistently in the public eye. In its formation it was a female microcosm of the total exhibition, having some of the most important women of 1908 on its committee. The president was Lady Jersey, vice-presidents the Duchess of Sutherland and Lady Haversham; out of some several dozen committee members only four were untitled. From its inception then the Palace was committed to an establishment position through the constitution of this prestigious selection panel. In fact the greater number of its members were wives or daughters of members of the exhibition Executive Committee.<sup>26</sup> In contrast to its American forerunners, the Palace had no genuinely feminist aspects to it. Rather, it voiced opposition to activists by presenting women as happy and willing participants in British life as they were, that was, domesticated and voteless.

The exhibits in the Palace set out to examine the contribution of women’s work to British society through the ages. A section on the arts and crafts of women formed a substantial part of the display, including needlework, lace-making, embroidery, enamelling, book-binding, book illustration and illumination, and what was described as the latest art women had come to monopolise, photography. There was a section on pickling and preserve-making, but no specific sections for painting, sculpture or architecture, as the women in these practices had largely chosen to show their work in the Fine Art Palace. Likewise there was little to represent women’s achievements in industry or science. This gave an overall impression that women had not entered into what were commonly considered as the major disciplines. Part of the Palace was filled with portraits and memorabilia of great women through the ages, including a fine painting of Elizabeth the First and the trap Florence Nightingale rode to the Front in. By far the most popular area was a mock hospital ward, where real nurses worked with mannequin patients. Incorporated into this area was a section on recent medical advances brought about by both sexes. In between the main sections objects of all kinds from the houses of some of the wealthiest women in the country filled the spaces. All manner of artworks and precious curios from the homes of the titled, made by men as well as women, created a dual feeling of opulence and confusion. Because of this in-fill and the absence of many of the major disciplines the whole experience tended to leave visitors unsure as to what exactly the theme of the Palace was, despite its title.

Ironically, sources by no means committed to female suffrage were often the most vocal in pointing to the dubious light women had been shown in. A reporter from the Times praised the needlework, ‘Daughters of Arachne, they have furnished the world through the centuries with lovely triumphs of the needle’, but felt the rest of the Palace was lacking: ‘a visit to this section leaves the impression, always a sad one, of a great opportunity missed, at least in part. (The Palace) bewilders the visitor and does not represent in the slightest degree the real place that women hold in the art of today’.<sup>27</sup> D. H. Marillier, critic, was equally disappointed and particularly hard on the organiser’s tendency to mix together different types of produce:

I do not see the real woman worker represented in any way . . . Palace of Women’s Work, nay, it is rather the housing of women’s filling up of time . . . This case shelters sample bottles of a patent paste for falling hair, the latest instantaneous remedy; metal repousse combs; blouse trimmings; belts and buckles; and nearby the pictures are hung behind jars of jam and tomato pulp and gooseberry jelly. Should you, to show the world what women can do, hail with praise a jar of jam . . . amateur, thats the note of this place. 28

Marillier resented what he rightly perceived as dilettantism on the part of the organisers, who even displayed their own hobbies and pastimes alongside exhibits of importance. Women were continually presented as light-weight, lacking a serious or intellectual dimension and, importantly, as servants of men and protectors of children. The displays were arranged mainly by daugthers of committee members in the absence of a trained exhibition designer. The aristocratic amateurism of the selection committee, without the experience of any of the skills on show, was bound to lead to an exhibition to warm the hearts of those opposed to women’s suffrage. Significantly, the central artistic issue, the design of the building itself, was not part of the responsibility of the Women’s Committee but was under the remit of the Central Committee. The chosen architect was a man, Maurice Lucet. In its celebration of the status-quo and its presentation of women as beings who could not or would not undertake work in numerous fields of human activity, the Palace of Women’s Work stood against those fighting for equality.

More telling than the mock examples of work in the Women’s Palace was the actual work undertaken by women on the site of the Franco–British Exhibition. Large numbers of working class women were employed throughout the season as cleaners, ticket-venders and booth operators, usually in preference to men. Within weeks of the opening, pay and conditions of service became an issue, the Commissioner-General Imre Kiralfy being accused of exploitation. The Women’s Industrial Council (W.I.C.), a recently formed organisation based in London, took up the women’s cause. In a letter sent by the W.I.C. to the Times it was stated that ‘at present there is no legislative protection for these women against long and continuous hours at their posts, as there is for workers in factories, and rest rooms’.<sup>29</sup> Women were expected to work a twelve hour shift, normally eleven to eleven, with few breaks. There was only one rest room on the site for women workers, built not by the exhibition organisers but by the Y.W.C.A. . This facility served over one thousand women in one area of the grounds, other women being unable to walk the distance during break-times in order to reach it. The W.I.C. requested that Kiralfy build another rest room at the other end of the site; so far no record has emerged to show whether this was done or not. The reality of working class women’s lives in 1908, with the prospect of endless twelve hour days and six day weeks as an accompaniment to the rôle of housewife and mother, was indeed a far cry from the pleasant fantasy of the Palace of Women’s Work. As the working women of the site trudged past its grand facade each day, they must have wondered in their distress how such a building could ever represent the work they knew. Any who pondered long enough could only conclude that the organisers believed in two types of woman; one to whom they felt bound to build a palace, the other from whom they denied a single rest room.

The Palace of Women’s Work was open to visitors on June 24th. 1908, when an ‘International Woman’s Suffrage Conference’ convened in Amsterdam with delegates from sixteen countries. Some of these had been funded by their governments to attend and speak. The atmosphere of enlightenment and progress represented by this conference was in stark contrast to the befuddled stupidity of British Liberal policy with regard to women. Similarly it highlighted the anachronistic confusion of the Palace of Women’s Work. With historical hindsight it can be seen as the last desperate attempt of a government to preserve an outlook and value system which was rapidly becoming redundant.<sup>30</sup>

The succeeding exhibitions on the White City site maintained the Palace of Women’s Work as a feature, though its scope and importance was steadily reduced toward the First World War. At the Imperial International of 1909 the Palace was used not only for women’s work but also for displays they could not fit in elsewhere. One bemused writer pointed out the eccentricity of this:

Indeed, the biggest collection of craftwork is to be found in the Women’s Palace – though . . . one is sometimes puzzled to find the connection between the exhibits and the title of the building in which they are collected. One is at a loss to understand why Mr. Howson Taylor’s pottery should be shown in the Women’s Palace – together with a few other exhibits that do not seem to have any special relation to women’s work.<sup>31</sup>

Interest had faded still further by the Japan-British of 1910. Finally, the Palace barely merited a mention in the publicity of the Anglo-American in 1914. As far as the government and the organisers were concerned it seems, the war of appeasement had been won.

The two largest exhibitions to be held in Britain after the war, the British Empire at Wembley (London 1924) and the Empire Exhibition (Glasgow 1938) had women’s sections, both of which took empire as a central theme. The Queen was patron to both, with titled women making up the majority of the respective committees. The Official Catalogue of the Wembley show made it clear why women had been included: ‘It was felt, and rightly, by the organisers of the exhibition that the success of Wembley can best be won by securing the actual sympathy of the women of the empire’.<sup>32</sup> The Royal Colonial Institute, the Overseas League and the Victoria League, all leading imperial associations, worked in tandem with the women’s committee to ensure the empire was properly represented.<sup>33</sup> Women were brought from the Dominions to work in the section and a Women’s Imperial Conference was arranged to be held during the exhibition. This lasted six days, with India, New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, Australia, Canada and Newfoundland taking a day each. Emphasis throughout was on the positive rôle women played in the maintenance of order in the empire. Among its more practical functions, the section had a crèche with trained teachers and nurses to look after children whilst their mothers explored the site.

The Glasgow exhibition was less overtly imperialistic in aim and far more progressive. A strikingly modern ‘Women of the Empire’ pavilion was erected, giving the impression that considerably more care and expense had gone into this area than at Wembley. The first hall of the building contained an exhibition of craft work from the nations of the empire. The second had a display of goods for the home, where all produce was for sale, and the third had a joint exhibition of the work of the Royal Society of Painters in Water-colour, the Royal Institute of Painters in Water-colour and the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Water-colour. Also here was the work of leading sculptresses Gertrude Knoblock, Hazel Armour, Phyliss Bone, Phoebe Stabler and Lady Kennet. The Women’s Gas Council exhibited a model kitchen designed by Mrs. D’Arcy Braddell, the Scottish Women’s Rural Institute created a country kitchen and a model canteen was constructed by the Industrial Welfare Society. Women’s organisations from all over Britain and the empire were offered space, the National Council for Women presenting the pavilion with a decorative panel twenty-four feet long.<sup>34</sup> The atmosphere and spirit of the pavilion, although still concerned with empire, was altogether healthier with regard to women’s independence and rights. This was partly due to women having had the vote for over a decade and partly because the Glasgow exhibitions tended to be conducted in a spirit of greater enlightenment than their London counterparts. However there was little to indicate the position women might have enjoyed in the world of work had they been afforded a real opportunity, nor was there any fundamental recognition of the unequal state of British society. Within two years of the close of the exhibition the Second World War would put millions of women into factories, offices and building sites in order to keep the economy alive, demonstrating fully that the link between womanhood and the domestic setting insisted upon at exhibitions was not in any sense an innate one.

French exhibitions from the end of the nineteenth century treated women in a subtley different way from events in America and Britain. Whilst following the same formulae in an organisational sense, underlying attitudes shifted the focus of French strategies. In 1900 there was a ‘Palais de la Femme’ based on the American pattern and similar structures were erected at the following two Parisian shows. In themselves however these were stilted and rather boring edifices in relation to the strident and politically manoeuvred equivalents in other countries. The French approach to women resided not especially here, but could be found everywhere on the site as part of the total ideological atmosphere.

The French appeared to be willing and happy to recognise their culture in broad terms as being feminine. This went beyond the identification of abstract values as being female, such as ‘La France’, ‘La

Liberté’ and ‘La Revolution’, to the point where stylistic traits in French art and design were associated with the female. Whether it was they themselves who pushed this particular vision or whether it was constructed by foreign buyers of French produce, French goods by 1880 were commonly thought to be emblematic of womanhood. Moreover, this was not a woman invented from a combination of housewife, baroness and scout-mistress, as it might have been in Britain, but a luxuriant, mysterious and erotic individual, whose wildness was combined peculiarly with orthodox middle-class values. The symbol of the 1900 Exposition was such a woman, ‘La Parisienne’. A fifteen foot high statue of ‘La Parisienne’ stood proudly before the world on top of the Porte Binet (the monumental entrance onto the Place de la Concorde), the goddess of decadent mass-consumerism. Described at the time by Georges D’Avenel as ‘the representation of a female being with teasing features, half fairy princess and half street-walker’ <sup>35</sup>, and later by Rosalind Williams as ‘an icon both sexy and remote, goddess and slut . . . she resembles the women who were portrayed on advertising posters all over Paris’ <sup>36</sup>, La Parisienne was the Jeanne d’Arc of the French liberal classes, the symbol of radical cultural development. As with most symbols of power since the industrial revolution, the forces behind her stemmed from an economic base. From 1850 onwards France had undisputedly been the leading producer of luxury goods in fields as varied as furniture, jewellry, perfume, clothing, objets d’art and food. By 1880 these were vital to the economy. A fundamental aspect of all of them was their pertinence to the woman rather than to the man; as creator of the domestic setting and as a ‘decorative being’ in herself, woman controlled the purchase of produce which beautified the body and the home. In this indirect way she controlled the French economy and influenced the national profile. It was understandable therefore that French manufacturers catered for her, lauded and patronised her until she came to embody French bourgeois culture. 37

The rapid evolution of consumer society in France in the second half of the nineteenth century entailed the growth of the rôle of woman as mass-consumer in a more central way than anywhere else in the West. The department store was ‘invented’ as it were to cope with middle class women’s need for comfort and entertainment whilst shopping. These citadels of consumption went on to influence the form and aims of the expositions. Michael Millar:

The Parisian department store of the late nineteenth century stood as a monument to the bourgeois culture that built it, marvelled at it, found its image in it. In its inspiration it captured that culture’s entrepreneurial drive to master and organise the material world to its advantage . . . The department store was, in short, a bourgeois celebration, an expression of what its culture stood for and where it had come over the past hundred years.<sup>38</sup>

Quite apart from the influence Parisian stores had on exposition sites through pavilions built by establishments like Le Printemps, Le Louvre and Le Bon Marché, the ideology of the luxury store infiltrated the consciousness of site organisers. The exposition was in a very real sense a massive display unit, a shop window arranged and constructed in the way the stores themselves were. As with the stores, women were a principal target. Decorative and applied arts palaces, fashion and textile pavilions, thousands of private manufacturers stalls and restaurant facilities were arranged self-consciously to attract what was thought to be the feminine eye. Thus a substantial part of the site was made specifically to captivate those sections of the female population able to buy, giving rise to massive areas of artificially constructed femininity.

The objects on show were also affected by gender. Particular French styles were readily identified as being feminine, most notably Louis Quinze and Louis Seize furniture and revivals of it. Commenting later on this at the Franco-British Exhibition critic M. H. Spielmann found it hard to disguise his lack of sympathy: ‘elegance and taste are the note of French work, and though some have called it effeminate, that is as much as to admit its charm’.<sup>39</sup> As early as 1884 Huysmans had shockingly decoded the message of Louis Quinze furniture in terms of female sexuality in his novel ‘A Rebours’:

There were in his opinion only two ways of arranging a bedroom: you could either make it a place for sensual pleasure . . . or else you could fix it out as a place of solitude. In the first place the Louis Quinze style was the obvious choice for people of delicate sensibility . . . The eighteenth century is in fact the only age which has known how to envelope a woman in a wholly depraved atmosphere, shaping the furniture on the model of her charms, imitating her passionate contortions and spasmodic convulsions in wood and copper . . . In his Paris house he had had a bedroom decorated in just this style . . . furnished with a great white bed which provides that added titillation.<sup>40</sup>

Critic Peter Philp has gone as far as to identify the components of this furniture which gave it its apparent femininity: the cabriole leg, the oval and the floral motif.<sup>41</sup> Whether such extraordinary claims for personification carry any weight or not, one thing is certain. The sites of the Expositions Universelles of 1889 and 1900 were saturated with what was then considered female imagery, from the form of the produce on show to the environment created for the leisure of the visitors. This was a female symbolism intended not to liberate or enlighten, but to make women buy, to use their influence over the household to make their husbands spend. If this was liberation, it was won not by women demanding equality but was handed over by shrewd manufacturers. The actual position of women in the power structure of French society was left unaltered by the consumer boom. Perhaps the only real gain was in social terms, whereby women could visit expositions and department stores without male accomplices and find facilities there to cater for their every whim. Middle class women were, because of this, suddenly more visible.

Indeed, visibility was the single real benefit the exhibition tradition bestowed on women. After the heady days of the Women’s Buildings at Philadelphia and Chicago there was little in the treatment of women on exhibition sites that could be said to be objectively or intentionally beneficial apart from this one thing. They were seen. They were recognised to be an element within society which could not be by-passed or forgotten. Much in the way propaganda was generated to support and justify empire and the class system, women, as an exploited race, were addressed and appeased. Propaganda campaigns to quieten and control working class and colonial subjects signified a growing consciousness amongst both those groups, in the same way that manipulation of womanhood indicated the developing awareness of women of their unacceptable position. Suffragette agitation off the site had produced a reaction on it; negative and divisive as this usually was, it implied the struggle for equality was no longer something to be blatantly ignored.

Although site organizers appeared willing to cater wholeheartedly for women buyers, and would even erect a pavilion for women to create their own world-view in, they were apparently less willing or unable to give women much room in the major sections of professional activity. It would be incorrect however to suggest these areas were exclusively male, as numbers of women did succeed in having their work seen. This can be best demonstrated by a statistical analysis of a specific area of skilled practice. The most prestigious displays at exhibitions were those devoted to the fine arts, the largest and most important fine art palaces being those at the Paris Expositions Universelles. Here the painting, sculpture, architecture, drawing and printing of all the Western nations was collected in vast quantities; some of it was by women. Taking the first five Expositions Universelles as a case-study sample, the percentage of women exhibitors amongst the eleven most prominent 42   
nations was as follows:

<table><tr><td></td><td>Women artists</td><td>Of the total work shown</td></tr><tr><td>1855</td><td>4.8</td><td>3.9</td></tr><tr><td>1867</td><td>3.0</td><td>2.9</td></tr><tr><td>1878</td><td>3.3</td><td>2.2</td></tr><tr><td>1889</td><td>4.0</td><td>3.8</td></tr><tr><td>1900</td><td>4.6</td><td>4.5</td></tr></table>

Thus on average for the second half of the nineteenth century, 3.5 of the work at the most important showing of the fine arts was by women. As low as the figure is, it indicates that numbers of women managed to receive some form of training and attained a level of nationally recognised competence. 602 women in fact from the eleven most prominent nations showed a total of 1004 works in these five exhibitions. This was out of a staggering grand total of 12,215 artists and 24,774 works.<sup>43</sup> Surprisingly, the percentage of women artists at the 1855 exposition was the highest throughout the century, undermining any idea that the progression toward equality was a linear one. More surprisingly still, the lowest percentage of women artists came in 1867 when several of the key organizers were committed Saint-Simonians. The whole period shows a rough consistency in the West, whereby there was little real overall change in the fortunes of women practitioners in the visual arts. By far the worst area was architecture, the expositions having virtually no representation here at all from women. Painting consistently had more women involved in it than any other discipline, especially watercolour, an area where individual women occasionally showed as many as ten works.

There was considerable variance within nations, some having far higher percentages of women exhibitors than others. The following list gives a breakdown of representation within nations. The first figure shows the percentage of women, the second the percentage of work they exhibited in the national contingent at the expositions <sup>44</sup>:

<table><tr><td></td><td>1855</td><td>1867</td><td>1878</td><td>1889</td><td>1900</td></tr><tr><td>France</td><td>5.9/ 6.8</td><td>3.6/ 8.4</td><td>4.5/2.3</td><td>6.1/ 4.5</td><td>7.2/5.0</td></tr><tr><td>Britain</td><td>2.0/ 1.0</td><td>2.7/1.6</td><td>3.8/ 2.5</td><td>2.8/ 4.5</td><td>4.1/ 3.6</td></tr><tr><td>America</td><td>0</td><td>1.8/ 2.1</td><td>1.2/.9</td><td>6.7/ 6.4</td><td>20.3/24.5</td></tr><tr><td>Germany</td><td>1.1/.6</td><td>0</td><td>—</td><td>4.1/  1.9</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Holland</td><td>3.9/ 2.2</td><td>7.2/5.0</td><td>4.4/ 1.1</td><td>11.3/10.0</td><td>12.3/11.8</td></tr><tr><td>Belgium</td><td>2.1/.8</td><td>一</td><td>0</td><td>一</td><td>7.6/  4.9</td></tr><tr><td>Italy</td><td>一</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>1.4/  2.6</td></tr><tr><td>Austria</td><td>1.3/.4</td><td>0</td><td>一</td><td>4.2/4.5</td><td>.4/.3</td></tr><tr><td>Sweden</td><td>8.3/18.2</td><td>13.9/11.0</td><td>20.3/16.7</td><td>26.8/19.7</td><td>11.5/9.9</td></tr><tr><td>Norway</td><td>6.3/  4.5</td><td>11.1/6.3</td><td>3.9/ 2.9</td><td>14.0/17.5</td><td>19.4/14.5</td></tr><tr><td>Swit/lnd</td><td>13.0/ 5.4</td><td>10.2/10.2</td><td>5.7/ 3.7</td><td>1.3/ 1.8</td><td></td></tr></table>

This is possibly unfair to nations such as France and Britain, who showed more work than other nations and consequently more women in real terms than anyone else. The following list shows actual numbers of women artists, followed by numbers of works they exhibited:

<table><tr><td></td><td>1855</td><td>1867</td><td>1878</td><td>1889</td><td></td><td>1900</td></tr><tr><td>France</td><td>71/162</td><td>17/44</td><td>33/47</td><td></td><td>74/125</td><td>109/168</td></tr><tr><td>Britain</td><td>8/8</td><td>8/9</td><td>13/19</td><td>11/25</td><td></td><td>8/10</td></tr><tr><td>America</td><td>0</td><td>1/2</td><td>1/1</td><td>24/</td><td>37</td><td>46/65</td></tr><tr><td>Germany</td><td>2/ 2</td><td>0</td><td>一</td><td>2/</td><td>2</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Holland</td><td>3/ 3</td><td>7/10</td><td>4/5</td><td>16/</td><td>29</td><td>16/19</td></tr><tr><td>Belgium</td><td>3/ 4</td><td>一</td><td>0</td><td>一</td><td></td><td>8/ 8</td></tr><tr><td>Italy</td><td>一</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td></td><td>2/ 6</td></tr><tr><td>Austria</td><td>1/ 1</td><td>0</td><td>一</td><td>3/</td><td>8</td><td>1/ 1</td></tr><tr><td>Sweden</td><td>2/ 8</td><td>5/7</td><td>13/17</td><td>26/</td><td>45</td><td>9/17</td></tr><tr><td>Norway</td><td>1/ 1</td><td>3/3</td><td>2/2</td><td>11/</td><td>25</td><td>12/21</td></tr><tr><td>Swit/lnd.</td><td>6/ 6</td><td>11/21</td><td>8/ 8</td><td>1/</td><td>3</td><td>一</td></tr></table>

At the top end of the scale, France showed considerably more women artists than any other nation. This however was due to the vast amount of work exhibited. In 1855 for example 1041 French artists presented 2726 works, putting the 71 women presenting 162 works into proper perspective. The case is the same with Britain, who showed more women than most others simply because their contingent was substantially larger than any other apart from France. Percentage-wise, both nations showed less women than several other nations. By far the highest exhibitor of women artists as a proportion of the national contingent was Sweden. Through the five expositions, Sweden revealed an ongoing willingness to give space to women, which went beyond coincidence, outstripping other countries in every exposition except the last. Sweden was followed by Norway and Holland, where levels of women exhibitors occasionally reached a pitch suggesting a policy had been formulated to reduce gender prejudice. The only other nation to show signs of enlightenment was America, who exhibited very few women until 1889, when there was a marked increase, followed by a dramatic increase in 1900. In 1900 American women represented a quarter of the total national contingent. In itself this was a remarkable achievement, the statistic being brought down from even dizzier heights by the fact that there was only one female exhibitor in the architecture section; taken in isolation, the painting and sculpture areas were the highest numerical levels women ever achieved in a fine art section of a major exhibition.

At the nadir languished Italy and Germany. Out of the four expositions the Italians participated in they could only bring themselves to allow two women to show six works, an appalling indictment of the situation of women in that country. The Germans showed two more artists but two less works than the Italians, revealing fully the chauvinistic grip male authorities had over the various German academies. There appears to be no discernible shift in the position of women artists after the two nations underwent unification.

To complete the plight of German-speaking women artists, Austria followed the pattern closely, choosing only ten works by five women over the fifty year period. Put together, the statistics indicate a clear correlation between the strength of women’s movements in the different countries and the size of their representation in the arts. Scandinavia, Holland and America emerged in the second half of the nineteenth century as the most progressive nations with regard to women’s rights, Italy, Austria and Southern Germany were amongst the least advanced.<sup>45</sup> The independent struggle of women to better their position did have its effect on the visual arts then, winning representation for women in one of the most male dominated spheres of human endeavour. Where the struggle for equality was weakest, representation in the arts was lowest. As low and disheartening as the overall figures are for the participation of women in this area, solace can be taken in that occasionally, in some countries, some of the time, the voices were heard and listened to.

The majority of women showed one work in one exposition, only a small handful gaining a larger representation over several events. Amongst the French, Mme. Bibron, Madame Girbaud, Jenny Girbaud (daughter of Madame Girbaud), Marie Lallemont, Mme. Lehaut, Hermine Mutel, Mme. O’Connell, Juliette Bourge, Virginie Demont-Breton, Élodie La Villette, Clémence Roth, Mme. Jacquemart and Mme. Lemarie distinguished themselves by having at least four works. Rosa Bonheur had ten works on show in 1867 and Henrietta Browne had five, eight and six respectively in 1855, 1867 and 1878. British women were almost entirely restricted to single objects, the spectacular exception to this being Kate Greenaway, who had the biggest showing of any woman throughout the tradition with thirteen works in 1889.<sup>46</sup> The most consistent British women were Mrs. and Miss Alma-Tadema, wife and daughter of painter Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema. Both showed single works in 1889 and 1900. Amongst the Americans, Sarah Dodson, Elizabeth Gardner, Cecilia Beaux, Laura Hills, Virginia Reynolds, Theodora Thayer and Maria Woodbury all had three or more works. The majority throughout were painters, many of them working with the miniature or in water-colour. The only exception to this pattern was Sweden, where a significant number of women were sculptresses. Mme. Ahlborn was the most prolific amongst these, showing seven works in 1855. No record has yet been traced to show whether women sold works from the expositions or won commissions as a result of them. Indeed, little biographical material exists to cast any light on them or their careers. Effectively, the process of exclusion the academies and selection juries left incomplete was taken to resolution by art historians in succeeding decades.