The ground women won with regard to representation in fine art exhibitions in the nineteenth century ought to have been the basis for a move toward absolute equality in the twentieth. It would be reasonable to assume that the century in which women finally won the vote would also be the one where they came in from the cultural cold. In fact this has not been the case, much of the twentieth century being little better than the nineteenth in terms of the presence of women artists in expositions, galleries and museums. If the French held an Exposition Universelle at this time, it would not be unreasonable to assume that the percentage of women participants in the Fine Arts Palace would be roughly the same as it was in 1900. It might even be lower. The proportion of women artists of all kinds in major contemporary art galleries and museums most certainly does not exceed five percent. Ironically, the last decade of the nineteenth century could easily be seen not as a tentative beginning in the drive toward cultural equality but as the golden age of the struggle, so bleak does the position of women within our cultural institutions remain.

## Notes

1 Quoted from J. Maas, The Glorious Enterprize: The Centennial Exhibition of 1876 and H. J.Schwarzmann, Architect-in-Chief, New York 1976, American Life Foundation.

2 J. S. Ingram, The Centennial Exposition, Described and Illustrated, Philadelphia 1876, Hubbard Brothers.

3 The fullest description of these artefacts amongst primary sources can be found in Ingrams (note 2), this being one of the most useful documents on the exhibition. See also R. C. Post, 1876: A Centennial Exhibition, 1976 Smithsonian Institution; Lois Craig and others, The Federal Presence – Architecture, Politics and Symbols in United States Government Building, 1978 M.I.T. Press.

4 It was here that the mother of F. L. Wright saw the Froebel system and introduced it to the future architect. In his autobiography, Wright believed the Froebel system had enhanced his early creativity.

5 Ingrams, note 2.

6 Quoted from Maas, note 1.

9 Ingrams, note 2.

10 Quoted from Craig, note 3.

11 The very earliest writings were by British women, at this time it is not clear who donated them.

12 Alice Rideout won the commission to design the interiors, in a competition similar to the one organised for the building.

13 The mural is illustrated in H. H. Bancroft, The Book of the Fair, An Historical and Descriptive Presentation, Volume One, Chicago 1893, reprint available in Bounty Books, New York.

14 Book of the Fair, Official Guide 1933, Chicago 1933, pub. Century of Progress Publications.

15 Quoted from Bancroft, note 13.

16 Quoted from an essay by Judith Paine in Susanna Torre (Ed.), Women in American Architecture: A Historic and Contemporary Perspective, 1977 Whitney Library of Design.

17 Quoted from Craig, note 3.

22 Ibid.

# EPHEMERAL VISTAS

18 Quoted from Bancroft who does not identify the speaker. Judith Paine does however (note 16), giving a version of the quote which is slightly different from the one in Bancroft.

19 Taken from two sources, Paine (note 16) and Craig (note 3). 20 Ibid.

21 The best (only?) source for the conference is Jeanne Madeline Weimann, Fashion and the Fair, Chicago History, the Magazine of the Chicago Historical Society, Volume XII, Number 3, Fall 1983.

23 Golden Gate Exposition, 1939, Official Guide Book, San Francisco 1939.

24 One of the best sources for the crisis of Liberalism and the women’s issue is George Dangerfield, The Strange Death of Liberal England, London 1935, reissued by Paladin 1972.

25 Style and general attitude indicate that it is the same anonymous writer for the Times quoted throughout this chapter.

26 This in itself of course did not mean the Palace of Women’s Work was bound to proclaim a reactionary stance. In Chicago most of the Board of Lady Managers had husbands and fathers on committees elsewhere, including Bertha Palmer.

27 Times August 12th, 1908. See note 25.

28 D. H. Marillier in F. G. Dumas (Ed.), The Franco-British Exhibition Illustrated Review 1908, London 1908, Chatto and Windus.

29 The Times July 30th. 1908.

30 See Dangerfield, note 24.

31 Anonymous, The Arts and Crafts at Shepherd’s Bush, Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, July 2nd., 1909.

32 British Empire Exhibition 1924 Official Guide, London 1924, Fleetway Press.

33 For a detailed analysis of the activities of these organisations see Chapter 5 and also J. M. MacKenzie, Propaganda and Empire: The Manipulation of British Public Opinion 1880– 1960 1984 Manchester University Press.

34 Empire Exhibition Official Guide, Glasgow 1938, published by Empire Exhibition.

35 Quoted from Rosalind H. Williams, Dream Worlds: Mass Consumption in late 19th. Century France., University of California Press.

37 See Chapter 5 for the visit of La Parisienne to London.

38 Michael B. Millar, The Bon Marché: Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store 1869– 1920., 1981 Princeton University Press. See also Russell Lewis Everything Under One Roof: World’s Fairs and Departmental Stores in Paris and Chicago., Chicago History Volume XII, Number 3, Fall 1983. In his exemplary article, Lewis carries the idea of the department store as an influence on the shape of exhibitions over to America. He reveals the mark made by the store ethos on the Chicago Columbian. The almost obsessive concern with the idea of woman as consumer was not carried to the same pitch however. The complex female symbology developed in France never attained the same level anywhere else.

39 M. H. Spielmann, Souvenir of the Fine Art Section, Franco-British Exhibition, 1908 London 1909, Bembrose and Sons.

40 Quoted from the Penguin Edition, 1959.

41 Peter Philp, Feminine Furniture, Antique Dealer and Collectors Guide, July 1975.

42 The statistics come from the various Catalogues Officiels. The first five expositions have been chosen for this case-study for several reasons. They form a block of events following at regular intervals; the catalogues are in a consistent format, women being identified throughout by prefixes or full Christian names; the exhibits were in standardized Palaces of Fine Art, meaning the conditions of exhibiting remained the same throughout. The exposition of 1925 broke with this format, making data connected with it uneven; these were the exhibitions foreign nations took most care over and therefore provide the soundest guide to national policy on the visual arts.

43 I have chosen to list the eleven most prominent nations simply because no others took part in enough expositions to provide a pattern of attitudes. Excluded nations showed small amounts of work only, no one nation exhibited a number of women inconsistent with the pattern created by the presented statistics.

44 Germany exhibited as separate nations before unification, I have added the figures from contributing states together. Italy exhibited as a unit throughout the period. The Papal

## WOMEN: EXHIBITING AND EXHIBITED

States always exhibited a handful of work separately. Needless to say, no women were included there.

She was also the most heavily represented British artist in Paris – male or female – through the fifty year period. Her popularity on the continent at the turn of the century could have had something to do with this showing. Amongst others Picasso was an admirer of her work in his formative years, as can be evidenced in the graphic work produced at the turn of the century and certain pieces in the blue period.

There does seem to be a link also between catholicism and female exclusion.

# CHAPTER EIGHT

# The fine arts

The Fine Arts were an important ingredient in any international exhibition of calibre. They were the counter-poise to industry and the sciences, the non-functional aspect of human endeavour every nation had to be seen to participate in to avoid the charge of philistinism. The fine arts carried great honour for those nations thought to excel in them and they bestowed prestige on exhibitions that gave them especial attention. Fine Art Palaces bristled with traditional aspects of civilization; they reminded urban dwellers of their pre-industrial heritage and of value systems vaguerised by modern life. They also made culture into a hierarchical system, separating the high from the popular, the functional from the ethereal and the expensive from the cheap. In their absence, an exhibition became a trade fair.

This is not to say the fine arts were the most popular aspects of exhibitions, or even that those investing them with prestige took much notice of the contents of the art pavilions they worshipped. The fine art palace at the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1855, one of the first and greatest in the whole tradition, had 906,530 visitors as compared to 3,626,934 for the machine hall. These figures, showing fine art with a quarter of the popularity of machinery, did not improve as the century progressed, especially when popular entertainment came flooding onto sites. It would be quite wrong to conclude from the vast attendances at exhibitions that art was more popular in ages previous to our own. Once on the site, the crowds did not enter the fine art palaces with undue frequency. Art historians have tended to retrospectively inflate the significance of the fine arts at exhibitions, allowing them to dictate the historical flavour of events they had relatively little impact on in actuality. Vital as their presence was on the curriculum vitae of an exhibition, no-one seriously believed it was they who brought the crowds, attracted attention or generated the atmosphere; they did not. It was commonly understood that they brought status, not pleasure, to the exhibition site.

At international exhibitions fine art normally implied painting in oil or water-colour, sculpture, architecture, drawing, engraving of metals and precious stones and print-making. Occasionally the last three would be excluded, depending upon space available or whether the authorities in the host nation considered them fine arts or crafts. There was no absolute standard for what was or was not considered fine art during the period. The French for example, rarely went beyond architecture, sculpture, oil and water-colour painting, whereas the British often used the widest of definitions. In 1874 at the South Kensington Exhibition for example, an extremely wide range of practices were counted as fine art in the pre-exhibition literature. Amongst these were painting of all kinds, including oil, water-colour, distemper, wax, enamel, on glass and porcelain; sculpture, including modelling, carving, chasing in marble, stone, wood, terra-cotta, metal, ivory, glass, precious stones; mosaïc; engraving; lithography; photography ‘as a fine art and executed in the last twelve months’; architectural designs and drawings, photographs of recently completed buildings, restorations and models; tapestries, carpets, embroideries, shawls, lace ‘shown not as manufactures but for the fine art of their design of form or colour’; designs of all kinds for decorative manufactures; reproductions, i.e. exact full size copies of ancient and mediæval pictures painted before 1556, reproductions of mosaics and enamels, copies in plaster and fictile ivory, electrotypes of ancient works of art.<sup>2</sup> The majority of the categories on this list would not be considered as fine art today. Fine art sections had consistent features throughout the period however, the most prominent being painting, which was invariably considered the quintessence of fine art practice. Painting pushed other disciplines to one side, occupying the central position as the most important visual art-form at international exhibitions. Even architecture assumed a less prestigious rôle than painting through the period, although along with the painters the architects were well in front of the other professions. For this reason painting must assume a primacy in this chapter.<sup>3</sup>

Fine art sections were usually divided into two, one half going to the host country, the other to foreign nations. Normally America would be the only non-European nation. The host country would send each participating nation an invitation to send work to the fine art palace and ask how much space it would need. Richard Redgrave, for example, acting for the British commissioners in 1855, requested twelve thousand square feet of wall space from the French Imperial Commission in charge of the Paris Exposition. He divided the space into 7,000 square feet for oil painting, 1,500 for water-colour, 2,100 for engravings and 1,400 for architectural drawings, all sculpture and models to fit into the floor-space this enclosed.<sup>4</sup> The request was accepted, making Britain into comfortably the next biggest exhibitor after France. Once all nations knew how much room they had, they selected work by jury much in the way Salons and Academy displays were chosen. Some nations gave up the majority of their space to a handful of favoured individuals, others restricted the amount of space per person and gathered a wide representation. The French liked to give vast areas to their leading masters, the British and Americans preferred to give a little to a lot.

In keeping with the principle of progress, organisers everywhere initially insisted on exhibitions of living artists, although rules were laid down to allow the work of the recently dead. By 1867 a standard procedure fixed a date artists had to be born after in order to qualify as exhibitors. This became problematic in the 1870s, however, when the number of international exhibitions increased. Some nations took part in so many that high quality contemporary work was often unavailable. Any work of merit by an acknowledged master tended to be commissioned or would speedily sell on the open market. Thus much of the best contemporary art was privately owned, and patrons began to tire of perpetually lending out their acquisitions to the state in order to have them appear in foreign venues. By 1874 the British admitted the problem openly, as arrangements for the South Kensington Exhibition of that year were slowed because of unavailability of work. Organisers declared ‘the possessors of fine pictures are becoming tired of lending for exhibition those works of art which they purchased for the decoration of their own homes and the pleasure of themselves and friends’.<sup>5</sup> It was thus decided to dispense with the idea of works by recent masters only, and a retrospective show of old masters from national collections was presented. The organisers felt themselves to have struck an innovative note, ‘The International quits the field which is full of rivals and enters on another which is almost entirely free’.<sup>6</sup> In like fashion in 1889 at the Paris Exposition it was decided to formalise the inclusion of old masters. Painting and sculpture were divided into Decennale and Centennale exhibitions, showing work of the last ten and hundred years respectively. This happened again at the Paris 1900 show, the Centennale there being a spectacular success. In Britain the most developed form retrospective displays reached was at the Franco-British Exhibition of 1908, where there were vast collections of British and French art from the Renaissance to the end of the eighteenth century. In America from the Chicago Columbian onwards, large numbers of European old masters were shipped over the Atlantic to fill art palaces at the World’s Fairs. The fine arts were therefore one of the few areas on exhibition sites where an exploration of the past was openly sanctioned.

The French set the standard in the fine arts at exhibitions. Both in the massive fine arts palaces they built at the Expositions Universelles and in the quantities of work they sent to foreign exhibitions they were unapproached. The Paris expositions were far and away the most important art displays within the exhibition tradition and rank amongst the greatest exhibitions of fine art of any kind held anywhere. Priding themselves on being leaders in European fine art, unlimited time, expense and energy went into the maintenance of that position. Central to their effort were painting and sculpture, with the former taking pride of place. Acknowledged masters of paint virtually from the decline of mannerist Italy, they consolidated their lead through State patronage, the Ecole des Beaux Arts and the Salon. By 1855 they had no rivals; it was therefore logical that fine art should be a central element in the first Exposition Universelle, with painting at the core. Over five thousand works of art were gathered, half of them French, in the greatest Salon so far held.<sup>7</sup> The effort would remain as intense through to the last event in 1937.

In France the 1850’s witnessed a strange time in the visual arts, one of transition from a static, pre-industrial world to an unstable modern one. Ostensibly the painting areas at the 1855 exposition were still locked in the duel between romanticism and classicism, a tussle by then tired and academicised. Delacroix, the grand master of romanticism, had a superb showing of thirty-five works, Ingres, the pillar of classicism, forty. Below these two however, the ideals and formalisms had become confused and mudded. Artists such as Gudin, Lehman, Chenavard, Antigna and Couture, all heavily represented, showed in their art that the political and ideological debates on freedom, individuality, rationalism and emotion had deteriorated into meaningless mannerisms. The pupils did their teachers no service. The real fight in 1855 in fact, regardless of appearances, was not between romanticism and classicism; a new force had arrived which ultimately would sweep them both away. Gustave Courbet, describing himself and his work as ‘realist’, had eleven controversial canvases in the Palais des Beaux Arts. His insistence on the depiction of reality in direct terms, by-passing the flamboyant exoticism of romanticism and the mannered rationalism of the classicists, announced a new idea as to what the rôle of art was. The technique was proto-impressionist, owing much to Goya and Rembrandt in application but little to the conventionalised rhetoric of the Beaux Arts. Politically committed, he depicted without idealisation or allegory the rural poor and the rawness of the landscape they lived in. Rejecting the raison d’être of most of the art of his day, he believed his work had a moral duty to develop a relationship with life and not solely with previous art. His stand against historicism, his

worship of the actuality of human experience and his insistence upon an alla-prima approach to paint mark him out as the first modern.

Self-centred and constantly excited by imagined plots against him, Courbet was incensed that his large master-pieces ‘The Studio’ (1855) and ‘The Burial at Ornans’ (1849) were two of three paintings the jury did not accept. They explained the decision as being taken due to lack of space, both paintings being enormous and the total number of works to be hung being vast. In itself this was quite reasonable. Courbet, furious at this apparent rebuff, determined to find a way for his work to be shown. He decided on a course of action described here in a letter to his friend Bruyas, with rejection still at the front of his mind:

I’m almost frantic. Terrible things have happened to me. They’ve refused my burial and my last picture as well as the portrait of Chamfleury. They declared to arrest at any cost the progress of my tendencies in art, which were disastrous to French art. Eleven of my works are taken. ‘The Meeting’ is taken with reluctance; they consider it too personal and too pretentious. I’ll open a separate show of twenty-seven of my pictures, new and old, with the explanation I’m taking advantage of the favour shown me by the government in accepting eleven paintings for their own show. To prepare an exhibition of pictures from my studio will cost me 10,000 or 12,000 francs. I’ve already leased the site for 2,000 for six months. The construction will cost me 6,000 or 8,000 francs. The strange thing is that the site is actually enclosed within the area of their show.

Thus he made a personal contribution to the Exposition in the form of a building housing some of his best works. In this action he set a precedent for the future, whereby elements within the avant-garde would show their work and make their protest from privately funded pavilions. Famous examples after Courbet were Manet in 1867, Samuel Bing and August Rodin in 1900 and Le Corbusier in 1925.<sup>9</sup> Sadly for Courbet, the twenty sous entrance fee and the vast collections of objects elsewhere on the site served to keep attendance low in his pavilion. He made a heavy loss, few taking the trouble to see the stunning collection of paintings which were poised to change the shape of French art.

Courbet was not wholly isolated; Millet, Daubigny and Corot were in the official exhibit, indicating that whilst the Beaux Arts controlled jury was obviously against approaches too far from their own canon, there was a degree of tolerance toward alternative practices. In 1867 the same could be argued. A Beaux Arts dominated French display still included Courbet, Corot, Daubigny, Millet, Troyon and Theodore Rousseau, giving good representation both to realism and the Barbizon School. At this exposition Manet rented space off the Avenue d’Alma, where he showed fifty works. The rift between the avant-garde and the academy began with realism but it would be a mistake to overplay struggles between them at that point in time. Whilst the majority of artists were within the realm of staid academicism, the best represented exhibitors were not necessarily so but rather were a mixture of regressive and progressive. Amongst the stalwarts of the Beaux Arts were Meissonier (14 works), Gérôme (13), Bouguereau (10), Bonnat (5), Dupré (12), Flandrin (4) and Ziem (4), but these were more or less balanced by Courbet (4), Daubigny (8), Corot (7), Rousseau (8), Millet (10) and Troyon (5). Confusing the issue were the two oddities of the Beaux Arts, Moreau and Puvis de Chavannes, who showed two and one works respectively. If censorship had been a feature of the selection, the pruning out had been a very delicate one.

The situation had changed by the Exposition of 1878 however, when exclusions were rife. Only six years after the Commune, in which prominent artists were involved, the authorities were in no mood for compromise. Courbet, a supporter of the Commune, was represented by a single landscape, ‘La Vague’ (1870); Millet, universally recognised as a social commentator, was completely excluded. As both artists had died in the years immediately before the Exposition, the event could easily have been used to commemorate them, both being widely acknowledged as masters even in 1878. Emile Zola, writing in ‘Le Messager de l’Europe’ noted the treatment of Courbet and affirmed his real position in French art: ‘Courbet revivra et fleurira de l’eternelle jeunesse du talent. On lui ouvrira les portes du Louvre, l’heure de son apothéose sonnera’.<sup>10</sup> The new generation of artists to follow the realist/naturalist line, the impressionists, were excluded as a group. Zola acknowledged this also, predicting of the movement that ‘l’avenir leur appartiendra’.<sup>11</sup> Only Corot and Daubigny remained, their art and their personal lives presumably being politically neutral enough to allow admission. The 1878 exposition therefore marked a pronounced rift between Beaux Arts and avant-garde, as one moved left and the other smartly to the right. Apart from Corot, Daubigny and the single Courbet, the Beaux Arts ruled, with Meissonier, Henner, Gérôme, Régnault, Bouguereau and Bonnat leading the way. Awkwardly poised in the middle were artists who attempted to bridge the gulf between realism and academicism, led principally by Pelouse and Bastien-Lepage.

A controversy without political overtone surrounded a sculpture entitled ‘The Bronze Age’ (1877) by a young sculptor working in Brussels, August Rodin. The jury and elements within the press wondered whether parts of the statue had been cast from a real person, as opposed to being modelled by hand. The sculpture, of a single, anguished-looking man, did look remarkably realistic. Rodin was scandalised, as casting from life was widely considered a shameful practice amongst the art fraternity. Going as far as to produce the man the statue was modelled from, to show the differences, the artist caused a stir both for his petulance and for the remarkable modelling ability he clearly had. By the end of the following decade he was to be recognised as the best living French sculptor, by the end of the century the greatest in that medium France had ever produced. At the Exposition of 1900 he towered as one of the living grand masters of French art, the Monet of sculpture and the Michelangelo of France. In a pavilion he himself paid for he staged a one-man show which was an artistic high-light of the event.

In ideological terms by 1889 the avant-garde/academy rift was more or less complete. Impressionism had given rise to the experimentation later known as post-impressionism and the avant-garde had grown into a formidable force containing some of the best artists ever to practice in France. Operating with private picture dealers outside of the Beaux Arts or the Salon, between 1880 and 1914 they produced a body of work which outshone most other periods and can rightly be thought of as giving rise to a golden age in Western art, effectively a second Renaissance. Yet the expositions allowed them to slip by largely unnoticed. It is insufficient to allow this omission to be explained away as a prolonged lapse of taste. It was not so much the formal characteristics of impressionism that disturbed the jury – academicians Moreau and Puvis de Chavannes both had far more bizarre formal approaches – it was what impressionism represented in a larger sense which was a cause for concern. An art-form committed to the depiction of the banal, using devices such as photography and scientific colour theory, was bound to worry those who feared modernity, especially in the form of urban democracy. Impressionism was the art of the new, a vision of the world as an impermanent continuum, a corporeal flux. It challenged cherished notions of training, skill and the rôle of art practice and so had to be opposed. Camille Pissarro saw an irony in the staging of the 1889 Exposition to commemorate the Revolution. As a socialist and a leading member of the impressionist group he was exasperated by the use of reactionary art to celebrate the centenary of a revolutionary event. He voiced his disgust in a letter to Esther Isaacson:

Business (it always comes down to that) disastrous, and this stupid universal exhibition. Far from helping us at this time it does the contrary, making our strained position even more difficult. . . you see the Eiffel Tower which is causing so much interest. The gushing fountains, the paintings, the dance of the Javanese girls, and what else? the machines and the frightful show of Pastellistes Français.<sup>12</sup>

A pavilion for the Pastellistes Français was set up more or less to represent progressive practice, a move which galled impressionist artists. Pissarro himself had two canvases in the main exhibition, naturalism there having been appropriated by Bastien-Lepage and his followers. Bastien-Lepage had nineteen canvases in the show.

If impressionism was undesirable in Beaux Arts circles, postimpressionism was inconceivable. Post-impressionist artists correspondingly had little but contempt for the Beaux Arts. Paul Gauguin, writing on the Decennale (art of the last ten years) half of the 1889 exhibition:

We are stubborn in our search for art and when we enter the space given to the Beaux Art school, which the State, that is, all of us, pays for so dearly, we are nauseated rather than astonished. I really mean astonished, because for a long time we have known what to expect – poor quality for which low prices are little consolation. All these vain creatures wantonly display their daubings with an unspeakable off-handedness.<sup>13</sup>

The Centennale (art of the last hundred years) was more liberal, as historical sections tended to be: ‘I was mistaken when I wrote that there was no more pictorial art at the Universal Exhibition. Now that the Centennale exhibition is open, I think differently . . . that exhibition is the triumph of the artists I mentioned as having been reproved and scorned: Corot, Millet, Daumier, and, above all, Manet’.<sup>14</sup> Not for the last time, the historical section was vastly superior to the contemporary.

The increasingly isolated position the Ecole des Beaux Arts had come to occupy as the harbinger of French cultural values prevented adaptation and development. The determination to institutionalise art and harness it to the national/imperial cause inevitably meant the exclusion of artists and ideas unsympathetic to that end. The Beaux Arts controlled French art in the public sector and had become in effect an establishment dictator, one which was less and less tolerant as the century progressed. In the closing decades of the nineteenth century leading academicians Bonnat and Bouguereau dominated juries of the Expositions Universelles and the panels selecting French works for foreign shows. Their overwhelming tendency was to choose art resembling their own, a mixture of myth, religion, allegory, sentimentality and paternal morality, executed with a polished yet vacuous approach to paint. Relying on the ability to draw objects and people with considerable accuracy, they lacked all ability to compose, to generate atmosphere or emotion with colour, or to create a convincing space in the paintings. It was little more than a competent, pompous escapism. They ascended to power after the Franco-Prussian War when the political climate was right and held on to their positions until they died early in the new century.

There was an irony in this whole situation. France was pouring vast sums into the arts in order to bolster its vision of itself as the leader of civilization, and indeed great art was being made in Paris through the period. Sadly, it was not the art the French government was investing in. Gauguin, so often the caustic but accurate commentator on the art of his time, summed up the position with a succinct bitterness in his comments on the 1889 exposition:

. . . the State increasingly protects mediocrity and professors who suit everyone have had to be invented . . . Where are all the artistic glories on which France can pride itself? Among the Pleiades of unsung thinkers with royal instinct: Rousseau, Delacroix, Millet, Corot, Courbet, Manet – all of them scorned in their own day . . . In 1889 as well, there is doubtless, like the artists we have just named, a whole Pleiades of independent artists whom the official painters have anxiously been keeping track of for fifteen years, and whom all the sensitive people, thirsting for pure art, true art, watch with interest. And this movement is in everything: in literature just as it is in painting. All of twentieth century art will derive from them. And you, gentlemen of the institute, you want to ignore them. 15

The lack of significant contemporary art was one of the most lamentable aspects of the expositions universelles. The heaviest representation impressionism and post-impressionism received at an exposition came, mainly through default, in 1900. Here, the Decennale was selected by a jury headed by Bonnat; naturally no impressionism or post-impressionism surfaced. The Centennale however was under the control of the relatively progressive critic Roger Marx. His selection traced the struggle between romanticism and classicism, the rise of realism and naturalism and the subsequent development of impressionism and post-impressionism. This magnificent collection included at the latter end, Manet, Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, Sisley, Seurat, Gauguin and Cézanne. By showing them as a natural resultant of the best art of the immediate past, Marx introduced the avant-garde into the Exposition in an historical context outside the immediate control of the Beaux Arts. Modernism had crept in, as it were, when the academy was not looking. An interesting aspect of the Centennale was Marx’s awareness of the artists he chose and his clear-headed ability to make an appropriate selection. In itself this suggests modernism was known about and looked at by those interested in art, a few of whom even had power in establishment circles.

French authorities accepted modernism only when it became clear it had triumphed and that much of it had been made in France. It was then harnessed to the national profile and presented at the Expositions Universelles. In the 1925 Paris show there was no specific area for the fine arts as the theme was the decorative arts, but quasi-modernist paintings littered the site. The main inspiration was cubism, manipulated into a bold decorative art through the use of bright colour and realist detailing.

The most influential artists were Robert and Sonia Delaunay and Fernand Léger. Excluding these three, the work was on the whole a superficial pastiche rather than full-blooded modernism. It was much the same at the last Exposition Universelle in 1937. With the Popular Front in power, fine artists were encouraged to address themselves to social issues. Artists unions and an association for unemployed artists were active on selection committees, which led to a committment to decorate the site with murals and sculpture. The employment of as many artists as possible appeared to be the paramount concern, this taking precedence over any plans for formal orchestration. As in 1925, Léger and the Delaunays appeared to be the major influence on a generation of young artists suffering from the effects of the depression. Sadly, the result was once again superficiality and pastiche. The problem in 1937 was not the embracing of modernism but the type of modernism used. The French contributions to the modern movement in this century have been fauvism, cubism and surrealism; there has been no strong school of non-objective abstraction. This however was the form the Exposition tended toward, the Delaunays being virtually the only French pracitioners to experiment in this area with any international credibility. Still it seemed, the French struggled to make best use of their available artistic resources at the expositions. The whole world was prepared to see Paris as the supreme art centre, yet organisers and juries persistently failed to show off the art which earned that status.

After France, Britain was consistently the largest displayer of fine art in the exhibition tradition. Britain was comfortably the second largest exhibitor in the fine art palaces at all the Expositions Universelles except one, being exceeded in 1900 by Germany and Austria. In exhibitions elsewhere Britain was always heavily present, and as with the Expositions Universelles their contingent was usually second only to that of France. Perhaps it was fitting that the British trailed behind the French in this area, since it was they who first alerted Britain to the importance of fine art at exhibitions. Left to their own devices, it is doubtful whether the British would have developed fine art as an integral part of international exhibitions since for them industry and empire were far more potent indicators of national status. It was only when it became clear fine art displays were vital to an event’s prestige that Britain wholeheartedly participated in them. At the Great Exhibition of 1851, before this was the case, there was very little painting, none of it in oil, and sculpture was scattered throughout the building, being gathered in numbers only in a modest Sculpture Court. There seemed to be a general integration of fine and decorative art, to the point where the two were almost indistinguishable. By French

definitions as to what fine art constituted, the Great Exhibition had little. Five areas were designated ‘Fine Art Courts’, being reconstructions of ancient styles considered to be at the apex of art. These were the Egyptian, Greek, Roman, Alhambra and Nineveh, all designed by Owen Jones except the Greek, by Jones and Digby Wyatt and Nineveh, by a Mr. Ferguson. This had nothing to do with fine art as it was later understood at exhibitions.<sup>16</sup>

In 1862 at the South Kensington Exhibition the situation was very different, a vast fine art section being prepared along the lines of the 1855 Paris show. The object was ‘to illustrate the progress and present condition of modern art’,<sup>17</sup> each participating nation deciding ‘the period of art which in its own case will best attain that end’.<sup>18</sup> The British selection committee allowed no work by artists who died before May 1st. 1762, making the section into a centenary celebration. Prominent in the British area were Hogarth, Reynolds, Morland, Wilson, Gainsborough, Turner, Constable, Leighton, Landseer, Wilkie and Egg. It was generally agreed by English commentators that only France rivalled the British showing, featuring in their contingent Delacroix, Ingres, Flandrin, Cabanel, Delaroche and Ziem. As with the Paris show, half the space went to the host but unlike that event no prizes were awarded. Each nation was given complete freedom in the hanging of its own area, resulting in the arrival of teams of artists and workmen from all over the world to arrange displays.

The four international events at South Kensington held between 1871 and 1874 confirmed the rôle of fine art established in 1862, although the insistence upon a very wide definition as to what constituted fine art reduced the overall impact. By far the most impressive fine art shows were in 1871 and 1874, the former being particularly interesting for the strikingly progressive French contingent. Beginning before the Franco-Prussian War started and finishing as the first engagements were underway, the exhibition caught a representation of French painting before the disaster precipitated a retreat from modernism on the part of the authorities. Present were Delacroix (6 works), Courbet (2), Corot (17), Daubigny (8), Rousseau (4), Troyon (4), and, amazingly, Monet (2) and Pissarro (2). Whilst the young impressionists were still some way from the spontaneity and colour of the later 1870’s, the exhibition was nevertheless a triumph for French naturalism. Also present was Rosa Bonheur with four works and a young academician with a single piece, William Bouguereau.

Faced with the problem of reluctant patronage the organisers of the British sections in 1874 set the precedent of exhibiting the work of deceased artists. Signs of failing enthusiasm had in fact been evident at the 1873 event, critics finding few artists they could complement in the

British section. Common consensus confirmed J. Phillips R.A. as the best artist of 18 73, a sorry reflection on the level of participation. In 18 74 four artists featured in virtual retrospectives; Constable (d. 1837), Wilkie (d. 1841), Egg (d. 1863) and Roberts (d. 1864); a huge show of water-colours supported this, with works by Turner, Pugin and Cotman. Whilst the foreign half of the section was physically bigger than at the previous three events, the relatively low quality of work showed that the frequency of exhibitions at South Kensington was reducing foreign interest. From the point of view of the fine arts, it was as well that the 1874 exhibition was the last in the sequence as there would have been serious difficulty in gathering work for another.

The European fine arts featured only incidentally at the last series of exhibitions held at South Kensington between 1883 and 1886. These were specialist events on the themes of Fisheries, Health, Inventions and India and the Colonies respectively. Painting and sculpture were accomodated in the display areas where they could be found conceptually to fit. In 1883 for example there was an exhibition of seascapes and of art generally related to fish. In 1886 there was no need for this, as a superb collection of art from India and the colonies was brought to London. An interesting feature here were references to some of the work on show as being ‘fine art’. At international exhibitions this label was normally reserved for the produce of Western nations, art from the various dominions and colonies being categorised as ‘craft’, ‘decorative art’ or even ‘raw materials’. It was also usual to exclude non-Western art from Palaces of Fine Art and put it into facilities built for the colonies. In the absence of Western art at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition however, the painting and sculpture of India was referred to as fine art. This did in fact follow a pattern in specifically imperial exhibitions where there was no Western art on show. Indian and various other Asian countries were separated out and temporarily given a higher cultural status than other nations. African art for example was never given the prefix ‘fine’. Fine art practice at international exhibitions thus had a hierarchical dimension based on race. In social Darwinian terms, the Europeans made fine art; by comparison with Europe India did not, but in the absence of Europe it was allowed to use the label; Africans did not make fine art, but were condemned in advance to be craftspeople only. The category implied then not only an elitism within the visual arts but one within peoples also.<sup>19</sup>

The four exhibitions held between 1883 and 1886 reveal a lack of enthusiasm for the fine arts often evident in Britain through the 1851– 1939 period. The British saw fine art practice as being central to their international exhibitions only on an occasional basis. The South Kensington exhibition of 1862 was the nearest they came to the French (or any other) model in the nineteenth century. The exhibitions of 1871 to 1874, whilst they had substantial displays of painting, sculpture, architectural models and drawings, diffused the impact of these by defining numerous other activities as being part of the fine arts. Into the twentieth century, a bizarrely wide range of practices were often included in Palaces of Fine Art. At the 1924 Empire Exhibition, the Palace of Fine Art seemed to be genuinely confused as to its rôle, ultimately appearing as an arbitrary gathering of hand-made produce. Its single virtue was its inclusion of artists from the dominions and colonies, exhibited for the first time in London as ‘fine artists’, albeit in a section separate from the British contingent. In Glasgow in 1911 and 1938 the fine art palaces were restricted to the standard disciplines but the insistence upon the primacy of Scottish artists left both displays barely above the mediocre. Only a retrospective of the Glasgow School prevented the latter event from being a total failure. It would be fair to say then that despite the extent of their investment in fine art displays at international exhibitions, Britain had no stable definition as to what it constituted or any consistent policy toward it.

By far the best Fine Art Palace this century in Britain was built for the Franco-British Exhibition of 1908; it was the only one which saw fine art as containing practices of genuine importance. Divided equally between the two nations, the palace consisted of four exhibitions: British art from the Renaissance to the mid-nineteenth century, modern British art, French art from the Renaissance to the mid-nineteenth century and modern French art. This was the largest single collection of French art ever exhibited in Britain and must have provided British artists and public alike with a valuable insight into the French tradition. As a survey however the British historical section was generally thought to be superior, as it contained a wider range of acknowledged masterpieces than the French side, which lacked prime examples of certain artists work.

A central concern of the exhibition was the cultural relationship Britain and France were in. This inevitably led to comparisons between French and British art. It was not the first time in fact that the art of the two had been analysed in relation to each other at an international exhibition. Normally such exercises were riddled with facile chauvinism, but occasionally something of interest emerged. In Paris in 1878 for example, a writer for ‘Scribbeners Monthly’ attempted a serious comparison:

The English have certainly a school of painting of their own, differing almost entirely from that of the French; much superior in sincerity and aim to the theatrical and pretty side of French art, but falling far short in deep and artistic feeling to their best work. They are generally much behind the

French in technical skill, execution and colour, while their drawing is almost always as good. The best French art is simple in its expression, the English is either too complicated and difficult to understand, or they do not interpret their subjects as well as the French. Their art appeals to the intellect, rather than to the emotions, and could generally be better expressed in literature than in painting; whereas Millet or Daubigny tells you something in a way that no words could convey as well.<sup>20</sup>

The writer recognised a superior French technical skill, which was indeed in evidence throughout the period under discussion. He also felt bound to comment on the anecdotal tendency of British artists in the wake of preRaphaelitism. His depiction, of the French as skilful but hedonistic and the British as sincere but without flair, was a common one. Amongst the French artists used in the study were Corot (‘great imaginative painter’), Daubigny, Millet, Pelouse, Bastien-Lapage, Levy, Delaunay, Henner, Régnault, Bertrand and Bouguereau. The English he gave special attention to were Millais, Orchardson, Brett, Burne-Jones (‘I do not attempt to understand Burne-Jones; although fascinating, he is certainly not a healthy or manly phase of art’) and Alma-Tadema. This latter artist was put forward as the greatest in Europe.

The idea of national temperament as a guide to artistic style was common in comparisons between the French and British schools. A writer in the Daily Mail used this angle at the Franco-British:

The differences are striking, and are no doubt based on national temperament. There is more genius among the French, more dazzling skill of brushwork, more bravura; while the English art as seen here is more delicate in its search for beauty, more pleasing. The French will dazzle you in an exhibition the English will delight you in your home, as companions of your daily life. There is but little joy of colour and little joy of life expressed by the French painters. They leave you bewildered and depressed, while you cannot but leave the British rooms in a serenely happy frame of mind.<sup>21</sup>

Riddled with bias as this person was, his discussion does not attempt to hide the fact of French technical superiority. He merely reduced what he saw as the painful truth by attempting to charge the French with emotional shallowness. Generally speaking, the most striking aspect of the comparison wherever and whenever it occurred was a recognition of the superiority of French skill. This in itself managed to please a wide sweep of the British ideological spectrum. Conservatives could but admire the stable consistency of the Ecole des Beaux Arts, progressives were in the debt of romanticism, realism, impressionism and postimpressionism. In sculpture, the French school was even more emphatically lauded, being seen as great not because of any one individual but because of the length and maintenance of the tradition.

Despite the level of admiration, a controversy arose to blight the opening weeks of the Franco-British. The French jury, headed inevitably by Leon Bonnat, decided to exhibit no post-impressionism and only small numbers of impressionist works. The decision was taken less because of Bonnat’s intransigence and more through French anticipations of what the British would appreciate. By 1908 even Bonnat was partly reconciled to impressionism, whilst post-impressionism had been rendered less extreme by the sensational emergence of fauvism at the Salon d’Automne of 1905. The exhibition was reasonably thorough on realism, naturalism and the Barbizon School. Even so the Times of August 19th. 1908 noted that ‘leading French critics’ were angry at the exclusion of ‘the modern school’. On this side of the Channel response to the omission was mixed. On the whole critics still found quite enough if not too much impressionism for their liking, one referring to ‘the mistakes of clever men’<sup>22</sup> another to a ‘room full of prismatic impressionism’,<sup>23</sup> both in reference to early pieces by Monet, Pissarro, Renoir and Sisley. A minority of others were aware of the French exclusions and were furious about them, displaying a knowledge of and enthusiasm for the new movements. Sir Walter Armstrong, writing in the Guardian, complained that only the ‘more academic’ end of leading public collections had been brought from France, and that

The freest and most modern spirits are represented but poorly . . . Impressionism is represented of course, but only by comparatively unimportant things – three or four bad Renoirs, one Manet, one good Monet and several poor ones, a Sisley or two – while nothing further down the slope of revolution has been admitted at all, not even a Cézanne.<sup>24</sup>

Referring to Bonnat as having a ‘strong but disagreeable manner’, Armstrong revealed by his frustration that some British critics had been hoping for a full display of the moderns. This would only finally happen in 1911 when Roger Fry organised his famous exhibition ‘Postimpressionism’ at the Grafton Gallery. It would be wrong however to assume the latter introduced artists and critics to anything they were not already aware of, rather he merely brought to London objects many had already viewed in Paris or in magazines.<sup>25</sup> Press reportage of the Franco-British Exhibition demonstrates that by 1908, whether for or against the new art, the majority certainly knew about it.

Some critics believed the influence of impressionism in Britain was not supportive of attempts to define and support the idea of a contemporary British national art. Two powerful personalities at the Franco-British and at many other international exhibitions were Sir Isidore Spielmann and his brother M. H. Spielmann. They attempted to generate nationalist ideas for a modem British art which circumvented continental influence. The artists they chose to accomplish this with were the PreRaphaelites, who, they proposed, showed genuine English characteristics in their style and moral approach. In the ‘Official Souvenir of the Fine Art Section’ M. H. Spielmann tells us that the PreRaphaelite Brotherhood

was a protest pure and simple – a protest which, shortlived as it was as an organised movement, led to the revolution of feeling against the uninspired art of the day far beyond the borders of the circle and of the country with which it is identified. Certain tenets Ruskin preached, and the Brotherhood practiced, tenets which are still the inspiration of some phases of the impressionist school and which when Monet, Manet and their followers 26 accepted them, were hailed as inventions, or at least as innovations.

By portraying impressionism as an off-shoot of preRaphaelitism he hoped to raise the profile of current British practitioners, a surprising number of whom still owed allegiance to artists like Burne-Jones, Rossetti, Holman-Hunt and Waterhouse. As co-organiser of the British section, Sir Isidore ensured the nationalist vision of his illustrious family was heavily present. He and his brother however were swimming heavily against the tide in their promotion of preRaphaelitism, many of the most creditable British painters having long accepted impressionism. Angry at the selection of British modern art, some of them protested to the Times:

We have received a protest couched in somewhat extravagant terms and signed by; Messrs. Strang, F. Howard, C. Shannon, C. H. Ricketts, A. Ludovics, A. John, W. Orpen, W. Nicholson, H. Wilson, H. Wain, and J. Pryde against the organisation of the British section of the Franco-British Exhibition, which they maintain is under the sway of amateurism and haphazard official interests. In particular they complain that the International Society of Sculptors, Painters and Engravers is not officially represented on the committee.<sup>27</sup>

As weak as progressive British art was at that time, the urge toward international modernism was strong, as was the recognition of the rôle of French artists. The Spielmanns were bound to stand against this. Organisers of British contributions to numerous exhibitions from 1880, for them the preRaphaelites were to fine art what the Arts and Crafts Movement was to design and architecture; that was, a recent, indigenous style with a moral dimension and a reverence for the past. Impressionism and post-impressionism, they believed, were none of these things.<sup>28</sup>

The British artists to appear most consistently in international exhibitions both in Britain and abroad were Sir Edward Burne-Jones (1823-1898), Sir John Everett Millais (1829-1896), William Powell Frith (1819-1909) and Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema (1836-1912). All were proclaimed at various times as best British artist (even though Alma-Tadema was Dutch and exhibited with Holland in the Paris show of 1867) and all four exerted enormous influence over their contemporaries. It would be fair to say also that Burne-Jones had influence on European symbolism between 1880 and 1906. Between them the four covered remarkable stylistic and conceptual ground; historicism, eclecticism, exoticism, symbolism and classicism were within their collective remit, shrouded in veils of sentiment, anecdote and repressed sexuality. As four pinnacles of British art perhaps they point to the real problem within British fine art sections; the genuine lack of quality art inside and outside establishment circles. After the decline of romanticism Britain failed to generate a body of work of genuine merit in either painting or sculpture. The real dearth came in the closing decade of the nineteenth century, W. R. Sickert being one of the few exceptions to the general trend. It is not insignificant that the British were the first to enshrine the idea of old masters at exhibitions, for at the end of the nineteenth century the retreat back to Hogarth, Turner and Constable was the only way to provide weight to displays. The French chose to exclude artists of quality on ideological grounds; the British had no such luxury of choice. The general mediocrity of their art through the period was highlighted by international exhibitions; the causes of this failing are outside the remit of this text, the evidence of it is not and is indisputable.<sup>29</sup>

America had different problems in the fine arts from those of Europe. These were both physical and ideological. There were few indigenous trained artists of real ability in 1855 when the first fine art section opened in Paris, and America had no identifiable independent tradition. The problem of availability was immediate, practical and denied the luxury of debate. The solution was unhappily found by exhibiting the work of twelve Beaux-Arts trained Americans resident in Paris. Of the forty-two works exhibited, none were made in America and many of them had never been on the American continent. Only G. P. A. Healy noted himself as having a second residence and studio (apart from Paris) in America, in Boston. With fourteen works he was the most heavily exhibited American artist, followed by W. P. Babcock with eight works. By the time of the second Paris Exposition in 1867 the National Academy of Design in New York had begun to train painters and sculptors, Massachusetts, Cornell and Illinois were training architects and the number of fine artists in all disciplines receiving training in Europe had increased dramatically. Despite the nearness of the Civil War, representation in the fine art palace was increased to fifty-three artists showing ninety-five works, outstripping many of the smaller European nations. At this Exposition the majority of artists lived in America, Winslow Homer being the only exhibitor whose name remains immediately familiar. In Paris in 1878 there was only a slight increase, to eighty artists showing 107 works, but in 1889 a dramatic expansion took place. Inspired probably by the foundation of the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts in 1876 and of museums in Boston and New York, the number of American artists of all kinds had increased remarkably. 357 artists showed work, a number exceeded only by France and Britain and in the grand total of works (572) America was outstripped only by France. This quietened a little by 1900 to 226 artists and 265 works but by then America had confirmed itself as one of the largest producers of fine art in the West. In forty-five years she had moved, in bulk if not in quality, from nowhere to the front rank.

Once the French had set the precedent of having vast quantities of fine art in expositions, no event was respectable without it. It was therefore decided at the onset to have a large art section in the Philadelphia Centennial in 1876, to be placed in the Memorial Hall, the only permanent building erected on the site. When estimates were made after consultation with the European contingent, an annex had to be built on the back of the Memorial Hall to accomodate a substantial overspill. The person appointed to organise the art section was John Sartain, a director of the Pennsylvania Academy and a well known figure on the American scene.<sup>30</sup> Sartain organised three committees to oversee procedures and select work in America, and three further juries in Paris, Munich and Rome to choose work by Americans working in Europe. Ships from the fleet were dispatched to Italy, France and Britain to pick up the selected work. In total 1008 pieces by American artists were collected, a massive achievement on the part of Sartain and his team on consideration of the distances involved.

Most popular in the Memorial Hall was the British section. The 247 paintings sent from public and private collections were a fair reflection both of contemporary practice and older art. Observers reported long queues to see Frith’s ‘Marriage of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales’, the most successful work at the Fair.<sup>31</sup> France sent 407 works, though these were generally agreed to be of low quality mainly by unknown artists. Still troubled by the aftermath of the war and the Commune, perhaps the greatest tribute was that France sent anything at all. Germany, Italy, Holland and Belgium all sent sizable representations, making the exhibition physically bigger than most of its European forerunners. Sadly, quality was low in most areas because of a reluctance on the part of patrons to send their possessions such distances. The American sections disappointed most critics and did indeed seem to indicate that whilst the necessary institutions were now established, they needed to mature before they could achieve the required level of academic proficiency. Grand exceptions to this unsureness were Winslow Homer, William Merritt Chase and Thomas Eakins. Had the latter been born in France or Britain, his reputation would have been far greater than it was, being one of the best handlers of paint anywhere in the world at that time.

The Chicago Columbian seventeen years later was larger and more impressive than the Centennial, with almost nine thousand works of art in its Fine Arts Building. The building itself, by Charles Atwood, was reconstructed in 1932 and is now the Chicago Museum of Natural History. By 1893 it was clear America could emulate Europe in the quantity and scale of its fine art practice. The question of identity remained. At the Columbian the use of classical architecture signalled the acceptance of Europe as the forebear; accompanying this was the belief that a conservative approach to design would bestow American culture with dignity. The exhibition did the same for painting and sculpture. A dry academicism was to be found everywhere in the American sections, with a correspondingly severe representation from Europe. A mold was created there which survived half a century; in the wake of the Columbian an academy system took a grip on training and exhibiting, barely slackening even after the Second World War. When modernism surfaced in painting and sculpture in America it did so largely in the private sector, as in France. Unlike France however, where versions of modernism were embraced offically in all the visual arts during the 1930’s, America accepted modernism in the design arts without inaugurating a parallel move in painting and sculpture. The struggles of painters toward internationalism and modernism in America thus went uncharted by the World’s Fairs. Interestingly, when the Museum of Modem Art New York opened in 1929, followed by the Museum of Non-objective art in 1931 in the same city, the art shown was, by policy, almost exclusively European. American authorities, through feelings of inferiority and possibly snobbishness, evidently decided indigenous artists were incapable of genuine artistic innovation. American painters and sculptors were condemned in advance by exhibition organisers and gallery supervisors to follow Europe.<sup>32</sup>

In the twentieth century the only stylistic variance from European trends at World’s Fairs emerged not in the painting and sculpture of the fine art buildings but in the mural and sculpture decoration on many of the sites. Here, a grandiose form of regionalism developed which had no exact equivalent in Europe. Reaching its definitive form in Fairs on the West Coast, the idiom allowed artists to treat themes from popular myth and culture in a bold, gregarious manner. This public art was later to have an influence on ‘regionalist’ artists such as Thomas Hart Benton, Reginald Marsh and Grant Wood and hundreds of artists employed on the Federal Art Project in the mid 1930’s.<sup>33</sup>

World’s Fairs were obsessive about the display of European old masters. Fine art pavilions after 1900 came to resemble superbly assembled museums, paintings flooding over the Atlantic to make some of the exhibitions the finest ever staged anywhere, fudging from the majority of Fairs after the First World War, Cezanne was considered to be as far as one could go chronologically before the realm of the old masters was left for that of the new. In Chicago at the ‘Century of Progress’ exhibition (1933) there was what amounted to a Cezanne retrospective show, backed by large numbers of works by Manet, Monet and Renoir.<sup>34</sup> A stunning collection of art from the Renaissance onwards was gathered for the New York World’s Fair six years later, this touring various American museums after the Fair until 1942. The definitive gathering of old masters came at the San Francisco Golden Gate Exposition in the same year, when the section organisers set themselves to gather not the largest but the highest calibre exhibition possible. The director of the Division of European Art, Walter Heil, boasted that ‘the splendid co-operation of European authorities has enabled us to show a considerable number of masterworks of singular greatness and fame such as the American public has not until now been privileged to see’.<sup>35</sup> As well as European works from American collections, paintings and sculptures were borrowed from Italy, Holland, France and Britain. The list of exhibits was remarkable, including work by Fra Angelico, Andrea Del Sarto, Antonello da Messina, Bellini, Bernini, Botticelli, Boucher, Bronzino, Brueghel, Caravaggio, Cézanne, Constable, Courbet, Corot, David, Degas, Delacroix, Donatello, Van Dyck, El Greco, Gainsborough, Van Gogh, Goya, Hals, Hogarth, Holbein, Ingres, Lotto, Manet, Mantegna, Massaccio, Michelangelo, Millet, Monet, Parmigianino, Piero di Cosimo, Pissarro, Pollaiuolo, Poussin, Raphael, Rembrandt, Renoir, Rubens, Signorelli, Sisley, Steen, Tintoretto, Titian, Turner, Velasquez, Veronese and Zurbarin.<sup>36</sup> In its quality and breadth this exhibition was never surpassed in the whole tradition, a stunning array of the greatest painting Europe could muster. The interior of the gallery must have struck up a strange contrast with the futuristic structures and entertainment facilities on ‘Treasure Island’.<sup>37</sup>

International exhibitions had an enormous impact on institutional aspects of the fine art world. Because of them, museums and galleries were built, temporary art exhibitions became commonplace and arts administrative bodies grew into huge organisations. There is far less evidence however to suggest Palaces of Fine Art at exhibitions influenced stylistic or theoretical trends in art practice itself. On the contrary, everything indicates the artists we now regard as important from the period 1851–1939 ignored the bulk of the work in fine art sections and on occasion openly fought against it. In their turn, the fine art sections often ignored them. There were exceptions. It is hard to imagine for example that the best British artists did not benefit from some of the art brought to Britain by the French, or that the Americans were not influenced, whether for good or bad, by European art at World’s Fairs. Obviously the displays of old masters must have inspired all who went to see them. In relation to the vast quantities of art shipped from exhibition to exhibition however, the size of the influence upon artists themselves was surprisingly slight. The predominance of contemporary academic art effectively reduced the impact of the shows, room after room of anecdotal formalism presumably nullifying any inspiration which might have arisen from the odd gem. In retrospect then the fine art sections failed in one of their key rôles; to educate artists.

It would be a mistake however to condemn completely the exhibitions as artistic inspiration. There was one area where they clearly had a marked impact, namely the ethnographic displays in the imperial sections. The exhibitions played a part in introducing artists to new forms and peoples previously unavailable except through occasional museum exhibits. Particularly in French art, orientalism and primitivism were important factors in the evolution of some of the greatest practitioners, the expositions most certainly being a prime source.

The Paris expositions of 1878, 1889 and 1900 brought primitive art from Oceania and Africa to the attention of a European public more dramatically than any events before or after. The exhibits were obviously of importance to anthropologists and ethnologists, but at the latter two events for the first time artists began to take serious note. In 1889 in particular primitive art was studied as art and not as exotic trimming or curio. The first artist of stature to study and use Oceanic art was Paul Gauguin, whose interest took him on now legendary journeys to Tahiti in 1891 and 1899, where he died in 1903. After the Exposition of 1900 African art appeared to supersede Oceanic as the focus of attention. Members of the avant-garde collected pieces, Maurice de Vlaminck and André Derain, for example, having numerous West African sculptures. Interest stirred from 1878 led to the growth of private and public collections and shops dealing specifically in primitive artefacts. An ethnographic collection was kept open to the public on a constant basis at the Palais du Trocadéro after 1889.

The expositions were crucial for the formation of the theoretical position which allowed artists to push their own visual culture to one side to embrace another. The stance involved not only formal adaptations but engagement with what was thought to be the social significance of the art. Gauguin’s use of Oceania did not involve a simple lifting of form, but an adoption of what he thought was the Oceanic lifestyle. He had read about Tahiti, he had been on a foray to Martinique in 188 7, in 1889 however he saw primitive peoples in Paris and was able to make comparisons with Europe which proved critical for his art. Convinced by Jean Jacques Rousseau of the degeneracy of European urban life and the legitimacy of the idea of the ‘noble savage’, he found exactly what he needed to trigger his move to Tahiti on the Champs de Mars, living examples of people whose very mode of existence seemed to be an embodiment of art. Writing to Emile Bernard in 1890 he described his intentions:

I am not going out there to look for a job or to offer you one. What I want to do there is found the Studio of the Tropics. With the money I’ll have I can buy a native hut, like the ones you saw at the Universal Exposition. Made of wood and clay, thatched over . . . That costs next to nothing; I’ll make it bigger by cutting wood and turn it into a comfortable residence. We’ll have a cow, hens and fruit – the main expenses in our diet – and after a while we’ll be living without any expenses at all, we’ll be free . . . I’ll go out there and live withdrawn from the so-called civilised world and frequent only the so-called savages . . . Out there, having a woman is compulsory, so to speak, which will give me a model every day . . .<sup>38</sup>

Shortly afterwards he left on his brave and idealistic quest. His astonishing naivety with regard to Tahitan life would be dispelled within weeks of arriving there, reality proving far rougher than the tableau-vivant he had seen in Paris. Before deciding on Tahiti he had in fact attempted to go to Tonkin, also represented in Paris by a village. The Exposition it seems had allowed him to see the world outside Europe as a single dreamlike encampment, one place being just the same and desirable as as any other. His exotic formal and symbolic approach to painting, evolved through his primitivist philosophy, were to be massively influential on succeeding generations of young artists.<sup>39</sup>

At the 1900 Exposition Africa featured in the colonial pavilions and in the Palais du Trocadéro; in addition to this artists and craftspeople lived and worked in their villages on site. The art appealed to the young Fauves and Cubists for a variety of reasons. For them, as with Gauguin, it had appealing implications for their own lifestyles. Almost completely misinterpreting the sexual and social symbolism in the art as suggestive of total freedom, they felt themselves spiritually akin to peoples they knew nothing of. Much more than this, the directness and abstract quality of the sculpture offered viable alternatives to academic conventions; in the way they analysed African art the cubists were far