# A BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE KELMSCOTT PRESS WILLIAM S. PETERSON CLARENDON PRESS·OXFORD Oxford University Press, Walton Street, Oxford OX2 6DP Oxford New York Toronto Delli Bombay Calcutta Madras Karachi Kuala Lumnpur Singapore Hong Kong Tokyo Nairobi Dar es Salaam Cape Town Melbourne Auckland and associated conipanies in Beirut Berlin Ibadan Nicosia Oxford is a trade mark of Oxford University Press © William S. Peterson 1984 First published 1984 Reprinted with corrections 1985 Publislted in the Uuited States by Oxford University Press, New York All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or trausmitted, iu any fornu or by any meaus, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of Oxford University Press British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Peterson, William S. A bibliography of the Kelmscott Press. — (Tle Solo bibliographies; 24) 1. Kelniscott Press — Bibliography 2. Privately printed books — Bibliography I. 'T'itle II. Serics 016.094 Z1028 ISBN 0-19-818199-X Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data Peterson, William S. A bibliography of the Kelmscott Press. (The Solto bibliograplies; 24) Includes iudex. 1. Morris, W'illiam, 1834–1896. 2. Kelmscott Press. 3. Bibliography — Fine editions — Catalogs. I. Title. II. Series. Z232.M87P44 1984 016.070509421 83-25017 ISBN 0-19-818199-X Printed in Great Britain at the Alden Press, Oxford ## TO MY WIFE EILEEN ## CONTENTS ILLUSTRATIONS ix ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS xi ABBREVIATIONS xiii INTRODUCTION xvii A. Published Works B. Unfinished Books I4S C. Advertising Circulars ISS D. Ephemera 169 E. Contracts and Memoranda for Kelmscott Press Books 189 INDEX OF COLLECTIONS 199 INDEX OF ASSOCIATION COPIES OF KELMSCOTT PRESS BOOKS 203 GENERAL INDEX 207 ADDENDA AND ERRATA (August 1985) 219 ## ILLUSTRATIONS Three type faces used at the Kelmscott Press xxiii Morris's two printer's marks xxxiii Three most commonly used ornaments and paragraph symbol xxxiii F. W. Goudy with Morris's largest press xxxvii Staff of the Kelmscott Press xxxix Frontispiece of A Dream of John Ball 17 Frontispiece of News from Nowhere 35 Engraved title of The History of Godefrey of Boloyne 42 Illustration in The Story of the Glittering Plain 59 10 Engraved title of The Poems of John Keats 64 11 Frontispiece of The Wood beyond the World 72 12 First text page of The Wood beyond the World 73 13 First text page of The Tale of Beowulf 83 14 Rejected wood-engraving designed by Arthur J. Gaskin for The Well at the World's End 99 15 Engraved title of The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer I02 16 First text page of The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer IO3 17 Two pressmen printing The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer IO5 18 Page 9 of The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer 107 19 Final text page of The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer II3 Illustration in Love Is Enough I40 21 Initial word in The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer I43 22 Last advertising circular of the Kelmscott Press 166 23 Poem printed by the Kelmscott Press workers after Morris's death 186