# KELMSCOTT PRESS, UPPER MALL, HAMMERSMITH. LOVE IS ENOUGH (Two Guineas) and A NOTE BY WILLIAM MORRIS(Ten Shillings)willbereadyonMarch24.Asthesewill be the last books issued, payment is requested in advance, in order that the Press may be closed withoutavoidabledelay. Loveis Enough will have two illustrations by Sir Edward Burne-Jones, instead of one as announced. Both books are fully subscribed for. A list of the books published at the Kelmscott Press, that may still be had at the original prices, is appended, with the number of copies in stock. All orders must be accompanied by a remittance. On paper 2 Godefrey of Boloyne 11 The Well at the World's End 6 Sidonia the Sorceress 13 Beowulf On vellum 2 Sidonia the Sorceress Twenty guineas Three hand presses and the remaining plant of the Kelmscott Press(exclusiveof thetype and ornaments), will be sold by private treaty. Particus lars may be obtained from S. C. Cockerell at 14, Upper Mall, Hammersmith,W. Feb.25,1898. READY: 39,38. NEARLY READY: 47,4I (vol.i). IN THE PRESS: 42,43, 44, 50, 45. IN PREPARATION: B5, B1, B4. ALREADY PRINTED: 34, 32, 28, 17, 19, 22, I5, 7, 8, 10. Also a list of OUT OF PRINT titles. 1500 copies printed (‘Specimens’). ## C45 Morris & Co. List, 1 October 1896 (‘Specimens’, no. 125.) One leaf. Golden type. NOw READY: 41 (vols. i–ii), 39, 38. NEARLY READY: 47, 43, 44. IN THE PRESS: 45. 60o copies printed (‘Specimens’). ## C46 Announcement of Spenser's Shepheardes Calender (A44), 12 November 1896 (Specimens', no. 129.) Two leaves. Golden type. Description of book (p. 2) and order form (p. 3). Also announces as forthcoming 41 (vol. iii), 47, 45, and 51, and reports that Bı and Sigurd (A5o) as originally announced have been abandoned. 1o0o copies printed (‘Specimens’). ## C47 List, 16 February 1897 (Specimens’, no. 136.) Four leaves. Two colours. Golden type. Now READY: 41 (vols.i-iv), 39. NEARLY READY: 47,48. IN THE PRESS: 50, 45. IN PREPARATION: 5I.ALREADY PRINTED: 34,32,28,19,I5,7, 8,1O. Also a list of oUT OF PRINT titles and the following notice: KELMS-COTT BOOKS ON VELLUM. A set of all the books that have been printed on vellum at the Kelmscott Press, with the exception of Chaucer's Works, 46 volumes, price Five Hundred Pounds. 150o copies printed (‘Specimens’). ## C48 Announcement of The Water of the Wondrous Isles (A45), 28 June 1897 (Specimens’, no. 14o.) Two leaves. Golden type. Description of book (p. 2) and order form (p. 3). 105o copies printed (‘Specimens’). ## C49 List, 28 July 1897 (Specimens', no. 141.) Four leaves. Two colours. Golden type. Now READY: 45, 41 (vols. i-vi), 39. NEARLY READY: 47, 48, 50. IN THE PRESS: 5I, 46,52.ALREADY PRINTED: 34, 32, 28, 19,I5, 7,8, 10. AlsO a list of ouT OF PRINT titles and a repetition of the notice about vellum copies (see C47), but this time including a vellum copy of Chaucer's Works (A40). 15oo copies printed (‘Specimens’). ## Cso Announcement of Some German Woodcuts (A49), and A Note by William Morris (A53), 23 November 1897 (‘Specimens', no. 142.) One leaf. Golden type. Proof (dated 18 November 1897): BL C.43.c.26 (ΣQ22).This [A Note] will be the last book printed at the Kelmscott Press, which will close early in the New Year. The type will remain in the hands of the trustees for future use, but all the special ornaments will be discontinued, and the woodblocks deposited in the British Museum.' 1500 copies printed (‘Specimens’). ## C51 Announcement of Love is Enough (A52) and A Note by William Morris (A53), 25 February 1898 (‘Specimens', no. 168.) One leaf. Golden type. Proof: BL C.43.c.26 (ΣQ22). List of titles still available: 15, 39, 19, 33, 19 (vellum). Also this notice: ‘Three hand-presses and the remaining plant of the Kelmscott Press (exclusive of the type and ornaments), will be sold by private treaty. Particulars may be obtained from S. C. Cockerell at 14, Upper Mall, Hammersmith, W.' This final circular was issued in several forms, at least one of which was printed on Perch paper (Jc). In the earlier issues more books (especially vellum copies) were listed, and the announcement about the presses was not included; these issues were essentially proofs, probably sent to only a few booksellers. Cockerell's copy of an early issue bears this note: ‘12 pulls taken Jan 18 1898'(CL ‘Morrisiana 18’). D. EPHEMERA Though the kP produced a surprisingly large amount of ephemera, Morris in general disliked job printing. On 23 July 1894, for instance, Cockerell wrote to Larner Sugden: I regret that Mr. Morris has decided not to print any leaflets in future. He has done it once or twice to oblige personal friends, but it was found to interfere too much with the other work'(LB). And to F. C. Eden, on 25 September 1894, Cockerell reported that Morris ‘regrets that he does not see his way to printing the Creed, Lord's Prayer & the Commandments in the manner proposed in your letter of the 7th inst. He feels that the printing press is essentially for the multiplication of copies, & that when a single copy only is required it is much better to get it written out or painted' (LB). On the same date Morris, again through Cockerell, declined to print a syllabus for T. Edwin Ashworth, suggesting that it be printed instead at the Chiswick Press (LB). ## D1 Specimen Pages This category does not include trial pages’ prepared at the KP as an aid in designing books; by ‘specimen pages' is meant pages that were distributed to booksellers, customers and friends of the Press, or the publisher of the book in question. See also A46, which is included in Šection A rather than here because it was in fact published. 1. The Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye (A8), four pages, including the explicit (p. 1), Caxton's prologue (pp. 2-4), and Morris's colophon and printer's mark 1 (p. 4). (Copy examined: Bod. Kelmscott Press d.4.) Troy type. Eight-line initials, and corner and side borders. Last two lines on first page in red. Two leaves of Flower paper, each 274 × 193 mm (trimmed). Text: 33 lines × 13o mm. An entry in Proctor's notebook indicates that it was a ‘specimen printed for Quaritch [the publisher] 1892’. Quaritch ordered 2ooo copies of the specimen (Saks sale, no. 181[24]). 2. The History of Godefrey of Boloyne (A15), one page (the beginning of chap. CC). (Specimens’, no. 8.) Troy type. Eight-line initial and three-quarter border. Chapter title in red. One leaf of Flower paper, 287 × 204 mm. Text: 31 lines × 125 mm. Both this and the following specimen page accompanied the Godefrey announcement (Cs), which was probably issued in April 1893. 2a. The History of Godefrey of Boloyne (A15), p. 415 (beginning ‘must neds take it on hym . . .’). (‘Specimens’, no. 7.) Troy type. Six-line initials and side border. One leaf of Flower paper, 283 × 2o8 mm. Text: 32 lines × 125 mm. 3. Sidonia the Sorceress (A19), p. 12. (Specimens', no. I1.) Golden type. Six- and ten-line initials. Title and shoulder note in red. Text: 41 lines × 126 mm. This appears on the second page of the Sidonia announcement (C9), which was probably issued in October 1893. For a cancelled version of this specimen, see Saks sale, no. 181(3). 4. The Tale of King Florus and the Fair Jehane (A21), p. 85. (Specimens', no. 12.) Chaucer type. Three-line initial and shoulder title (the latter in red). Text: 22 lines × 64 mm. This appears on the second page of the King Florus announcement (C) (probably issued in December 1893), of which soo copies were printed. 5. Vitas Patrum (B3), p. 75. (‘Specimens’, no. 21.) Golden type. Sixline initial and shoulder title. One leaf of Flower paper, 29o × 207 mm. Text: 42 lines × 125 mm. This accompanied 50o copies of the prospectus of Vitas Patrum (C15), which was probably issued in late February 1894, though Vitas Patrum itself was never published. 6. The Book of Wisdom and Lies (A28), pp. 11-12. (Copies examined: BL C.1o2.h.18; BQ.) Golden type. Six-line initials. Shoulder notes and titles in red. Two leaves of Flower paper, each 204× 140 mm. Text: 30 lines × 88 mm. Morris sent three copies of these pages to Bernard Quaritch, the publisher of the book, on 17 March 1894 (BQ), and Quaritch replied on 19 March that he was ‘delighted with the specimen leaves'(HEH HM 36668). 7. The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer (A4o), pp. I-2. (‘Specimens', no. 73.) Chaucer type. Border, illustration by Burne-Jones with frame, nineteen-line initial word, and six-line initial. One leaf of Perch paper, 423 × 285 mm. Text (p. 2): two columns of 63 lines × 105 mm each. The word ‘SPECIMÊN.’ is printed in red (Golden type) in the lower left corner of p. 1. The first page differs slightly from that of the published version in that the left column contains seven rather than six lines. The specimen pages were printed in August 1894 even though all paper copies, and all but three vellum copies, of the Chaucer had already been sold. On 3o October 1894 Cockerell wrote to Allan F. Vigers: I regret to inform you that . . . the very few specimen pages struck off have been distributed among the leading booksellers' (LB). When Quaritch later asked for twenty-five copies of the specimen (after Morris had decided to print an additional ioo copies of the Chaucer), Cockerell replied on 19 November 1894: ‘The few specimens of the first sheet of the Chaucer struck off were distributed long ago, but as soon as we are printing another picture I will have an extra 25 done for you' (LB). 8. Froissart's Chronicles (B1), 16 pages. (Copy examined: Bod.) Text in Chaucer type; title on first page in Troy type. Three- and ten-line initials (many of which are left blank) and half-border. Eight leaves of Perch paper, each $4 2 0 \times 2 8 4$ mm. Text: two columns of 63 lines × 87 mm each. The colophon reads: Incomplete sheets of Froissart. 32 copies printed at the Kelmscott Press on Dec. 24, / 1896, before the distribution of the type. Not for sale.' This is a fuller version of the specimen sold at the KP $\left( \mathbf { A } _ { 4 } 6 \right)$ : the first and second pages are identical to [a]2 and [a]ı, respectively, of the latter, except that this privately printed version contains fewer ornaments. Proof of p. 1: Sotheby cat., 18 December 1944, no. 195. 9. Sigurd the Volsung (Aso), two pages (the second of which is p. 19). (Copy examined: Bod.) Text in Troy type; colophon in Chaucer type. Border, eight-line initials, blank space for fourteen-line initial word. Colophon in red. Two leaves of Perch paper, each 42o × 28o mm. Text: 49 lines × 19o mm. The second and third pages are blank. The colophon reads: [ornament 1] Incomplete sheet of Sigurd the Volsung. 32 copies printed at the Kelmscott Press on / Jan. 11, 1897, before the distribution of the type. Not for sale.' Cockerell's diary indicates that the pages were issued on 22 January 1897. The pages record the form in which Morris originally intended to print Sigurd; they were distributed to friends along with the Froissart specimen pages (above). ## D2 Press Stationery and Forms The majority of these items are undatable, but many of them appear to have been printed after Sydney Cockerell became Secretary of the Press in July 1894. Before that date, for example, Sparling seems to have carried on the kP correspondence on his personal stationery. All of the following items are printed in the Golden type. 1. Stationery. (Specimens’, no. 4o.) Kelmscott Press, Upper Mall, / Hammersmith./ 189 ’. One leaf of thin laid paper (watermarked ‘Silver Linen’), 198 × 125 mm. There are at least two variants of this. In one (Specimens’, no. 41), there are two leaves (175 × 112 mm each) of thicker laid paper. (This is watermarked ORIGINAL CREAM KENT' and appears not to have been used before July 1894: see BL Add. Ms. 45340, f. 141.) In the other (copy examined: BL C.102.h.18), the ‘Silver Linen'watermarked paper is used but the heading reads: Kelmscott Press, Upper Mall, / Hammersmith, W.' 2. Envelope. (Specimens’, no. 34.) 106 × 132 mm. On flap: ‘Kelmscott Press. 3. Envelope. (‘Specimens', no. 35.) 79 × 137 mm. Oval red ½d. stamp. On flap: Kelmscott Press. 4. Envelope. (‘Specimens', no. 38.) 8o × 134 mm. Oval pink 1d. stamp. On flap: Kelmscott Press.' 5. Envelope. (Specimens', no. 39.) 97 × 223 mm. Oval red ½d. stamp. In upper left corner: From the Kelmscott Press, Upper Mall, Hammersmith.'A blue variant of this, without the stamp, was sold at the Saks sale, no. 186. 6. Postcard. (‘Specimens’, no. 36.) ‘Kelmscott Press, Upper Mall, / Hammersmith./ 189 . / I beg to acknowledge your order for / which shall receive attention. / Secretary. / To 7. Postcard. (‘Specimens', no. 37.) ‘Kelmscott Press, Upper Mall, Hammersmith. / 189 / Secretary./ To 8. Postcard. (Copies examined: BL C.43.g.19.) Addressed: ‘The Secretary, / KELMSČOTT PRESS, / UPPÉR MALL, / HAMMER-SMITH, / LONDON, W.'The copies examined are postmarked November 1897. 9. Form for summary of work completed by the printers. (Copies examined: BL C.43.g.16.) One leaf of ledger paper, 226 × 316 mm. The copies examined are dated 1897. 1o. Paper and vellum account form. (Copies examined: BL C.43.g.- 16.) One leaf of ledger paper, 324 × 202 mm. The copies examined are dated 1896 and 1897. I1. Invoice. (‘Specimens’, no. 53.) One leaf of thin wove paper, 132 × 207 mm. Upper Mall, Hammersmith, W. / 189 /. / In account with The Kelmscott Press. / [space for titles and prices] / N.B. Cheques and postal orders should be made out to order of William Morris, / crossed “Lloyd's Bank, Fleet Street," & addressed to the Secretary of the Kelms-/cott Press, Upper Mall, Hammersmith, W.'There are at least two variats of this, both probably earlier. In one (Specimens', no. 33) the phrase Terms: Cash.'appears in the upper left corner, and the final sentence reads: N.B. Cheques and postal orders should be made out to order of William Morris, / crossed “Lloyd's Bank, Law Courts Bank," & addressed to the Secretary of the / Kelmscott Press, Upper Mall, Hammersmith, W.'In the other variant (‘Specimens', no. 32), otherwise identical to the preceding, te final line reads: Press, H. Sparling, 8, Hammersmith Terrace, W.' 12. Form letter addressed to booksellers. (‘Specimens’, no. 31.) One leaf of Flower paper, 205 × 145 mm. ‘To the Trade only. / 14, Upper Mall, / Hammersmith, W. / Dear Sir, / We send you the enclosed, and shall / be glad to receive your orders. The discount to the / trade will be 15 per cent., and we must ask you to / understand that these terms are strictly for cash. / We shall write you when the book is actually ready / for delivery, and on receipt of your cheque your / order will be executed. / The Kelmscott Press.' The position of this item in Proctor's notebook list suggests that it may have been printed in 1894. 13. Order form. (‘Specimens', no. 54.) One leaf of Flower paper, 210 × 145 mm. ORDER FORM. / To the Secretary of the Kelmscott Press, Upper / Mall, Hammersmith. / Please to send me, when ready, /. .. . . [three lines] / for which cheque, value . . . . . . . is / enclosed. / Name . .. .. ./ Address . .. . . .. / Date . . .. . . . .. / N.B. Cheques should be made out to the order of William Morris, and crossed “Lloyd's Bank, / Fleet Street." 14. Invoice for Godefrey of Boloyne (A15), dated 2o May 1893. (‘Specimens’, no. 6.) One leaf of Flower(?) paper, 164 × 196 mm. Godefrey is spelled ‘Godefroy’. ## D3 London County Council Scholarship Certificates On 16 January 1894 H. P. Harris wrote to Morris: ‘I have been asked, to ask you if the Kelmscott Press would undertake the printing of certificates for scholarship boys etc. for the Technical Instruction Committee of the London County Council. There is a feeling that to have such things printed in the best possible way would be a good thing all round. What do you say to it? If you are disposed to take it up, I will let the proper authorities know'(cLMorrisiana 23’). By the following autumn the Press received the first printing order. Morris is said to have complained, ‘I am not a jobbing printer', but he agreed to the request because of his friendship with Dr William Garnett of the Technical Education Board (Colebrook, p. 37). Cockerell wrote to Garnett on 26 October 1894: I beg to acknowledge, with thanks, your order of yesterday's date for 1ooo copies of the certificate, which shall be put in hand as soon as possible. I regret that we are unable to supply envelopes'(LB). And on 2o November Cockerell reported to Garnett: ‘The certificates have now been printed, & they will be sent to you today. I hope that you will find them satisfactory'(LB). Each of the certificates was printed in the Golden type, with one decorated initial, on a single leaf of Flower paper approximately 18o × 225 mm, using the frames designed by Morris for the illustrations in the Chaucer (A4o). (However, two of the certificates – nos. 22 and 28 – include frames intended for the Chaucer but not printed in it.) Altogether 9942 copies of the certificates were printed. The following list is based on a table supplied by Tomkinson (pp. 127-8), the details of whichare taken from the set of Certificates in Mr. S. C. Cockerell's Collection'; an annotated set of certificates in the ‘Specimens' book; an incomplete annotated set in NYPL; entries in Proctor's notebook; and an analysis of the certificates in Proctor's hand (CL Morrisiana 23’). 1. Junior County Scholarship. (Specimens', no. 61.) Printed 2o November 1894. Undated. Frame 4. 100o copies printed. 2. Schools of Art Scholarship. (‘Specimens', no. 98.) Printed January 1896. Undated. Frame 1. 75 copies printed. Corrected proof: ‘Specimens’, no. 97. 3. Schools of Art Scholarship. Printed January 1896. Dated June 1895. 175 candidates. Frame 1. 25 copies printed. Identical to no. 2 except for the date and number of candidates. Corrected proof: Specimens’, no. 97. 4. Artisan Art Scholarship. (‘Specimens', no. 95.) Printed January 1896. Undated. Frame 15. 75 copies printed. Corrected proof: ‘Specimens’, no. 96. 5. Artisan Art Scholarship. Printed January 1896. Dated June 1895. 82 candidates. Frame 15. 25 copies printed. Identical to no. 4 except for the date and number of candidates. Corrected proof: ‘Specimens', no. 96. 6. Intermediate County Scholarship. (‘Specimens’, no. 93.) Printed January 1896. Undated. Frame 3. 15o copies printed. Corrected proof: ‘Specimens’, no. 94. 7. Intermediate County Scholarship. Printed January 1896. Dated June 1895. 565 candidates. Frame 3. 150 copies printed. (100 copies printed, according to Tomkinson.) Identical to no. 6 except for the date and number of candidates. Corrected proof: ‘Specimens’, no. 94. 8. Certificate of Five Month's [sic] Instruction at a School of Domestic Economy. (Specimens', no. 9o.) Printed January 1896. Undated. Frame 5. soo copies printed. 9. Junior County Scholarship. (‘Specimens', no. 89.) Printed January 1896. Undated. Frame 4. 1ooo copies printed. Identical to no. 1 except that there is no comma at the end of the second line. 1o. Evening Art Exhibition. (‘Specimens', no. 92.) Printed January 1896. Dated June 1895. 269 candidates. Frame 2. 125 copies printed. (12o copies printed, according to Tomkinson.) II. Evening Exhibition in Science and Technology. (‘Specimens', no. 91.) Printed January 1896. Dated June 1895. 223 candidates. Frame 13. 120 copies printed. 12. Senior County Scholarship. (‘Specimens', no. 99.) Printed January 1896. Dated July 189 . Frame 10. 30 copies printed. 13. Domestic Economy Training Scholarship Tenable at the Battersea Polytechnic Institute. (Specimens', no. 13ī.) Printed January 1897. Undated. Frame 1o. 30 copies printed. 14. Horticultural Scholarship Tenable at the Swanley Horticultural College. (‘Specimens’, no. 13o.) Printed January 1897. Dated July 1896. Frame 18. 12 copies printed. 15. Evening Exhibition in Science and Technology. (Specimens', no. 133.) Printed 15 January 1897. Dated April 1896. 285 candidates. Frame 17. 10o copies printed. 16. Evening Art Exhibition. (‘Specimens', no. 134.) Printed 15 January 1897. Dated April 1896. 270 candidates. Frame 9. 120 copies printed. 17. Intermediate County Scholarship. (Specimens', no. 132.) Printed 15 January 1897. Dated June 1896. 872 candidates. Frame 8. 80 copies printed. 18. Artisan Art Scholarship. (Specimens', no. 135.) Printed 27January 1897. Dated March 1896. 84 candidates. Frame 9. 30 copies printed. 19. Domestic Economy Training Scholarship Tenable at the Battersea Polytechnic Institute. (Specimens', no. 16o.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 13. 75 copies printed. Corrected proof: CL. 2o. Senior County Scholarship. (‘Specimens', no. 158.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 11. so copies printed. Corrected proof: CL. 21. Junior Scholarship in Practical Gardening, Tenable at the Royal Botanic Society's Gardens in Regent's Park. (Specimens', no. I59.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 1o. 50 copies printed. Corrected proof: CL. 22. Junior Artisan Evening Art Exhibition. (Specimens', no. 164.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 19. 45o copies printed. The frame does not appear in the Chaucer, because Morris found it to be unsatisfactory. 23. Intermediate County Scholarship. (‘Specimens', no. 163.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 18. 35o copies printed. Corrected proof: CL. 24. School of Art Scholarship. (‘Specimens', no. 161.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 6. 10o copies printed. Corrected proof: CL. 25. Artisan Art Scholarship. (‘Specimens', no. 162.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 4. 15o copies printed. Corrected proof: CL. 26. Certificate of Having Attended a Course of Five Month's [sic] Instruction at a School of Domestic Economy. (‘Specimens', no. 166.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 12. 2ooo copies printed. Corrected proof: CL. 27. Evening Exhibition in Science and Technology. (Specimens’, no. 165.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 17. 55o copies printed. (soo copies printed, according to Tomkinson.) Corrected proof: CL. 28. Junior County Scholarship. (Specimens’, no. 167.) Printed February 1898. Undated. Frame 2o. 25oo copies printed. Note by Cockerell: ‘This border was not used in the Chaucer. It was originally printed round the cut on p. 6o, but being found too dark the sheet was cancelled & the frame changed’(cL Morrisiana 23'). Corrected proof: CL. 29. Horticultural Scholarship Tenable at the Swanley Horticultural College. (Specimens', no. 57.) Printed 4 March 1898, according to Proctor's notebook. (Printed February 1898, according to Tomkinson.) Frame 16. 20 copies printed. Corrected proof: CL. ## D4 Keats Memorial Leaflet ‘AN AMERICAN MEMORIAL TO KEATS.'(‘Specimens', no. 3o.) Golden type, three- and ten-line initials. 2 leaves (printed on outer side of first leaf only) of Flower paper, each 207 × 144 mm. 750 copies. Ms in Sir Edmund Gosse's hand and corrected proof: CL Morrisiana 23’. The occasion was the unveiling of a bust of Keats by Miss Anne Whitney of Boston at Hampstead Parish Church on 16 July 1894. On 18 June, Gosse, who was to participate in the ceremony, wrote to Morris: I have just received from Mr Day, of the American Keats Memorial Committee, a note from Lyons asking me to send you the enclosed form of invitation, which he tells me you are going to print at the Kelmscott Press. I have copied out his rough draft, & send you the form. I presume that Mr Day has communicated fully on the subject with you already'(CL Morrisiana 23’). In a cancelled version of the leaflet (Specimens', no. 44), it was announced that Bret Harte would represent the donors and that Dr Alexander C. MacKenzie would perform on the organ: Cancelled, as neither Bret Harte, nor Dr Mackenzie were able to attend’(Cockerell's note) (CL‘Morrisiana 23’). An accompanying invitation (‘Specimens’, no. 29) to the unveiling is in Golden type, with six-line initial. 2 leaves (printed on outer side of first leaf only) of Flower paper, each 102 × 144 mm. 75o copies. ## D5 Ancoats Brotherhood Leaflet ANCOATS BROTHERHOOD. / March, 1894, to / March 1895.' (Specimens', no. 17.) Golden type, six- and ten-line initials, side and corner borders, illustration by Burne-Jones. Two leaves of Flower paper, each 204 × 143 mm. Note by Cockerell: 25o copies, 1894'(CL Morrisiana 23’). Proofs: HPL; CL ‘red portfolio'. The frontispiece of John Ball (A6) appears on p. 1; an extract from Tennyson's ‘The Golden Year' appears on p. 2; a passage from Ruskin appears on p. 3; Tennyson's Flower in the Crannied Wall'and printer's mark I appear on p. 4. The cost of production was £1o I3s. (Ledger). Morris met Charles Rowley in 1883, and, at Walker's suggestion, Rowley persuaded Morris to lecture to the Ancoats Brotherhood, a socialist workers’organization in Manchester; Morris frequently attended the Ancoats meetings thereafter (reminiscences by Rowley [BL Add. Ms. 45347, ff. 93–6]). ## D6 Address to Sir Lowthian Bell ‘TO SIR LOWTHIAN BELL, BARONET, / F.R.S., D.C.L., &c., &c., THE FOUNDER OF/ THE FIRM OF BELL BROTHERS IN THE YEAR 1844 [two ornaments 3]'. (Specimens', no. 27.) Golden type, six-line initial. Four leaves of Flower paper, each 2o7 × 144 mm. Proofs: BL C.43.c.26 (ΣFF 2o). Note by Cockerell: 250 on paper, 2 on vellum 1894’(CL‘Morrisiana 23’). The Address, dated 3o June 1894, appears on pp. 1-2; names of the officials of Bell Brothers appear on pp. 3-5; names ofthe Representatives appointed by the Workmen to make the presentation on their behalf' appear on pp. 6-7; p. 8 is blank. The occasion was the fiftieth anniniversary of the founding of Bell Brothers by Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell (1816–19o4) and his two brothers, Thomas and John. For the anniversary Walter Crane also designed a folio broadside, engraved by A. Leverett, with a portrait of Sir Lowthian, a border, and a congratulatory poem, printed by Walker & Boutall on Batchelor paper (reproduced in Saks sale, no. 152). The cost of production, not including the binding of the two vellum copies, was £3 16s. 3d. (Ledger). ## D7 Deaconess Institution Associate's Card ‘The Deaconess Institution for / the Diocese of Rochester, 83 / North Side, Clapham Common. / Associates'Card.'(Specimens', no. 137.) Chaucer and Troy types, five-line initial, frame. Two leaves of unusually thick Flower paper, each 127 × 79 mm. Design for frame: CL. Proofs: JC (corrected); CL red portfolio'. Trial proofs: Sotheby cat., 18 December 1944, no. 194; CL ‘red portfolio’. April 2. 1897. 250 & 10 copies. Flower {paper]: 2 thicknesses.'(‘Specimens’). The heading and rules appear on p. I; a prayer (within a frame) appears on pp. 2-3; a scriptural text appears on p. 4. The frame, not used elsewhere, was designed for the illustrations of a projected edition of The House of the Wolfings [B24]’ (List’). Cockerell wrote to Jane Morris on 19 March 1897: ‘Mrs Gilmore [William Morris's sister Isabella, who was head of the Institution] was anxious to have the associate's card of her institution printed at the Kelmscott Press, and it is now being done. Please let me know whether you wish her to be charged for it. It is a small affair, and one that might be made an “unbirthday present" of, if you think well' (BL Add. Ms. 52738, f. 11). ## D8 The Wayzegoose Menus The annual printers' dinners of the KP were held at the Royal Stag Hotel, Datchet, 5 September 1892; at the Crown Hotel, Broxbourne, 8 September 1893; and at the Dumb Bell Hotel, Taplow, 31 August 1894 and 13 September 1895. Only the 1894 menu is represented in the ‘Specimens’book (no. 23); in a complete set of the menus (CL 'Morrisiana 23'; another set is in PML 76941) there is this note by Cockerell: ‘A very few copies of these four menus were printed. The arrangement was that of the compositors and was not shown to Morris.'In each case the KP printers have introduced as many of the Kelmscott types and ornamênts as possible, though May Morris quotes one of the printers as complaining, . . . it isn't quite what we could have done if we'd had more “sorts"’ (Introductions, ii, 43s). The menus are each two leaves: the venue appears on p. I; the menu on p. 2; the programme on p. 3; and printer's mark 1 on p. 4. The 1892 ānd 1893 menus are on card stock (each leaf 178× 114 mm and 234× 178 mm, respectively); the 1894 and 1895 menus are on Batchelor paper (each leaf 215 × 142 mm in both). All are in two or more colours. ## D9 Greeting Cards and Invitations 1. HAMMERSMITH SOCIALIST / SOCIETY/ Request the pleasure of / [blank space for name] / Company on Saturday, January 3oth, 1892, / at 8 p.m. / R.S.V.P. / Kelmscott House, Upper Mall, Hammersmith.'(‘Specimens’, no. 171.) Golden type, three-line initial. Two leaves of Batchelor paper, each 75 × 115 mm. Proof: BL C.43.c.26 (ΣQQ46). 2. ‘THE HAMMERSMITH / SOCIALIST SOCIETY / REQUEST THE PLEA-/SURE OF THE COM-/PANY OF / [blank space for name] / ON SATURDAY, FEBRUARY ıth,/ 1893, AT 8 p.m. / MUSIC. / KELMSCOTT HOUSE, / UPPER MALL, / HAMMERSMITH, W.'(‘Specimens’, no. 172.) Golden type, five-line initial. Two leaves of Whatman paper, each 95 × 119 mm. 3. 8, Hammersmith Terrace, W. / New Year's Greeting / from / May Sparling. / 1893-1894.'(Copy examined: FM[1].) Chaucer type. One leaf of Batchelor paper, 70 × 1o5 mm. 4. ‘8, Hammersmith Terrace, W. / New Year's Greeting from / May Sparling. / 1895-1896.'(Proof only examined: CL.) Chaucer type. 5. ‘WISHING YOU A/ MERRY XMAS / AND A HAPPY / NEW YEAR [two ornaments 3] / Dec. 1896.'(Copies examined: BL C.43.f.24 [∆b12]; CL). Troy type, four-line initial, 16° border (turned ninety degrees). Tompkinson (p. 125) describes this as the Unofficial Xmas Card of the Pressmen'. The BL copy is inscribed to May Morris, the CL copy to Cockerell. This is probably the card listed in the Perry Collection, no. 192, which is inscribed With G. Funstres best wishes’and bears the note (by Cockerell?) ‘Designed by one of the workmen'. See also D4. ## Dro Book Labels Except for no. 1, the following book labels were printed at the Kelmscott Press during 1897 and 1898. The numbers of copies printed are supplied by the ‘Specimens' book. All are in the Golden type on Batchelor paper. Several book labels were also printed in the Golden type at the Chiswick Press after the closing of the KP, but they are not included in the following list. In the Bodleian Library (JC) is a proof on Perch paper of two designs perhaps intended for a bookplate for Morris. Since the lettering is very poor, the designs are probably not by Morris. I.‘FROM THE LIBRARY / OF WILLIAM MORRIS / KELMSCOTT HOUSE / HAMMERSMITH'(Specimens', no. 124). Printed in November 1896 while negotiations for the sale of Morris's library were being carried on by Cockerell and Ellis. 2.FROM THE LIBRÂRY OF/ EDWARD BURNE-JONES / THE GRANGE NORTH/ END ROAD FULHAM [two ornaments 3]’(‘Specimens’, no. 147). 2ooo copies printed. Two trial versions (cL) are dated 1o December 1897. 3. FROM THE LIBRARY / OF EMERY WALKER / NO. III THE TERRACE / HAMMERSMITH [two ornaments 3]’ (‘Specimens', no. 149). 4. ‘FROM THE LIBRARY OF / CH: FAIRFAX MURRAY' (Specimens', no. 151). sooo copies printed. 5. EX LIBRIS / C. F. MURRAY'(‘Specimens', no. I52). 100 copies printed. Smaller than the preceding. 6. FROM THE LIBRARY / OF MAY MORRIS [two ornaments 3]'(‘Specimens', no. 153). 50o copies printed. 7. ‘EX LIBRIS JOHANNIS ET / MARGARETAE MAC-KAIL'(‘Specimens', no. 148). 2ooo copies printed. 8.‘FROM THE LIBRARY OF / LAURENCE W. HOD-SON,/ COMPTON HALL, NEAR / WOLVERHAMPTON.’ (Specimens', no. 15o). sooo copies printed. 9. FROM THE LIBRARY / OF H. C. MARILLIER, / KELMSCOTT HOUSE, / HAMMERSMITH.’(Specimens', no. 146). I0.GIVEN BY MRS WILLIAM MORRIS / IN MEMORY OF HER HUSBAND 1897’(‘Specimens', no. 144). Used in the surplus copies of kP books donated to various British libraries late in 1897. ## Dı Spine Labels Only special labels are listed here; for descriptions of spine labels on the κP books, see Section A. I. MORRIS / HOPES / & / FEARS / FOR ART'(Golden type). (Copies examined: BL C.43.c.26 [ΣQQ43]; CL.) Batchelor paper. On the CL copy is this note by Cockerell: ‘Done for my copy of the book which had lost its label. scc'. 2.‘EXHIBITION OF/VENETIAN ART/NEW GALLERY / 121, REGENT ST. / LONDON, W. 1895. / Price One Shilling.’ (Golden type). (‘Specimens’, no. 65.) Proof paper. With the following notes by Cockerell: Dec 19. 94 for Walker & Boutall'; ‘Not used’. The label may have been abandoned because the spine of the volume was extremely narrow. 3. When the kP was winding down its operations, Mrs. Morris gave books from the remaining stock to a number of British libraries, each accompanied by a presentation label (see Dio.1o). Most of these books were offered in a quarter holland binding, though they were originally issued in limp vellum at the time of publication; hence it became necessary to print new spine labels for the following books. (Copies examined: BL C.43.26 [∆.d.1.].) ‘SIDONIA / THE / SORCER-ESS.'(Troy type). ‘GODEFREY / OF / BOLOYNE.' (Troy type). ‘THE GLIT-/TERING / PLAIN. (Golden type). ‘THE WELL / AT THE / WORLD'S END / BY / WILLIAM / MORRIS' (Golden type). A proof of the last label appears in the ‘Specimens’' book (no. 123) with this note: 5o [copies printed]. Oct. 31, 1896'. ## D12 Miscellaneous 1. CHANGE OF ADDRESS. / [ornament 2] Mr. Halliday Sparling, having been com-/pelled by the pressure of other work to resign / the Secretaryship to the Kelmscott Press, has / been succeeded by Mr. S. C. Cockerell. Cor-/respondents are asked to note the consequent / change of address.'(Specimens’, no. 28.) Golden type. One leaf of Batchelor paper, 69 × 138 mm. Inserted in the list of 2 July 1894 (see C23), on which date the change became effective. Sparling resigned the Secretaryship because his marriage with Morris's daughter May had broken up. 2. For errata and other slips inserted in the KP books, see A7, A32, A35, A42, and A53. 3. According to Tomkinson (p. 126), An Address Delivered . . . at the Distribution of Prizes to Students of the Birmingham Municipal School of Art (1898), the first of six lectures by Morris printed by the Chiswick Press in the Golden type and published by Longmans, was set up at the Kelmscott Press just before it closed and the type was transferred to the Chiswick Press for printing, but a copy is in the possession of Mr. S. C. Cockerell, printed at the Kelmscott Press before the type was transferred’. 4.‘WILLIAM MORRIS /POET CRAFTSMAN / SOCIAL-IST LIVED / HERE 1878-1896’. (Copy examined: CL.) Golden type on Batchelor paper. Note by Cockerell: ‘This is reproduced outside Kelmscott House' 5. ‘THIS BOOKCASE FORMERLY BE-/LONGED TO WILLIAM MORRIS [ornament 3]'. (Copy examined: CL.) Golden type on Batchelor paper. Note by Cockerell: ‘Done for the purchaser of one of w.M.'s bookcases'. 6. IN MEMORY OF / JAMES LEIGH JOYNES / FOR-MERLY SCHOLAR OF / ETON COLLÈGE AND OF / KING'S COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE / BORN MAY 29th 1853 / DIED JANUARY 13th 1893 / UNTIL THE DAY BREAK AND / THE SHADOWS FLEE AWAY.'(Copy examined: CL.) Golden type on Batchelor paper. Joynes was a former classical master at Eton who became associated with some of Morris's socialist activities. 7. ‘IN LOVING AND REV-/ERENT MEMORY OF / HENRIETTA JONES, / THE WIFE OF / WILLIAM JOHN JONES / (SYLVANUS DAUNCEY) / BORN JULY 12th, 1865, / DIED MAY 24th, 1896. / “BELOVED TILL LIFE / CAN CHARM NO MORE, AND MOURNED TILL/ PITY'S SELF BE DEAD."’(Copy examined: CL.) Golden type on Batchelor paper. 8. IN MEMORY OF THOMAS SADLER, Ph.D., / BORN JULY 5, 1822. DIED SEPT 1, 1891 [ornament 2] MINISTER FROM 1846, OF THE OLD CHAPEL / & FROM 1862 OF THE CONGREGATION MEETING HERE [ornament 2] FIVE TIMES / DURING A PASTORATE OF 45 YEARS HIS FOLD WAS ENLARGED FOR AN / INCREASING FLOCK, DRAWN TO HIM BY THE GRACES OF HIS APOSTOLIC / CHARACTER [ornament 2] BORN OF THE SPIRIT, HE SHARED THE BLESSING OF THE PURE / IN HEART [ornament 2] THE SECRET OF A LIFE HID WITH CHRIST IN GOD WAS FELT / IN THE SERVICES OF THIS HOUSE, & SEEN IN HIS PATIENCE OF FAITH, HOPE, & / LOVE [ornament 2] VERSED IN THE SCRIPTURES & THE RECORDS OF THÈ CHURCH, HE / LOOKED ON THEIR HUMAN TRAITS WITH HISTORIC SYMPATHY, & ON / THEIR LIGHTS OF DIVINE TRUTH AS INTO THE OPENED HEAVENS [ornament 2] / HE LOVED THE COMMUNION OF SAINTLY SOULS CHIEFLY OF THOSE / NEAREST TO THE SIMPLICITY OF CHRIST [two ornaments 2] IN HIS OWN HOME,/ SUDDENLY, SILENTLY, ALONE， HE PASSED WITHIN THE VEIL WHERE / ALL LIVE UNTO GOD.’(‘Specimens', no. 64.) Note by Cockerell: ‘Nov. 1894. 450 copies' (cL Morrisiana 23’). Golden type. One leaf of Flower paper, 123 × 253 mm. Corrected proof: BL C.43.f.24 (∆b12). A slip giving the text of a memorial to Dr. Thomas Sadler, for distribution at the unveiling of it in Rosslyn Hill Chapel, Hampstead' (List’). On 17 September 1894, Cockerell wrote to Morris & Co.: We can print the inscription by Thursday next, if you give the order by return of post. The size of the paper will be determined by the length that the lines make, as we have only one size of Roman type. The cost of 45o copies will be two guineas'(LB). On 2o November he wrote again: ‘As the time was so short, & it might be inconvenient to print the inscription later in the week, I thought it best to put it in hand at once. A few copies had been struck off when your telegram arrived, but the correction has now been made'(LB). 9. Morris supplied specimen passages in the Golden, Chaucer, and Troy types, printed on one side only of a single leaf of Flower paper (‘Specimens', no. 75), 189 × 138 mm, to be included in Edward F. Strange's Alphabets: A Handbook of Lettering with Historical, Critical and Practical Descriptions, Ex-Libris Series (London: George Bell and Sons, 1895), following p. 2o6. Note by Cockerell: 2ooo like this and 6o on large paper. Dec. '94.’(CL ‘Morrisiana 23’). On 7 December 1894 Strange wrote to Cockerell: ‘Thanks for the proof which I like very much. I have sent it on to Messrs. Bell & Sons from whom you will receive a formal order, with precise details as to size of paper &c'(íEH HM 36674). To Gleeson White, the editor of the series, Cockerell