# The Gates Operating System

An unpalatable example of shovelware from Time magazine. This page is 1,577 pixels tall and requires a small-screen user to scroll through three to four windowfuls, and yet it is only one of 12 pages in the total article. Great example of why repurposing doesn't work.

<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>NSERCH</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=2>JANUARY 13, 1997 VOL. 149 NO. 2It&#x27;s a rainy night, and Gates is bombing around in his darkblue Lexus. He loves fast cars. When Microsoft was based inAlbuquerque, New Mexico, in its early years, he bought aPorsche 911 and used to race it in the desert; Paul Allen hadto bail him out of jarl after one midnight escapade. He gotthree speeding tickets--two from the same cop who wastrailing him-just on the dnve from Albuquerque the weekend</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>OF THEREALBILLGATES</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>he moved Microsoft to Seattle. Later he bought a Porsche930 Turbo he called the &quot;rocket,&quot; then a Mercedes, a JaguarXJ6, a $60,000 Carrera Cabriolet 964, a $380,000 Porsche959 that ended up impounded in a customs shed because itcouldn&#x27;t meet import emission standards, and a Ferrari 348that became known as the &quot;dune buggy&quot; after he spun itinto the sand.Despite this record, Gates is not wearing a seat belt. (Adilemma: Is it too uncool to use mine?) He rarely looks at youwhen he talks, which is disconcerting, but he does so whenhe&#x27;s driving, which is doubly disconcerting. (I buckle up. Ashis mother and others have learned, it&#x27;s not always prudentto compete.) He turns into a dark drive with a chain-linkfence that slides open as the Lexus approaches. It&#x27;snearing midnight, and the security guard looks a bit startled.Gates&#x27; home of the future has been under construction formore than four years, and is not expected to be completed</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>unti this summer. Built into a bluff fronting Lake Washington,t nas 40,000 sq. ft. of space and will cost about $40 million. uming against the night sky are three connected pavilionsof giass and recycled Douglas fir beams, looking a bit like acorporate conference center masquerading as a resort.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Gates swings into a vaulted 30-car garage carved into thehillside. In the corner, like a museum piece, sits his parents</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>pavilion is mainly for public entertaining,&quot; he says as he pickshis way past construction debris down four levels of stairs.Despite the hour, threa technicians are working in theground-floor reception hall, with its view of the OlympicMountains across Lake Washington, adjusting two dozen40-in, monitors that will form a flat-screen display coveringan entire wall, &quot;When you visit, you&#x27;ll get an electronic pinencoded with your preferences,&quot; he explains. &quot;As youalong with the music you like or a TV show or movie you&#x27;rewatching. The system will learn from your choices, and it willremember the music or pictures from your previous visits so</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=3 colspan=1>ones, We&#x27;ll have to have hierarchy guidelines, for when morethan one person goes to a room.&quot; Like Gates himself, it&#x27;s allMoving into the center pavilion, Gates shows off what willbe the library. A mammoth carved wooden dome hangs just</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>above the floor, waiting to be r</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>aised into the cupola. (I</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>wonder: Does this grand chamber dispel my fear that he will</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>relegate print to museum status? Or inadvertently confirmit?) He has hired a New York rare-books dealer to stock thelibrary for him. His current reading is eclectic. &quot;On a recenttrip to Italy,&quot; he says, &quot;I took the new Stalin biography, abook about Hewlett-Packard, Seven Summits [amountaineering book by Dick Bass and the late Disneypresident Frank Wells] and a Wallace Stegner novel.&quot;He&#x27;salso a fan of Philip Roth&#x27;s, John Irving&#x27;s, Ernest J. Gaines&#x27; andDavid Halberstam&#x27;s, but his all-time favorite novels are theschoolboy standards The Catcher in the Rye, The GreatGatsby and A Separate Peace. A nearby room will be filled byan enormous trampoline; at the office he sometimesand he finds bouncing on a trampoline as conducive toconcentration as rocking.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>The only completed part of the house is the indoor poolunder the famıly quarters. A sleek lap pooł reflacting imagesbath area. The security guard reappears and warns, &quot;Be</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6 of 12</td></tr></table>