CHAPTER 16 # A New Era of Design? he material in this book represents our progress to date in learning how to design sustainable human ecosystems. None of these concepts or techniques is perfect; all can bear improvement. Nevertheless, I do believe a fruitful direction has been established. We are beginning to learn to design the landscape in a responsible way. To act responsibly, we need to have some understanding of the consequences of our actions, that is, to make predictions. Ecosystematic design is based on predictions of the structural and functional forms that will take shape in the landscape following our actions. In the perspective of history, we might even view this predictive approach as a new phase in the shaping of the physical environment. Looking back, we can see at least three earlier phases that brought us to where we are now. First, there is the instinctive phase, which is still the way of all nonhuman species. Building is done without plan or forethought, by following programs somehow implanted in the genes. Some incredibly complex, technically sophisticated creations have come about in this way. Witness the spider web, the termite hill, and the beehive. If human beings once had such instincts, they are considerably less effective now than those of the spider, the termite, or the honeybee. The earliest living environments made by man, and those still being built by primitive peoples today, reflect the next phase, which is shaped by tradition, or the application of accumulated knowledge. Each generation passes on its store of technical wisdom to the next, which then builds in essentially the same way, usually with minor improvements. Thus, the traditional forms are both conserved and continuously bettered. Over time, they achieve an en--vironmental fit that serves their purpose well. Next is the form-making phase, in which the completed form is envisioned and described on paper before it is built. Human capacities for reason and insight are brought to bear, and a high level of invention becomes possible. This phase reached its highest development between the beginning of the Renaissance and our own day. At their best, the results are as formally logical and symbolically meaningful as Villa Lante or Versailles, but they seldom achieve the environmental fit. Finally, the emerging era of predictive adaptation uses the skills developed in earlier phases and adds to them our abilities for storing knowledge and for technological manipulation, for reason, insight, and invention, for predicting the behavior of an imagined form in relation to its environment. and for shaping it on that basis. It is unlikely that prediction in design, occurring as it does in the infinitely variable world of reality, will ever be entirely deterministic. We have a great many tools and techniques, considerable volumes of information, many data—all useful, even indispensable—to help us in our predicting, but there is no method, no formula for success. The intangible and the ineffable always enter in. Even though the possibilities are infinite, we need to be willing to explore them. The exploring involves both halves of the brain: imagining future landscapes and analyzing their behavior. I believe it is one of the promising achievements of our times that so many people are taking part in the imagining and predicting. Genuinely participatory processes are beginning to take place, in design if not in government, but these do not simplify or clarify design processes. Rather they add layer upon layer of varied values and perceptions. It is important to recognize that, however sophisticated our tools and techniques, the unexpected can always occur. With prediction goes uncertainty. Recognizing the inevitability of uncertainty and having done all we can to shape a system that will behave as predicted, we need to minimize the possibility of catastrophe when it does not. We need to be as sure as humanly possible that when the unexpected does occur, it does not bring about a disaster. This means checks, balances, feedback, complexity, sometimes a conservative stance. In ecosystem design, the whole stake should never ride on a roll of the dice. The second quality we must ensure is a capacity for adaptive change. Creative change should always be possible as a designed system interacts with its environment. Herein lies the importance of the linkage between design and management. Forms should be pliable, not rigid. The Taoist way is really the way of human ecosystems, although we also have to adapt to an economic world that operates in a generally Confucian way. All in all, we have not learned to do it very well yet, but I believe we have at least reached the point where we know what we are trying to do. Alden, Jeremy, and Morgan, Robert. 1974. Regional Planning: A Comprehensive View. New York: John Wiley and Sons. Alexander, Christopher. 1964. Notes on the Synthesis of Form. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Allen, Robert. 1980. How to Save the World. Totowa, New Jersey: Barnes and Noble. Appleton, Jay. 1975. The Experience of Landscape. New York: John Wiley and Sons. Armstrong, J. T. "Breeding Home Range in the Nighthawk and Other Birds: Its Evolutionary and Ecological Significance." In Ecology 46, 1965. Assagioli, Roberto. 1971. Psychosynthesis. New York: The Viking Press. Barney, Gerald, ed. 1980. The Global 2000 Report to the President of the U.S.: Entering the 21st Century. Vols. I and II. New York: Pergamon Press. Bastian, Robert K. "Natural Treatment Systems in Wastewater Treatment and Sludge Management." In Civil Engineering, May, 1982. Bennett, John. 1976. The Ecological Transition: Cultural Anthropology and Human Adaptation. New York: Pergamon Press. Bente, Paul F., Jr. The Food People Problem: Can the Land's Capacity to Produce Be Sustained? Washington, D.C.: Council of Environmental Quality, 1977. Bernatzky, A. “The Performance and Value of Trees." In Anthos. No. 1, 1969. Berry, Wendell. 1977. The Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture. New York: Avon Books. Boer, K. "Tree Planting Reconsidered." In Landscape Architecture. Vol. 62, No. 2, 1972. Bormann, F. H., and Likens, G. E. “The Watershed-Ecosystem Concept and Studies of Nutrient Cycles." In The Ecosystem Concept in Natural Resource Management, ed. George M. van Dyne. New York: Academic Press, 1969. "The Fresh Air-Clean Water Exchange." In Natural History. Vol. 86, No. 9, 1977. Braun-Blanquet, Josias. 1964. Pflanzensoziologie, Grundzugie de Vegetationskunde, 3rd ed. Vienna: Springer. Braun-Blanquet, Josias, and Furrer, Ernst. "Remarques sur l’etude des groupements de plants." Bulletin Societe Languedocienne de Geographie 36, 1913. Bronowski, J. 1973. The Ascent of Man. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. Brown, Lester. 1978. The Twenty-Ninth Day. New York: W.W. Norton Co. Brown, Lester R., with Eckholm, Erik P. 1974. By Bread Alone. New York: Praeger Publishers. Brubaker, Charles William, and Sturgis, Robert. "Urban Design and National Policy for Urban Growth." In American Institute of Architects Journal, October, 1969. Bruner, Jerome. 1965. On Knowing: Essays for the Left Hand. New York: Atheneum. Bryson, Reid A., and Ross, John E. "The Climate of the City." In Urbanization and Environment, ed. Thomas R. Detweiler and Melvin G. Marens. Belmont, California: Duxbury Press, 1972. Bureau of Land Management. The California Desert Conservation Area Plan Alternatives and Environmental Impact Statement. Draft. Riverside, California, 1980. Churchman, C. West. 1979. The Systems Approach and Its Enemies. New York: Basic Books. Clements, Frederic E. “Plant Succession, An Analysis of the Development of Vegetation." Carnegie Institution of Washington Publications 242, 1916. Cooper, Charles F., and Zedler, Paul H. “Ecological Assessment for Regional Development." In Journal of Environmental Management 10, 1980. Cranz, Galen. "The Useful and the Beautiful: Urban Parks in China." In Landscape. Vol. 23, No. 2, 1979. Curtis, J. T. 1959. The Vegetation of Wisconsin. Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press. Dangermond, Jack; Derrenberger, Bill; and Harnden, Eric. Description of Techniques for Automation of Regional Natural Resource Inventories." Redlands, California: Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc., 1982. Daubenmire, R. F."Vegetation: Identification of Typal Communities." In Science 151, 1966. Deithelm and Bressler, Inc. 1980. Mt. Bachelor Recreation Area: Proposed Master Plan. Eugene, Oregon. Department of Conservation, State of Illinois. Illinois Streams Information System. Urbana, 1982. Diesing, Paul. 1962. Reason in Society. Urbana: The University of Illinois Press. Dubos, Rene. 1980. The Wooing of Earth. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. Duckworth, F., and Sandberg, J. "The Effect of Cities Upon Horizontal and Vertical Temperature Gradients." Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 35, 1954. Earle, Eliza. Conservation of Natural Areas in the Context of Urban Development. Unpublished M.L.A. thesis. Pomona, California: State Polytechnic University, 1975. Eberhard, John P.“A Humanist Case for the Systems Approach." In American Institute of Architects Journal, July, 1968. Eckholm, Eric. 1976. Losing Ground. New York: Norton. Ehrenfeld, David. 1972. Conserving Life on Earth. New York: Oxford University Press. Ehrlich, Paul, and Ehrlich, Anne. 1981. Extinction. New York: Random House. Emmelin, Lars, and Wiman, Bo. 1978. The Environmental Problems of Energy Production. Stockholm: Secretariat for Futures Studies. Environmental Protection Agency. “Aquaculture Systems for Wastewater Treatment/Seminar Proceedings." EPA 430/9-80-006, MCD-68. September, 1979. "Aquaculture Systems for Wastewater Treatment An Engineering Assessment." EPA 430/9-80-007, MCD-68. June, 1980. Evans, Francis C. "Ecosystem as the Basic Unit in Ecology." In Science 123, 1956. Fabos, Julius G. 1979. Planning the Total Landscape: A Guide to Intelligent Land Use. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. Fabos, Julius G., and Caswell, Stephanie J. Composite Landscape Assessment. Research Bulletin No. 637. Amherst: Massachusetts Agricultural Experiment Station, Amherst 1977. Holling, C. S., and Clark, William C. "Notes toward a Science of Ecological Management."In Unifying Concepts in Ecology, eds. van Dobben, W. H., and Lowe-McConnell, R. H. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk B.V. Publishers, 1975. Holloway, Cecile, and Yarbrough, Janet. San Diego Wild Animal Park Land Use Study. Pomona: Department of Landscape Architecture, California State Polytechnic University, 1978. Hopkins, Lewis. "Methods for Generating Land Suitability Maps." In Journal of the American Institute of Planners. Vol. 43, No. 4, 1977. Hopkins, Lewis D.; Brill, E. Downey, Jr.; Liebman, Jon C.; and Wenzel, Harry G., Jr. "Land Use Allocation Model for Flood Control." In Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management Div. ASCE. Vol. 104, No. WRI, 1978. Hopkins, Lewis D.; Goulter, Ian C.; Kurtz, Kenneth B.; Wenzel, Harry G., Jr.; and Brill, E. Downey, Jr. A Model for Floodplain Management in Urbanizing Areas. Final Report. Water Resources Center, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1980. Hough, Michael. "Metro Homestead." In Landscape Architecture. Vol. 73, No. 1, 1983. Hutchinson, Boyd A.; Taylor, Fred G.; and the Critical Review Panel. "Energy Conservation Mechanisms and Potentials of Landscape Design to Ameliorate Building Climates.' In Landscape Journal. Vol. 2, No. 1, 1983. Hutchinson, Boyd A.; Taylor, Fred G.; and Wendt, Robert L. 1982. Use of Vegetation to Ameliorate Microclimates: An Assessment of Energy Conservation Potentials. Oak Ridge National Laboratory Environmental Sciences Division. Hyams, Edward. 1976. Soil and Civilization. New York: Harper Colophon Books. Jantsch, Erich. 1975. Design for Evolution. New York: George Braziller. Janzen, Daniel. "Tropical Agroecosystems." In Science 182, 1973. Johansson, Thomas B., and Steen, Peter. 1978. Solar Sweden: An Outline to a Renewable Energy System. Stockholm: Secretariat for Futures Studies. Johnson, Arthur H., and Hester, James S. "Nitrate as a Consideration in Planning Future Land Use." In Landscape Planning 8, 1981. Jokela, Alice Tang, and Jokela, Arthur W. "Water Reclamation, Aquaculture, and Wetland Management." Paper delivered at Coastal Zone '78, Symposium on Technical, Environmental and Regulatory Aspects of Coastal Zone Planning and Management. San Francisco, California. March 14–16, 1978. Jokela, Arthur. "Institutional Ecology: Another Agenda for the Landscape Planner." In Landscape Research. Vol. 5, No. 1, 1979. Kilpack, Charles. "Computer Mapping, Spatial Analysis, and Landscape Architecture." In Landscape Journal. Vol. 1, No. 1, 1982. 1982. Innovating Landscape Architecture. Washington, D.C.: Architecture Technical Information Series, American Society of Landscape Architects. Knowles, Ralph. 1975. Energy and Form. Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press. Koenig, Herman E. “Engineering for Ecological, Sociological, and Economic Compatibility." In IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. Vol. SMC 2, No. 1, 1972. Koenig, Herman E.; Cooper, William; and Falvey, James M. Industrialized Ecosystem Design and Management." Unpublished working paper. East Lansing: Michigan State University, 1971. Fabos, Julius G., and Joyner, Spencer A., Jr. "Landscape Plan Formulation and Evaluation." In Landscape Planning 7, pp. 95-119, 1980. Falini, Paola E.; Grifoni, Cristina; and Lomoro, Annarita. Conservation Planning for the Countryside: A Preliminary Report of an Experimental Study of the Terni Basin (Italy)." In Landscape Planning 7, 1980. Federer, C. A. “Trees Modify the Urban Microclimate." In Journal of Arboriculture 2. 1976. Feibleman, James K. “Theory of Integrative Levels." In British Journal of the Philosophy of Science. Vol. V, No. 17, 1954. Friedmann, John. "Introduction” (to issue on regional planning). In Journal of the American Institute of Planners. Vol. 30, No. 2, 1964. Regional Planning as Field of Study." In Regional Development and Planning, eds. Friedmann, John and Alonso, William. Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press, 1964. Frissell, Sidney S.; Lee, Robert G.; Stankey, George H.; and Zube, Ervin H. “A Framework for Estimating the Consequences of Alternative Carrying Capacity Levels in Yosemite Valley." In Landscape Planning 7, 1980. Geddes, Patrick. 1915. Cities in Evolution. London: Ernest Benn Ltd. Geiger, Rudolph. 1965. The Climate Near the Ground. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Geis, Aelred. "The New Town Bird Quadrille." In Natural History. Vol. XXXIII, No. 6, 1974. Giedion, Sigfried. 1967. Space, Time and Architecture, 5th ed. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Gill, Don, and Bonnett, Penelope. 1973. Nature in the Urban Landscape. Baltimore: York Press. Gilpin, M. S., and Diamond, J. M. "Subdivision of Nature Reserves and the Maintenance of Species Diversity.' In Nature 285, 1980. Gold, A. J. "Design with Nature: A Critique." In Journal of the American Institute of Planners. Vol. 40, No. 4, 1974. Golley, F. B. "Energy Flux in Ecosystems." In Ecosystem Structure and Function, ed. Wiens, J. A Corvallis: Oregon State University Press, 1971. Gomez-Pompa, A.; Vazquez-Yanes, C.; and Guevara, S. “The Tropical Rain Forest: A Nonrenewable Resource."'In Science 176, 1972. Gottmann, Jean, 1961. Megalopolis. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press. Haller, J. R. "Vegetation of Central America." Mimeograph. University of California, Santa Barbara, n.d. Hartman, Frederick. “The Chicago Forestry Scheme." In Natural History. Vol. LXXXII, No. 9, 1973. Hathaway, Melvin G. "The Ecology of City Squirrels." In Natural History. Vol. LXXXII, No. 9, 1973. Higgs, A. J., and Usher, M. B. "Should Nature Reserves Be Large or Small?" In Nature 285, 1980. Hills, Angus. “The Classification and Evaluation of Land for Multiple Uses." In Forestry Chronicles. Vol. 42, No. 2, 1966. Holdridge, Leslie R. 1971. Forest Environments in Tropical Life Zones. New York: Pergamon Press. Holdridge, Leslie R., and Tosi, Joseph A., Jr. Report on the Ecological Adaptability of Selected Economic Plants for Small Farm Production in Six Regions of Costa Rica. San José, Costa Rica: Tropical Science Center, n.d. Krebs, Charles J. 1978. Ecology: The Experimental Analysis of Distribution and Abundance. New York: Harper & Row. Küchler, A. W. In Goode's World Atlas, ed. Espenshade, E. B.. Ir. Chicago: Rand-McNally, 1960. 1964. Potential Natural Vegetation of the Coterminous United States. New York: American Geographical Society. Kuehn, E. "Planning the City's Climate." In Landscape. Vol. 8, No. 3, 1959. Landsberg, H. E. "The Climate of Towns." In Man's Role in Changing the Face of the Earth, ed. Thomas, William L. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1956. Leopold, Aldo. "The Conservation Ethic." In Journal Forestrv 31, 1933. 1936. Game Management. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. Lewis, Charles A. "Comment: Healing in the Urban Environment." In American Planning Association Journal, July, 1979. Lewis, Phillip H., Jr. “Quality Corridors." In Landscape Architecture. Vol. 54, No. 1, 1964. "“The New Landscape Challenge." In Agora, Autumn, 1982. Likens, Gene E., and Bormann, F. Herbert. "Nutrient Cycling in Ecosystems." In Ecosystem Structure and Function, ed. Weins, John A. Corvallis: Oregon State University Press, 1972. Lösch, August. “The Nature of Economic Regions." In Regional Development and Planning, ed. Friedmann, John, and Alonso, William. Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press, 1964. Lovelock, J. E. 1980. Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. New York: Oxford University Press. Lovins, Amory B. 1977. Soft Energy Paths: Toward a Durable Peace. Cambridge: Ballinger Publishing Company. Lowry, Ira S. "A Short Course in Model Design." In Journal of the American Institute of Planners. Vol. 21, No. 2, 1965. Lyle, John, and von Wodtke, Mark. "An Information System for Environmental Planning." In Journal of the American Institute of Planners. Vol. 40, No. 6, 1974. "Design Methods for Developing Environmentally Integrated Urban Systems." In DMG-DRS Journal: Design Research and Methods. Vol. 8, No. 3, 1974. Lynch, Kevin. 1971. Site Planning, 2nd ed. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press. MacArthur, R. H., and Wilson, E. O. 1967. The Theory of Island Biogeography. Princeton: Princeton University Press. MacDougall, E. Bruce. "The Accuracy of Map Overlays." In Landscape Planning. Vol. 2, No. 1, 1977. “Fuzzy Set Evaluation in Landscape Assessment." In Regional Landscape Planning Proceedings. Washington, D.C.: Annual Meeting of the American Society of Landscape Architects, 1981. McHarg, Ian L. 1969. Design with Nature. New York: Natural History Press. "Human Ecological Planning at Pennsylvania." In Landscape Planning. Vol. 8, No. 2, 1981. McHarg, Ian L., and Sutton, Jonathan. "Ecological Plumbing for the Texas Coastal Plain." In Landscape Architecture. Vol. 65, No. 1, 1975. MacKaye, Benton. 1962. The New Exploration: A Philosophy of Regional Planning. Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press. Margalef, Ramon. “On Certain Unifying Principles in Ecology." In American Naturalist 97, 1963. 1968. Perspectives in Ecological Theory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. "Diversity, Stability and Maturity in Natural Ecosystems." In Unifying Concepts in Ecology, eds. van Dobben, W. H., and Lowe-McConnell, R. H. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk B.V. Publishers, 1975. Marquis, Stewart. Urban-Regional Ecosystems: Toward a Natural Science of Cities. Unpublished manuscript. School of Natural Resources, University of Michigan, 1974. Martin, Alexander C.; Zim, Herbert S.; and Nelson, Arnold L. 1951. American Wildlife and Plants: A Guide to Wildlife Food Habits. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc. Marušič, Ivan. ‘Landscape Planning Methods in the U.S.A.: An Outside View." In Landscape Research. Vol. 5, No. 1, 1979. May, R. M. "Stability in Ecosystems: Some Comments." In Unifying Concepts in Ecology, eds. van Dobben, W. H. and Lowe-McConnell, R. H. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk B.V. Publishers, 1975. —1973. Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Meadows, Donella H.; Meadows, Dennis L.; Randers, Jorgen; and Behrens, William W. 1972. The Limits to Growth. New York: Universe Books. Meier, Richard L. 1974. Planning for an Urban World: The Design of Resource Conserring Cities. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press. Meinig, D. W. "The Beholding Eye: Ten Versions of the Same Scene." In Landscape Architecture. Vol. 66, No. 1, 1976. Meldan, R. “Besondere luftechnische Aufgaben der Industrie." Staedtebygiene. Vol. 3, No. 8, 1959. Mesaroviê, Mihaljo, and Pestel, Edouard. 1974. Mankind at the Turning Point. New York: E. P. Dutton and Company. Moore, Russell T.; Ellis, Scott L.; and Duba, David R. "Advantages of Natural Successional Processes on Western Reclaimed Lands." Papers Presented at the Fifth Symposium on Surface Mining and Reclamation. Louisville: National Coal Association, 1977. Mumford, Lewis. "The Natural History of Urbanization." In Man's Role in Changing the Face of the Earth, ed. Thomas, William L. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1956. Needham, Joseph. 1954. Science and Civilization in China. Vol. IV:3. Cambridge University Press. Novikoff, Alex B. "The Concept of Integrative Levels and Biology." In Science 101, 1945. Odum, Eugene P. "Strategy of Ecosystem Development." In Science 164, 1969. 1971. Fundamentals of Ecology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Company. "Diversity as a Function of Energy Flow." In Unifying Concepts in Ecology, eds. van Dobben, W. H., and Lowe-McConnell, R. H. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk B.V. Publishers, 1975. Odum, Howard T. "Energy Quality and Carrying Capacity of the Earth." In Tropical Ecology 16, 1976. "Net Energy Analysis of Alternatives for the United States." Testimony delivered before the U.S. House of Representatives Subcommittee on Energy and Power of the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, March 25 and 26, 1976. Odum, Howard T., and Odum, Elizabeth C. 1975. Energy Basis for Man and Nature. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company. Orians, Gordon H. "Diversity, Stability and Maturity in Natural Ecosystems." In Unifying Concepts in Ecology, eds. van Dobben, W. H., and Lowe-McConnell, R. H. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk B.V. Publishers, 1975. Ornstein, Robert E. 1972. The Psychology of Consciousness. New York: The Viking Press. Pinkard, H. P. "Trees, Regulators of the Environment." In Soil Conservation, October, 1970. Powell, John Wesley. Report on the Arid Regions of the United States with a More Detailed Account of the Lands of Utah. Edited by Stegner, Wallace. Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1962. Prigogine, Ilya. "Order through Fluctuation: Self-Organization and Social Systems." In Evolution and Consciousness: Human Svstems in Transition, eds. Jantsch, Erich, and Waddington, Conrad H. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1976. "From Being to Becoming." Austin, Texas: University of Texas Center for Statistical Mechanics and Thermodynamics, 1978. "Biological Order, Structure, and Instabilities." In Review of Biophysics. Vol. 4, Nos. 2 and 3, 1978. Reed, Sherwood; Bastian, Robert K.; and Jewell, William J. Engineers Assess Aquaculture Systems for Wastewater Treatment." In Civil Engineering, July, 1981. Regional Energy Consumption: Second Interim Report of a Joint Study. New York and Washington, D.C.: Regional Plan Association, Inc. and Resources for the Future, Inc., 1974. Reichle, D. E.; O’Neill, R. V.; and Harris, W. F. "Principles of Energy and Material Exchange in Ecosystems." In Unifying Concepts in Ecology, eds. van Dobben, W. H., and Lowe-McConnell, R. H. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk B.V. Publishers, 1975. Reilly, Michael. Ecological Uses of Urban Trees. Unpublished M.L.A. thesis, California State Polytechnic University, 1976. Richards, P. W. 1952. The Tropical Rain Forest. London: Cambridge University Press. Richardson, Harry Ward. 1979. Regional Economics. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. Rigler, R. H. "The Concept of Energy Flow and Nutrient Flow between Trophic Levels." In Unifying Concepts in Ecology, eds. van Dobben, W. H., and Lowe-McConnell, R. H. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk B.V. Publishers, 1975. Robinette, Gary. 1972. Plants, People and Environmental Quality. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior. Robinson, A. C., et al. "An Analysis of the Market Potential of Water Hyacinth-Based Systems for Municipal Wastewater Treatment." Research Report No. BCL-OA-TFT-76-5. Columbus, Ohio: Battelle Columbus Laboratories, 1976. Rodiek, Jon. "Wildlife Habitat Management and Landscape Architecture." In Landscape Journal. Vol. 1, No. 1, 1982. Rodiek, Jon, and Wilen, Billy. "Landscape Inventory: A Key to Sound Environmental Planning." In Landscape Research. Vol. 5, No. 1, 1979–80. Saurin, Jean-Pierre. "The Compatability of Conifer Afforestation with the Landscape of the Monts D’Arrei Region. In Landscape Planning 7, 1980. Schlauch, Frederick C. "City Snakes, Suburban Salamanders." In Natural History. Vol. LXXXV, No. 5, 1976. Schram, D., and Grist, C. “Building Site Selection to Conserve Energy by Optimizing Topoclimatic Benefits." Proceedings for the National Conference on Technology for Energy Conservation. Rockville, Maryland: Environmental Protection Agency, 1978. Schweitzer, Albert. Out of My Life and Work. 1933. Reprint. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1972. Sharpe, Carl, and Williams, Donald L. "The Making of an Environmental Fit." In Landscape Architecture. Vol. 63, No. 3, 1972. Soemarwoto, Otto. "Rural Ecology and Development in Java." In Unifying Concepts in Ecology, eds. van Dobben, W. H., and Lowe-McConnell, R. H. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk B.V. Publishers, 1975. Sperry, R. W. “The Great Cerebral Commissure." In Scientific American, January, 1964. Steiner, Frederick; Brooks, Kenneth; and Struckmeyer, Kenneth. "Determining the Regional Context for Landscape Planning." In Regional Landscape Planning: Proceedings of Three Educational Seminars. Washington, D.C.: Annual Meeting of the American Society of Landscape Architeçts, 1981. Steinitz, Carl. "Simulating Alternative Policies for Implementing the Massachusetts Scenic and Recreational Rivers Act: The North River Demonstration Project. In Land-scape Planning 6, 1979. 1978. Defensible Processes for Regional Landscape Design. Washington, D.C.: Landscape Architecture Technical Information Series, American Society of Landscape Architects. Steinitz, C., and Brown, H. J. “A Computer Modeling Approach to Managing Urban Expansion." Geoprocessing 1, 1981. Steinitz, Carl; Brown, H. James; and Goodale, Peter. 1976. Managing Suburban Growth: A Modeling Approach. Cambridge: Landscape Architecture Research Office, Harvard University. Steinitz, Carl; Murray, Timothy; Sinton, David; and Way, Douglas. 1969. A Comparative Study of Resource Analysis Methods. Cambridge Department of Landscape Architecture Research Office, Harvard University. Stilgoe, John. "Suburbanites Forever: The American Dream Endures." In Landscape Architecture. Vol. 72, No. 3, 1982. Stobaugh, Robert, and Yergin, Daniel. 1979. Energy Future: Report of the Energy Project at the Harvard Business School. New York: Random House. Streeter, Robert G.; Moore, Russell T.; Skinner, Janet J.; Martin, Stephen G.; Terrel, Ted L.; Klimstra, Willard D.; Tate, James, Jr.; and Nolde, Michelle, J. "Energy Mining Impacts and Wildlife Management: Which Way to Turn." Transactions of the 44th North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference. Washington, D.C.: The Wildlife Management Institute, 1979. Strong, Maurice F. “A Global Imperative for the Environment." In Natural History. Vol. 83, No. 3, 1974. Stuart, Darwin G. The Systems Approach in Urban Planning. Planning Advisory Service Report No. 253. Chicago: American Society of Planning Officials, January, 1970. Study of Man's Impact on Climate (SMIC). 1971. Inadvertent Climate Modification. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press. Sullivan, Arthur L, and Shaffer, Mark L. "Biogeography of the Megazoo." In Science 189, 1975. Tansley, A. G. “The Use and Abuse of Vegetational Concepts and Terms. In Ecology 16, 1935. Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre. 1966. Man's Place in Nature. London: Collins Publishing Company. Tosi, Joseph A. 1969. Republica de Costa Rica: Mapa Ecológico. San José, Costa Rica: Tropical Science Center. "El Recurso Forestal como Base Pontencial para el Desarrollo Industrial de Costa Rica." In La Nación, March 20 and 21, 1971. U.S. Department of the Interior. Yosemite Draft General Management Plan. Washington, D.C., 1978. U.S. Department of the Interior. Final Environmental Impact Report and Proposed Plan: California Desert Conservation Area. Riverside, California, 1980. van Dobben, W. H., and Lowe-McConnell, R. H. “Preface" to Unifying Concepts in Ecology. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk B.V. Publishers, 1975. Van Dyne, George M. “Ecosystems, Systems Ecology and Systems Ecologists." In Readings in Conservation Ecology, ed. Cox, George W. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969. Van Til, Jon. "Spatial Form and Structure in a Pcssible Future." In American Planning Association Journal, July, 1979. Wagstaff and Brady and Robert Odland Associates. San Gorgonio Wind Resource Study—Draft Environmental Impact Report/Environmental Impact Statement. Berkeley, California, 1982. Wallace, McHarg, Roberts, and Todd. Woodlands New Community Phase One: Land Planning and Design Principles. Houston: Woodlands Development Corporation, 1972. Woodlands New Community: Guidelines for Site Planning. Houston: Woodlands Development Corporation, 1973. Watson, James D. 1968. The Double Helix: A Personal Account of the Discovery of the Structure of DNA. New York: New American Library. Wheaton, William. "Metropolitan Allocation Planning." In Regional Planning, ed. Hufschmidt, M. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1967. Whitehead, Alfred North. 1929. The Aim of Education and Other Essays. New York: The MacMillan Company. Whittaker, R. H. “Gradient Analysis of Vegetation." In Biological Review 42, 1967. “A Study of Summer Foliage Insect Communities in the Great Smoky Mountains." Ecological Monographs 22, 1966. Williamson, Robert D. “"Bird-and-People-Neighborhoods." In Natural History. Vol. LXXXII, No. 9, 1973. Wittfogel, Karl A. “The Hydraulic Civilizations." In Man's Role in Changing the Face of the Earth, ed. Thomas, William L., Jr. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1956. Wolman, Abel. "The Metabolism of Cities." In Scientific American. Vol. 213, No. 3, 1965. Woodwell, George M. "Recycling Sewage Effluent through Plant Communities." In American Scientist 65, 1977. "The Carbon Dioxide Question." In Scientific American. Vol. 238, No. 1, 1978. Woodwell, G. M.; Whittaker, R. H.; Reiners, W. A.; Likens, G. E.; Delwicke, C. C.; and Botkin, D. B. "The Biota and the World Carbon Budget." In Science 199, 1978. Page numbers in boldface indicate case studies. acid rain, 83 advocate designer, 140 agriculture. See also Irrigation and energy flow, 207–8 at global scale, 84–85 at Huetar Atlantica, 53, 65–67, 203 at North Claremont, 172 and soil, 241–42 structure of, 202–3 at University Village, 85, 104, 208 urban/suburban, 85, 208 Alaska Geographic Information System, 151-57 computer mapping at, 149–50, 158, 244, 259 and correction of computer inaccuracy, 259 grid images for, 150 LANDSAT imagery for, 158 polygon computer-mapping for, 150, 244 suitability models for, 149–50, 244, 259 Alden, Jeremy, 133 Alexander, Christopher, 130 Aliso Creek Development, 33-39 budgeting resources at, 236 and clear design goals, 139 descriptive models at, 233 legal rationality applied to, 133 and location, 243 management at, 40 as plan-unit-scale design, 32, 40 as project-scale design, 32, 40 sewage treatment at, 238 as site-scale design, 40 water flow at, 32, 40–41, 84, 180, 196- 97,232 amensal interactions, 205 American Association for the Advancement of Science, 79 American Institute of Architecture, 41 analytical design processes, 18, 127–29, 172. See also Rational problem-solving approach animals. See also Habitats; Nature preservation affect of human environments on, 213. 14 at Bolsa Chica Lagoon, 171 buffers for, against human communities, 226 and building design, 226 cover needs of, 214–15 designing for, 214 food needs of, 214 human ambivalence toward, 213 human interaction with, 205 and Los Angeles flood control system, 68,114 at Madrona Marsh, 104, 110, 217 planting for, 226–27 at San Elijo Lagoon, 3–4, 226 sensitivity model for, 247–57 territorial needs of, 215 threatened at global scale, 82 in urban landscapes, 213–14, 215, 217, 218,226 and vertical lavering, 200 water needs of, 215 at Whitewater Wash, 88 Appleton, Jay, 209 Aristos, The, (Fowles), 127 Assagioli, Roberto, 128 associations, 196 Bennett, John, 43 Bernatzky, A., 205, 207 Berry, Wendell, 15 biomass plantations, 83–84 biosphere, 80 Boer, K., 205 Bolsa Chica Lagoon, 173–79 animals at, 171 evaluation matrices used at, 180 as issue-oriented process, 132 and public participation, 142, 160 and recreational use, 171 and thematic design alternatives, 171, 180 Boston, Metropolitan, 47–52 allocation models at, 262–63 evaluation models at, 262–63 and geographic information systems, 53 manual-overlay maps at, 244 as regional-scale design, 45, 46, 53 suitability models at, 244 Braun-Blanquet, Josias, 195, 196 Bronowski, Jacob, 228 Brooks, Kenneth, 43 Bruner, Jerome, 161 Burnham, Daniel, 184 California Desert Conservation Area and design possibilities, 162, 171 and ideal design, 140 and public participation, 142, 159–60 capability models, 244 carbon dioxide, 83, 205 Chia Jang, 236, 237, 239 Churchman, C. West, 129, 130, 139 Clements, Frederic, 195, 198 Club of Rome, 81, 262 cluster analysis, 257 commensal interactions, 205 communities. See also Animals; Plants; Structure classifying structural characteristics of, 196 diversity in, 21, 196, 198, 200, 203, 213, 225, 227 dominance in, 196 growth form in, 196 homogeneity in, 195 interactions among, 195–96, 204 rarity in, 247 relative abundance in, 196 resilience of, 247–57 significance in, 247 trophic structure in, 196 competing uses, 137–38. See also Economic planning; Nature preservation competitive interactions, 205 computer mapping advantages of, 257–59 at Alaska, 149–50, 158, 244, 259 for geographic information systems, 46 53, 149–50, 158 grid format for, 150, 158 inaccuracy of, 259 at Nigeria, 244 polygon format for, 150, 158 purpose of, 46, 244 at San Elijo Lagoon, 20, 244, 261 Confucian theory and energy-flow design, 239 and sewage treatment, 238–39 and water-flow design, 236–38 construction scale defined, 110 energy flow at, 84 and gestalt resource inventory, 146 and landforms, 110, 114, 123 at San Elijo Lagoon, 123 at Simon Residence, 114 technical decision-making process at, 131 conurbations, 44, 45 Cooper, Charles, 247, 257, 258 Council on Environmental Quality, 84 Cranz, Galen, 208 creative design processes, 18, 127–29, 161 Crowe, Sylvia, 217 cultural preservation as design issue, 138–39 at Huetar Atlantica, 46 investigation of, during informationgathering, 159 da Vinci, Leonardo, 44 decision-making structures, 134 Deithelm and Bressler, Inc., 244 desertification, 85–86 design process. See also Rational problemsolving approach; Stage of Generalization; Stage of Precision; Stage of Romance; Systems approach analytical, 18, 127–29, 172 Confucian, 236–39 creative, 18, 127–29, 161 criteria for method in, 127 environmental movement's influence on 126 governmental influence on, 126–27 history of, 126 as a learning activity, 128, 129 vs. planning, 17 as rational process, 126, 129 as a science, 127, 128 Taoist, 236–39 themes of, 18, 135 Design with Nature (McHarg), 18, 45, 130 Dewey, John, 131 Diamond, I. M., 216 Diesing, Paul, 132, 133, 134 disjointed incrementalism (muddling through), 133 Dubos, Rene, 209, 211 Duckworth, F., 207 Eberhard, John, 131 ecologic rationality, 132 economic planning and cultural tradition, 46, 65–67 and design conflict, 137–38 and goal designers, 140 vs. preservation, 2–3, 15, 45, 65–67, 102, 171 and resource protection, 104, 110 and river systems, 67 and urban regional planning, 45–46 economic rationality, 132 ecosystems. See also Design process; Order; Scale accidental, 1, 16 design process for, 17–18 global, as human, 80, 86 human, defined, 15, 16–17, 24–25 intentional, 16 order within, 17, 18–21, 194 scales of, 17, 24 types of, 85 ecotones, 195, 225–26 Ehrenfield, David, 137 energy/material flow. See also Food; Function; Water flow and agriculture, 207 and biomass production, 198 budgeting, 235–36 Confucian approach to, 239 cycles of, and human use, 196, 230–31 defined, 228 depicting, 232–34 at global scale, 83, 229 at Huetar Atlantica, 145 and landforms, 114 limits of, 230 and location, 83–84, 243 and nature preservation, 84, 104, 233 at North Claremont, 240 optimum population density for, 239– 40 predicting, 232 quantifying, 180, 234–35 at San Elijo Lagoon, 15, 18–19, 145, 230 234 at Simon Residence, 84 soft, 83, 88, 239 at Southern California, 204 stability of, 231 Taoist approach to, 239 at University Village, 84, 104, 233, 234– 35, 236,240 and urban areas, 4, 229, 231–32, 240 and visual beauty, 83, 88, 101 at Whitewater Wash, 83, 99, 101, 243 English landscape gardens, 210 entropy, 228 environmental corridors, 67 ethical positions, 139–40, 172 exotic greens, 218, 226 feedback, 130, 191 Feibleman, James, 25 Feibleman's laws, 25, 40, 42 flood control, 68–75, 114, 137, 161–62, 243 food. See also Energy/material flow at global scale, 84–85 urban production of, 208 forests, 78, 79, 103. See also Rain forests fossil fuels, 83, 207 Fowles, John, 127 Friedmann, John, 43, 45 Fuller, R. Buckminster, 80, 81, 194 function. See also Energy/material flow; Food; Water flow analysis of, for information about physical landscape, 145 defined, 18–19, 194 and dysfunctional flows, 228 at Huetar Atlantica, 145 at global scale, 83–85, 229 related to structure, 196 at San Elijo Lagoon, 18–19, 145 and urban landscapes, 229, 231–32 fuzzy set evaluation, 257 Geddes, Patrick, 44, 45, 53, 126, 146, 148 Geiger, Rudolph, 207 generalization. See Stage of Generalization geographic information systems, 46. See also Computer mapping at Alaska, 149–50, 158, 244, 259 at Boston, 53 and computers, 149, 150 in decision-making structure, 134 examples of, 149–50 at global scale, 81 and LANDSAT imagery, 158 and political rationality, 149 for prediction, 53, 134 purpose of, 149 and Stage of Precision, 135 gestalt method of design, 77, 242 resource inventory using, 146 Giedion, Sigfried, 44 Gilpin, M. S., 216 global scale, 41 defined, 80 function at, 83–85 and geographic information systems, 81 goals at, 81–82, 86–87 human responsibility at, 80 and other scales, 81–82 structure at, 82–83 Global 2000 Report, 82, 83, 84, 85, 211 goal designer, 139 Gottmann, Jean, 45 graytone technique, 246, 257 greenhouse effect, 83, 205 ground water, 68 habitats. See also Animals design of, for featured species, 225 design of, for species richness, 225–26, 227 exotic greens, 218, 226 wild areas, 215–16 wild corridors, 217–18 wild enclaves, 217, 226 wildlife parks, 218–25 wild patches, 216–17 Hanging Gardens of Babylon, 210 Hathaway, Melvin, 218 hazards, protection from as design issue, 137 and location, 242–43 hedgerows, 202–3 Higgs, A. J., 216 High Meadow Residential Development, 105–9 impact-prediction models at, 260 and information-gathering, 145 manual-overlay maps at, 244 plants at, 102 as project-scale design, 102–3 and recreational use, 103–4 scenic beauty at, 102 sensitivity models at, 247 site absorption at, 103–4 as site-scale design, 102–3 suitability models at, 102, 244, 260 technical decision-making process at, 131 Hills, G. Angus, 245, 257 Holloway, Cecile, 224 Hopkins, Lewis, 196, 246, 261 Huetar Atlantica Region of Costa Rica, 54– 64 agricultural development at, 53, 65–67, 203 cultural preservation at, 46 energy flow at, 145 landscape unit approach at, 245, 257 management at, 184 management zones for, 65–67 and population settlement, 241 soils at, 53, 65–67 suitability models at, 245, 257 ideal designer, 139–40 Illinois Streams Information System, 148– 49 inception, 135. See also Stage of Romance information (-gathering) and accuracy, 145 defined, 135 economy in, 144-45 and function, 145–46 immaterial, 144, 158–60 and location, 146–58 need for, 144 physical, 144, 145–58 and structure, 145 as theme of Stage of Precision, 135 and unexpectedness, 145 integrative rationality. See Social rationality interactions between animals and humans, 205, 213– 14 among communities, 3–4, 18, 21, 195- 96,204 between plants and humans, 205-10 types of, 205 interdisciplinary design roles of specialists in, 141 successful organization of, 141 and systems approach, 130 irrigation. See also Agriculture; Flood control; Water flow and energy/material flow, 207 at global scale, 84 limits of survey grids for, 77 and Los Angeles flood control system, 25, 31, 68 Powell's consideration of, 77–78 and Southern California watershed, 25, 31 at Wild Animal Park, 224 issues, design at Bolsa Chica Lagoon, 132 competing uses as, 137–38 cultural preservation as, 138–39 goals embedded in, 139 as impetus for design process, 131, 136- 39 interrelated, 139 location as, 138 at Madrona Marsh, 136 nature preservation as, 137 resource conservation as, 137 at San Elijo Lagoon, 2–3, 136 scenic beauty as, 138 at Whitewater Wash, 136 Jantsch, Erich, 17, 18 Japanese gardens, 210 Johnson, Herbert, 216, 217 Jokela, Alice Tang, 238 Kilpack, Charles, 141, 149 Charles 141 149 Knowles, Ralph, 207, 239 Koenig, Herman, 230 Küchler, A. W., 82 Kuehn, E., 205 Lake Elsinore Floodway, 163-70 descriptive models at, 160 design possibilities at, 161–62 predicting water flow at, 232–33 predictive models at, 160 water flow at, 161–62, 232–33 land resource inventory, 146. See also Gestalt; Geographic information systems; Short-term inventory; Special-resource inventory LANDSAT imagery, 158 Landsberg, H. E., 208 landscape units, 245–46 legal rationality, 132–33 Le Nôtre, André, 191, 210 Leopold, Aldo, 208, 214, 225 Lewis, Charles, 210 Lewis, Phillip, 45, 67 Liebig, Justus, 79 limiting factor approach, 79, 83 location. See also Geographic information systems; Maps and mapping; Models; Suitability models at Aliso Creek, 243 and concentration vs. dispersal of energó/ materials, 138, 240 and consumption, 243–44 defined, 19, 194 and economic planning, 194 and energy/material flows, 138, 240, 243 and gestalt design, 242 at global scale, 85–86 and hazards, 243 and human use, 197, 241 intuitive choice of, 241–42 at Madrona Marsh, 242 and resources, 243 resulting from environmental modifcation by inhabitants, 241 at San Elijo Lagoon, 19 at Simon Residence, 242 at Whitewater Wash, 243 Los Angeles Regional Flood Control System, Multiple Use of the, 69–74 and flood control, 68, 75, 239 and indirect design, 199 and irrigation, 25, 31, 68 and landforms, 114 and nature preservation, 68, 114 and recreational use, 68 and sewage treatment, 68 Lösch, August, 45 Lovelock, James, 80 Lovins, Amory, 83 Lowry, Ira, 160 MacDougall, Bruce, 148, 257, 259 McHarg, Ian, 18, 45, 130, 131, 159, 237, 246 MacKaye, Benton, 44, 45, 53 Madrona Marsh, 115–18 animals at, 104, 110, 217 clear design goals at, 139 conflict as impetus for design at, 136 and gestalt resource inventory, 146, 242 and recreational use, 110 scenic beauty at, 110 site resource protection at, 104, 110 as site-scale design, 104, 110 technical decision-making process at, 131, 139 as wild enclave, 217, 226 management at Aliso Creek, 40 automatic, 184 and continuing redesign, 192 and design implementation, 184, 191 of exotic green, 218 feedback as element of, 130, 191 at Huetar Atlantica, 184 importance of, 18, 184, 191 and monitoring, 191 as product of design process, 184 and resource consèrvation, 137 at San Dieguito Lagoon, 191 at San Elijo Lagoon, 19, 21, 184 and succession, 198–99 as theme following Stage of Generalization, 135 at Wild Animal Park, 218, 224–25 of wild areas, 216 of wild corridors, 217–18 of wild enclaves, 217 of wildlife parks, 218–25 of wild patches, 216 Man and the Biosphere (UNESCO), 80 Manning, Warren, 126, 146 maps and mapping. See also Geographic information systems; Suitability models at Alaska, 149–50, 158, 244, 259 at Boston, 53, 244 computer, 20, 46, 53, 149–50, 158, 244, 257-59 graytone, 246, 257 at High Meadow, 244 inaccuracy in, 259 LANDSAT, 158 landscape unit approach, 245–46 manual overlay, 146–47, 244, 257–59 at Nigeria, 244 problem of boundaries in, 148 problem of homogeneity in, 148 at San Elijo Lagoon, 20, 244, 261 sieve, 244–45, 257 at Wild Animal Park, 244, 257 Margalef, Ramon, 1, 18, 198 Marquis, Stewart, 149 marshes, 201–2. See also specific case studies material flows. See Energy/material flow; Food; Function; Nitrogen cycle; Water flow May, Robert, 201, 202 megalopolises, 44, 45 Meier, Richard, 208 Meinig, D. W., 159 Mesarovič, Mihaljo, 43 models. See also Geographic information systems; Maps and mapping; Suitability models allocation, 262–63 descriptive, 160, 233 evaluation, 262–63 graphic, 130 mathematical, 129–30, 160, 261–62 planning, 160 predictive, 160, 260–63 purpose of, 129, 160 and systems approach, 129–30 as theme of Stage of Precision, 135 Moore, Russell T., 227 Morgan, Robert, 133 Mumford, Lewis, 44, 45 mutual interactions, 205 National Environmental Policy Act (1969), 126–27, 144, 260 National Wetlands Inventory (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service), 148 nature preservation. See also Animals; Plants and advocate designer, 140 vs. agriculture, 65–67 as design issue, 137 vs. development, 2–3, 15, 45, 102, 104, 110,171 at global scale, 82 neglect of, by Powell, 79 Nebuchadnezzar, King, 210 Needham, Joseph, 236, 239 Nelson, Anne, 172 Nigeria, Federal Capital Territory of, 248– 56 computer mapping at, 244 sensitivity models at, 247 nitrogen cycle, 228–29, 230, 234 suitability models at, 244, 246, 247 weighting and scoring suitability at, 246, 247 noosphere, 80 North Claremont, 181–83 concentration vs. dispersal at, 138 plant productivity in urban landscapes at, 208 population density and energy flow at, 240 scenario approach used to examine possibilities at, 171–72 Notes on the Synthesis of Form (Alexander), 130 Novikoff, Alex, 24 Odum, Eugene, 15, 16, 18, 44, 198, 200, 201, 202, 231 Odum, Howard, 233, 239 Olmstead, Frederick Law, 126 order. See also Function; Location; Structure in architecture, 194 defined, 17, 18–20 existing vs. future, 197–98 as foundation of ecosystem design, 194 and succession, 198–99 Orians, Gordon H., 201 Ornstein, Robert, 127–28 parasitic interactions, 205 Pestel, Edouard, 43 Pestel, Edouard, 45 plants. See also Agriculture; Forests; Nature preservation; Rain forests as air cleansers, 205 as air creators, 205 and buildup of carbon dioxide, 83, 205 criteria for selection of, 211 design for interaction with, 211–12 and emotional satisfaction, 210 and energy/material flow, 207 food production of, in urban landscape, 208 at High Meadow, 102 human interaction with, 205, 210 and Los Angeles flood control system, 68,114 and microclimate control, 206–7 at North Claremont, 208 and order, 210 at San Elijo Lagoon, 3–4 and scenic beauty, 208–10 sensitivity models for, 247–57 at Simon Residence, 212 as svmbols, 210 and vertical layering, 200 and water flow, 206 at Whitewater Wash, 101 and wildlife, 226–27 at Woodlands, TX, 103 plan-unit scale, 41 at Aliso Creek, 32, 40 community planning at, 88 defined, 88 and ecologic rationality, 132 at Whitewater Wash, 88, 101 political rationality, 134, 149 possibilities, 161 "balanced," 162 at Bolsa Chica Lagoon, 171, 180 at California Desert Conservation Area, 162.171 and designer's ethics, 172 and "imagability," 184 at Lake Elsinore Floodway, 161–62 and "manageability,"184 and “"movement," 184 "no-action," 162 at North Claremont, 171–72 number of, 162 at San Elijo Lagoon, 2–3, 4, 20–21, 136 scenario approach to, 171–72 thematic, 171, 180 "straw man,"172 as theme of Stage of Generalization, 135 at Whitewater Wash, 171 at Yosemite National Park, 171 Powell, John Wesley, 76–80, 86, 126 precision. See Stage of Precision predatory interactions, 205 prediction economic process models for, 172, 180 of energy flow, 232, 234 evaluation matrices for, 180 and feedback, 130 geographic information systems for, 46 impact, 180, 260–63 quantitative analysis for, 180 required by NEPA, 126–27 and suitability models, 260-63 as theme of Stage of Generalization, 135 of water flow, 232–33 preservation. See Nature preservation Prigogine, Ilya, 192 project scale, 41 at Aliso Creek, 32, 40 defined, 101–2 and ecologic rationality, 132 energy/material flow at, 84 at High Meadow, 102–3 and technical decision-making process, 131 property lines, 102 public opinion at Bolsa Chica Lagoon, 142, 160 at California Desert Conservation Area, 142. 159–60 and design possibilities, 184 investigation of, 159–60 at Madrona Marsh, 104, 110 and participation in design process, 126, 142–43, 159–60 at San Elijo Lagoon, 3, 160 at Whitewater Wash, 88, 101 at Yosemite National Park, 142, 159 rain forests, 53, 65–67, 86, 200, 201–2, 203, 243 rational problem-solving approach, 131– 35,143 recreational use at Bolsa Chica Lagoon, 171 at High Meadow, 103–4 and Los Angeles flood control system, 68 at Madrona Marsh, 110 and resource protection, 110 at San Elijo Lagoon, 4 and site absorption, 103–4 at Whitewater Wash, 88, 101 reforestation, 211 Regional Planning Association of America, 44, 45 regional scale, 41 and Boston, 45, 46, 53 defined, 43 and economic planning, 45–46 goal establishment at, 75 history of design at, 45–46 at Huetar Atlantica, 46, 53, 65–67 information base for, 46 and nonindustrial countries, 53, 65–67 patterns at, 45 purpose of design at, 45–46 river systems as design focus at, 67–75 sensitivity models at, 247–57 and Southern California watershed, 25, 31 and urbanization, 44, 45–46 Reilly, Michael, 205, 207 resource conservation, 137 resource protection (site), 104, 110, 243 Richardson, Harry Ward, 43 Rodiek, Jon, 148, 225 romance. See Stage of Romance Sandberg, J., 207 San Dieguito Lagoon, 185–90 management àt, 191 positive/negative impact prediction at, 180 realization strategy at, 191 San Elijo Lagoon, 5–14 computer-generated maps at, 20, 244, 261 conflict as impetus for design at, 2-3, 136 energy/material flow at, 15, 18–19, 145, 230,234 information-gathering at, 16 and interrelated issues, 139 locational patterns at, 19 management at, 19, 21, 184 nitrogen-flow cycle at, 230, 234 plants at, 3–4 and public participation in design, 160 reconstructing order at, 21, 197, 204, 231 recreational use at, 4 scale of, 17, 123 scenic beauty at, 3 sewage treatment at, 4, 21 structure at, 18, 145 substructures at, 18, 145 suitability models at, 20–21, 244, 261 and technique control at construction scale, 123 and varied-use development, 4, 20–21 and wildlife, 3–4, 226 scale. See also specific levels A.I.A. system of, 41 boundaries to determine, 24 construction level of, 41 defined, 17, 24 and design process, 129 Feibleman's laws applied to, 25, 40, 42 global level, 41 interdisciplinary activitó at various levels, 130 plan-unit level, 32 and predictability, 199 project level, 40 regional level, 25, 31, 41 site level, 40 subcontinental level, 31 and systems approach, 129 and technical decision-making process, 131 water flow as determinant of, 25, 31, 32, 40-41, 67, 76-79 scenic beauty as design issue, 138 at High Meadow, 102 and human structure, 209 and landforms, 114 at Madrona Marsh, 110 and plants, 208–10 at San Elijo Lagoon, 3 at Whitewater Wash, 101, 209 Schlauch, Frederick, 215 Schweitzer, Albert, 139 Sealth (Seattle), Chief, 213 sensitivity models, 247–57 sewage treatment, 4, 21, 68, 238–39 Shaffer, Mark L., 82, 216 Shannon theorem, 146 short-term inventory, 146–48 sieve mapping, 244–45 Simon Residence, 119–22 as construction-scale design, 114, 123 energy conservation at, 84 gestalt design approach at, 242 landform influencing design at, 114, 123 plant-interaction design at, 212 technical decision-making process at, 131 site absorption, 103–4 site scale, 41 at Aliso Creek, 32, 40, 41 defined, 103 energy flow at, 83 and gestalt resource inventory, 146 at High Meadow, 102–3, 104 at Madrona Marsh, 104, 110 resource protection at, 104, 110 site absorption at, 103–4 site utilization at, 104 and technical decision-making process 131 at University Village, 104 at Woodlands, TX, 103 site utilization, 104 Snowden, William, 67 social rationality, 132, 133–34 Soemarwoto, Otto, 203 soil and desertification, 85–86 flow diagram of, 234 and hazardous settlement locations, 242– 43 at Huetar Atlantica, 53, 65–67 and location of human communities, 241 threatened at global scale, 82, 85–86 at Whitewater Wash, 101 at Woodlands, TX, 103 Soleri, Paolo, 240 Southern California Urban Region, Land Use and Water Flow in, 26-30 irrigation at, 25, 31 lack of structural interaction at, 204 as regional-scale design, 25, 31 as subcontinental-scale design, 25, 31, 76 water flow and scale at, 25, 31 special resource inventory, 148–49 Spinoza, 16 Stage of Generalization. See also Management, Possibilities, Prediction and analytical design process, 172 and creative design process, 161, 172 defined, 129, 135, 161 and rational approach, 135 theme of management following, 135 theme of planning within, 135 theme of possibility within, 135 theme of prediction within, 135 Stage of Precision. See also Informationgathering; Models and analytical design process, 129 defined, 129, 135, 144 and rational approach, 135 theme of information-gathering within, 135 theme of models within, 135 Stage of Romance characteristics of, 136 and creative design process, 128–29 defined, 128, 135 and design participants, 140–43 and ethics, 139–40 questions to answer during, 136 and rational approach, 135, 143 and subjects for design, 136–39 theme of inception within, 135, 136 Stegner, Wallace, 79–80 Steiner, Frederick, 43 Steinitz, Carl, 18, 45, 126, 245, 262 Stewart, William, 80 Stilgoe, John, 208 Stobaugh, Robert, 83 Streeter, Robert G., 227 Strong, Maurice, 81 Struckmeyer, Kenneth, 43 structure abiotic components of, 195 and agricultural landscapes, 202–3 analysis of, for information about physical landscape, 145 and associations, 196 biological components of, 195 and communities, 195–96 defined, 18, 194 diversity of, 196, 198, 200, 203, 213, 225, 227 and dominance, 196 at global scale, 82–83 growth form of, 196 horizontal zonation in, 200 and inorganic nutrients, 200 and mature ecosystems, 201 and niche specialization, 198 and organism size, 198 pattern diversity in, 201 and relative abundance, 196 resistance vs. resilience in, 201 at San Elijo Lagoon, 18, 145 stability of, 201–2 and substructures, 18, 200 and succession, 200, 227 and total organic matter, 198, 200 trophic, 196, 200 and urban landscapes, 204, 208, 213–4 vertical layering, 200, 204 Stuart, Darwin, 131 subcontinental scale, 41 Powell's design at, 76–80 and Southern California watershed, 25, 31,76 succession, 197–98, 200, 227 suitability models, 258. See also Computer mapping; Geographic information systems; Maps and mapping for Alaska, 149–50, 244, 259 assumptions as basis for, 244 for Boston, 244 cluster analysis for, 257 and computer mapping techniques, 20, 244, 257–59 fuzzy set evaluation for, 257 graytone technique for, 246, 257 for High Meadow, 102, 244, 260 for Hueuar Atlantica, 245, 257 for impact prediction, 260–63 improper use of, as plans, 21 landscape unit approach to, 245–46, 257 for locational patterns, 19–20, 146–47, 149–50,160,244–47 and manual-overlay maps, 146–47, 244, 257-59 for Nigeria, 244, 246, 247 objective judgments as basis for, 244 for San Elijo Lagoon, 20, 244, 261 scoring in, 246, 247, 257 sieve mapping for, 244–45, 257 for Whitewater Wash, 101, 244, 247, 257 for Wild Animal Park, 244, 257 Sullivan, Arthur L., 82, 216 survey grids, 76–77 symbiotic interactions, 205 syntropy, 228 systems approach, 129–31. See also Rational problem-solving approach Tansley, A. G., 16, 195 Taoist theory and energy-flow design, 239 and sewage treatment, 238–39 and water-flow design, 236–38 technical decision-making process, 130–31 Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 80 Tennessee Valley Authority, 46, 126 United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), 81, 148 University Village, 111-13 agricultural design at, 85, 104, 208 depicting energy/material flow at, 233, 234-35 energy-flow design at, 84, 104, 236 population and energy flow at, 240 as site-scale design, 104 site utilization at, 104 urban landscapes animals in, 213–14, 215, 217, 218 and energy/material flows, 25, 31, 85, 229, 231–32, 240, 241–42 neglect of, by Powell, 79 and plant productivity, 208, 210–11 and regional-scale design, 44, 45–46, 68, 75 and resource protection, 104, 110 rivers in, 62, 68, 75 structure in, 204 Usher, M. B., 216 vegetation. See Plants Versailles, 191, 210 Visual Resource Management Systems, 209 water flow. See also Energy/material flow; Flood control; Irrigation Confucian design theory of, 236–38 at construction scale, 114, 122 at global scale, 84, 229 importance of, in design, 196–97 as limiting factor in design, 79 management of, 231 and plants, 206 prediction of, 232–33 as regional-scale design focus, 67 as scale determinant, 25, 31, 32, 40–41 46, 67,76–79 as subcontinental design focus, 76–79 Taoist design theory of, 236–38 Watson, James, 128 Wheaton, William, 133 Whitehead, Alfred North, 128 Whitewater Wash, 89-100 animals at, 88 associations at, 196 competing uses at, 83, 138, 171 conflict as impetus for design at, 136 energy flow at, 83, 88, 101, 243 plants at, 101 as plan-unit-scale design, 88, 101 quantitative analysis for prediction at, 180 recreational use at, 88, 101 scenic beauty at, 101, 209 soils at, 101 suitability models for, 101, 244, 247, 257 Wild Animal Park, 219–23 irrigation at, 224 management for wildlife at, 218, 224–25 manual-overlay maps at, 244, 257 short-term inventory at, 146–47 suitability models at, 244, 257 wild areas, 215–16 wild corridors, 217–18, 226 wild enclaves, 217, 226 wildlife. See Animals wild patches, 216–17 Wilen, Billy, 148 Williamson, Robert D., 226 Woodlands New Community, TX, 103, 237 Woodwell, George, 239 World Conservation Strategy, 81, 86 Yarbrough, Janet, 224 Yergin, Daniel, 83 Yosemite National Park, 142, 159, 171 Zedler, Paul, 247, 257, 258 zoning, 102 ## Island Press Board of Directors Chair SUSAN E. SECHLER Vice President, Aspen Institute Vice-chair HENRY REATH President, Collector's Reprints, Inc. Secretary DRUMMOND PIKE President, The Tides Foundation Treasurer ROBERT E. BAENSCH Professor of Publishing, New York University CATHERINE M. CONOVER GENE E. LIKENS Director, The Institute of Ecosystem Studies DANE NICHOLS JEAN RICHARDSON Director, Environmental Programs in Communities (EPIC), University of Vermont CHARLES C. SAVITT President, Center for Resource Economics/Island Press VICTOR M. SHER Environmental Lawyer PETER R. STEIN Managing Partner, Lyme Timber Company RICHARD TRUDELL Executive Director, American Indian Resources Institute WREN WIRTH President, The Winslow Foundation ## 11 t is a memorable, timeless, and potentially life-changing book. Lyle traveled extensively to share ideas, but Design for Human Ecosystems stands still and shines like a lighthouse. We see the shine of its light and find our own course." —Joan Woodward, from the foreword “His work will be read twenty-five years from now and he will rank among the important figures of this transítional time. —David Orr, Professor and Chair of the Environmental Program, Oberlin College, and author of Earth in Mind and Ecological Literacy "He is irreplaceable in the role he served. He was a spokesperson for a new way of looking at and acting in the world." —Robert L. Thayer, Jr., FASLA, Professor of Landscape Architecture, University of California at Davis ## F or more than 30 years, John Tillman Lyle (1934–1998) was one of the leading thinkers in ecological design. Design for Human Ecosystems, originally published in 1985, is his classic text that explores methods of designing landscapes that function in the sustainable ways of natural ecosystems. The book provides a framework for thinking about and understanding ecological design, along with a wealth of real-world examples that bring to life Lyle's key ideas. Lyle traces the historical growth of design approaches involving natural processes and presents an introduction to the principles, methods, and techniques that can be used to shape landscape, land use, and natural resources in an ecologically sensitive and sustainable manner. This new edition features a foreword by Joan Woodward, a noted landscape architecture professor and colleague of Lyle, that places the book in the context of current ecological design thinking and discusses Lyle's contributions to the field. It will be a valuable work for landscape architects, planners, students of ecological design, and anyone interested in creating landscapes that meet the needs of an area's inhabitants—human and nonhuman alike. John Tillman Lyle was, until his death in the summer of 1998, professor of landscape architecture at California State Polytechnic University in Pomona, California. ## ISLAND PRESS Washington, D.C.• Covelo, California