# FOREWORD Have you ever broken your arm and tried to open a door? Been late for a plane and had to negotiate a crowded airport laden down with luggage? Picked up your 98-year-old aunt from synagogue or church? Struggled to understand directional signage in the street of an unfamiliar city? Felt left out at a neighborhood meeting because you couldn't see or hear the speaker? Reached to settle your belongings on a high shelf that lies just beyond your reach? If so, you have faced the consequences of design, an activity that has the power to affect our daily lives, for good or ill. Yet, for much of our history, designers and builders have ignored large segments of the population. As human beings, we do not exist in the abstract. Throughout the continuum of our lives, we grow and shrink in stature, strengthen and weaken in musculature, quicken and diminish in visual and aural acuity—our physical state, including our senses and our strength, varies radically from age to age. In addition to more obvious physical challenges, our abilities and our infirmities can ebb with the barometric pressure, the pollen count, and our psychological sense of well-being. The diverse portrait of the human condition thus avoids moralizing: We are not “good" one year and "bad" the next. Instead, for designers, it demands that we ask questions. Do the objects, spaces, places, and cities that we design enhance our experience? Enable us to perform tasks at peak efficiency? Encourage our passage or our rest? Ennoble or degrade us? Welcome our collaboration or exclude us? Simplify or improve our lives? In its highest sense, universal design, which this book addresses, suggests a change of focus. Rather than codifying rigid rules for the abstract, perfect person (as earlier handbooks did), it asks us to remove our rose-colored glasses, see the world as it really is, and adjust our designs accordingly. The operative point of view for designers (whether architects, landscape architects, interior designers, engineers, industrial designers, Web designers, or wayfinders), becomes one of empathy for the human condition; in universal design, solutions reflect the diversity of human abilities—throughout the range of life. Although codes may help ensure compliance where the society has proved intransigent, the ultimate answer to universal design lies in employing our full imaginative and aesthetic gifts in a new way of seeing. Digital technology may prove an ally in this effort, allowing us to "see" in ways we may not have imagined. But the solution to a more sympathetic physical environment lies in the human consciousness—refocused, enlightened, and responsive to the fullness of who we are, and what we can accomplish. Read the following pages, and learn. Robert Ivy, FAIA Editor in Chief Architectural Record Magazine New York, NY