# PREFACE This book is inspired by the unprecedented and growing worldwide interest in the design of environments and products that respect the diversity of human beings. The attention comes from many sectors: It includes market-oriented interests that see the spending power of aging baby boomers with a significantly expanded customer base; aging advocates speaking for themselves; families and clients who want to live productive lives and wish to remain in their own homes; disability rights policy makers; activists who assert their right to equality and inclusive environments for people with disabilities. The engagement with universal design is evidenced by an increasing number of international conferences with participants from every continent. Numerous study tours to the United States by international groups of designers, government officials, and businesses wanting to understand the relationship between the Americans with Disabilities Act and universal design further confirm the need to create this publication in an attempt to communicate the remarkable range of effort in the arena of universal design in the United States, as well as around the world. The primary purpose of this book is to help encourage the practice of good design by making universal design information available to designers, design educators, decision makers in business and government, as well as advocates. The editors have combined their collective expertise in universal design and environment/behavior studies to shape a publication that illustrates the range of worldwide policies and practices. Why should one be concerned with universal design? In a period of rapidly changing demographics, with an aging population that will have a longer life expectancy, it is of paramount concern to anticipate a range of disabilities that will affect an increasing number of the population. For instance, in the United States, more than 50 million people have varying degrees of disabilities, including mental and physical. This number is expected to increase, and thus, by providing this segment of the population with accessibility, safety, convenience and satisfaction, universal design will be practiced in the spirit of its “inventors." Perhaps the most vocal and effective of these was the late Ronald L. Mace, FAIA, to whom this book is dedicated. The question arises how lasting changes can be effected in the design professions regarding the awareness and understanding of the concept of universal design and its implications for the planning and design of facilities. These changes must occur in the design world, as well as with the agencies that are concerned with aging and people with disabilities. It appears that the one major realistic hope for such change lies in education and in teaching of future professionals in schools of design, including architecture, engineering, planning, graphic, industrial, interior design, and information technology. This is why the editors of this volume have put a major emphasis on design education, both within the university as well as within community settings. This has included the curriculum and teaching of required introductory courses for the past 15 years. They have reinforced this through exercises and field studies of real buildings in upper-level courses, including thesis programs and design projects and 30 years of community and continuing education programs. From the outset, it was clear that this book would reflect a global perspective. Contributors from 18 primarily industrialized countries were invited to contribute chapters on the experience with universal design and with accessibility standards over the last 20-plus years, and to project into the future needed directions and changes. Clearly, some contributors were not in agreement with the legislative developments in this field in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom, and it is hoped that their critical stance will encourage discourse among the users of this volume. Language and translation issues had to be addressed, as a number of contributors reside in non-English-speaking countries. This presented a challenge of word-by-word editing and of retaining the proper meaning of words and terminology in the authors' home countries, as opposed to the United States. Measurement systems had to be dealt with, in terms of differences between metric and nonmetric, and it was decided to retain the original system in a given author's country, and to provide conversions where deemed feasible and useful. Personal, life-changing events occurred to several authors: First and most tragic, Powell Lawton (author of Chap. 7), passed away. He will be missed and remembered for his humanity and great contributions to both gerontology and the environment and behavior field. One author served the United Nations in Kosovo while preparing his chapter, a true challenge; two author groups had their prime authors become parents during the year-long process of writing their manuscripts; and finally, several authors changed their professional affiliations. An editorial process was evolved for this book, which consisted of three rounds of reviews for each manuscript, building upon each other. Sixteen review categories were established to assure consistency of content, structure, and format. They included such issues as: the sequence in which items were to be addressed in a given chapter; the introduction linking a given chapter topic to universal design; the background and historical evolution of the topic, building type, or issue being addressed in a given chapter; the use of illustration materials; cross-referencing among chapters in the book; and the balancing of topics in a given section. Finally, human aspects of shepherding 69 author groups through the arduous editing process can only be understood by someone who has experienced this him- or herself. Extracting manuscripts from busy authors in a timely manner is quite a challenge, indeed. Electronic communications were both an asset that made the book possible and added some challenges as well, in accommodating the range of technological expertise and computer capacity. As a result, this handbook reflects an in-depth review of the state of the art in the progression to more universal designing. The introduction to each chapter provides a brief summary that will help orient the reader.