# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The editors wish to acknowledge the crucial role of the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) and the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) for their support for universal design through their policies as well as grants for education, research, product development, technical assistance, and promotion. The impact of both agencies is reflected in the work of a number of the authors from several countries. In addition to their research and program support, both agencies have used their position to inform other government agencies and the public about universal design. Three national Rehabilitation Engineering Research Centers on universal design are now in place, with NIDRR support. Two on the built environment are the Center for Universal Design at North Carolina State University and the RERC on Universal Design, University at Buffalo. The RERC on Information Technology Access is at the Trace Research and Development Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison. We are most appreciative of the 69 author teams who worked diligently, often rewriting their chapters three and four times to reach the clarity that would reflect the excellence of their work. The language barriers were daunting, and we are humbled by those authors who produced work in “U.S. English"—fully aware of our own limits in their native languages. Thanks are owed to the persons who got the editors interested in the field of accessible and universal design in the first place, and the agencies, which helped sustain that interest through grants and other support. In the case of Editor in Chief Preiser, the National Science Foundation (NSF) assisted research leading to the publication of Public Building Accessibility: A Self-Evaluation Guide\* in the late 1970s. This guide would allow businesses, hospitals, or any organization for that matter, to check out their facilities for accessibility without necessarily hiring consultants. Later, the NEA provided several grants to help develop an electronic "Guidance System for Visually Impaired Persons" for buildings and the campus of the University of New Mexico. Ray Marshall, coordinator for special services at that university, is thanked for his excellent cooperation and for providing subjects for the research that lead to a prototype of that guidance system. We also thank William Davis at the New Mexico School for the Visually Handicapped in Alamogordo, New Mexico, for assisting in the testing and research, which was awarded the 1984 Progressive Architecture Annual Award in Applied Research. Preiser was inspired by the late Ronald L. Mace, who coined the term universal design and who shared his vision in the book Design Intervention: Toward a More Humane Architecture. Senior Editor Ostroff is extremely appreciative of the significant role played by the many individuals who actively participated on the board of directors of Adaptive Environments since 1978. Their sustaining support, commitment, and fiduciary risk taking allowed her and the staff of a small nonprofit organization to create participatory, user-centered design education programs—first in accessible, then in universal, design. Other significant support has come from NEC Foundation of America, who, along with the NEA, supported ongoing work in universal design education. The editor in chief acknowledges the role that Senior Editor Elaine Ostroff, played in recruiting more than 45 authors into this book project. Her national and international network reflects her work of more than 30) years in the field of accessibility and in universal design, and her knowledge of this emerging field was invaluable in the editorial process. Ostroff, the founding director of Adaptive Environments in Boston, developed the Universal Design Education project noted throughout the handbook and was instrumental in organizing the international conferences "Designing for the 21st Century," held in New York City in 1998, and Providence, Rhode Island, in 2000. The growing number of presenters and attendees is evidence of the fact that universal design is sweeping the world as a movement, apparently unstoppable and particularly significant in aging societies. We wish to thank the many individuals and organizations that helped shape this book, as well as refine the emphasis of the contents. Working in the global arena, a number of difficulties had to be overcome, ranging from communications in general, to an equitable editorial process, which recognizes regional and cultural differences in universal design, as well as accessibility for persons with disabilities in different countries. The CD-ROM that accompanies this handbook was made possible by the cooperation of the U.S. Access Board, who has provided the electronic files of the most current ADA Accessibility Guidelines and related technical assistance materials. Perhaps the most important source of inspiration and continuing involvement in the field of universal design have been our students and colleagues over the course of the past 25 years. Without their help and genuine care, we would not have been able to carry out this and numerous other projects. We thank Wendy Lochner, senior editor for architecture at McGraw-Hill, for shepherding us through the daunting process of creating this innovative handbook on universal design, without any precedent to emulate. Tom Laughman of North Market Street Graphics was a true facilitator in managing the book production, including copyediting, as well as the page composition and proofing process for McGraw-Hill. Deirdre Price was an excellent project assistant in charge of word processing and handling three rounds of manuscript reviews, as well as multiple communications with our authors. Last, but not least, Gary DeVoe played an invaluable role in the final submission by compiling an electronic record of 69 chapter drafts with over 400 images on a set of three CDs. Finally, our spouses, Cecilia Fenoglio-Preiser and Earl Ostroff, provided strong support throughout this long and challenging project. INTRODUCTION