CHAPTER 1 # UNIVERSAL DESIGN: THE NEW PARADIGM Elaine Ostroff, Ed.M. Adaptive Environments Center, Boston, Massachusetts ## 1.1 INTRODUCTION The Universal Design Handbook is a unique compilation that brings together the rich international experience of what we call universal design. Universal design is not a trend but an enduring design approach that assumes that the range of human ability is ordinary, not special. This book describes and illustrates the extraordinary growth in the international movement to create environments and products for all people. During the past 15 years, the approach to design that accommodates people with functional limitations has been changing from narrow code compliance to meet the specialized needs of a few to a more inclusive design process for everybody. Contrary to the negative assumption that attention to the needs of diverse users limits good design, the experience of imaginative designers around the world reveals the range of applications that delight the senses and lift the human spirit when universal design is integral to the overall concept. Universal design is assuming growing importance as a new paradigm that aims at a holistic and integrated approach to design, ranging in scale from product design to architecture, and urban design on one hand, and systems controlling the ambient environment and information technology, on the other. The terminology differs from one country to another; there are significant cultural differences in how the movement has evolved in each country, but the similarities are more apparent than the differences as they transcend national laws, policies, and practices. There is a confluence of factors generating the need for more universally designed products, environments, and amenities—it includes the competitive, global nature of business today, the flourishing communications technology industry, the international disability movement, and the rapidly growing aging and disabled populations all over the world. Everyone is likely at some time to experience the misfit between themselves and their environment. Ambient conditions or stress may create problems with using products or buildings. Aging increases the potential for vulnerability in the environment. People worldwide are living longer, the aging population will double in the next 20 years (McNeil, 1997), and a child born today has a 50 percent chance of living to be 100 years old. In this introductory chapter, we note the multiple influences affecting universal design. We also discuss the different terminology used throughout the book to label the design process that respectfully includes all people, and in so doing, we illuminate the differences between meeting legislated national accessibility requirements and the practice of universal design. We explain the structure of the book and then identify key international themes that are discussed by authors from different countries. Late-breaking developments are included and future challenges are highlighted. ## 1.2 INTERNATIONAL INFLUENCES LEADING TO UNIVERSAL DESIGN What has inspired this worldwide appetite for universal design efforts around the world? The U.S. Supreme Court Decision in 1954, Brown vs. the Board of Education, established the precedent that "separate is not equal." Ostroff, in Chap. 43, “Universal Design Practice in the United States," considers this precedent of equal opportunity in education as the milestone that marks the beginning of an approach to design that respects all users. Accessibility features that are a thoughtless add-on after the basic design of a place or a product have a stigmatizing quality not unlike the segregated “back of the bus" practices that were once the norm in the United States. There are two major, distinctive threads that can be traced historically—the legislative measures that included specialized requirements to accommodate people with disabilities, primarily affecting the larger-scale built environment and the nonregulated market-driven responses to an aging society, primarily relating to products. Both of these threads are well covered within the handbook, by several authors. Sandhu's Chap. 3, "An Integrated Approach to Universal Design: Toward the Inclusion of All Ages, Cultures, and Diversity," provides a broad historic view of the legislative and civil rights measures around the world. Others detail the legislative developments in several countries—the United States, the United Kingdom, Italy, Canada, Japan, and Israel. Chapter 4, "Designing for Our Future Selves," by Coleman, offers a rich perspective from the United Kingdom on ways that the changing demographics are leading to new business opportunities and a more inclusive design consciousness. In Chap. 50, “Universal Design in Automobile Design," Steinfeld and Steinfeld discuss the innovative design changes in the highly competitive automotive industry in order to respond to the safety and comfort needs of an older society. Ikeda and Takayanagi, in Chap. 55, "Universal Design Research Collaboration Between Industry and a University in Japan," detail the mutually beneficial experience in which the attention to older and disabled consumers fuses two separate objectives: (1) commercialization and profit for industry and (2) the education of product designers. In addition to the nondiscriminatory accommodations for people with disabilities and the attention to the aging demographics that were the initial influences for universal design, there is an increasing awareness of conditions that have not traditionally been thought of as universal design issues. Attention to these issues is expanding the scope of universal design to encompass a broad range of environmental concerns. They include the prevalence of “sick buildings" and their concomitant health problems related to poor indoor air quality that have been a major source of disablement for growing numbers of people. Diseases of the respiratory system are the highest cause of disability in children under age 18, with asthma the most common disabling condition (Wenger et al., 1996). The U.S. Access Board is directing a quarter of its research money, beginning in 2000, for work on indoor environmental air quality (Lamielle, 1999). Acoustics and lighting are also assuming importance in the creation of optimum, nondisabling environments. Weisman, in Chap. 69, “Creating the Universally Designed City: Prospects for the New Century," further stretches the potential for universal design. ## 1.3 TERMINOLOGY The terms used to describe environments that promote human functioning differ in many countries, as will be seen throughout this book. There has also been a developmental change in the language used in some countries, reflecting not only the evolution from initial efforts to remove barriers that exclude people to a more inclusive design approach, but changing social policies as well. What follows are the most common terms and a discussion of what they mean in different contexts Universal Design. Universal design is a term that was first used in the United States by Ron Mace (1985), but the concepts were also expressed in other countries. Universal design and inclusive design are terms often used interchangeably in the United States to label a design approach that implies equity and social justice by design. Although there are other terms that are frequently used, such as life span design and transgenerational design, Mullick and Steinfeld (1997) explain that what separates universal design from these terms is universal design's focus on social inclusion. This relates to the "separate is not equal" precedent of equal opportunity. Unfortunately, the term universal design has inappropriately been adopted by some people, especially in the United States, as a trendy synonym for compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act Standards for Accessible Design. We see the poor design and the problems created by this confusion, especially in thoughtless new designs that end up looking like retrofits. Ramps added in new construction are a good example, where none would have been needed if the architects had considered the needs of all users as fundamental in the earliest stages of the programming process, rather than a technical requirement to be added at the end of the design process. Perhaps this misunderstanding is the result of good intentions—the use of what may be thought of as a politically correct term, but it inhibits the creative process invited by universal design. Welch and Jones (1999) note. "This indicates that significant systemic and attitudinal barriers stand in the way of real change." Ron Mace noted that minimum standards are an important part, but not the definition of universal design. His 1988 definition of universal design is quoted in several chapters: Universal design is an approach to design that incorporates products as well as building features which, to the greatest extent possible, can be used by everyone." Barrier-Free Design. The initial term used around the world was barrier-free design and related to the efforts that began in the late 1950s to remove barriers for disabled people from the built environment. An international conference held in Sweden in 1961 cited extensive efforts throughout Europe, Japan, and the United States, primarily by rehabilitation organizations, to "reduce the barriers to the disabled\* (ISRD, 1961). Around that same time, a related international effort began, shifting care for people with disabilities who had been institutionalized and removed from mainstream society back to community-oriented programs and facilities. Christophersen and Gulbrandsen (2000) highlight the Norwegian policy shift from “institutional care to special needs housing to equality and inclusion" as parallel to international trends. Lusher, in her detailed article on the development of access laws and codes in the United States (Lusher, 1989) reported on the efforts by the President's Committee on the Employment of the Handicapped and the Veterans Administration to study ways that the federal government might increase accessibility More recently, in the United States, the term barrier-free has been perceived negatively, as a feature prescribed only for use bv disabled people. In Europe and Japan, the term has been used more broadly to describe universal design. However, in Europe, the term design for all has been increasingly used since 1967, and now the more popular term in Japan is universal design. Accessibility. This term has a very different meaning for some European experts involved in the European Concept for Accessibility (Wijk, 1996). For them, accessibility is the umbrella issue for all parameters that influence human functioning in the environment. They define accessibility as an environmental quantitv. In the United States, accessible design became more widely used in the 1970s as a more positive term than barrier-free design, but it was and is still very much linked to legislated requirements. ## 1.4 STRUCTURE OF THE UNIVERSAL DESIGN HANDBOOK The 69 chapters of the handbook are organized in 10 parts, moving from the most comprehensive to more specific topics. Every part has an international mix of authors. Each chapter has a similar structure, beginning with an introduction that is essentially an overview that summarizes the contents of the chapter for the reader. A synopsis of each part follows. Part I: Introduction. This part introduces the reader to the key themes of the book and also provides a more experiential reminder of the environmental interactions faced by users on a daily basis. It highlights the challenges and opportunities to enable people, by design. Part 2: Premises and Perspectives in Universal Design. The chapters in this part reflect upon broad themes in universal design—the genealogy of universal design; responses to demographic changes and market needs; the implications for universal design in industrializing nations where the socioeconomic conditions sharply divide the haves and have-nots; the importance of individualized assessment within an environment/behavior framework; and the role that the human brain plays in environmental perception and universal design. The critical involvement of the user is highlighted and universal design evaluation as a continuous effort to improve the quality of design through appropriate feedback mechanisms is described. Part 3: Universal Design Guidelines and Accessibility Standards. This part encompasses the development of performance-based criteria and guidelines for universal design in varied settings including outdoor play for children and natural environments as well as international policy-making efforts. National governmental efforts in several countries show the development and application of accessibility standards. Included are issues relating to prescriptive standards and challenges they present to universal design. The Principles of Universal Design are critiqued in relation to a complex user group—people with Alzheimer's disease. This section also has comparisons of accessible housing built to national standards in Europe, and problems when accessibility by legislation is interpreted by the courts, along with issues of safety standards in residential stair design. Part 4: Public Policy Systems and Issues. This part includes the analysis of universal design issues in mass transportation and also identifies complex issues in the development of national policies for accessibility and universal design. Historic developments are detailed, including struggles and successes—both in industrialized countries and in developing economies. It presents approaches to universal design based on high-level planning as well as sustainable human and social development. Part 5: Residential Environments. This part begins with a well-illustrated description of the next-generation universal single-family home and moves on to multifamily housing and group living arrangements, addressing both the design as well as government policies that impact design. Housing policies from the United States, Canada, Switzerland, Âustralia, Germany, and Southeast Asia are reviewed. Two chapters deal specifically with housing elements: one on universally designed kitchens and appliances and another on bathrooms. Part 6: Universal Design Practices. With an emphasis on the creation of places and products, this part begins with the civil rights history leading to universal design practice in the United States. It includes a briefing process for universal design from the United Kingdom and illustrates universal design primarily in settings and building types in the United States. Thcse include offices and workplaces, educational environments, sports and entertainment facilities, landscape design, as well as the universal design of products and automobiles. The practice of landscape architecture is illustrated through the aesthetic spirituality of universally designed outdoor gardens and parks in Japan. Part 7: Education and Research. The chapters in this part describe teaching experiences in professional schools of design in the United States, Australia, and the United Kingdom. It also includes a partnership between a college of design and a corporation in Japan. Advances and obstacles are detailed in each setting. Examples of universal design research are presented, including post-occupancy evaluation and the use of rating scales for inclusive design at the building and the urban design scale. Part 8: Case Studies. This case study part of the book examines specific projects that include either accessibility or universal design, and from which practical lessons can be derived. Examples include urban design projects in the United Kingdom and the United States; a United Nations regional project in Southeast Asia; an award-winning building serving people with vision impairments in New York City; capital planning in a local public school district in Arizona; the systematic rebuilding of the war-ravaged central district in Beirut, Lebanon; and a transportation-oriented multibuilding campus in Oakland, California. Part 9: Information Technology. This part details the methods and public policy by which the emerging communication and information technology is being made more universally usable. The incentives in new U.S. legislation are described and strategies for designers of telecommunications equipment are introduced. The international guidelines for the Internet and sophisticated innovations in every aspect of mass media are presented and European developments in Smart Card technology are explained. Part 10: The Future of Universal Design. The book concludes with a visionary chapter that builds a bridge to the future. It underscores both the growth as well as the massive problems in cities around the world, challenging planners and designers of cities to apply principles such as diversity, inclusivity, equity, and environmental health in the rethinking of our cities. ## 1.5 INTERNATIONAL THEMES There are several themes that appear frequently throughout the book, and they surface in different parts, reflecting experiences from different countries. The following sections analyze and relate some of the authors who address similar themes. ## Design-for-All Grosbois, in Chap. 27, "The Evolution of Design for All in Public Buildings and Transportation in France," provides both historic architecturally based theory as well as illuminating case examples of how design for all was achieved in transportation systems and in public buildings. He cites Vitruvius, the often-quoted Roman architect, who said that architecture should be based on three qualities: (1) Firmitas (solidity of construction), (2) Voluptas (the aesthetic experience), and (3) Commoditas (adaptation to use). Vitruvius recommends, “Laying the building out so ingeniously that nothing could hinder its use." Grosbois also references architect Alvar Aalto's critique of formalism and its inhuman nature. He uses a door handle that Aalto designed and the remarkable Fiskars scissors, produced by a Finnish industrialist, as examples of design for all. There are welcome connections between Grosbois' analysis of design for all in the Lille metro system and the Grenoble Tram with Chap. 24, "Universal Design in Mass Transportation," by Steinfeld, in which he emphasizes the importance of mass transportation in urban environments, in promoting social and economic viability. He introduces the concept of the universally accessible travel chain. The travel chain includes the information needed to understand and gain access to transportation, the stations, and the vehicles. Steinfeld includes guidance for universally designed elements of transportation-related design from information strategies and wayfinding, to level changes and security systems in terminals, to passenger loading and seating. ## Aging as a Stimulus for Universal Design Numerous authors emphasize the unprecedented change in demographics, with an aging population that will have a longer life expectancy than ever before, and the implications for design. Only a few are noted here. Moore, in Chap. 2, "Experiencing Universal Design," reminds the reader of the more affluent and style-conscious baby boomers who want function, convenience, and good design—all at once. Sandhu's bell-curve diagram in Chap. 3 illustrates the huge increase in users from when designers go beyond the old norms based on young, ablebodied users, to a more inclusive, universal design approach. He also cites the humane recommendations to the United Nations from the International Federation for Ageing that point to universal design. Coleman, in Chap. 4, also reframes the thinking about the recipients of the design process in this developing context of social and demographic change. He explains the concept of “designing for our future selves" to help designers and policy makers move beyond some statistical "other." Kose, in Chap. 17, "The Impact of Aging on Japanese Accessibility Design Standards," charts the growth of aging populations in industrializing nations. He notes that Japan has the fastest-growing aging population. By 2015, more than 25 percent of the country will be over 65 years of age, and the Japanese government has developed design guidelines to accommodate these changes. Harrison, in Chap. 40, "Housing for Older Persons in Southeast Asia: Evolving Policy and Design,"describes the pressure of demographics and changing cultural patterns that lead to older people living apart from their families, in new urban housing developments where they have access to services and public transportation. ## Information Technology This exploding field is both a source of worldwide economic development and, currently, the most productive arena for universal design practice. Several authors illuminate aspects of information technology that increasingly impact the daily experience of every individual and the work of every corporation and government agency. Vanderheiden, in Chap. 65, “Fundamentals and Priorities for Design of Information and Telecommunication Technologies," explains the congruence between the technology needs of a mobile workforce and consumers with physical and sensory limitations. Brewer, in Chap. 66, “Access to the World Wide Web: Technical and Policy Perspectives," details the international effort to create standards and tools that assure access to this fast-growing medium. Goldberg, in Chap. 67, “Universal Design in Film and Media," highlights the expanded access to film and television now possible through digital technology. Sandhu and Leibert describe the European work to provide wide usability in another emerging field in Chap. 68, "User-Centered Deployment and Integration of Smart Card Technology: The DISTINCT Project." In a related development with far-reaching commercial implications, the U.S. Access Board (2000) has recently published the regulations and technology standards to be used by the U.S. government in the purchase and use of accessible electronic and information technology. These unique standards encompass the types of technology covered and lay out the minimum level of access required. They provide both technical criteria specific to various types of technologies and performance-based requirements, which focus on the functional capabilities of covered technologies. ## Government Policies and Universal Design The book intentionally reflects divergent views of government policies and laws that relate to universal design. While many authors, as seen throughout the book, describe architectural and transportation designs that are not limited by accessibility standards, a few authors are critical of legislated approaches and believe.that they thwart the practice of universal design. Salmen, in Chap. 12, “U.S. Accessibility Codes and Standards: Challenges for Universal Design," cites court challenges as proof of the problems with legislated requirements. He proposes performance criteria instead of prescriptive design standards. Mazumdar and Geis, in Chap. 18, "Interpreting Accessibility Standards: Experiences in the U.S. Courts," have related concerns about legislated means to assure accessible design. Wijk, in Chap. 28, “The Dutch Struggle for Accessibility Awareness," recounts the failed results in the Netherlands of separate accessibility requirements in influencing designers and builders. Subsequent efforts produced some improvements, but he questions any requirements and labels that give designers the excuse to marginalize the needs of diverse users. He illustrates the continuing gap between what is built and what all people need, and he proposes changes in the professional educational process as one approach to good design for everyone. Goldsmith, in Chap. 25, "The Bottom-Up Methodology of Universal Design," has a similar view. He asserts that the top-down prescriptive legislated requirements for accessibility in both Great Britain and the United States do not make buildings more convenient for everyone. Although he acknowledges that these statutory controls for making public buildings accessible have massively extended their general use, to achieve universal design he recommends a bottom-up approach that would begin with the needs of all users. He suggests, "For architects who are keen to take it on, informative design guidance would help." Bringa, in Chap. 29, "Norway's Planning Approach to Implement Universal Design," explains the new approach of the Ministry of the Environment to develop a high-level strategy that would introduce accessibility as a goal in planning, to overcome fragmented, poorly coordinated technical approaches. In addition to national policy and research, a series of pilot projects as well as educational programs for planners are underway and being evaluated. ## Urban Design Universal design is comparatively new at the urban scale, and several authors bring important experience to this emerging area. D'Innocenzo and Morini, in Chap. 15, “Accessible Design in Italy," provide a thorough review of the development of accessibility in Italy, with a focus on public buildings and urban design. They emphasize the renewal of existing buildings and areas rather than new construction. Many of their case studies illustrate the way accessibility is regulated and applied. Noting that the focus in Italy in the coming decades will be on improving the quality of existing neighborhoods at the urban scale, they introduce a remarkable process of Neighborhood Agreements. Municipalities can apply for funding of this experimental tool for urban renewal that includes local planning and priority setting. They point to the “city for all" as the goal for urban and building processes. Fletcher, in Chap. 60, “A Neighborhood Fit for People: Universal Design on the South Boston Waterfront," introduces another neighborhood-oriented urban design project in her Boston-based experience. Unlike the Italian emphasis on renewal of urban areas, Fletcher's focus is on the biggest new development in Boston's recent history. Acres of industrial waste, parking lots as well as prime waterfront property are part of the highly political project that will include massive building projects. She presents the strategies involving multiple partnerships, education for user/experts, and technical assistance to introduce universal design principles at the urban scale in the overall planning of the South Boston Waterfront. Manley also illustrates the application of universal design at the urban scale as she, with her university students, address the challenge in Chap. 58, "Creating an Accessible Public Realm." Her focus is to remove barriers in the disabling urban environment by using a mainstream, universal design approach that will enable all people to walk safely on city streets and sidewalks, minimizing reliance on the use of private automobiles. She introduces one method—collaborative street audits—which have proved useful in towns in the west of England. Involving local citizens with and without disabilities, audits were conducted and the results entered into a geographic information system (GIS) for capital planning. Manley explains the advantages as well as the disadvantages of the highly participatory and complex audit process. She provides the readers with extensive process information that can be applied elsewhere. Tappuni, in Chap. 63, “Access in Rebuilding Beirut's Center," describes the process of creating a socially inclusive urban environment in the context of a developing economy. In Lebanon, the policies, criteria, and methodologies were established as part of the major reconstruction of a city center leveled by war. ## User Involvement User involvement in the teaching, learning, and practice of universal design is addressed by a number of authors. Ringaert, in Chap. 6, "User/Expert Involvement in Universal Design," introduces the primacy of the consumer expressed in the independent living paradigm as the basis for the involvement and contribution of people who are disabled in accessibility consulting work in Winnipeg and other parts of Canada. The role of the user/expert involves extensive education to enable people to offer more than their own personal experience as consultants, however valuable that may be. Ringaert describes the training programs in which user/experts acquired the technical expertise and cross-disability awareness to become consultants. She illustrates the application of that knowledge in a city-wide access consultation that involved multiple users, including design students and street kids, in Winnipeg. Noting that this is only the beginning, she emphasizes the need for further development and research in the work with user/experts. Pedersen's experience in Western Australia also involves the users, but in a very different context. In Chap. 53, "Designing Cultural Futures at the University of Western Australia," Pedersen describes two teaching/research project experiences with architecture students in experimental design studios. Both projects explored an inclusive pedagogy that would lead to the students'appreciation of collaboration, diversity, and cultural equity. One studio involved the collaborative design of housing with a remote indigenous community; in the second studio, the students worked with disability consultants to experiment with universal design within the university. The teaching context that Pedersen discusses is intensely complex, and lightly sketched here to identify the range of issues surrounding user involvement. ## Sustainability Sustainability is mentioned by several authors as a component of their universal design process. Weisman and Walsh both discuss sustainability in depth. Walsh, in Chap. 33, “Sustainable Human and Social Development: An Examination of Contextual Factors," introduces a broad person-centered view of sustainable development that he believes can be a more appropriate and powerful context for universal design. He provides a detailed background through United Nations and European reports and treaties that promote sustainable design. He also criticizes the lack of success in many European design-for-all efforts to gain mainstream support for accessibility. Walsh proposes changes to the European Disability Agenda that would broaden research and development along with extensive monitoring and higherlevel coordination by the European Union. Weisman, on the other hand, in her postscript to the book (Chap. 69) sees universal design as providing the context and a base for environmentally healthy communities. She documents the connections between social and environmental health, linking environmental risk to poverty and racism. Her discussion of massive urbanization and the impact of modern building and in-adequate public transport emphasizes the challenge we face in sustainable urban planning. Her vision for the universally designed city not only defines the environmental imperatives ahead, but also offers great examples that illustrate solutions that work. The editors are mindful that sustainability issues and solutions in industrializing nations may be of different scale but share many characteristics of the industrialized world. Although the book is comprehensive and voluminous, there are still other remarkable developments in universal design that could not be captured within these pages, as we faced the constraints of what could be included in one volume, as well as the familiar phenomenon of those who produce great work but do not write about it. Fortunately, there are several relatively new periodicals, Web sites, and a new CD-ROM that document many of these efforts. To highlight some recent European work, we note several designs that are featured in Crisp and Clear, a new glossy, well-illustrated periodical of the European Institute of Design and Disability (2000). Recent issues examine the Copenhagen Metro in Denmark, which is currently in design by the Italian firm, Giugiaro. The interviews with the designers reveal their enthusiasm in combining high style and ergonomics to create design for all. Also featured is the famous London taxi TXi, known as the “Black Cab," and the world's most universally designed taxi. Jevon Thorpe designed it in response both to his father's needs as a wheelchair user and to the requirements of the Disability Discrimination Act. Selected as an example of brilliant British creativity by the Design Council's Millennium Products Initiative, TX1 includes a recharging unit for mobile phones as well as a swing-out seat, an integral child seat, and a simple ramp that extends easily from the low-floor cab. The Universal Design magazine from Japan is another highly visual periodical. It is relatively new, and began in 1997 primarily as a Japanese-language quarterly (Universal Design Consortium, 2000). It initially had a strong focus on health care settings but now includes schools, corporate, and residential facilities and services. The Universal Design Newsletter, a U.S. quarterly periodical that includes international developments, has published on universal design and accessibility since 1993. The vast range of articles have included golf course design, theater design, playgrounds, supermarkets, concert halls, historic Williamsburg, and talking signs. Back issues are available in bound volumes (Universal Designers and Consultants, 2000). The Global Universal Design Educator's Online News is the timeliest periodical, emailed monthly with international news on universal design. Back issues are archived and searchable online (Ostroff, 2000). The Proceedings of “Designing for the 21s Century II" is readily available online (Ostroff, 2000) and includes papers from 15 countries that were presented at the international conference held in June 2000 in Providence, Rhode Island. The Exemplars of Universal Design is a new CD-ROM that illustrates universal design excellence in 32 well-photographed projects selected by a jury from international submissions. They represent the work of many design disciplines—architecture, landscape architecture, industrial design, interior design, and graphic design. Supported by the National Endowment for the Arts and NEC Foundation of America, the CD-ROM was produced by and is available from the Center for Universal Design (2000). A superb and easy-to-use universally usable teaching tool, it relates the applicable Principles of Universal Design to each project. The descriptive text inserted to explain each image is a model of accessible visual media for people who use screen readers. ## 1.7 FUTURE CHALLENGES The book illuminates many of the problems facing our society and the opportunities for a more broadly conceived universal design approach to mitigate these challenges. However, the practice of universal design is relatively young and has just begun to grapple with issues that affect its long-term development. The book introduces significant but limited efforts in each of the following three areas that will address the future success of universal design: 1. Education of design professionals 2. Evaluation of the impact of universally designed products and environments 3. Communication about universal design to the general public Education of Design Professionals. Until universal design is infused in preprofessional and continuing professional education, the attitudes of designers will limit their understanding and appreciation of diversity. They will continue to shape their designs for a mythical average norm, creating barriers that exclude the contributions and participation of millions of people all over the world. Evaluation of the Impact of Universally Designed Products and Environments. Universal design evaluation has barely begun. Although there is a rich history of environmental behavior research to draw from, there has been little research in universal design. Until we understand the impact of universal design on the usability and quality of buildings and products, we cannot establish meaningful criteria for future design. Communication About Universal Design to the General Public. Mainstream communication is essential. Until the general public—which includes decision makers and clients—appreciates the value of universal design, it will not assume importance to designers. This publication will reach the professionals who want to integrate universal design into their mainstream design practice. To significantly influence the process of design, we need to reach the rest of society. ## 1.8 BIBLIOGRAPHY Access Board, Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility Standards, Federal Register, Washington, DC, 21 December 2000. Center for Universal Design, Exemplars of Universal Design, Center for Universal Design, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 2000. Christophersen, J., and O. Gulbrandsen, Studentboliger for funksjonshemmede (Housing for disabled students), Project report no. 293, Norwegian Building Research Institute, Oslo, Norway, 2000. European Institute for Design and Disability, Crisp & Clear, European Institute for Design and Disability, Aarhus, Denmark, 2000; www.design-for-all.org. International Society for Rehabilitation of the Disabled (ISRD), Proceedings of the Physically Disabled and Their Environment, ISRD, Stockholm, Sweden, 12–18 October 1961. Lamielle, M., Press release on environmental air quality research, National Center for Environmental Health Strategies, Vorhees, NJ, 28 September 1999. Lusher, R. H., "Handicapped Access Laws and Codes," Encyclopedia of Architecture, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1989. Mace, R., Universal Design, Barrier Free Environments for Everyone, Designers West, Los Angeles, 1985. McNeil, J., Americans with Disabilities: 1994–95, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1997. Mullick, A., and E. Steinfeld, "Universal Design: What It Is and What It Isn't," Innovation, the Quarterly Journal of the Industrial Designers Society of America, 16:1, 1997. Ostroff, E. (ed.), Global Universal Design Educator's Online News, Elaine Ostroff, Westport. MA, 2000; www.universaldesign.net. Ostroff, E. (ed.), Proceedings of "Designing for the 21st Century II, An International Conference on Universal Design," Adaptive Environments Center, Providence, RI, 14–18 June 2000; www.adaptenv.org/ 21century/. Universal Design Consortium, Universal Design, Universal Design Consortium, Tokyo, Japan, 2000. Universal Designers & Consultants, Universal Design Newsletter, Universal Designers & Consultants, Takoma Park, MD, 2000. Welch, P., and S. Jones, "The Power of Imagination," in T. Mann (ed.). Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Environmental Design Research Association, Orlando, FL, 1999. Wenger, B. L., S. Kaye, and M. P. LaPlante, Disabilities Among Children, Disability Statistics Abstract (15), National Institute for Disability and Rehabilitation Research, Washington, DC, 1996; http://dsc.ucsf.edu. Wijk, M., European Concept for Accessibility, CCPT, Rijswijk, Netherlands, 1996.