CHAPTER 7 # DESIGNING BY DEGREE: ASSESSING AND INCORPORATING INDIVIDUAL ACCESSIBILITY NEEDS M. Powell Lawton, Ph.D. Philadelphia Geriatric Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ## 7.1 INTRODUCTION Universal design is the central topic of this chapter. For the present purpose, universal design may be defined as the best approximation of an environmental facet to the needs of the maximum possible number of users. This definition implies an effort at inclusiveness. A circular staircase may meet the aesthetic need of a particular consumer, but as a standard feature in a new housing tract, it would clearly limit access for some, and unnecessarily so, given the possibility of a custom order. There is also an opposite-directional aspect of universal design. It is possible that a feature explicitly created for a special user group may, in fact, turn out to be useful for all (e.g., a front porch stair rail). Thus, expanding usership capability and importing creative ideas from the specific to the universal are equally important design strategies. ## 7.2 BACKGROUND The most universal aspect of the design process is the assumption that all people share a basic set of common needs and that all design must spring from the accommodation of such needs. Perhaps the best-known conceptualization of needs has been the Maslow (1964) hierarchy, which arranges needs from the most basic, or visceral, level through needs to know and to manipulate the external world, proceeding up to self-actualization, a level that can be attained only as lower-level needs become satisfied. In this conception, universality is greatest at the most basic, life-maintaining level, and it decreases as limitations on individual competence and on environmental resources increase. Maslow made an important distinction between deficiency motivation (i.e., stimulated by a lack of need satisfaction at the most basic levels) and growth motivation (stimulated by active search for new experience). Preiser (1988, 1991; see also Chap. 9) has used a similar habitability framework as the theoretical beginning of the design process, featuring three habitability levels. The thoughts pursued in this chapter speak to the theme of this section, "Transcending the ADA Legacy," by suggesting that the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) has made major steps in reducing deficiency, but has further to go to enhance growth. In the process, an attempt will be made to reconcile the dialectic of universality and individuality by searching for variation in design solutions in the context of individual needs, as exhibited within a common need structure. To perform this task, a number of theoretical concepts that link person and environment will be utilized. In turn, these concepts will lead to design solutions that reflect the priorities of users of different environmental types. One of the first conceptual issues that requires attention is the question of the relationship between characteristics of the person and those of the environment. ## Human Needs Versus Environmental Affordances Needs, as construed for the present purpose, are clearly a property of the person. Much has been written to explore the alternative view that person and environment are one, versus their duality (Altman and Rogoff, 1987; Ittelson, 1976). It is convenient to deal with them as separate entities because the assessment task is more easily accomplished in that fashion than in more global concepts like the behavior setting (Barker, 1968), even though this latter concept may do better justice to the philosophic indivisibility of person and environment. Personal needs are seen as differentially capable of being satisfied as a function of the ability of the environment to support those needs. Gibson's (1979) concept of affordance describes an environmental structure present in the physical configuration that allows a behavior to occur if the behaving individual discovers the structure and emits the behavior that uses the structure. An affordance thus is not the cause of any behavior. The individual must use the environment actively. The author's view is that personal need provides the motivation to search for affordances and that individual characteristics of the person determine the content of the behavior that effectively uses the affordance. This theoretical view implies a parallel set of personal needs and environmental affordances whose behavioral outcomes and subjective states are capable of being evaluated in terms of quality of life. An early short list of environmental affordances was provided by Brill and Krauss (1970) as a set of continua (left-hand column of Table 7.1). TABLE 7.1 Environmental Affordances and Personal Need Analogues
<table><tr><td>Environment*</td><td>Personal need</td></tr><tr><td>Communality—privacy</td><td>Privacy</td></tr><tr><td>Sociopetality—sociofugality</td><td>Affiliation</td></tr><tr><td>Informality—formality</td><td>Order</td></tr><tr><td>Familiarity—remoteness</td><td>Novelty</td></tr><tr><td>Accessibility—inaccessibility</td><td>Function</td></tr><tr><td>Ambiguity——legibility</td><td>Cognition</td></tr><tr><td>Diversity—homogeneity</td><td>Stimulation</td></tr><tr><td>Adaptability—fixity</td><td>Autonomy</td></tr><tr><td>Comfort—discomfort</td><td>Comfort</td></tr></table> \* Source: From Brill and Krauss (1970, p. 50). It is not difficult to find terms that refer to propensities of the person to relate to these environmental properties. The right-hand column of Table 7.1 shows the author's matching of commonly used personal needs from sources such as Murray (1938), Edwards (1953), and others, with the environmental dimensions suggested by Brill and Krauss. A definitive single set of universal needs/affordances is unlikely to be attainable, primarily because of the idiosyncrasies of nomenclature and the likelihood that in choosing category names, some will prefer broad categories (e.g., autonomy) and others will prefer more numerous but narrower categories (e.g., detachment, power, dominance, etc.). It thus would seem that a set of 8 to 12 needs could roughly define the universe. Although they cannot be reviewed here in detail, a continuous search for dimensions of environment, such as those shown in Table 7.1, has gone on, some of it reviewed in Lawton et al. (1997). One result of this work was the Professional Environmental Assessment Protocol, developed to guide experts in the assessment of the ecological qualities of nursing home environments (Lawton et al., 2000); Norris-Baker et al., 1999; Weisman et al., 1994). This approach, in turn, is presently being adapted to develop a set of quality-of-life indicators for the nursing home, with parallel measures for the personal, social, and physical environments (Kane, Kane, & Lawton, 1999). Later in this chapter, the question of the completeness of the needs/affordances shown in Table 7.1 will be discussed further. The core of a model for optimizing environmental design is, therefore, a set of human needs, which, in generic form, are likely to be universal, and a parallel set of environmental affordances. The next requirement is a means to account for individually tailored content on both the person and environment sides. That is, there are multiple routes toward the fulfillment of any higher-order need and, therefore, multiple variations in any affordance that may be consistent with the need. Recognition of such personal idiosyncrasies forces recognition of the generic issue of the study of person and environment, the relationship between the individual and the aggregate. If the ideal is universality, what happens to the individual? The ADA attempted to resolve this dilemma, first, by extending the boundaries of design for the majority so as to include a simply broader range of personal mobility and access affordance—expanded design. Many solutions are seen as possible at little extra cost by simply thoughtful, planned design. Beyond the accessibility requirements of ADA, repeated instances of discovery that universal design can be both better and cheaper have occurred in the recent history of design development. The tub grab bar, differentiation of wall and floor color/texture, and task lighting are only a few such examples. The second approach was to design solutions tailored to the special needs of users for whom expanded universal design was not helpful. The many technologies for special signaling, enhanced motor behaviors, and communication fall into this category. The universal design ideal has begun the process of influencing special-user design to result in mainstreaming design's replacing handicapped design. That is, user acceptance and the social message conveyed by the design are greatly enhanced when the aesthetics and the commonplace look of products are given the same attention as their functional quality. The combination of expanded design and special-user design form an improved approximation to universal design. How is it possible to move beyond this first-generation achievement? The next section will make general suggestions for this task. ## 7.3 MOVING BEYOND ADA The psychological and social sciences have a potential contribution to the goal of universal design from three related vantage points. First is the extension of the concept of universal design from a deficiency-reduction purpose into the concept of a growth-promotion purpose. Second is to amplify the lexicon of needs and affordances. Third is to suggest strategies and techniques by which needs and affordances may be assessed and applied to design problems. ## Growth Promotion In the narrowest view, physical access represents a small proportion of all human activity. Access is, of course, a precondition for the satisfaction of a large number of other needs. Its instrumental value is thus high. Nonetheless, the focus on access has a tendency to obscure one's view of the larger and more diverse set of goals that access serves. The history of research in mental health and in the psychology of need satisfaction was slow in catching up with Maslow's distinction between deficiency reduction and growth promotion. By now, however, there is general acceptance of the duality of mental health, in the sense that the many forms of psychopathology characterize deviations below “normality," while a separate set of personal characteristics denotes positive mental health. Examples of negative indicators are depression, anxiety, antisocial behavior, and the many other symptoms of mental illness. Examples of positive dimensions of mental health may be illustrated from Carol Ryff's (1989) work: autonomy, environmental mastery, personal growth, positive relationships, purpose, and self-acceptance. Although people who are mentally ill are likely to have fewer of the markers of positive mental health, the positive and negative aspects of mental health are far from being two ends of a single continuum. The same duality has been established when the focus is narrowed to emotional states. When the frequency and duration of people's affect states are measured, positive affect is inversely correlated with negative affect, but the strength of their relationship is only moderate, in the neighborhood of a correlation coefficient ranging from 0.30 to 0.60, depending on circumstances. More concretely, this means that some people who are frequently sad may also be frequently happy and vice versa, while others may be infrequently either happy or sad. Yet, another established relationship is seen in the tendency for externally engaging events, for example, social interaction, diverting activities, novel environments, to be relatively strongly associated with positive-emotion states but less so with negative states. Health and internalized cognitions such as self-concept, in turn, are inversely related to negative states but less to positive states (Bradburn, 1969; Lawton, 1983b; Lawton, DeVoe, and Parmelee, 1993). In particular, a positive evaluation of their homes and neighborhoods by older people was related to the frequency of positive feelings but not to negative feelings (Lawton, 1983a). ## Growth Promotion and Deficiency Reduction Extrapolating such findings into the environmental area, one would thus look toward stimulating and interesting environmental enhancements to fortify the positive aspects of mental health, but would expect them to be less effective in counteracting negative symptoms such as anxiety and depression. In contrasting fashion, removing environmental features that make health care more difficult or that elicit feelings of personal inadequacy may counteract some of the negative aspects of mental health. There is thus good reason to search further for ways that environmental design, human services, and, especially, self-motivated effort, all may be enhanced to pay better attention to the growth-promoting side of life. The next section will begin by making a further theoretical link between needs/affordances and outcomes, and then revisit the task of suggesting a structure with which to begin a lexicon for universal needs and affordances. ## 7.4 NEEDS, AFFORDANCES, OUTCOMES, AND QUALITY OF LIFE The previous section was devoted to two aspects of mental health. Positive and negative aspects of mental health are best seen as outcomes of the transactions between people and their environments. People with particular needs who live in environments capable of satisfying those needs and who either proactively or reactively utilize those environmental affordances are more likely to experience positive behaviors and emotional states, and they are less likely to experience negative ones. The bottom line by which a fulfilling life is judged is based on the mix of behaviors and affects judged in such evaluational terms. The antecedents of mental health in these terms fall into the realm of quality of life (QOL). Quality of life is composed of a set of value judgments, made on the basis of both subjective and social-normative standards, of how well various domains of the person's everyday life function in leading to their overall mental health. The number of possible domains may be many, but their number and relative importance vary with the individual. Examples are domains of family, friends, marriage, home, spirituality, and leisure time. Each may be seen as a suboutcome, and any of them may sometimes become a major life goal of its own. For example, some people specialize in their work, others in a hobby, others in their homes or their families. These domains of QOL represent the idiosyncratic aspects of the person-environment transaction where the larger categories of needs and affordances represent the universals. It will be argued that the needs and affordances are a template that should he used to map the specific aspects of ()OL for individuals. ## The Basic Set of Needs and Affordances The parallel set of needs and affordances shown in Table 7.1 was based on the single array of environmental features offered a number of years ago by Brill and Krauss (1970). Not being driven by the concept of need, they made no particular effort (a) to represent all needs or (b) to arrange the environmental aspects in any hierarchy. In fact, introducing these two principles does not change the array a great deal. The set to be described next is suggested as basic for the present purpose. It revises the set suggested by Brill and Krauss primarily by introducing a rough hierarchical ordering and by augmenting the needs at the upper and lower levels of the hierarchy, and it extends the content somewhat beyond the user group of the Professional Environmental Assessment Protocol (PEAP) on which it is hased (Weisman et al., 1994; i.e., physically or mentally frail older people living in a nursing home). The model is thus meant to apply to any designated user group in any context. The hierarchy represented in Table 7.2 is based roughly on Maslow's hierarchy, which is a continuum of physiological needs to self-actualizing needs. The low end, missing from Table 7.1, may be designated as “security and safety" {i.e., the needs that must be satisfied to maintain life—physiological functioning such as nourishment, health, and safety from external threats such as weather or bodily harm [“health and safety" level in Preiser's (1983) formulation]}. The basis on which a rough order is suggested here is that as one moves upward from safety and security, the content of needs varies increasingly across individuals, the person's dependence upon fixed aspects of the environment decreases, and the ultimate outcome becomes mixed with proportionately more positive affective elements. In the case of safety and security, such outcomes as accidents, starvation, or victimization by criminals are potentially negative for all people. Environmental solutions that address these problems, such as stair rails, home-delivered meals, and target hardening are relatively powerful forces in reducing negative affect. Although one may feel warmly secure (positive affect) when a security threat is removed, the more typical outcome is, nonetheless, the reduction of negative outcomes as security increases up to the point of full adequacy. If an environment cannot satisfy basic physical needs, there is no opportunity to pursue other needs higher in the hierarchy. On the other hand, a person's willingness to pursue needs higher in the hierarchy may clearly involve taking the risk of loss of complete security. Similarly, near the basic level is Brill and Krauss's accessibility, the broader term function being preferred, termed functional and task performance level, according to Preiser (1983). This is the heart of ADA. Assuming physical health and security, being mobile is clearly the first stepping-stone toward satisfaction of many other needs. The environmental antecedents for functionality are well known. but there is more to functionality than body access. Included in the affordances for functional behavior are a variety of conditions such as lighting, auditory features, signaling mechanisms, response modes. many of them contributed to by diverse disciplines such as engineering and ergonomics, in addition to the usual design professions. See Fisk and Rogers (1996) for a summary of age-relevant research in human factors. ()n the affective side, functional need frustration is commonly a sense ol distress. deprivation. anxiety, and often anger at the barriers imposed by both personal disability and poor environmental design. There is an equally strong opportunity, however, for positive feelings to emerge, associated with successful environmental coping. Self-efficacy is a powerful motivator partly because of the frequent sense of elation that comes from mastering a new task and managing one's environment. TABLE 7.2 Need-Affordance Analysis Model for Older People in Nursing Homes
<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=9>Need satisfaction Environmental indicatorbehavior Possible measure Affordance examples</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=8>Security/Safety 1. Preference Protective, safe,Resident feels secure 2. Consumer satisfaction nurturing environ-</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Front desk with receptionistDoor alarms in dementia units</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=7>about personal safety, 3. Personal competence ment.</td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>h nonslip surface</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=3 colspan=9>availability of health 2-min response time forcare, accident minimi- resident signalservices.Function 1. Preference Structure, furnishings, Storage space accessible</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=3></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=8>Residents move about 2. Consumer satisfaction and staff practices</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Toilets near activity spaces</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=3 colspan=9>and perform basic 3. Scales for indepen- encourage independ- Roll-in shower stallself-care. dence in activities ence in self-care. Wall-floor color contrastof daily livingResident handbook in large printorienting features to Building structure</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=8></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=5></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2></td></tr><tr><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>the meaning and 3. Cognitive screening</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>foster comprehension</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>comprehensible</td></tr><tr><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>signals communicated</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>of environment.</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Sufficient light without glare</td></tr><tr><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=7>by their environment.</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>Thoughtful orientational signageVestibule draft buffer</td></tr><tr><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=7>Comfort 1. Preference Responsive HVAC</td></tr><tr><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>Residents experience 2. Consumer satisfaction</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>regulatory system,</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Room HVAC control</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>physical well-being 3. Mental health</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>furniture, staff</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Outdoor seating in sun and shade</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>and staff are alerted 4. Nonverbal signs of</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>training in recogniz-</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Low ambient noise level</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>to identifying and pleasure or distress</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>ing pain.</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>ameliorating discomfort.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>Order 1. Preference Spaces and objects</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>“Props” visible that denote</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>Residents know what 2. Consumer satisfaction</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>have self-</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>denote activity (e.g., religious</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>to expect, what is</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>communicating</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>symbol for worship area)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>expected of them,</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>designations for</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Posted schedules for the week</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>and what behaviors</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=3>appropriate behavior “Preview&quot; capability of seeing</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=3 colspan=1>Au</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>should occur where.</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=3>what is going on in an areaprior to entering it</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=2 colspan=5>tonomy 1. Preference</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>Fixed and semi-fixed</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Movable seating</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>Residents take initiative</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>2. Consumer satisfaction</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>environmental</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Large, small, and private social</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>and make choices for</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>3. Perceived control</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>features emphasize</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>spaces</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=2 colspan=6>their lives and care.</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Pr</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>ivacy 1. Preference</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>auditory, and</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=3></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>communication</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=3>Door signal, used by staffPrivate staff consultation spacesStaff training on confidentiality</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>privacy available.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=6>Stimulation 1. Preference</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>Environmental and</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>Homelike décorColors, textures, vistas, furnish-</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=5>Sensory, cognitive, 2. Consumer satisfaction</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>behavioral variety.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=2 colspan=9>and behavioral 3. Varied activity program ings varied within moderatestimulation at optimal participation rangelevel. 4. Openness to experience Low-stimulation areas available</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr></table> TABLE 7.2 Need-Affordance Analysis Model for Older People in Nursing Homes (Continued)
<table><tr><td>Need satisfaction behavior</td><td>Possible measure</td><td>Affordance</td><td>Environmental indicator examples</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Affiliation Social interaction or</td><td rowspan="2">1. Preference</td><td rowspan="2">Physical and behavioral social</td><td>Familiar-looking objects and spaces Seating in high-traffic areas</td></tr><tr><td>Seating with outdoor views Adequate 2-, 3-, and right-angled seating Small spaces for small social</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Individuality (self actualization) Maintain personal</td><td rowspan="2">1. Preferences 2. Consumer satisfaction 3. Self-esteem scale</td><td rowspan="2">Social and physical environment encourage preservation of</td><td>Scheduled social, intergenera- tional activities Individuality of room decor Self-markers from past (hobby,</td></tr><tr><td>props) Staff training module on linking with past Personalization of room entrance Staff concern for end-of-life quality</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Opportunity for religious observance, meditation, feeling of unity with being or cultural guide beyond the human level</td><td colspan="2">2. Consumer satisfaction 3. Attitudes toward religion, spirituality, and cultural identity</td><td rowspan="2">Physical symbols of cultural, national, or religious back- ground evident but not obtrusive Dedicated religious observance space</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr></table> Cognition. This is a need almost as basic as security and function. A primary task of life maintenance is to comprehend the external world and apply its meaning to all other phases of life. The pathologies of cognition are well known and include the many forms of biological disorders of the nervous system as well as psychologically based misreading of the meaning of environment, Within the normal range of cognitive functioning, environmental legibility and cognition have been some of the most studied of the environmental affordances. Much of this research has dealt with comprehending aspects of the environment that stimulate growth and new experience. On the affective level, it is clear how failure to read the environment is associated with deprivation and anxiety, but it is just as clear how excitement and new skills emerge from successful comprehension of environmental affordances and ability to accept new challenges and enrichment. Comfort. This is a much more difficult need to define than the first two, but the sense of comfort bridges the life maintenance and the life-enriching ranges almost equally. Clearly, if safety and function are not satisfied, there can be no comfort. There is a very broad range, however, over which comfort can be positive rather than simply indicating the absence of distress. For example, Kolcaba (1991) has distinguished three forms of comfort: (1) relief from a previous state of distress, (2) ease as an ongoing state, and (3) transcendence, the most active form. Personal preference comes into play over some ranges of environmental variation, such as temperature, lighting, and ventilation, to say nothing of cognitive and aesthetic preferences. Beginning at this level of need, a primary affordance is the flexibility of the environment, in terms either of its capacity to be manipulated or its ranges of choices available to meeting individual needs. Comfort and the remaining needs to be described were called psychological comfort and satisfaction by Preiser (1983). He characterized them at that time as "not codified." Their complex nature has made them resistant to formalized assessment. Part of the purpose of this chapter is to suggest that it is time to undertake that difficult task. Order. Knowing and being comfortable in one's world are possible when order is present. The skills of planning and looking into the future are proactive ways of satisfying the need for order. A world that is unpredictable or chaotic can be the source of intense negative emotion. By contrast, predictability and familiarity are well-known sources of emotional contentment. Socially and culturally legible environmental messages are a source of familiarity and predictability. As noted in relation to security, most people learn to take risks by judiciously choosing the unpredictable and unfamiliar at the right time. Autonomy. The need for autonomy is a very complex need, one that is present at every stage of human development. Regardless of stage, people differ in the strength and pervasiveness of such a need. Its many faces may be seen in independence, dominance, assertiveness, uniqueness, choice, the wish for control, and other traits. Lack of ability to satisfy the need for autonomy is associated less with psychopathology than with passive dependence and lack of self-confidence. Major theories of behavior have been built around personal control as the central feature of human motivation (Schulz and Heckhausen, 1996). Various manifestations of this need appear as people construct their own environments in ways that afford privacy, territorial marking, and control over their uses. Anxiety and depression may be associated with lack of autonomy and exhilaration with independence and the successful exercise of power or feeling of freedom. Affiliation. Where autonomy implies some status separation or distance from others, the need for affiliation distinguishes those who thrive on relationships and interaction with others from those who are more comfortable at a social distance from others (i.e., isolates). Environmental psychology has devoted considerable attention to those conditions that foster social interaction, called sociopetality, and those that discourage interaction, termed sociofugality. Positive interchange with others has typically been associated with positive affective states and involuntary isolation with negative states. Again, as in the case of most higher-order needs, personal preference is the critical determinant of the mental health outcome of socially rich or deprived environments; some people distance themselves from others by choice and do not find isolation stressful. Cultural variations and social norms condition all need-satisfying behaviors, but their influence on affiliation is particularly notable. The choice between affiliation and isolation is important to provide in all environmental design. Stimulation. Other people are one source of stimulation, but people do appear to have differing need levels for stimulation in much broader ways, whether sensory, cognitive, or affective (Berlyne and Madsen, 1973; Csikszentmihaly and Graef, 1980). There is such a thing as a deprived level of stimulation, with pathological behavioral and emotional outcomes. In contrast, an anxious and behaviorally disorganized response is possible to overstimulation, represented in the extreme by some people with dementia who may require a stimulation-dampened environment (Hall, Kirschling, and Todd, 1986). Environmental diversity and novelty are more commonly associated with enjoyment and other positive affects, the most intense being the experience of flow (Csikszentmihaly and Graef, 1980). In unusual instances, and for unusual people, flow is a peak experience with complete focus on the experience to the exclusion of awareness of anything else. Individuality. The need for individuality, although universal, has very different manifestations for different people. Need fulfillment may be so difficult for the cognitively impaired or very limited person as to strip him or her of full awareness of personal identity. Such unusually low awareness is unfortunately often interpreted by both caregiving professionals and designers as a lack of all sensitivity to individual needs in such people. Such ascribed “nonpersonhood" may be counteracted by active attempts to help mark their individuality. For most people, such fulfillment begins with a sense of dignity and moves further through past memories and on to a subjective schema of the self against which all contemporary experience is given meaning. In Maslow's (1964) terms, self-actualization is a developmental level achieved only by the few who have developed need-satisfying systems for all lower needs, and who are able to be creative in whatever domain of life their gifts lead them. Typically, people construct or choose environments that reflect their individuality, whether through housing type, automobile, yard, household decor, hobby, or manner of dress. Successful identity marking is likely to be associated with positive feelings ranging from contentment to the peak of flowlike self-actualization. It should also be noted, however, that the peaks of creativity or selfless contribution to others are by no means attained in the context of positive affect alone. Conflict and anxiety are often mixed with creative behavior. Spirituality. Does spirituality qualify as a universal need? It seems unlikely, yet those for whom the conception of merging with some power greater than that of any human being is highly important, would place this need at the pinnacle of any need hierarchy. One cannot automatically assign the absence of spiritual need fulfillment to the deficiency realm, but the spiritual realm in those who value it clearly belongs in the growth motivation and the positive affect zone. One might also think of cultural tradition as a related source of need fulfillment, in the sense that merging with an organized symbolic system is a source of personal strength and affective experience. ## 7.5 UNIVERSALITY AND INDIVIDUALITY REVISITED The list of needs and their implied environmental affordances is suggested as the universal component of the design process. Is this assertion anything more than an academic exercise? There is a next step capable of translating this theoretical array into environmental design in a way that maximizes universality but that allows for diversity. The translation is based on formal assessment, divided into four steps, the most important of which is the first. Step I. The systematic consideration of each need, for every prospective user. The critical question is, How will this need be best accommodated? In a way, the need list is a set of reminders, a checklist that needs to be completed before takeoff. Sometimes, a need is neglected by planners because they simply did not think to consider it. Working from a needaffordance matrix at the very least reminds the planner to take cach into account systematically. In other instances, a relevant environmental affordance is not obvious. Perhaps the most malignant type of omission is the assumption that some need is irrelevant or of low priority because of some socially stereotypic presumed property of the user group. For example, under the assumption that the only really important need of a person with a motor disability is an attribute that enhances functional performance, that person's need for positively toned stimulation and mainstreaming (e.g., aesthetic quality) may be ignored. Step 2. Systematic assessment of individuals on the characteristics of representative members of the user group. The social and behavioral sciences have developed a technology for such formal assessment. Earlier practice has often been to identify the average ability or range of ability of the user group to satisfy a particular need and to use this average as the basis for the design process. In the procedure advocated here, assessment should be applied in a way that defines the limits of individual competence and leads to a broadening of the affordances of the environment-stretching the fit. Competence is a continuum along which the quality of a person's behavior as judged by social norms may be evaluated (White, 1959). In fact, the term should be used in the plural. The author, for example, has defined competences in biological health, functional health, cognition, time use, and social behavior as basic dimensions that characterize individual behaviors (Lawton, 1982). Each of these dimensions may be assessed by a variety of standardized measures, resulting in a profile of competencies and incompetencies unique to that individual. This is the point at which the artificial distinction between person and environment, alluded to earlier, becomes a major barrier to the task of behavioral design. Is there really such a person as an incompetent person? A disabled person? In contrast, the transactional view clearly represents the reality. Competent behavior is the favorable outcome of any person acting in an environmental context. Incompetence and disability are thus not personal terms but transactional. A key aspect of the individual assessment step is to think in terms of choice and alternatives, as contrasted with a design that is so closely tailored to the average as to allow little variation in the need-satisfying abilities of the planned user group or little future change in the users' abilities. Step 3. Assessment of an existing or prospective environment in terms of its affordances. The technology for assessing environments is less well developed than that for assessing people. In addition, the goal of assessing affordances is not likely to be attained in its strictest sense. An affordance is not always evident to either user or scientist. Instead, attributes of the environment about which there is some hypothesis regarding its potential usefulness are the focus of assessment. In analogous fashion to the discussion of competence, environmental affordances cannot be studied in the abstract, but always must be assessed in light of the transaction with the user. Step 4. The design process itself, at this point, is still an art rather than a science. Empirical science has led to the designation of needs and recognition of their universality by demanding that every user and every environment be assessed in terms of the way each need might be satisfied. Assessment of people and assessment of environments, while directed toward broadening the area of possible fit between user and environment, cannot be expected to lead literally to universal design. Although post-occupancy evaluation (POE) has long been an essential component of person-environment research (Moore, 1982; Preiser, Rabinowitz, and White, 1988; Reizenstein and Zimring, 1980), its technology needs to grow in concert with growing understanding of the complexities of the transaction. The science-informed art of design must begin with such knowledge, and then proceed through the usual processes of iterations and successive approximation. To address the issues in universal design, this process continues to apply the principles of stretching the fit, embedding choice, and anticipating change. As has already happened in the mainstream of universal design, many previously narrowly designed features will be found possible in stretch-fitting style that does not diminish the potential satisfaction of needs other than function. This art-of-design phase utilizes the material from the three previous steps but now depends on fitting patterns of expertise to the task. Weisman (1998) has written compellingly of the process by which experienced designers apply their knowledge in dynamically shifting fashion, when each new design task modifies the patterns in the designer's mind for use in the next process [see Alexander, Ishikawa, and Silverstein's classic development of the concept of pattern language (1977)]. ## 7.6 APPLYING THE NEED STRUCTURE Table 7.2 portrays examples of how the first three steps might be identified, beginning with safety and security. The example of a nursing home is used, but the method is generic. The process begins with the universal aspect of design, that is, a brief definition of each need, in the first column. The second column notes what personal attributes might be assessed formally in order to define the full range and central tendencies of user characteristics. Design may cease to be totally universal as a result of such individual assessment, but the first purpose of such assessment is to remind the designer of the limits of individual ability and, at that point, to start the process of stretching the fit. The details of assessment are just beginning to become specified. Three measurement approaches follow. Determining Preferences. The technology of assessment is probably less necessary for the majority of the population because they can verbalize their desires and act on them relatively easily. For physically and especially mentally impaired people, as wel as socially low-powered people, there is value in the attempt to survey formally some of the varieties of ways people prefer to satisfy their needs. Few such survey instruments exist. For frail older people in longterm care, Van Haitsma et al. (1999) designed The Preferences for Everyday Living Inventory, which is available in a preliminary version. Preferences are so varied that the length of such instruments tends to become unwieldy. In addition, preferences are often context-specific, so that the design specifics may be less than universal. In another sense, the preference survey aids universal design because of its ability to display the broad range of choice that would be ideal to achieve universality. Nonetheless, some method for matching preferences to environmental affordance should be a standard component of the design process. Consumer Satisfaction. Consumer satisfaction is a postdesign component of the process. That is, asking the consumer for feedback regarding an existing design solution for use in the next design solution is an important aspect of post-occupancy evaluation. The environment behavior literature is full of such devices (Carp, 1975; Lawton, 1979). Since congressional action in 1987 mandated that input from nursing home residents be included in their program of care, a number of surveys designed for this purpose have been constructed (Applebaum, Straker, and Geron, 2000; Cohen-Mansfield and Ejaz, 1999). Because of wide variation in user competence (see next paragraph), the measures themselves are group-specific. User Competence and Well-Being. For some, but not all, needs, variations in the abilities or competencies of the user and in the well-being of the user may be determined by existing measures, Such assessment is most important when there are deficits in the abilities required to meet needs at the lower levels of the hierarchy. Limitations in cognitive ability put severe constraints on the use of universal design, for example, for people with dementia, developmental disabilities of intellectual function, or impairments in judgment. Thus, screening tests are important and readily available in many treatment situations, for intellectual impairment, sensory function, or difficulty in performing activities of daily living (ADL). Outcomes of some need-affordance transactions may be assessed with overall measures of mental health such as self-esteem or depression, or with domain-specific instruments such as quality of life among friends, family, housing, use of time. Finally, the possibility of using personality measures such as introversion-extraversion, openness to experience, locus of control, or attitudes toward spirituality may be helpful. 'There is a large literature in assessment for each of many user groups [for adults in general, see Robinson, Shaver, and Wrightsman (1991); for older adults, see Lawton and Teresi (1994)]. ## 7.7 LESSONS LEARNED FOR UNIVERSAL DESIGN:A SKELETON PROCEDURAL OUTLINE There is a growing demand for the services of a consultant in behavioral design for new residential facilities for elders and for renovation and reuse design. Sometimes, the major mission of either the design-oriented or the behavior-oriented consultant is to sensitize the sponsors, board, administration, and prospective staff to the principles of universal design merged with user-specifie needs when appropriate. These constituencies usually find gratification in becoming involved in design diseussions, but they usually also require instruction and expert input as the process unfolds. A capsule outline of principles to be conveyed follows. • Define the user group. • Specify the ranges of user characteristics. • Needs • Competences • Preferences • Cultural and social patterns • Define desired outcomes. • Deficiency reduction • Growth promotion • Specify environmental affordances likely to enhance outcomes. • Needs—meeting environmental features • User-group-specific compensatory design features • Consumer survey, focus group, and other approaches to elicit environmental preference • Feedback cycle where universality is the goal. • Redesign in expanded-design mode, according to the principles of universal design • Redesign in special-user mode, preserving universality to the maximum degree possible while accommodating special needs • Reshape both expanded and special-user trial designs in the direction of mainstreaming • Post-occupancy evaluation. • Observe environment in use • Identify misuses, errors, and ambiguities of place designation • Identify magnet areas or features • Group discussion and instruction on optimal use of the environment The end result of a clear planning process with interchange between client subgroups and the design team/consultants is very likely to result not only in a more effective design but in a continuing process over time to optimize the use of the new environment. ## 7.8 CONCLUSION It is not realistic to think that every design decision will result in optimum usability for every person. The argument has been advanced that human needs are, however, universal and that it is possible to pursue a universally relevant procedure as the design process procceds. That procedure involves asking questions systematically about every need for every user. Specification of the user group and assessment of the preferences and the competences of the user group as to the central tendency and range, as its members pursue satisfaction of needs, follows. One result from this process will be that growth-inducing needs will be far better represented than has been achieved by traditional prosthetic design planning. As needs and competences are assessed, environmental design affordances are matched to the personal characteristics. At this stage, some design decisions will result in stretching the fit to reduce the gap between universal design and special-user design. The major result, however, will be achieving the universal goal of representing every common need in the design, if not by the same solution in every case. Bidirectionality is an ideal of universal design. The search for universal principles to guide design should lead to maximum inclusiveness; special attention would be directed toward any design feature that excluded a potential user. Not every user can be accommodated in this way, however. Approaching the problem from the opposite direction (i.e., recognizing that needs, competences, preferences, and cultural tradition may not all be universal), can motivate creativity in design. With an open mind, the designer can then linger longer to wonder whether what appeared to be group-specific can actually lead to an innovation that is useful beyond that group. ## 7.9 BIBLIOGRAPHY Alexander, C., S. Ishikawa, and M. Silverstein, A Pattern Language, Oxford University Press, New York, 1977. Altman, I., and B. Rogoff, "World Views in Psychology: Trait, Interactional, Organismic, and Transactional Perspectives," in D. Stokols and I. Altman (eds.), Handbook of Environmental Psychology, vol. 1, John Wiley, New York, 1987, pp. 7–40. Applebaum, R. A., J. K. Straker, and S. M. Geron, Assessing Satisfaction in Health and Long-Term Care, Springer, New York, 2000. Barker, R. G., Ecological Psychology, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, 1968. Berlyne, D. E., and K. B. Madsen (eds.), Pleasure, Reward, Preference, Academic Press, New York, 1973. Bradburn, N., The Structure of Psychological Well-Being, Aldine, Chicago, 1969. Brill, M., and R. Krauss, "Planning for Community Mental Health Centers," in H. Sanoff and S. Cohn (eds.), Proceedings of the Environmental Design Research Association, vol. 1, EDRA, Edmond, OK, 1970. Carp, F. M., “Long-Range Satisfaction with Housing," Gerontologist, 15: 27–34(a), 1975. Cohen-Mansfield, J., and F. Ejaz, Consumer Surveys in Long-Term Care, Springer, New York, 1999. C'sikszentmihaly, M., and R. Graef, "The Experience of Freedom in Daily Life," American Journal of Community Psychology, 8: 401–414, 1980. Edwards, A. L., Manual for the Personal Preference Schedule, Psychological Corporation, New York, 1953. Fisk, A. D., and W. A. Rogers (eds.), Handbook of Human Factors and the Older Adult, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1996. Gibson, J. J., The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, Houghton-Mifflin, Boston, 1979. Hall, G., M. V. Kirschling, and S. Todd, "Sheltered Freedom—An Alzheimers Unit in an ICF," Geriatric Nursing, 7 (May/June): 132–136, 1986. Ittelson, W. H., "Some Issues Facing a Theory of Environment and Behavior," in H. M. Proshansky, W. H. Ittelson, and L. G. Rivlin (eds.), Environmental Psychology, 2nd ed., Holt, Rinehart, & Winston, New York, 1976, pp. 51–59. Kane, R. A., R. L.. Kane, and M. P. Lawton, Measurement, Indicators, and Improvement of the Quality of Life in Nursing Homes, contract with Health Care Financing Administration, Division of Health Care Services Research and Policy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 1999. Kolcaba, K. Y., "A Taxonomic Structure for the Concept Comfort," IMAGE: Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 23: 237–240, 1991. Lawton, M. P, "Social Science Methods for Evaluating Housing Quality for Older People," Journal of Architectural Research, 7: 5–11, 1979. "Competence, Environmental Press. and the Adaptation of the Elderly." in M. P. Lawton. P. G. Windley, and T. O. Bverts (eds.). Environmental Theory and Agmg. Springer, New York. 1982, pp. 33-59. —, “Environment and Other Determinants of Well-Being in Older People," The Gerontologist, 23: 349–357, 1983a. "The Dimensions of Well-Being," Experimental Aging Research, 9: 65–72, 1983b. -, M. R. DeVoe, and P. Parmelee, "The Relationship of Events and Affect in the Daily Lives of an Elderly Population," Psychology and Aging, 19: 469–477, 1993. , and J. Teresi (eds.), Annual Review of Gerontology and Geriatrics, vol. 14: Assessing Older People, Springer Publishing, New York, 1994. -, G. D. Weisman, P. Sloane, and M. Calkins, "Assessing Environments for Older People with Chronic Illness," Journal of Mental Health and Aging, 3: 83–100, 1997. , C. Norris-Baker, M. Calkins, and S. I. Zimmerman, "Professional Environmental Assessment Procedure for Special Care Units for Elders with Dementing Illness." Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 14: 28–38, 2000. Maslow, A. H., Motivation and Personality, Harper, New York, 1964. Moore, G. T. (ed.), “Applied Architectural Research: Post-Occupancy Evaluation of Buildings," Environment and Behavior, 14 (6): 643–724, 1982. Murray, H. A., Explorations in Personality, Oxford, New York, 1938. Norris-Baker, L., J. Weisman, M. P. Lawton, and P. Sloane. "Assessing Special Care Units for Dementia: The Professional Environmental Assessment Protocol," in E. A. Steinfeld and G. S. Danford (eds.), Measuring Enabling Environments, Plenum, New York, 1999. Preiser, W. F. E., "The Habitability Framework: A Conceptual Approach Towards Linking Human Behavior and Physical Environment," Design Studies, 4: 84–91, 1983. “Design Innovation and the Challenge of Change," in W. F. E. Preiser, J. C. Vischer, and E. T. White (eds.), Design Intervention: Toward a More Humane Architecture, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1991, pp. 335–351. -, H. Z. Rabinowitz, and E. T. White, Post-Occupancy Evaluation, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1988. Reizenstein, J. E., and C. M. Zimring, “Evaluating Occupied Environments," Environment and Behavior, 12: 427–558, 1980. Robinson, J. P., P. R. Shaver, and L. S. Wrightsman (eds.). Measures of Personality and Social Psychological Attitudes, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1991. Ryff, C. D., "Happiness Is Everything, or Is It? Explorations on the Meaning of Psychological Well-Being," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57: 1069–1081, 1989. Schulz, R., and J. Heckhausen, "A Life-Span Model of Successful Aging," American Psychologist, 51: 702–714, 1996. Van Haitsma. K., K. Ruckdeschel. B. Carpenter, and M. P. Lawton, The Preference for Everyday Living Inventory, Philadelphia Geriatric Center, Philadelphia, 1999. Weisman, G., Toward a Model for Architectural Research and Design: Pragmatism, Place, and Patterns, Architectural Institute of Japan, Osaka, Japan, 1998. , M. P. Lawton, P. D. Sloane, L. Norris-Baker, and M. Calkins, Professional Environmental Assessment Protocol (PEAP): A standardized method of expert evaluation of dementia special care units, School of Architecture, University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, 1994. White, R. W., "Motivation Reconsidered: The Concept of Competence," Psychological Review, 66: 297–333, 1959.