CHAPTER 11 # UNITED NATIONS STANDARDS AND RULES Maria Cristina Sará-Serrano, Dipl. with John Mathiason, Ph.D. Associates for International Management Services Mt. Tremper, New York ## 11.1 INTRODUCTION The United Nations Standard Rules for the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities were adopted to provide a normative framework for public policies and programs to enable persons with disabilities to participate fully and equally in all aspects of life. They have particular relevance for universal design in that they provide a framework within which designs can be placed and an incentive for governments, who have accepted the Rules by voting for them in United Nations bodies, to implement universal design principles. The imperatives can be seen in an analysis of the content of the Rules as they apply to universal design issues. The effectiveness of the Rules depends on the extent to which they are cited and used by advocates for persons with disabilities, and for this, new efforts are underway to equip advocates to use them at national and international levels. ## 11.2 BACKGROUND Over time, each country in the world has dealt with accessibility and universal design in some way. Some countries elaborated detailed laws, regulations, and guidelines, but most dealt with accessibility by ignoring it. In a globalizing world, unevenness in accessibility is always ethically wrong and is increasingly economically unacceptable. The experience of any person with a disability flying from an accessible airport in one country to an inaccessible one in another is poignant testimony to the truth of this proposition. The need for global standards was recognized for many years, first by persons with disabilities themselves, and then by policymakers in all countries. The United Nations Standard Rules for the Equalization of Opportunity for Persons with Disabilities, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1993, are a response to this need. While some have said that the Standard Rules are neither standard nor are they rules, they are the only universally accepted normative statements on what accessibility should mean. They constitute a point of reference, a normative floor, for elaborating national standards and guidelines and ensuring that persons with disabilities, wherever they live and wherever they may travel, have a minimum level of accommodation to their special needs and circumstances. They provide a politically agreed consensus on the basis of which universal design can be implemented. The applicability of the Standard Rules to universal design can be understood in terms of the origins, limitations. content, and monitoring of the Rules. This chapter provides an overview of these elements. ## 11.3 ORIGINS OF THE STANDARD RULES The issue of disability had been on the United Nations social development agenda since the beginning of the organization. Its original focus, like that of most countries, was on disabled veterans, soldiers who had been wounded in World War II. The first two heads of the United Nations Disability Unit were disabled veterans. This was politically logical. Disabled veterans were almost exclusively men, had been disabled as adults, were felt by society to merit attention because of their service, and had special governmental programs. Nonveteran, nonmale persons with disabilities were largely invisible. It was assumed that the rights of persons with disabilities were protected by the human rights standards expressed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the United Nations in 1948. As the century progressed, more and more human rights advocates recognized that more detailed norms would have to be agreed upon if the rights of particular segments of the population were to be adequately protected. Perhaps the first to recognize this were advocates for women's human rights, who sensed that the mere prohibition of discrimination on the basis of sex was not sufficient to promote enjoyment of other human rights. In 1969, at the time of the first United Nations Conference on Human Rights, a Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women was adopted. From the early 1970s there was a movement to convert these norms into a United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which culminated in the adoption of the Convention by the General Assembly in 1979. Advocates for the rights of persons with disabilities took note of these developments. They pressed successfully to have 1982 designated as International Year for Disabled Persons. The Year provided an opportunity to reflect on the nature of disability and the public policies necessary to address it. The end result of the Year was the drafting of a World Plan of Action Concerning Disabled Persons and its adoption by the General Assembly at its 37th session in 1982. The World Plan mentioned accessibility in 8 of its 201 paragraphs, mostly in terms of stating that human settlements, transportation, and information should be accessible, but not elaborating further. In United Nations usage, a plan of action is a broad menu for possible action by governments, but does not constitute a normative statement as such. By 1988 there was a concern among the members of the community concerned with disability that the World Plan of Action was not functioning as well as it should and that member states were not taking it seriously. At a meeting of the Commission for Social Development two delegates, one from Sweden with a disability, and the other from Italy, with a child with a disability, were particularly concerned. They worked together so that the delegations of Sweden and Italy respectively argued that an international human rights convention for persons with disability should be drafted. While the idea of a convention inspired some interest on the part of other delegations, it was not strongly supported. There were a number of reasons for this. Many delegations were concerned that there might be a spread in the number of human rights conventions and that this would dilute the human rights regime. Others were concerned that a convention might propose binding obligations for states that they could not meet given the level of development or given the amount of public resources available. In the United Nations, whenever an idea has been advanced that receives some support there is an effort to find a compromise that will at least meet part of the concerns. In this case, the Commission for Social Development decided to begin the process of drafting an intermediate type of human rights document. This would be in the form of a declaration that would try to specify what states should do but would not have the status of a treaty that would make compliance obligatory. As a result, the Commission proposed to the Economic and Social Council that a process begin to draft what were called Standard Rules for the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities. The Council authorized the Commission to establish a Special Committee to draft the Rules. The Special Committee met on three occasions. Using the World Plan of Action as its basis, it prepared a draft that could be adopted by the General Assembly. The process of negotiating the text was unusual in that the Special Committee made provision to have full participation of representatives of international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) concerned with disability. As a result, organizations such as Disabled Peoples' International, the World Blind Union, and the World Federation of the Deaf participated actively. In some cases they participated as nongovernmental organizations. However, many interested governments made sure that representative organizations of persons with disability were included on national delegations. As a result, the draft text reflected much of the views held by organizations representing persons with disabilities. When the time came for the Special Committee to meet, Disabled Peoples' International had a representative to the United Nations Office in Vienna, Austria. This meant that this representative (one of the authors of this chapter) was present at all of the negotiations that took place between 1991 and 1993. As an NGO representative, she tried to influence government delegations to adopt the disability community's point of view. One matter of immediate concern to her was that there were very few women involved in the negotiations, either from the government or NGO sides. She saw one of her tasks as being to keep a focus on gender in the discussions. NGO representatives were surprised that the content of the Rules could be negotiated rather quickly. Partly this was because many of the Rules were vague and subject to interpretation. Partly it was because most of the negotiators were genuinely committed to the cause of disability. Although there were some intense discussions, the main content was agreed upon early in the process. Instead of being concerned with the content of the rules, the main debates in the Committee were focused on the monitoring mechanism. The persons with disability wanted a monitoring committee to be funded from the regular budget of the organization. Governments, especially those that were major contributors to the UN budget, were opposed to additional expense. The end result was a compromise that would not cost as much. But the representatives of the disability community wondered if it would work as well. ## 11.4 WHAT THE RULES ARE AND WHAT THEY AREN'T The Standard Rules were adopted by consensus. This means that the governments accepted the content of the package as a whole even though they might have had reservations with regard to some of the elements. The Standard Rules do not have the same status as a convention. In international treaty law, a convention is mandatory for all states that become party to it. The process of drafting and ratifying an international convention is lengthy. For example, it took over 15 years for the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to come into force because of the difficulty of many governments in ratifying it. In most countries, an international convention takes on the same status as domestic law adopted by Parliament, and in most countries acceptance of an international convention means that all national laws, regulations, and procedures have to be brought into conformity with the convention. The Standard Rules do not have this status. Governments are not legally obligated to implement the Rules' provisions. Rather, they accept a moral obligation to implement as many of the provisions as they can. The Rules constitute a standard against which national policics and procedures can be measured. States that are in compliance with the Rules have "bragging rights" internationally. For states not in compliance, the Rules provide a tool for advocacy groups to embarrass governments and encourage them to bring policies, laws, and procedures into conformity with the Rules. Because the Rules are global in nature they can be used for comparison across countries. They can also be used as a basis for establishing agreements on specific items such as accessibility. It is this characteristic of the Rules that makes them particularly applicable to the issue of universal design. The Standard Rules have a simple structure. They have five parts: (1) definitions, (2) preconditions, (3) target areas, (4) implementation measures, and (5) monitoring. Each of these has relevance to universal design. ## 11.5 BASIC DEFINITIONS AND PRECONDITIONS A fundamental question for policy is the definition of disability. It is the basis for determining for what "rcasonable accommodation" (in the sense used in the Americans with Disabilities Act) must be made. It sets the conditions around which accessibility must be designed and built. The answers are not obvious. Does a disability have to be permanent or can it be temporary? What impediments lead to disability? The Rules reflect a consensus that could be reached in the carly 1990s. The Rules' define disability as: I. The term “disability" summarizes a great number of different functional limitations occurring in any population in any country of the world. People may be disabled by physical, intellectual or sensory impairment, medical conditions or mental illness. Such impairments, conditions or illnesses may be permanent or transitory in nature. The Rules also define the term handicap in the following terms: 18. The term “handicap” means the loss or limitation of opportunities to take part in the life of the community on an equal level with others. It describes the encounter between the person with a disability and the environment. The purpose of this term is to emphasize the focus on the shortcomings in the environment and in many organized activities in society, for example, information, communication and education, which prevent persons with disabilities from participating on equal terms. The Rules draw on the World Health Organization's International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps (ICll)H), which made a distinction between individual characteristics (impairments that could lead to disability) and social contexts (the consequences of these in a society). The terms used have become somewhat “politically incorrect," since they have a negative connotation and have been found, particularly by advocates for persons with disabilities, to underplay the role of the social, economic, and physical environment in guaranteeing equalization of opportunities. As a result, the WHO is in the process of revising the ICIDH.² The current draft uses a concept called disablement.³ Disablements are: • Losses or abnormalities of bodily function and structure (impairments) • Limitations of activities (disabilities) • Restrictions in participation (formerly called handicaps) In accordance with the social model, the ICIDH-2 also includes a list of contextual or environmental factors, including physical conditions such as climate and terrain, as well as aspects of the social and human built environment, including social attitudes, laws, policies, and social and political institutions. The new terminology, while improving the correctness and clarity of language and making it clear that disability is more a social than a medical question, does not change the underlying definitions used in the Standard Rules, although when the Rules are revised, their definitional language will doubtless be updated. Within both the older and newer definitions, the purpose of universal design could be seen as reducing restrictions on participation and overcoming limitations of activities. For the Rules to be implemented, certain preconditions must exist. Four are specified: (1) awareness-raising. (2) medical care, (3) rehabilitation, and (4) support services. The logic is that unless there is awareness that dealing with disability is important, there will be little incentive for action. There must be adequate medical care to address the source of impairments and a minimum amount of rehabilitation to address limitations. There should be support services primarily in the form of assistive devices. Rule 4 states about support services that: States should ensure the development and supply of support services, including assistive devices for persons with disabilities, to assist them to increase their level of independence in their daily living and to exercise their rights. ## 11.6 ACCESSIBILITY IN THE RULES The main substantive section of the Rules is called Target Areas and includes eight rules that deal, respcctively, with all aspects of life in society. The first of these, Rule 5, is on accessibility. 'This highlights the central role of accessibility in achieving equalization of opportunities. The basic goal of the Rules on accessibility is that: States should recognize the overall importance of accessibility in the process of the equalization of opportunities in all spheres of society. For persons with disabilities of any kind, States should (a) introduce programmes of action to make the physical environment accessible; and (b) undertake measures to provide access to information and communication. Because the Rules are intergovernmentally adopted, their focus is on the role of the state rather than on society generally. 'They try to specify what states can do, within the limitations of state roles. Government responsibility is clearer in terms of physical environment than in terms of information and communication. Both aspects, however, are relevant to universal design. If principles of universal design are included in all governmental regulations of the physical environment in all countries, clearly accessibility will be enhanced. Similarly, if principles of universal design are included when information and communication systems are developed, accessibility will be ensured. The Rules are precise in terms of physical accessibility, where government responsibility is clear in all countries. A sense that there is also a responsibility for accessible information is also beginning to be reflected in laws in some countries. The first mandate refers to the responsibility of governments to legislate accessibility standards. 'The Rule states: States should initiate measures to remove the obstacles to participation in the physical environment. Such measures should be to develop standards and guidelines and to consider enacting legislation to ensure accessibility to various areas in society, such as housing, buildings, public transport services and other means of transportation, streets and other outdoor environments. When the Rules were agreed upon, not all states felt that they were in a position to agree to the use of mandatory language even on the adjustment of public areas to accessibility. Thus, the term to consider enacting was used. The Rules did not specify whether the standards and guidelines should be applied only to new construction or should involve retrofitting old constructions. Persons with disabilities were clear in their belief that the standards should apply to all areas within the purview of governments. In drafting the Rule, the negotiators were aware that standards can only be implemented and enforced if those involved in design and construction were aware of them. Even where the building industry is primarily in the private sector, the government can influence compliance through communication, education, and training. The Rule specifies: 2. States should ensure that architects, construction engineers and others who are professionally involved in the design and construction of the physical environment have access to adequate information on disability policy and measures to achieve accessibility. How states ensure this is left open. However, it is clear that a number of means are available, including codifying, assembling, and distributing information; ensuring that accessible design is included in the curricula of architectural and engineering schools; and including knowledge about accessibility in certifying examinations for professionals. The Rules recognize the critical role of design in ensuring accessibility by stating that: 3. Accessibility requirements should be included in the design and construction of the physical environment from the beginning of the designing process. The adoption of universal design criteria is entirely consistent with this Rule. Finally, the Rules call for providing for participation of persons with disabilities in the design process. This language was strongly advocated by the organizations of persons with disabilities who were involved in the negotiations and its adoption reflects the resonance that the disability community's position had in government delegations. The Rule states: 4. Organizations of persons with disabilities should be consulted when standards and norms for accessibility are being developed. They should also be involved locally from the initial planning stage when public construction projects are being designed, thus ensuring maximum accessibility. This Rule presupposes that there are organizations of persons with disabilities, that they can be mobilized to participate, and that a structure of openness can be achieved. However, without this participation, designs will not necessarily be adequate. Anyone who has stayed in an "accessible" hotel room in different parts of the world can question whether persons with disabilities were consulted when the designs were made, or whether a wide range of persons with disabilities was surveyed about their needs The accessibility norms regarding communication are focused on ensuring that information presentation designs accommodate various disabilities. The Rule states that: 6. States should develop strategies to make information services and documentation accessible for different groups of persons with disabilities. Braille, tape services, large print and other appropriate technologies should be used to provide access to written information and documentation for persons with visual impairments. Similarly, appropriate technologies should be used to provide access to spoken information for persons with auditory impairments or comprehension difficulties. 9. States should encourage the media, especially television, radio and newspapers, to make their services accessible. 10. States should ensure that new computerized information and service systems offered to the general public are either made initially accessible or are adapted to be made accessible to persons with disabilities. Implied in the Rule is that whenever a design involves communication or infrastructure, it should include accessibility criteria. The case of elevators that include Braille control markings and audible indicators of floors, as well as controls that are at the level of persons using wheelchairs, is an example. In other target areas, specific accessibility norms that are relevant for universal design are included. Rule 7, on employment, states that government action programs should include: (a) Measures to design and adapt workplaces and work premises in such a way that they become accessible to persons with different disabilities; (b) Support for the use of new technologies and the development and production of assistive devices, tools and equipment and measures to facilitate access to such devices and equipment for persons with disabilities to enable them to gain and maintain employment; Similarly, Rule 10, on culture, says that: 2. States should promote the accessibility to and availability of places for cultural performances and services, such as theatres, museums, cinemas and libraries, to persons with disabilities. 3. States should initiate the development and use of special technical arrangements to make literature, films and theatre accessible to persons with disabilities. And Rule 11, on recreation and sports, specifies that: States should initiate measures to make places for recreation and sports, hotels, beaches, sports arenas, gym halls, etc., accessible to persons with disabilities. Such measures should encompass support for staff in recreation and sports programmes, including projects to develop methods of accessibility, and participation, information and training programmes. Reflecting the nature of agreements that could be reached a decade ago, the accessibility norms in the Rules emphasize accessibility to public spaces but are silent on norms and standards that can be applied in, for example, private housing or nonpublic aspects of the private sector. These are areas where implementation of universal design would be encouraged only indirectly by the Rules. ## 11.7 IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES The part of the Rules dealing with implementation measures includes a number of norms that have relevance for universal design and its implementation. They provide a normative incentive for everyone to take the situation of persons with disabilities into account when making policy or decisions. They also emphasize the importance of action at the local level, and the need to support local programs by preparing and disseminating material on accessibility, among other things. Rule 14, on policymaking and planning, states: 4. The ultimate responsibility of States for the situation of persons with disabilities does not relieve others of their responsibility. Anyone in charge of services, activities or the provision of information in society should be encouraged to accept responsibility for making such programmes available to persons with disabilities: 5. States should facilitate the development by local communities of programmes and measures for persons with disabilities. One way of doing this could be to develop manuals or checklists and provide training programmes for local staff. Another implementation measure suggests the utility of assembling public funds or using public policies to increase the incentives for using accessible design. Rule 16, on economic policies, says that: 3. States should consider the use of economic measures (loans, tax exemptions, earmarked grants, special funds, and so on) to stimulate and support equal participation by persons with disabilities in society. 4. In many States it may be advisable to establish a disability development fund, which could support various pilot projects and self-help programmes at the grass-roots level. Implementing the international norms in the context of universal design involves more than knowing the Standard Rules. It involves using them to obtain leverage to influence public policy and private attitudes in favor of actions that will improve accessibility. This means taking advantage of two elements in the Rules: (1) participation of persons with disabilities, and (2) the monitoring mechanism. ## Participation of Persons with Disabilities The strongest proponents of the Rules have been organizations of persons with disabilities. They were actively involved in the drafting process and have been among those most concerned with implementation. They have the greatest stake in seeing to it that universal design principles are adopted. The Rules throughout call for participation of persons with disabilities in all aspects of implementation. For this to happen, however, efforts must be made to strengthen and support organizations of persons with disabilities both nationally and internationally. Generally speaking, organizations of persons with disabilities are not well-funded. Ensuring that such organizations are given a voice in design issues, where their added value in terms of improved design is clear, is one way of increasing their support and importance. ## Monitoring Mechanism International human rights treaties inevitably have monitoring mechanisms that are instruments for implementation. Usually this is in the form of an expert committee that reviews reports of states that are parties to a given convention as an inducement to comply with its provisions. In this, the potential for international embarrassment when there is noncompliance is one of the strongest means of inducing states to implement their obligations. Because the Standard Rules are not a treaty, no provision was made for a standing expert committee to monitor states for compliance. As noted earlier, the kind of monitoring mechanism that would be created was the part of the Rules that took the longest to negotiate. In the end, a compromise was reached. The Commission for Social Development would be the formal monitoring body, but a Special Rapporteur would assist it. The Rules state: 2. The Rules shall be monitored within the framework of the sessions of the Commission for Social Development. A Special Rapporteur with relevant and extensive experience in disability issues and international organizations shall be appointed, if necessary, funded by extrabudgetary resources, for three years to monitor the implementation of the Rules. The institution of special rapporteur is an old one in United Nations human rights practice. It is based on the notion that an individual expert can undertake fact-finding to provide an independent basis for intergovernmental bodies, especially the Commission on Human Rights, to make determinations about human rights situations. It has been applied from time to time in other specialized subsidiary bodies and its application to the Standard Rules was a logical compromise. While the Special Rapporteur was initially only mandated for three years, his term has already been extended once by the Economic and Social Council to August 2000.+ The Special Rapporteur's responsibility is: 5. The Special Rapporteur shall send a set of questions to States, entities within the United Nations system, and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, including organizations of persons with disabilities. The set of questions should address implementation plans for the Rules in States. The questions should be selective in nature and cover a number of specific rules for in-depth evaluation. In preparing the questions the Special Rapporteur should consult with the panel of experts and the Secretariat. 6. The Special Rapporteur shall seek to establish a direct dialogue not only with States but also with local non-governmental organizations, seeking their views and comments on any information intended to be included in the reports. The Special Rapporteur shall provide advisory services on the implementation and monitoring of the Rules and assistance in the preparation of replies to the sets of questions. The Special Rapporteur has reported annually to sessions of the Commission and has made recommendations on a number of aspects of the Rules. He has not focused specifically on issues of universal design. One difficulty is that the Special Rapporteur is funded from extrabudgetary sources, which has made the office somewhat uncertain. He has a mandate to organize an advisory group made up of representatives designated by the main international organizations of persons with disabilities, but recently this group had difficulty meeting because of a lack of resources. Its most recent meeting took place before the 2000 session of the Commission for Social Development, in February 2000. ## 11.8 CONCLUSIONS There is a growing consensus among organizations of persons with disabilities that the Standard Rules, while providing a good starting point for directing public policy toward equalization of opportunities, are not sufficient to provide the necessary universal guidance. Two alternatives have been suggested. The first is to revive the idea of drafting a human rights convention on the rights of persons with disabilities that would contain, in an obligatory manner, the provisions of the Standard Rules. An effort to include this possibility in the resolution on disability adopted by the Commission for Social Development in February 2000 was not successful. The second is to revise the Rules in the light of experience to incorporate those elements that are missing. For example, technological changes in the information field, particularly those relating to the Internet, require more detailed guidance than the rules currently provide. Further guidance would be useful also if universal design criteria were to be applied to all countries. The next review of the Long-term Strategy to Implement the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons to the Year 2000 and Beyond, which is scheduled for 2002, should begin to answer some of these questions and determine future directions, including possible revision of the Standard Rules. The monitoring mechanism that was extended for a further two years in 2000 will also be reviewed during 2002 and either the existing method, based on a Special Rapporteur, or a new approach will be decided upon. In either case, it will be important to ensure that this mechanism is used actively to promote implementation of the accessibility elements of the Standard Rules, including promotion of universal design approaches. For the moment, the Standard Rules will have to be used as an advocacy tool and largely self-monitored. The main actors in this will be persons with disabilities through their organizations, as well as government offices concerned with equalization of opportunities. To support this effort, the United Nations has organized or supported a number of seminars and workshops. These have included training in the use of the Standard Rules, examination of the meaning of the Rules and advocacy strategies. Recent examples include the Seminar on Internet Accessibility and Persons with Disabilities: an ASEAN Perspective, held in Bangkok in July 1999; the Training Seminar for Central America and the Spanish-Speaking Caribbean on the Standard Rules, organized by Disabled Peoples' International in Santo Domingo in April 1998; and the Interregional Seminar and Symposium on International Norms and Standards Relating to Disability, organized by the Equal Opportunities Commission, Hong Kong SAR, in cooperation with Hong Kong University, Faculty of Law, Centre for Comparative and Public Law, in December 1999. In addition, a number of nongovernmental organizations, like the World Blind Union, have organized their own training programs on the Rules. Both the United Nations and a private initiative, WorldEnable, post information about the Rules on the Internet. Persons interested in both universal design and the implementation of international norms for equalization of opportunities for persons with disabilities should make an effort to understand the Standard Rules and find ways to apply them to their particular circumstances. ## 11.9 NOTES 1. The Rules are found in General Assembly resolution A/RES/48/96 and are reproduced in the United Nations Website at www.un.org/esa/socdev/dissre00.htm. United Nations documents are organized in terms of numbered paragraphs, and references to the specific Rules are made in those terms. 2. The revision of a WHO classification is a long and laborious process. The current state of the ICIDH-2 can be found at www.who.int/icidh/brochure/content.htm. 3. www.who.int/icidh/brochure/concepts.htm 4. Since the adoption of the Rules in 1993 there has only been one Special Rapporteur, Bengt Lindquist of Sweden, a former parliamentarian and leader of organizations of persons with disability. His term of office was recently extended for an additional two years, to 2002. ## 11.10 RESOURCES