CHAPTER 12 # U.S. ACCESSIBILITY CODES AND STANDARDS: CHALLENGES FOR UNIVERSAL DESIGN John P. S. Salmen, A.I.A. Universal Designers and Consultants, Inc., Takoma Park, Maryland ## 12.1 INTRODUCTION The United States has been a crucible for the initiation of the universal design movement. The Americans with Disabilities Act has brought great attention to the concept of accessibility. Some people would like to see a similar regulatory approach applied to universal design; however, the lessons learned in the United States indicate that effective implementation of accessibility codes and standards is dependent upon the education of and the availability of appropriately formatted information to those who must create or implement the design. This chapter highlights the regulatory processes that result in prescriptive standards, contrasts these with performance criteria, and identifies the challenges facing designers and developers in an increasingly global economy. ## 12.2 BACKGROUND: ACCESSIBILITY VERSUS UNIVERSAL DESIGN There is a profound difference between universal design and accessibility. Accessibility is a function of compliance with regulations or criteria that establish a minimum level of design necessary to accommodate people with disabilities. Universal design, however, is the art and practice of design to accommodate the widest variety and number of people throughout their life spans. As more is learned about human needs and abilities, and as technologies develop, the practice of universal design improves, evolves, and changes. In truth, it might be better to think of this field as “universal designing," so as to focus on the decision-making process, rather than some end product that may be improved in the future. The term universal designing was coined in 1997, by Dr. Edward Steinfeld, AIA, during a meeting of faculty and advisors to the Universal Design Education Project, in Boston, Massachusetts. The more designers know about users, the better they can design. But designers will probably never be able to know it all. This reality demands collaborative efforts between designers, environmental decision makers. and users as the diversity and complexity of our global society increases. In this fluid context, it is undesirable to establish fixed criteria for what constitutes a universal design. Instead, universal design should be considered a receding horizon line toward which good design will forever advance. ## 12.3 HISTORY OF ACCESSIBILITY CODES IN THE UNITED STATES Accessibility codes are a relatively new phenomenon, appearing only in the last 40 years of the twentieth century. The first accessibility technical standard in the United States was ANSI A117.1, Specifications for Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible to, and Usable by the Physically Handicapped, published in 196l (see Chap. 25, “The Bottom-Up Methodology of Universal Design," bv Goldsmith). While ANSI A117.1 (1961) was not immediately adopted, it became the model for nearly all the accessibilitv codes and regulations that followed. Accessibility standards were a direct outgrowth of the changing demographics that followed advances in medical technology. Medical technology allowed many people to live who otherwise would have died in World War II, the Korean War, and the polio epidemic of the early 1950s. For the first time in history, there was a large population of young Americans using wheelchairs. Public and private efforts for veterans and other survivors provided rehabilitation and educational opportunities, resulting in a large, well-educated population of young people with disabilities who would not accept discriminatory practices that limited their participation in society. They took advantage of the changing landscape of American politics and opinion, inspired bv the civil rights movement of the 1960s that culminated in the passage of the landmark U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964. That was the first legislation prohibiting discrimination based on race; it established the foundation for future civil rights-based laws. With technical standards available and the nondiscrimination concept affirmed, accessibility regulations development began. ## Laws, Regulations, and Standards In the United States, there are three formal levels of guidance that affect the accessibility of the built environment—laws, regulations, and standards. Laws are promulgated by a legislative body such as the U.S. Congress or a state legislature to address a public concern. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) was a law passed by the U.S. Congress to address discrimination against people with disabilities. Laws are general rules that require more specific regulations to be developed, implemented, and enforced. The law usually identifies an agency or agencies responsible for the development and/or enforcement of the regulations. The ADA directed the U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (Access Board) to develop technical criteria for accessibility compliance and the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) to write the implementing regulations and adopt specific standards for enforcement. Regulations are usually created by an enforcement agency of a government entity. Regulatory agencies are required to consider public input in their processes, and are encouraged to adopt in part or in whole existing recognized standards from the public sector. For example, the regulations to implement Title III of the ADA were published by the DOJ (28 CFR art 36, 1991), detailing the procedures to prohibit discriminatory practices. The regulation also requires that certain places “be designed, constructed and altered in compliance with accessibility standards established by this part." Standards are technical criteria surrounding an issue area. Standards that have received broad input during their development are considered to be more dependable and authoritative. One balanced process that ensures consideration of all input is called consensus-based standards making, in which all affected parties have input and a vote on the standard. The technical regulations that the DOJ adopted were heavily based on standards that were developed in a consensus process approved by a private organization, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). It is important to note, however, that a standard is not enforceable until it is referenced or adopted into a regulation. For example, the Access Board developed the ADA Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) based on the ANSI A117.1 consensus-based standard. The ADAAG was not enforceable until it was adopted by the DOJ as the appendix to the ADA Title III regulations and became the ADA Standards for Accessible Design (ADA Standards). ## ANSI A117.1—Where It All Started After the development of the first ANSI Standard in 1961, technical criteria of accessibility were incrementally refined and expanded over time, through a back-and-forth process between private and federal agencies. On the private side, the ANSI A117 Standard was referenced or adopted for most of the construction regulations known as model building codes. On the federal side, the ANSI Standard was also used as a basis for regulations, including the Minimum Guidelines and Requirements for Accessible Design (MGRAD) in 1981; the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standard (UFAS) in 1985; and the ADA Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) in 1991. The Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 was the first federal law to reference the ANSI Standard and lay the foundation for accessibility criteria in a series of other federal laws, including Sec. 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (see Chap. 35, “Fair Housing: Toward Universal Design in Multifamily Housing," by Steinfeld and Shea), and eventually the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990, which collectively require accessibility in most newly constructed public, private, and commercial buildings. ## ANSI Versus ADAAG A major effort was undertaken from 1994 to 1996 by the ANSI A117 Committee and the ADAAG Review Federal Advisory Committee established by the Access Board, which were simultaneously revising both the ANSI A117.1 Standard and the ADAAG. They worked together to substantially harmonize the format, organization, and technical requirements of both the ADAAG and ANSI A117.1. This resulted in a 1998 version of the ANSI Standard and a corresponding set of proposals for revisions to the ADAAG, which were ultimately used only in part for the version of ADAAG 2000 proposed by the Access Board in late 1999. (The Access Board guidelines are included on the CD accompanying this handbook.) ## State and Local Building Codes Disability and accessibility advocates have not limited their efforts solely to the national level. Throughout the United States, state and local code officials have grappled with the needs and demands of citizens with disabilities to ensure access through state and local building codes and statutes. During the 1970s, state and municipal building authorities adopted their own versions of what they thought was necessary to make buildings accessible. Unfortunately, almost no two versions were alike, and the plethora of regulations led to a design and construction nightmare in the 1970s and 1980s when developers, designers, and manufacturers were unable to standardize any design details that would remain the same across state borders and sometimes between localities within the same state. In the early 1990s, the differences between accessibility codes were somewhat reduced by the further development of later versions of ANSI A117 1 and the introduction of the ADAAG in 1991. Most states and municipalities have adopted one of the two, often through adoption of a model building code which uses ANSI Al17.1. However, at the turn of the millennium, it is still impossible for national developers to cost-effectively design buildings to one single standard, because in almost every instance, states and municipalities have added local amendments and interpretations to "enhance" their access requirements. The unfortunate result of these enhancements is the creation of some ambiguity and conflict. For instance, Florida requires a lavatory in the accessible toilet stall, which conflicts with the clear floor area beside the toilet. Although there is a process to determine the appropriate standard to use when standards conflict, the resolution is not simple since it is often difficult to determine which criteria is more stringent or more beneficial to people with disabilities. For example, the state of Minnesota reuuires a vertical grab bar above the horizontal side bar beside accessible toilets. Does this bar obstruct the useful area above the horizontal grab bar, or does it assist semiambulatory people in getting up and down from a seated position? ## How Minimums Become Maximums Accessibility regulations typically establish minimum criteria which are often perceived as or become absolutes, or maximums, in the building industry. Often, when facing compliance with a regulation that is not part of the intended development program, the tendency on the part of building owners or developers is to provide no more space, material, or equipment than is needed. Designers are subsequently directed to be as efficient as possible and to design no more than the regulations require. This forces the designers to design the facility to the minimum requirements possible, resulting in the minimums becoming the maximums. ## 12.4 THE ADA The ADA has two sections directly affecting the construction of buildings: Title II—State and Local Governments, and Title III—Public Accommodations and Commercial Facilities. Neither of these sections uses the term universal design, but both try to encourage designs that meet the needs of all people by setting a starting point with minimum criteria for accessible design. Title II sets out regulations that assure nondiscrimination in the provision of services. These include requirements for new construction and alterations of state and municipally owned facilities. 'The regulatory agency, DOJ, allows designers to use either the UFAS or the ADA Standards until such time that Title II ADA Standards are promulgated. The final version of the ADAAG 2000 is likely to include the Title II ADA Standards. Title IIl sums up the accessibility requirements for buildings that are open for commercial transactions with the public in the following statement: "Prohibition of discrimination. No individual shall be discriminated against on the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations of any place of public accommodation by any private entity who owns, leases, (or leases to) or operates a place of public accommodation” [28 CFR Part 36.201 (a)]. Title III requires that any new construction, alteration, or addition to a building that affects commerce be accessible as defined by the ADA Standards. It also states that businesses that provide services to the public—places of public accommodation—remove barriers to the extent that doing so is "readily achievable,"—that is, "easily accomplishable and able to be carried out without much difficulty or expense" [28 CFR Part 36.304 (a)]—or, in other words, cheap and easy. Alterations trigger one of the more commonly overlooked and confusing aspects of the ADA, known as the path of travel rule. This rule requires that up to 20 percent of the cost of an alteration be expended to ensure that there is an accessible path of travel from the property line to the altered area. Above the 20 percent, this cost would be considered a disproportionate expense, and thus the regulation is sometimes called the disproportionality rule. The rule requires that the rest rooms, drinking fountains, and telephones that serve the affected path of travel be made accessible, to the maximum extent feasible. This can produce dramatic and potentially costly additions to alteration projects. For example, if a hotel plans to spend \$100,000 to renovate a ballroom, it would be required to spend up to an additional \$20,000 to upgrade the rest rooms, drinking fountains, and telephones serving the ballroom, as well as those serving the path of travel from the property line to the ballroom (including parking, curb ramps, entry doors, and elevators) if those elements do not presently meet all the criteria for new construction found in the ADA Standards. The prioritization of barrier removal within the 20 percent additional cost is left up to the building owner, with recommendations from DOJ, that entry be addressed first, followed by primary function areas, bathrooms, and other features in that order. Exceptions that are typically not considered to be part of an alteration and therefore do not trigger the path of travel requirement include HVAC system modifications, lighting, fire suppression systems, roofing, and finish materials. ## Civil Rights Versus Building Codes The ADA is a civil rights law. The civil rights terminology of the ADA states that all people, regardless of their abilities, should have access to goods and services provided by businesses. The regulations promulgated by the U.S. DOJ and the technical assistance for voluntary compliance are intended to provide guidance to building designers and owners on how to meet the broad civil rights requirements of the law. This places a difficult responsibility on designers and building owners, who, for the most part, have never studied law or civil rights interpretations. Designers and building owners are responsible for providing facilities and spaces that are safe for the public to use, and they rely on the building codes to guide them in this mandate. The civil rights nature of the ADA and the resemblance of its specific criteria to building codes lead many to believe that compliance with the letter of the law will ensure compliance with the law. Sometimes, unfortunately, this is not the case. When faced with ADA Title III lawsuits, U.S. courts are often turning to the spirit rather than the letter of the law (see Chap. 18, “Interpreting Accessibility Standards: Experiences in the U.S. Courts," by Mazumdar and Geis). The problem is exacerbated by the fact that the ADA enforcement agency, the U.S. DOJ, does not provide definitive interpretations unless legal action is underway. Even if a building code has been certified by the DOJ as meeting or exceeding the minimum requirements of the ADA Standards, local building officials are not empowered to allow variances from the design criteria. Furthermore, these officials' interpretations can be challenged if the DOJ, in responding to a complaint, believes that the ADA civil rights requirements have not been met. However, if a DOJ-certified building code is followed, that fact can be used as rebuttable evidence if a complaint is filed. This situation makes the practice of architecture and the operation of buildings increasingly difficult and costly. There is little certainty of compliance, outside of literal adherence to the prescriptive criteria, and great risk of legal action by anyone who feels that the design or operation of the facility creates an environment that limits their “equal enjoyment" and thus violates their civil rights. In the cases of PVA v. Ellerbe Beckett and Lara et al. v. Cinemark USA, Inc., designers and developers who had followed the letter of the law in the design of arenas and stadium theaters (and, in the Cinemark case, had complied with a DOJ-certified building code) were sued by disability advocates who maintained that the location of the seats did not provide a “comparable line of sight" to that provided to standing spectators in the arena and most of the other attendees in the cinemas ## 12.5 PERFORMANCE VERSUS PRESCRIPTIVE CRITERIA For many years, a debate has been ongoing in the U.S. design and construction community regarding the best format for building codes—performance or prescriptive. Simply stated, perfornace codes identify the ultimate operation or function of an element or space, whereas prescriptive codes explain to a greater or lesser degree how a space or element must be designed to satisfy the codes. For example, a performance code might say that a wall assembly must be able to withstand a fire for a specific period of time. A prescriptive code would say that the wall must be constructed of specific materials organized in a specific design, such as two lavers of ½-in gypsum wallboard over a 4-in metal stud wall. It is generally easier to write performance criteria because the concept of how an element or space should operate is fairly easily described. However, it is generally more difficult to evaluate and enforce performance criteria because the designer or building official must understand how all the individual elements work and how they work with each other. As building technology becomes increasingly sophisticated, materials and assemblies of materials may have characteristics that are not readily apparent or easily understood. Prescriptive codes, on the other hand, are very tedious to develop and write because the language must be exact and vet applicable to a broad variety of situations. Prescriptive codes are easier to follow and enforce because they require less understanding of the function or purpose of the design and rely instead on evaluation of whether the design complies with the written letter of the law. U.S. accessibility codes have tended to be prescriptive in nature. Disability advocates have argued that there is a large information gap between people with disabilities and the design and construction industry, regarding the needs and abilities of people with disabilities. This gap makes it difficult, they argue, for designers to produce designs that meet the intent of performance-based codes. Disability advocates also prefer prescriptive standards because they give clear evidence of compliance or discrimination. This argument is also presented by building officials who desire easily interpreted and therefore easily enforceable standards. Unfortunately, prescriptive criteria can stifle design creativity. Where the design of a facility or element is rigidly specified, there is little opportunity for investigation of alternative or innovative designs, or use of new materials or products, without risking misinterpretation and noncompliance. Although there are sections in most accessibility codes that allow equivalent designs, there is no generally accepted methodology to determine what is equivalent. Section 2.2 of the ADA Standards accepts equivalent facilitation, which is stated as follows: "Departures from particular technical and scoping requirements of this guideline by the use of other designs and technologies are pernitted where the alternative designs and technologies used will provide substantially equivalent or greater access to and usability of the facility." Few building owners or design firms have the knowledge base to be confident in attempting an alternate design. ## 12.6 LACK OF A STATISTICAL ERGONOMIC DATABASE The specificity of the level of detail in the technical criteria of U.S. accessibility standards might be justified if there was a substantial body of ergonomic data upon which they were based. However, this is not the case. The criteria in the standards are largely based on studies of relatively small population samples. The research conducted at Syracuse University in the late 1970s for the ANSI A117.1 standard used a sample of approximately 200 individuals that included 58 wheelchair users (Steinfeld, 1979). Most of the criteria in the present ANSI and the ADA Standards are direct descendants of that small study group. Although the body of statistical data is limited, the attempt to develop accessibility standards has gone on unhindered. The process has attempted to overcome this limitation by using the best judgments of groups of experienced and interested individuals. In the absence of more recent definitive statistical information, regulators have often based their decisions on personal experiences influenced by anecdotal evidence presented at regulatory committee meetings. The development of dependable statistical ergonomic data should be the single most important goal for those involved in the development of accessibility criteria. The Access Board and the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) were able to fund and initiate efforts in this direction in the late 1990s. With this data it will be less difficult to establish more reliable standards and to justify alternative solutions that meet the intent of equivalent facilitation and performance-based language. ## 12.7 THE FUTURE OF ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS There are many problems with existing accessibility standards, and it is questionable whether they will ever encourage designers to practice universal design in their present form. However, if one thing is clear, it is that because of the growing population of aging persons, many of whom have some type of disability, combined with the need for access in all areas, accessibility regulations will, in all likelihood, increase in the coming years. It is likely that there will be a continued proliferation of specific criteria aimed at specialized areas of the environment, extending beyond the scope of new residential and commercial buildings to include recreation and leisure activities, travel and tourism venues, and more historic and cultural sites. The Access Board is in the process of developing guidelines for cruise ships, wilderness trails, sports fields, playgrounds, swimming pools, and other similar facilities. There is no reason to think that this direction of their efforts will change. ## International Consistency As international communication and travel increase, it will become increasingly difficult to justify national or regional differences in accessibility criteria. U.S. travelers with disabilities already expect that multinational hotel chains will provide the same level and quality of accessibility in their properties in foreign countries as they do in the United States, whether it is required by building codes in those countries or not. The marketplace is demanding accessibility at a rate that is outstripping accessibility standards. Businesses that wish to capture this growing market of aging consumers recognize that they must provide a consistent level of quality across their chains from Bangor to Bangkok. It is inevitable that regional differences in accessibility criteria will start to vanish as medical technology and commercial products become more uniformly distributed. The sooner that accessibility regulators around the world recognize this, and begin to pool their efforts and resources to establish researched and ergonomically-based performance criteria, the sooner accessibility will proliferate around the globe. Performance standards can transcend national boundaries, whereas prescriptive criteria fail to allow for regional, if not local, differences. And, most important, performance standards can act as an intermediate step to the development of an understanding of how to create universal designs. ## 12.8 CONCLUSION It is the author's opinion that most building designers, developers, and construction professionals lack an understanding of the changing needs and abilities of our society and thus of how to develop appropriate universal design solutions. The present generation of designers and facility owners and operators has had little involvement with and, consequently, little understanding of the needs of the growing populations of aging people or of people with disabilities. The problem would be easy if only one or two groups had responsibility for environmental decisions that impact users. With the civil rights nature of the issue, however, the actual population of environmental decision makers expands dramatically, as does legal liability. Maintenance workers can replace a moveable trash receptacle to a position where it blocks an accessible route, thus negating the carefully designed plans of the architect. A new sales clerk can inadvertently violate the civil rights of a person with a disability by placing a promotional display on the lowered portion of a cashier counter required for use by people of short stature or customers who use wheelchairs. Further regulation will never resolve these types of problems. The solution is appropriately targeted educational materials and programs. Architects and sales clerks need very different kinds of information and education, yet they both need education. Designers of amusement parks need information that is different from that needed by designers of multifamily housing. Naval architects attempting to design more accessible cruise vessels have concerns and constraints that are vastly different from those of landscape architects who are designing interpretive trails in a wilderness forest. While basic principles, such as the turning radius of an average wheelchair, may be the same everywhere, the information needed by individuals who are expected to apply that information is very different. Anyone who has studied the ADA Standards will recognize that parts of them are very difficult to understand, even for people who are very familiar with the document. Finding all the information that is appropriate for the specific situation with which one is concerned can sometimes be very difficult and frustrating, especially when an obscure though important section is pointed out after the design is constructed. With our increasingly sophisticated means of communications, it should soon be possible to format and deliver appropriate types and levels of information for each person along the spectrum of environmental decision making. When designers needs technical criteria or examples, they should be cross referenced and easily available, or when maintenance workers are replacing a lavatory, they should be able to easily find the correct mounting height without having to search through volumes of technical criteria. Unfortunately, here at the beginning of the twenty-first century, such interactive and customized formats are still limited in availability and not widely disseminated. Although there are some accessible design CAD programs used in architectural offices, and some pocket guides for use in the field, many more targeted, technologically appropriate, and user-friendly tools need to be developed. Once society begins to develop appropriate informational and educational tools, there will be more widespread application of accessibility, and eventually a demand by consumers for the superior performance of universal design will overtake the need for prescriptive standards. ## 12.9 BIBLIOGRAPHY Council of American Building Officials, and American National Standards Institute, CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992, American National Standard: Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, ANSI, New York, 1992. Lara et al. v. Cinemark USA, Inc., District of Texas EP-97-CA-502-H. Steinfeld, E., "Accessible Buildings for People with Walking and Reaching Limitations," U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research, Washington, DC, 1979. U.S. Department of Justice, "Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability by Public Accommodations and in Commercial Facilities; Final Rule," Federal Register, 56(144): 35544–35961, 1991. ## 12.10 RESOURCES Universal Design Newsletter. Published quarterly by Universal Designers & Consultants, Inc., Takoma Park, MD 20912 Universal Design Online. www.UniversalDesign.com.