CHAPTER 44 # PROJECT BRIEFING FOR AN INCLUSIVE UNIVERSAL DESIGN PROCESS Rachael Luck, B.A.(Hons.), Dip.Arch., M.Sc., A.R.B. Hans Haenlein, M.B.E., Dip.Arch., RIBA, F.R.S.A. and Keith T. Bright, M.Sc., F.R.I.C.S., F.B.Eng., M.A.S.I. University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom ## 44.1 INTRODUCTION This chapter describes a process being used at the University of Reading to design an inclusive building. The case for the introduction of a universal approach to project briefing is presented, first describing different methods for project briefing, then a discussion of why more user involvement is necessary. Based on these findings, the universal approach is presented. The building users are an integral part of the briefing process; voicing their needs and being part of the project organization's decision-making process, they filter ideas as the design is refined. ## 44.2 BACKGROUND The change in language associated with universal design has been noticeable, and it not only reflects semantic preferences but also different meaning and responsibility. The shift in terminology from barrier-free, design for all, design for disabilities, and accessible design to universal design parallels the change from the handicapped to people with disabilities. This has been well documented and summarized by the Center for Universal Design, and others. This semantic issue, discussed elsewhere within this book, is raised within this chapter because of the specific use of the term inclusive environments. The work of the Research Group for Inclusive Environments at the University of Reading, United Kingdom, centers on the belief that if a building cannot be satisfactorily used by all, the fault lies with the building, not the user. An inclusive environment is one that meets the needs and requirements of all users, as well as addressing the problems experienced by people who have reduced physical, sensory, or cognitive ability. This parallel's Jim Sandhu's definition that universal design extends beyond the issues of accessibility for people with disabilities to respond to the broad diversity of users who have to react with the built environment. The politics of inclusion are an integral part of universal and inclusive design, and the terms are used interchangeably within this chapter. In common with Susan Goltsman's work in Chap. 64, "The Ed Roberts Campus: Building a Dream," this chapter describes the design of an inclusive building. The Ed Roberts Campus project is much further developed than the building at Reading, and is able to report on the site and physical aspects of the building. This chapter focuses on the process used to capture project ideas and to structure these so they can be incorporated within the project brief, without constraining or losing the meaning intended by the user representative. ## 44.3 DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO PROJECT BRIEFING It is difficult to generalize about the briefing process; the methods used will vary from project to project, and people have preferences and preferred modes of working. Although briefing is not a homogenous, unified activity throughout the construction industry, recent developments in briefing research have highlighted some deficiencies that have led to the development of a more inclusive approach. The brief is the term used in the United Kingdom to describe one of the legal documents that encapsulates the client's requirements for a building. The RIBA Plan of Work (RIBA, 1967) linked the client's brief to be developed between stages A (inception) and D (sketch design). Later editions of the Appointment of an Architect (RIBA, 1992, 1999) and The Process Protocol (Kagioglou et al., 1999) research at the University of Salford proved what many in the industry were already conscious of: The sequential staged model used to plan projects did not describe what happened in reality. The process model shows stages of work that are in progress concurrently, and it shows that briefing is not a distinct project phase that starts at one time and is completed before design commences. If the needs of the commissioning and user client could be established at a distinct phase early in the project's progress, this would increase the certainty of the project and limit the number of design changes in the procurement process. Reality, unfortunately, is different from this. Acknowledging that briefing is a process introduces some flexibility in the timing of design decisions—some can be made later without delaying the progress of the project. In this way, the rich information that users suggest, as their understanding of the building becomes more refined, can be included with a positive effect on their satisfaction with the building. The information needed to develop a project brief was another area identified for attention. There is a need to include both overt and tacit information (Cooper and Press, 1995). This is information that not only describes the functional requirements for the building, but also background information to better meet the needs of those who will eventually occupy the building. The importance of “hard-" and “soft-"people-focused information was mentioned in Barrett's work (Barrett, 1991). His inclusion of the Johri window as a method for revealing unknown information through discussion follows the same line of thought as the approach proposed at Reading. These methods support Mintzberg and Water's (1985) management studies, which show that discussion can reveal the unknown and also enhance better understanding among those involved (Mintzberg and Water, 1985). The message coming through was that understanding the human dimension was an integral part of the briefing process, equally important to knowing the functional requirements. To bring the universal approach to briefing in line with current thinking, the outmoded views of the brief as a document and of briefing as a fixed stage of the project were addressed. The issue of the type and quality of information gathered during the briefing process introduces the universal component to the briefing process. This provoked thought about appropriate user involvement. ## 44.4 WHY IS MORE USER INVOLVEMENT NECESSARY? Greater user involvement in the design and briefing processes of buildings was considered necessary because of critical attention since the 1980s, which showed that the lack of inclusion of the user perspective in the design process was considered an oversight. The lack of user participation and designer accountability in the design process were considered to be the two main reasons for inadequacies in design decisions. It was thought that the inclusion of the end user's views in the design and briefing processes would result in greater user satisfaction with the building. This inclusive approach also acknowledges that giving users a voice reflects an organization's consideration for its employees' working conditions. This has been explained in terms of power within organizations, where greater participation in design is linked to the empowerment of those whose views are sought. There was also a movement toward more user-centered methods for product design and development in the 1980s. The term user-centered came to mean a number of different things: design for users, where analysts study user behavior to design a system to match user characteristics, and designed by users, where users become involved in the design exercise. The movement toward actual user involvement whenever possible was popular as many were critical of empirical anthropometric models, finding the data unreliable. This is especially true when designing for people with disabilities, because generalized anthropometric data is rarely useful. A participatory building design and management approach was developed to create good relationships among a project team. This approach was concerned with enabling people to complete a project together, rather than the power of one party over another. The approach was of particular interest to the design of this building as it is concerned with the representation of views from different parties and gaining experiential knowledge through dialogue. It is considered that knowledge is socially constructed through dialogue. Knowledge is generated and confirmed in a dialectic between concrete and abstract knowing. This is a key observation, which coincides with the approach of this project, that knowledge and new ideas are generated through the process of discussion. The movement toward greater user involvement has also been driven by changes in societal values and the politics of inclusion. Linked with a need for user participation in the design process is the issue of hegemony and representation of disabled building users. Hegemony concerns the location of power and decision making by a majority on behalf of others. There is a feeling among people with disabilities that many decisions that have a strong influence on their lives are made by others on their behalf. This includes the design of environments, even those with specific access concerns, where design decisions are made with little or no consultation with people with disabilities. Much has been written about design for disabilities, which is uncomplimentary about the process. A study of architects' understanding of building needs of people who are disabled, based on their relationships with building users, found that many designers were assuming a knowledge and understanding of environmental issues for people who are disabled, which they do not have. This presumptive designing has led to dissatisfaction. Research by Mason has shown that when people with disabilities are able to choose for themselves, their decisions differ from those made on their behalf (Mason, 1992). This reflects that their interests have not accurately been represented in the past. The issue of user participation and representation of views is particularly sensitive when designing for people with disabilities, because activity in the field of disability theory and the politics of disability has increased since the 1970s. There has been a rejection of the hegemonic labeling of a person as “handicapped" or “disabled" among disability theorists, and an introduction of disability as a social construct. Disability studies look at impairment from a sociological perspective, where a social model of disability considers that societal values determine what is considered abnormal, and this defines normality. The politics of disability and the social model have brought about a movement among people who are disabled for greater involvement and empowerment rather than representation of their needs and values. Although there are mechanisms for the inclusion of various disability perspectives to influence the design of environments (e.g., access committees to influence local authority access policies), there is criticism of the effectiveness of these methods. It has been observed that the advice given to a local authority by an access committee can be ignored, but the fact that an access committee exists meets the authority's consultative duties. This illustrates the main thrust of this chapter that, although design exercises may involve a user consultation process, ultimately there is an autocratic decision made on behalf of people who are disabled. Taking a social model of disability perspective, to address this imbalance, people with disabilities should be emancipated and their views should be considered from an empowered, rather than a consultative, position. This would be possible if people who are disabled were designing environments for themselves, but few architects and planners are disabled. Even this position would be flawed if a person with one disability had to presume the needs of a person with a different disability, and the approach assumes that the views of one individual will represent those of a larger population. The nature of design makes an emancipatory approach difficult. Design is a specialist activity, with liabilities, knowledge, and expertise that cannot arbitrarily be passed on to someone else. ## 44.5 A UNIVERSAL APPROACH TO PROJECT BRIEFING The approach to project briefing presently being used to design a universal building attempts to address some of the drawbacks of previous approaches to project briefing and to impartially include end users' views in the briefing process. This approach uses three mechanisms to collect data and knowledge from the client-user about the future building: (1) semistructured interviews, (2) an information base for the feasibility study, and (3) steering group meetings. These mechanisms formalize the social processes within the project to develop the brief. The mechanisms are discreet events to gather information about building users' preferences and to elicit the commissioning client's requirements for the building. The approach is systematic without being a checklist. There is a process for the collection of this information, but each person presents their information and their requirements in their own terms. ## Semistructured Interviews The method used to gather information for the feasibility study was to individually interview people to better understand their experience of working and communicating in buildings. An interview approach was preferred because this allowed people to express their perceptions of the built environment in their own terms. This will generate a theoretical model of the user based on experience and scenarios of use. The interviews were concerned with the ease with which people use the built environment and encouraged people to illustrate their responses with examples of buildings or environments and to describe these settings. The semistructured approach used a series of headings on an aide-némoire (Table 44.1) to steer the discussion and to better understand the experience of people working and communicating in different environments. The aide-mémoire prompts were developed through experience in architectural practice, developing an understanding of the information needed to design different types of projects. The prompts relate to aspects of a potential building and were used to encourage the respondent to generate ideas for the building being designed. The headings also prompted comments on other buildings and the experience of other environments, as well as qualitative judgments on the relative merit of these environments. It was this rich information that provided invaluable data for the next stages of the briefing process. The aide-mémoire prompts were trigger statements used by the person conducting the interview. The response to a prompt was the raw data for collection and analysis. The responses to each heading were included in the notes taken by the interviewer, usually verbatim. The notes were very detailed, and the interview text was unmodified within the “information base" document produced in the next stage of the briefing process. TABLE 44.1 Aide-Mémoire, in Part
<table><tr><td>Aide-mémoire (part)</td></tr><tr><td>Needs of users</td></tr><tr><td>Relationship of functions</td></tr><tr><td>Activities and needs of occupants/users (compare with current conditions)</td></tr><tr><td>Duration and frequencies of activities</td></tr><tr><td>Special provisions (e.g., for elderly people, people who are disabled, patients with strollers)</td></tr><tr><td>Special items to be accommodated [e.g., machines, animals, vehicles (give key dimensions, weights, etc.)]</td></tr><tr><td>Safety and health risks (e.g., noise, heat, chemicals, plant, etc.) Flexibility</td></tr><tr><td>Future trends/changes, need for flexibility</td></tr><tr><td>Phasing, any occupancy retained during contract works</td></tr><tr><td>Area usage</td></tr><tr><td>Zoning, permanent and temporary</td></tr><tr><td>Conflicting activities</td></tr><tr><td>Communication routes, systems</td></tr><tr><td>Access and escape</td></tr><tr><td>Fire and security</td></tr><tr><td>Flexibility of use, partitioning, etc.</td></tr><tr><td>Rooms, workstations, work spaces</td></tr><tr><td>Staff priorities, confidentiality</td></tr><tr><td>Special occupational needs</td></tr><tr><td>Health and safety</td></tr><tr><td>Amenities</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>Internal environment</td></tr><tr><td>Energy policy</td></tr><tr><td>H&amp;V, air conditioning</td></tr><tr><td>Special services</td></tr><tr><td>Noise and lighting criteria</td></tr><tr><td>Fenestration, building envelope, and structure</td></tr></table> The interviews were conducted by the same project researcher, who used the same prompt sheet for each person interviewed. This allowed consistency across the sample of people interviewed, but did not impose a structure as to how an individual should respond. The responses were the unprompted, unbounded ideas of the person interviewed. This approach generated rich data of personal perceptions of their experience of buildings and suggestions for improvements to the built environment. Interviewing people individually had the advantage that their ideas were personal and not affected by group pressures and influences. A key concern was selecting who should be interviewed. The research team felt that it was important to consult a range of people with different disabilities, not only to satisfy sociopolitical pressures of representation but also because of the universal ethos of the project, that the built environment should be accessible for all. The individuals selected were people who would occupy the building, when complete. These people had a range of different disabilities and experience of the built environment and were interviewed so they could have direct influence on the design of the project. This group included people with visual impairments, wheelchair users, and people who were profoundly deaf and hard of hearing. This method of inclusion of views directly empowered those involved, as their unsolicited opinions were included in the exercise. The decision of whether to include an idea within the scheme was subject to the filtering processes of the steering group at a later stage rather than the decision of a single person. One of the interviews was conducted with an interpreter using British sign language to enable the discussion between the researcher and a deaf person. This changed the dynamic of the interview and introduced another level of interpretation. It became more of a three-way discussion of ideas rather than a prompt-and-response conversation. Although the words and terms referred to in the checklist were easy to understand, they were all relevant to construction and their use needed to be clarified to the interpreter so they were not misrepresented to the person being interviewed. The response to the prompt was also influenced by the person's knowledge of construction and a keenness to respond in an informed manner. A key factor to get across to the respondent was that there was no correct response. Each response was an expression of his or her personal wish list for the building based on his or her own experience. In this way, the response was individual and was not assumed to represent a disability. The wealth of information gathered when communicating with a person with a different experience of the built environment is captured in the written notes from the interview. The criticism of interviews that a person may attach more than a single meaning to his or her experience was addressed within this process by grouping a person's response, which may be applicable to more than one heading of the aide-mémoire, within several headings. This meant that the textual transcript of the interview included some repetition, but that the response was included with the prompt that triggered that response, as well as the heading where comments on a related subject from other people interviewed would be included. The interview process encouraged the interviewee to discuss around the prompt, so this type of response was acceptable and easily accommodated within the data-gathering process. ## Developing an Information Base Developing an information base for the feasibility study was the term given to the second stage for gathering user and commissioning client expectations from the built environment. The information base is the preliminary briefing document for the project developed by combining each of the notes from the semistructured interviews into a single document. Each interview was written as a separate document, then a combined document was generated, structured around the aide-mémoire headings. Each person's response to an item was presented in a section so it was possible to read the different responses together. This document was an unedited version of the views represented by those interviewed and contained some conflicting items. This approach was the cumulative representation of the responses without interpretation or judgment on the content of the response. Developing the information base is a consolidation process allowing all views to be equally represented within a single document. The interview text was unmodified during the information base stage of the process. The response to a prompt was treated as an individual's view or experience that would unconditionally be included in the information base document. It was accepted that the information base would include personal judgments that may not be representative of a wider population, even for people with a similar disability. This stage of the process, allowing conflicting and unreasonable views to be expressed, was a method that allowed “unknown knowledge," at the project outset, to be found out during the interview process. Filtering opinions and addressing any conflict of need or preference would be considered at the steering group stage. ## The Steering Group The steering group is a management device within the project organization introduced to formalize decision making and to ensure the representation of different user groups. The steering group is a useful mechanism for tradeoff and negotiation of problems. It is a forum for problems to be raised and resolved. The intention was for the steering group to be at regular 2-month intervals; in practice, however, the meetings were less frequent and were called when there was sufficient new user requirements to discuss, approximately every 4 months. A key to a successful tradeoff is the composition of the steering group and the understanding that each member of the group has of his or her role within the group. A consideration was that the representatives on the group were of sufficient status, part of the decision-making unit, so views could be expressed without reference back to others. Each person on the steering group totally represents an organization, but acts in a personal capacity. In this way, each person is encouraged to have his or her own head and generate ideas. If there are different views among members of the steering group, in order to resolve disputes and move forward and make a decision, the members are reminded of their role as a representative of their own organization and the wider objectives of the project. This shift in perspective and reminder of the broader responsibilities is a useful mechanism of the steering group structure for group problem solving. The steering group should include representation of the building user group as well as the commissioning client. For this project, this includes the involvement and representation of various disability groups. The minutes of the steering group meeting represent a paper trail recording the decisions made on the project. The ability to generalize the findings from one person to a larger population was a representation issue to consider. The concern was that the needs and views expressed by one person with one type of disability may not represent the needs and views of others with the same disability. It also applies that one person who is disabled may not be able to represent the views of a person with a different disability. Although the time constraints of the project meant that a small range of commonly occurring disabilities were represented during the structured interviews, these were considered adequate because of the structure of the interview and the way the data were interpreted. The steering group resolved any differences of opinion within the information base and feasibility study through discussion. Careful examination of the language used and the emergence of ideas were the main thrust of this way of working. It was recognized that metaphors illustrate views and subtly encapsulate and communicate complex ideas. The synergy of the group was a good platform for generating and developing ideas. An advantage of this method is that ideas are discussed and more fully understood by all concerned, which may lead to a more valid and thoroughly negotiated result. The process is transactional and relies on the shared understanding of language to quickly arrive at a valid result. ## 44.6 GENERAL LESSONS FOR UNIVERSAL DESIGN Applying the inclusive briefing approach to this project was a useful exercise that demonstrated how complex the project organization can become. It becomes complex in terms of the number of people that are involved in the briefing process and, as a consequence of this, there is an increased number of differing views and perspectives expressed. Transcribing the user discussions into text documents using the aide-mémoire headings meant that much paperwork was generated. The information for the feasibility study produced a lengthy document combining the views of everyone interviewed. This took over a month to produce, because of people's availability to be interviewed and editing the interview notes into a single document—the information base. It took the steering group 1 to 2 weeks to read and digest the lengthy document before they could comment on any conflicting items suggested by the users. Developing a method to quicken this process would improve the ease of using this approach. This exercise demonstrated that although many user representatives were interviewed, and this increased the number of suggestions for the project, in this instance only one item was in potential conflict and needed further clarification. This may not always be the case, and using the steering group, drawing upon the members' role as a representative of an organization, may be necessary. An interesting issue to consider is defining the boundaries of the project team. The issue of commissioning client and user-client discrepancy is something that has been raised within briefing literature and is also an issue for this approach to project briefing. The issues of hierarchy that may already exist within an organization are transferred to the project and become a project issue. Should there be any difference in the way the views, wants, and needs of the commissioning client, who may also be an end user of the building, are handled from the other users of the building? For the process to be truly universal, there should be no hierarchy reflected within the process, the ethos is equal representation and equitable use. In practice, the commissioning client's requirements control the budget for the project. How can this ultimate command control position be avoided in project briefing? A concern for designers may be that although ideas have been "universally" suggested, designers will assume design responsibility for these suggestions. If a designer refines an idea to make the design work in practice, has the designer breached the ethos of inclusive design? At what point does design modification become presumptive designing? Using the inclusive briefing approach raised many issues for further investigation; many are common to the universal design of the built environment: • Who should be interviewed, whose views should be gathered? • Who should conduct the user consultation exercise? • Who should act as the intermediary, the interface between the construction team and the building users? • What is the legal position of user representative information? • How should this information be incorporated within the design of the scheme? • Should there be a cutoff point for the inclusion of ideas? ## 44.7 CONCLUSION The approach described here was developed to address some of the user representation imbalances discussed. Current briefing methods do not per se cause an imbalance, but the manner in which user information is gathered and decisions are made within the briefing process can influence whether these views are represented. This was a prototype, with the potential for further development as knowledge and experience are gained. The method is a series of decision-making mechanisms and social processes that regulate the capture of ideas and filter these among the project team. Taking a consultative approach was the only reasonable game plan to arrive at common understanding among the project team. ## 44.8 BIBLIOGRAPHY Barrett, P., "The Client's Brief: A Holistic View," Management, Quality and Economics in Building, E&FN Spon., 1991. -, and C. Stanley, Better Construction Briefing, Blackwell Science, Oxford, UK, 1999. Bejder, E., “From Client's Brief to End Use: The Pursuit of Quality," in P. S. Barrett and A. R. Males (eds.), Practice Management: New Perspectives for the Construction Professional, E&FN Spon, London, UK, 1991. Cooper, R., and M. Press, The Design Agenda—A Guide to the Successful Management of Design, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK, 1995. Kagioglou, M., R. Cooper, G. Aouad, and J. Hinks, "The Process Protocol: Improving the Front End of the Design and Construction Process for the UK Industry," Journal of Construction Procurement, 5(2). 1999. Mace, R., Housing Definitions: Accessible, Adaptable and Universal Design, Fact Sheet No. 6 OPFS.4.91, The Center for Üniversal Design, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 1990. Mason, P., "The Representation of Disabled People: A Hampshire Centre for Independent Living Discussion Paper," Disabled, Handicap & Society, 7(1), 1992. Mintzberg, H., and J. A. Water, "Of Strategies Deliberate and Emergent," Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 6, 1985. Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), Plan of Work, RIBA, London, UK, 1967. —, Appointment of an Architect SFA./92, RIBA, London, UK, 1992. —, Appointment of an Architect SFA./99, RIBA, London, UK, 1999. ## 44.9 RESOURCES The Web site of the Research Group for Inclusive Environments is part of the University of Reading's Department of Construction Management & Engineering site at www.construct. rdg.ac.uk/.