CHAPTER 66 # ACCESS TO THE WORLD WIDE WEB: TECHNICAL AND POLICY PERSPECTIVES Judy Brewer, M.A. World Wide Web Consortium: MIT, INRIA. Keio ## 66.1 INTRODUCTION The World Wide Web has, in a few short years, become one of the cornerstone technologies of the information society. In many countries the Web already plays a leading role in providing access to information, educational resources, employment opportunities, workplace interactions, government services, and entertainment. To what extent does this new information resource welcome people with disabilities, and what factors will contribute to or hinder its accessibility for people with disabilities? This chapter examines issues of accessibility and universal design of the Web from several perspectives: barriers to accessibility on the Web, dimensions of universal design on the Web, policies that impact on Web accessibility, and guidelines and implementation issues that affect accessibility of Web sites and Web-based applications. ## 66.2 ACCESSIBILITY OF THE WEB Why is accessibility a concern for a medium such as the Web? After all, there are no overt physical barriers such as stairs on the Web. Moreover, for some people with disabilities, access to Web-based information is already a vast improvement over the barriers endemic in existing information resources, such as libraries without ramps, or the unavailability of alternative formats for many texts. However, this new information medium is unfortunately just as prone to accessibility problems as is any other environment. Accessibility problems on the Web can affect people with a variety of disabilities. For example, users with visual disabilities may miss information that is represented in graphics or video unless it is accompanied by alternative text. They may be unable to access navigational hot spots in image maps, find their way through unlabeled frames, or understand poorly constructed tables. Uncaptioned audio similarly creates barriers for people with hearing impairments who may be unable to hear audio on a Web site. Lack of keyboard support for mouse commands can slow down individuals with physical disabilities. Web sites without consistent navigation options. or with flashing or serolling text, can impede navigation and comprehension for users with dyslexia, short-term memory problems, or other cognitive or neurological disabilities. The rapid rise in the role of the Web in society has been a mixed blessing for people with disabilities. When accessible, the Web can provide access to information at far greater speed and volume than was available in the past. But when inaccessible due to the kinds of barriers just desenbed, the Web excludes people with disabiltes ttom accessing ctitical intormation and resources. Given that the Web is already displacing traditional means of accessing information—for instance, local offiees where in-person contaet is possible, or telephone-based information services where voice contaet is possible—it is paramount that industry, government, and the user community work together to ensure accessibility of Web-based services. Otherwise, for many people with disabithites, contmnued expansion ot the Web will mean exclusion from educational and employment opportunities, and from participation in comneree, civic life, and more. ## Accessibility and Universal Design of the Web As with so many other areas of the built environment and information technologies, accessible Web design, or design for people with disabilities, contributes substantially to universal design—design for the needs and capabilities of a broad diversity of Web users. In the context of the World Wide Web, universal design, or design for all, has been described as design that eneompasses accessibility for people with disabilities, as well as issues such as device independence for any Web user, internationalization of the Web, usability, and affordability. In the context of this chapter, accessibility refers to access by people with disabilities to Web-based information. Device independence refers to comparable access to Web-based information, regardless of the type of device that one is using (e.g., a desktop computer with a mouse, a mobile phone, a personal digital assistant, an information kiosk, a TV, or a land-line-based telephone). Internationalization means ensuring that Web technologies can represent Web content equally well across all of the world's languages. Usability refers to general human factors issues. Affordability refers to issues of economie access to computers and Internet services. In considering the spread of ideas within the Web community, it is important to note that the Web commumty is more heavily mternatonal than many othet seetors of the mnformation technology industry, and one that tunetions on many levels. It includes those who build Web technologies, those who develop content for it, and those who use its content. While it is unhkely that consistent detinitions ot accessibility and universal design will prevail throughout such a divetse and geogtaphueally dhspetsed community, it is rematkable to observe the sptead of coneepts such as accessibidity and devtce independence that has already occurred in a relatively short time. Efforts to promote awareness of the need for Web accessibility first emerged in 1995. In 1997, with the help ot Mike Paciello trom the Yut Rubinsky Insight Foundation, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) took on a project called the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAD). Since 1997, WAl's eftorts, coupled with the eftorts of many other organizations in the field, have generated a steady steam ot mformaton about the benefits of accessibility toward ensurmng that the Web is usable by all. Duting 1999 and 000, this coineided with the explosive growth of the mobile phone mdustty. As mobile phones have converged into Web space, a huigh degtee ot mntetest has emetged within the industty around cattyover benefits of accessi bility fot device undependence in genetal, and mobile phone access in particulai (see Chap. 65. "Fundamentals and Prorities tor Design of Information and Telecommunication Tech nologies," by Vanderheiden). An intormal comparison by Daniel Dardaitlet. W3C (unpublished), of the difference between provisions in the Web Content Accessibidity Guidefines and provisions that would likely be included in a hypothettcal set ot gudelines for device independenee showed a dif ferential of only petcent. Whule this has not yet been formally substantiated, it indicates a potentially minimal difference between the provisions needed for accessibility and those needed to ensure device independence of Web content. This perspective is reinforced by growing support for accessibility among those involved in the Wireless Access Protocol Forum (WAP Forum) and other organizations providing access to the Web over mobile phones. For instance, at the Ninth International World Wide Web Conference (WWW9) held in May 2000, almost every presenter from the mobile phone industry spontaneously mentioned during their presentations that W3C/WAI's accessibility guidelines provided a strong foundation for ensuring access to content via mobile phones. Less is known about the similarities between provisions supporting other dimensions of universal design, such as internationalization and usability, in part because there are not yet guidelines for those other dimensions with which accessibility provisions could be compared. Consideration of other dimensions would very likelv broaden that differential. For instance. effective design for internationalization requires not only following accessibility checkpoints (e.g., "Identify the primary natural language of a document," and "Clearly identify changes in the natural language of a document's text and any text equivalents") but also recommendations on the use of a particular character model, such as Universal Character Set (Unicode/ISO) 10646), which supports more universal access for the world's languages. Developing appropriate universal design guidelines in the context of the Web would presuppose existence of guidelines-type provisions, comparable to the accessibility guidelines, within each of the areas of device independence, internationalization, and so on. ## The Role of the Web Accessibility Initiative at the World Wide Web Consortium The W3C is an international, vendor-neutral, primarily industry consortium that develops the core technologies—the data formats and transport protocols-used on the Web. It has close to 500 Member organizations, and is hosted at MIT's Laboratory for Computer Science in the United States, at Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique (INRIA) in France, and at the Shonan-Fujisawa campus of Keio University in Japan. WAI is one of four domains, or areas of work, of W3C. W3C's Web Accessibility Initiative addresses accessibility at several levels to identify and promote comprehensive accessibility solutions for the Web. On the most fundamental level, WAI ensures that the core technologies of the Web can support accessibility—for instance, by supporting mechanisms for deviceindependent navigation and access to accessibility information in HyperText Markup Language (HTML 4.0) (Raggett et al., 1999), Cascading Style Sheets Level 2 (CSS 2) (Bos et al., 1998), Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL) 1.0 (Hoschka, 1998), Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0, second edition (Bray et al., 2000), and a score of other evolving Web technologies (World Wide Web Consortium, 1994–2000). WAI also provides guidance on how to use Web technologies in ways that support accessibility, through three WAl guidelines and related documents. In the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines L.0) (WCAG L.0) (Chisholm et al., 1999), WAI describes how to design Web sites that are accessible, and vet also are advanced from a technical and design standpoint. The Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (ATAG 1.0) (Treviranus et al., 2000a) addresses developers of the software used to build Web sites bv providing guidance on the use of Web standards, on support for accessible authoring practices, and on accessibility of the user interface. The User Agent Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (UAAG 1.0) (Gunderson et al., 2000b) provides guidance for user agents, including browsers, multimedia players, and their inter-operability with assistive technologies, focusing on accessibility of the user interface and on rendering of accessibility information on Web sites. In addition to development of these guidelines, WAl works on different approaches for evaluation and retrofitting of Web sites and transformation tools for inaccessible sites; develops education and outreach materials; and coordinates with other organizations researching future Web technologies. ## 66.3 A POLICY CONTEXT FOR ACCESSIBILITY OF THE WEB Over the past several years, guidelines and other resources developed by WAI have emerged as a common reference point throughout many policies relating to Web accessibility around the world. Because the Web is not a single entity but rather a decentralized information space to which people all over the world—businesses, community organizations, governments, and individuals-contribute in various ways, it is extremely unlikely that any one set of laws or policies will apply consistently across all these communities around the world. ## Regulation of Rapidly Evolving Technologies In many areas of our technologically complex society, it is difficult for public policy to keep pace with the rapid evolution of emerging technologies. Technology that may seem a curiosity one year, and a luxury the next, suddenly emerges an essential element of business communications--but often, this happens before policy makers have learned how to use the new technologies, let alone had time to consider meaningful policies that might allay any potentially negative ramifications. Similarly, the user community cannot always learn about the potential impact of each new technology at a sufficiently rapid pace to articulate and protect their interests. An instance of this, which has received much media attention, is the threat to personal privacy engendered by the growth of the Internet, with many people not even aware of privacy risks that are caused by simple interactions with this new medium. Typically, the media play a role in educating the public, including people with disabilities, on new issues. But the phenomenon of the “disability digital divide"—the effects of accessibility barriers to new technologies combined with affordability issues that disproportionately impact the disability community—has received little attention from the media. Without a fluency in the technical jargon, an understanding of the technology development and standardization process within industry, or a command of the existing information technology policy context, the disability community has less chance of gaining timely access to key policy discussions that can affect the extent to which accessibility and universal design are considered in new technologies. ## Public Policy Trends Around Web Accessibility Approaches to regulating the accessibility of information technologies generally fall into one of several categories. Governments can establish that individuals with disabilities have a civil right to certain kinds of information; they can require that products or services sold within a country must meet certain criteria for accessibility; or they can require that information technologies procured by certain kinds of organizations must be accessible. The first approach—establishing that access to certain kinds of information by individuals with disabilities is a civil right—is usually tied to a disability discrimination act, such as the Disability Discrimination Act in Australia or the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in the United States. Recently, as in Portugal, some legislation has directly required Web accessibility. Usually, this approach applies primarily to government Web sites, but in some cases, it can extend beyond those to apply to some kinds of commercial sites. This has been the interpretation in both Australia ànd the United States. In the United States, a congressional hearing in February 2000 attempted to reverse the U.S. Department of Justice opinion issued in September 1996 (Patrick, 1996) that the ADA applies to the Internet and the Web, but the hearing was unsuccessful in this regard. A hypothetical example of the second approach might have been Sec. 255 of the Telecommunications Act, which requires accessibility, to the extent readily achievable, of all telecommunications products and services sold in the United States—if the definition of telecommunications products and services had been interpreted differently. As it was, the definition of telecommunications products and services excludes most Internet- and Web-related information and services in the regulations promulgated by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission to enforce Sec. 255. Given that few other countries have legislation similar to Sec. 255, we have yet to see what effect that type of provision might have on accessibility of the Web. For an example of the third approach, we again turn to the United States. Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1998 sets requirements for accessibility of information technology procured by the federal government. It has the dual goal of ensuring that federal employees with disabilities have comparable access as nondisabled employees to the information technology in their workplaces, and that members of the public with disabilities will have access to government information in accessible formats. Among other aspects of federal information technology procurement addressed by Sec. 508 are federal Web sites. The final rule for Sec. 508, issued in December 2000 (Access Board, 2000), included reuse of some provisions from WCAG 1.0, albeit with some rewording, additions, and omissions of certain items. While these regulations apply only to government Web sites in the United States, Web design and development represent a nontrivial part of the estimated \$27 billion U.S. government information technology marketplace. Section 508 is, therefore, expected to have a constructive ripple effect on the Web industry in the United States with regard to awareness of accessibility, development of accessibility expertise within the Web design community, and demand for authoring tools that support accessible design. The period of 1999 through 2000 has been an active one for policy developments related to Web accessibility. WAI maintains a listing of policy reference links providing more detail on the following: • Canada has established a Common Look and Feel for the Internet (Treasury Board of Canada, Secretariat, 2000), which references priority levels 1 and 2 of WCAG 1.0 as requirements for federal Web sites. • In Australia, the Equal Opportunity Commission held hearings on Internet accessibility, which resulted in requiring conformance to WAI guidelines for Web sites (Office for Government Online, 2000). • In Europe, a European Union Ministerial Conference adopted the WAI guidelines as requirements for European Union and member-state Web sites (eEurope 2002, 2000). • A number of individual European countries passed or started action on Web accessibility requirements for government sites, including France, Ireland, Portugal, Sweden, and the United Kingdom (Brewer, 1998–2000). • The United Nations Standard Rules for the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities provide a normative framework for public policies that includes access to the physical environment as well as access to information. Sara-Serrano and Mathiason (Chap. 11, "United Nations Standards and Rules") highlight this policy, and also highlight implementation strategies developed by several countries in collaboration with the United Nations. ## 66.4 GUIDELINES FOR ACCESSIBILITY OF WEB CONTENT From 1997 to 1999, W3C/WAI developed the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (WCAG 1.0) with the help of organizations from around the world interested in Web accessibility. These organizations included representatives of industry, disability communities, accessibility research, and government, participating in or contributing to development of WCAG 1.0 according to W3C process. Their goal was to develop authoritative guidance on what constitutes an accessible Web site. This proved to be a complex task. There were already a number of Web accessibility guidelines in existence, but few of these guidelines comprehensively addressed the needs of all disability groups, and few were up to date with the latest Web technologies. It took extensive exploration of issues and consensus building to come up with accessibility solutions that were cross-disability, that were forward-compatible with emerging Web technologies such as XML applications, and that also took into account the prevalence of “legacy" browsers and assistive technologies used by many people with disabilities. The result of this effort was a document with 14 guidelines—abstract principles of accessible Web site design—and a total of 65 discrete checkpoints correlating with those guidelines. These checkpoints are also available via a checklist that breaks out the checkpoints according to three priority levels, the priority l checkpoints being those most crucial for ensuring accessibility of Web sites. In addition, the working group produced a techniques document as a reference note. Techniques for Web Content Accessibilitv Guidelines 1.0 (Chisholm, Vanderheiden, and Jacobs, 2000) includes nonnormative implementation approaches for each of the WCAG 1.0 checkpoints and provides detail regarding language-specific markup (e.g., for HTML, CSS, SMIL, etc.). Additional implementation support materials of a promotion or training nature have been developed separately through WAI's Education and Outreach Working Group. This approach of developing complementary resources, including an authoritative guidelines document, prioritized list of checkpoints, an accompanying nonnormative techniques document, and additional promotion and training materials, has also been followed for WAI's other guidelines. As Web technologies evolve, WAI updates each of these resources as necessary to address new technologies. ## General Principles for Accessibility of Web Content The WCAG 1.0 starts with a discussion of two overriding themes of accessibility on Web pages: (1) ensuring that Web content will "transform gracefully," and (2) "making content understandable and navigable." In explaining graceful transformation, WCAG 1.0 states: Pages that transform gracefully remain accessible despite any of the constraints described in the introduction, including physical, sensory, and cognitive disabilities, work constraints, and technological barriers. Here are some keys to designing pages that transform gracefully: • Separate structure from presentation (refer to the difference between content, structure, and presentation). • Provide text (including text equivalents). Text can be rendered in ways that are available to almost all browsing devices and accessible to almost all users. Create documents that work even if the user cannot see and/or hear. Provide information that serves the same purpose or function as audio or video in ways suited to alternate sensory channels as well. This does not mean creating a prerecorded audio version of an entire site to make it accessible to users who are blind. Users who are blind can use screen reader technology to render all text information in a page. • Create documents that do not rely on one type of hardware. Pages should be usable by people without mice, with small screens, low resolution screens, black and white screens, no screens, with only voice or text output, etc. ## In explaining the intent of making content understandable and navigable, WCAG 1.0 states: Content developers should make content understandable and navigable. This includes not only making the language clear and simple, but also providing understandable mechanisms for navigating within and between pages. Providing navigation tools and orientation information in pages will maximize accessibility and usability. Not all users can make use of visual clues such as image maps, proportional scroll bars, side-by-side frames, or graphics that guide sighted users of graphical desktop browsers. Users also lose contextual information when they can only view a portion of a page, either because they are accessing the page one word at a time (speech synthesis or Braille display), or one section at a time (small display, or a magnified display). Without orientation information, users may not be able to understand very large tables, lists, menus, etc. ## Overview of Guidelines for Accessible Web Content The 14 individual guidelines in WCAG 1.0 state abstract principles of Web site design: 1. Provide equivalent alternatives to auditory and visual content. 2. Don't rely on color alone. 3. Use markup and style sheets and do so properly. 4. Clarify natural language usage. 5. Create tables that transform gracefully. 6. Ensure that pages featuring new technologies transform gracefully. 7. Ensure user control of time-sensitive content changes. 8. Ensure direct accessibility of embedded user interfaces. 9. Design for device independence. 10. Use interim solutions. 11. Use W3C technologies and guidelines. 12. Provide context and orientation information. 13. Provide clear navigation mechanisms. 14. Ensure that documents are clear and simple. These guidelines are presented here only as an overview. When using them for Web site design, one should refer to the full guidelines with explanatory text and the specific checkpoints against which implementation can be evaluated. ## Implementation of Web Content Accessibility Guidelines Some of the most common questions about Web accessibility involve the cost of compliance. Perhaps, surprisingly, accessible design in some cases actually presents a cost savings in the development and maintenance of sites; in other cases it entails an effective return on investment given that it enables a deeper market penetration. In some cases, receptivity to Web accessibility solutions is at first colored by urban legends seemingly spawned by the backlash against accessibility of the built environment still prevalent in some sectors of society. These urban legends include misconceptions such as "the WAI guidelines ban the use of color or graphics on the Web." Quite to the contrary, WCAG 1.0 encourages the use of color and graphics on accessible Web sites, as these can help with navigation and with differentiation of types of content. ## 66.5 GUIDELINES FOR ACCESSIBILITY OF WEB-BASED APPLICATIONS Accessibility of the Web relies on implementation of complementary solutions at different levels. While addressing the accessibility of the Web content itself provides an immediate—and crucialstarting point, it is also necessary to increase the accessibility of the software used on the Web. There are several kinds of applications (software) relevant to Web accessibility: user agents (applications that one uses to access Web content, such as browsers, multimedia players, and assistive technologies used by some people with disabilities), authoring tools (applications used to create Web content and Web sites), and various utilities used to evaluate, transform, or retrofit Web sites for accessibility. ## Guidelines for Authoring Tools Web authoring tools hold the greatest promise for increasing the amount of accessible content on the Web. Consider, first, that the Web is an "information space," where tens of millions of people are already publishing information. Then, consider the effort involved in educating every one of those people to understand and use accessibility guidelines whenever they put information on the Web. It quickly becomes apparent that it is far easier to ensure that the software that people use to publish Web content makes it easy to create accessible Web sites than to expect each person to follow accessibility guidelines. W3C's Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (ATAG 1.0) explain to the developers of authoring tools how to develop software that facilitates the process of producing accessible content. For instance, the guidelines explain that for a software feature that allows an author to add an image to a Web page, it is important to have a user-configurable prompt available to remind the author to add alternative text to the image. In addition, ATAG 1.0 explains how to ensure that the authoring tools themselves are accessible to people with disabilities, so that people will be able to publish information to the Web, whether they have a disability or not. For example, mouse-driven commands should also be able to be activated by keyboard strokes, since authors with physical or visual disabilities might not be able to use a mouse. ATAG 1.0 has seven guidelines, or abstract principles. These are further elaborated by 28 specific checkpoints prioritized in three levels, as are the WCAG checkpoints. The seven guidelines include: 1. Support accessible authoring practices. 2. Generate standard markup. 3. Support the creation of accessible content. 4. Provide ways of checking and correcting inaccessible content. 5. Integrate accessibility solutions into the overall look and feel. 6. Promote accessibility in help and documentation. 7. Ensure that the authoring tool is accessible to authors with disabilities. As with WCAG I.0, WAI has produced complementary resources for authoring tool accessibility, which are being updated as Web technologies evolve. These include a checklist of prioritized checkpoints, a nonnormative techniques document with implementation detail, and additional promotional materials such as a “frequently asked questions" (FAQs) page. ## Guidelines for Browsers, Multimedia Players, and Assistive Technologies Another area where improved accessibility is needed is in the browsers, multimedia players, and assistive technologies that people use to access the Web. WAI provides guidance for developers of these types of applications through the User Agent Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (UAAG 1.0). The primary goal of UAAG 1.0 is to increase accessibility of browsers and multimedia players for people with disabilities, for instance, by explaining the need to render certain types of accessibility information such as long descriptions for complex charts or graphs, or captions for audio files. In addition, UAAG 1.0 addresses interoperability between mainstream browsers or multimedia players, and various kinds of assistive technologies, such as screen readers, screen magnifiers, or speech recognition software (see Goldberg, Chap. 67, “Universal Design in Film and Media"). There is some synergy between the provisions of UAAG 1.0 and WCAG 1.0: once certain accessibility improvements are implemented within mainstream browsers and multimedia players, related provisions within WCAG 1.0 will drop priority levels, or will be eliminated entirely. To put this another way, the sooner user agent developers implement UAAG I.0, the fewer WCAG 1.0 checkpoints Web content developers will need to follow. For example, WCAG 1.0 includes a priority 2–level provision stating that Until user agents allow users to turn off spawned windows, do not cause pop-ups or other windows to appear and do not change the current window without informing the user Therefore, once most browsers and multimedia players allow the user to control window popups, Web content developers would not have to restrict their use of pop-up windows. UAAG 1.0 includes the following 10 guidelines or abstract principles: 1. Support input and output device independence. 2. Ensure user access to all content. 3. Allow the user to configure the user agent not to render some content that may reduce accessibility. 4. Ensure user control of styles. 5. Observe system conventions and standard interfaces. 6. Implement specifications that promote accessibility. 7. Provide navigation mechanisms. 8. Orient the user. 9. Allow configuration and customization. 10. Provide accessible product documentation and help. These guidelines are further elaborated by specific checkpoints, prioritized in three different levels. The document is accompanied by a checklist of those checkpoints, and by a techniques reference note providing implementation detail for different markup languages. ## Implementation of Guidelines for Web Applications Software development cycles often range from 6 to 18 months. There is, therefore, a very different implementation pattern for accessibility solutions in Web applications compared with Web content where one can implement WCAG 1.0 directly on a Web site in a short amount of time. Applications developers typically must wait until a guideline is finished before they can implement the majority of its provisions into the feature set of a given product. The consensus-based W3C process provides opportunities for developers to get an early perspective on features that they may eventually want to implement, by participating in the working group, commenting on drafts, and/or prototyping implementations of accessibility guidelines while they are still in progress. Often, the input of product engineers makes the crucial difference in ensuring the feasibility of implementation of accessibility features, since these features must compete with cascades of other priorities under consideration within product development groups. A number of developers have taken the opportunity to participate in one or more of these matters, thereby getting a heads-up on potential features of either ATAG 1.0) or UAAG 1.0); these and other developers are working on implementations of WAI guidelines as this book goes to press. ## 66.6 ACCESSIBILITY OF CORE WEB TECHNOLOGIES Much of the work needed to ensure the future accessibility of the Web is at the level of what is called core Web technologies. These are the markup languages such as HTML, which was the original common document format on the Web. But instead of one Web markup language as in 1990), 10 years later the W3C “Technical Reports" page shows 20 to 30 different specifications for markup and presentation languages, each of which must be reviewed for potential accessibility issues while in development. As W3C technologies continually advance through stages of development from initial concept to finished specification, WAI participants review these specifications for potential impact on accessibility. This process starts with reviewing working group charters, requirements documents, early working drafts, then last call drafts, candidate recommendations, and proposed recommendations, and continues until the specifications are issued as final W3C recommendations. Such reviews have resulted in improvements such as better support for representation of alternative content and easier navigation in HTML 4.0; user override of author style sheets in CSS 2; the capacity for synchronized captions in SMIL 1.0); and accessibility features in Scalable Vector Graphics 1.0 (SVG 1.0). Many of these improvements, which would not have been possible without the close integration of WAI's work within W3C, are detailed in W3C Notes [Accessibility Features of CSS (Jacobs and Brewer, 1999), Accessibility Features of SMIL (Koivunen and Jacobs, 1999), and Accessibility Features of SVG (McCathieNevile and Koivunen, 2000)]. ## 66.7 TOOLS FOR EVALUATING AND RETROFITTING WEB SITES Almost everyone who tries making an accessible Web site wants some way to evaluate that Web site. WÀI provides a centralized forum for coordination of development of a variety of evaluation and retrofitting tools through the Evaluation and Repair Tools Working Group, in which many tool developers participate. One popular evaluation tool is Bobby, developed by the Center for Applied Special Technology (CAST, 1998–2000). This accessibility checker is available in online and downloadable versions, and can provide quick feedback on a number of accessibility problems on Web sites. The WAVE (Kasday, 2000), currently under development by Len Kasday, provides a different type of feedback on Web site accessibility. Lynx-me (Oskoboiny), which is a Lynx emulator (Lynx is a text-only browser), provides yet another type of feedback on Web site accessibility. There are also several retrofitting tools under development, such as A-Prompt (Treviranus et al., 1999–2000) from the University of Toronto's Adaptive Technology Resource Centre, which identifies accessibility problems and then walks the page author through accessibility solutions for those problems. When evaluating or retrofitting a Web site, it can be most effective to use several of these tools in combination. WAI has fostered dialogue between users and developers regarding desirable feature sets for accessibility checkers and retrofitting tools, and has captured recommended approaches in a W3C Note, Techniques for Accessibility Evaluation and Repair Tools (Ridpath and Chisholm, 2000). WAI has found that its most important role in this regard is to develop common resources that can help increase the functionality and the quality of evaluation, repair, and transformation tools. Given the enormity of the Web community and the complexity of some aspects of Web accessibility, it is essential to have a variety of materials available to both promote awareness of the need for Web accessibility, and to support training on how to implement Web accessibility. WAI's Education and Outreach Working Group focuses on this area. Education and outreach materials range from online curricula to videos and hard-copy promotional materials. The Curriculum for Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (Letourneau and Freed, 2000), an online and/or downloadable electronic curriculum that explains the guidelines in detail and provides marked-up examples of each checkpoint, is in use in a variety of Web training courses. Another popular implementation support material started as a challenge to see how many key concepts of accessible Web site development could fit on two sides of a business card. The result of this was the Quick Tips to Make Accessible Web Sites (World Wide Web Consortium, 2000) available in a vinyl business card in 11 languages with more on the way. WAI has distributed over 100,000 of these, and the demand continues to increase. These are not complete guidelines, so Web site designers must follow the URL on the card to refer to the complete guidelines, which include information critical to understanding and implementing the Quick Tips. Additional educational or outreach materials include frequently asked question (FAQ) sheets, technical reference notes, links to policy reference pages, and a variety of other implementation support materials for WCAG 1.0. ## 66.9 CONCLUSIONS In general, much of the Web community has seemed receptive to learning about Web accessibility and appreciative of the economic benefits that universal design brings for the proliferation of new devices to access the Web. In a field that is evolving and expanding as rapidly as the World Wide Web, however, this receptivity does not automatically translate into widespread and comprehensive implementation of accessibility solutions. Therefore, one challenge is to ensure that the availability of accessibility solutions keeps pace with—or, better yet, outstrips—the availability of new technologies for the Web. Another challenge will be to continue to push awareness of the need for accessibility out to the ever-expanding circle of people participating in the Web community. In some countries, this push for accessibility awareness parallels a broadening societal appreciation of the need for accessibility and universal design; in other countries, the accessibility message may be quite new. A further challenge is to articulate how the principles of Web accessibility work in specific application areas such as online learning environments and electronic commerce. As the Web becomes more and more essential in our societies, the success or failure of these efforts will determine the extent to which large parts of the population are included in or excluded from social and economic interactions. Continued international collaboration around development of Web accessibility solutions will also be essential toward ensuring accessibility of the Web. As an increasing number of governments adopt Web accessibility requirements, it is important to converge on common solutions and expectations for Web accessibility, in order to avoid the pitfalls of conflicting guidelines and requirements, which can create confusion among Web content developers and narrow the market for evaluation tools, retrofitting tools, and authoring tools that support production of accessible content. To a far greater extent than with the built environment, it is important to avoid the fragmentation of standards for Web accessibility, since so many Web accessibility solutions rely on complementary approaches on several levels at once. WAI will continue to play an important role in bringing together international collaborations around Web accessibility; these collaborations should reinforce an awareness of the importance of harmonizing standards. Access Board, Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility Standards, 2000; http://www.accessboard.gov/sec508/nprm.htm Bos, Bert, Håkon Wium Lie, Chris Lilley, and Ian Jacobs, Cascading Style Sheets, Level 2 Specification (CSS2), W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1998; http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-CSS2 Bray, Tim, Jean Paoli, ('. M. Sperberg-McQueen, and Eve Maler, Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0, 2nd ed., 2000; http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml Brewer, Judy, Policies Relating to Web Accessibility, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1998–2000; http://www. w3.org/WAI/References/Policy Center for Applied Special Technology (CAST), Bobby, 1998–2000; http://www.cast.org/bobby Chisholm, Wendy, Gregg Vanderheiden, and Ian Jacobs, Techniques for Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000; http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG10-TECHS , and —, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1999; http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG10 Dürst, Martin J. WWW Character Model, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1999; http://www.w3.org/Talks/ 1999/0901-charmod-mjd/Overview eEurope 2002, An Information Society for All, Participation for All in the Knowledge-Based Economy, European Commission, 2000; http://europa.eu.int/comm/information\_society/eeurope/actionplan/ actline2c\_en.htm Evaluation, Transformation, and Repair Tools for Web Content Accessibility, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1998–2000; http://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/existingtools.html Fact Sheet for Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines 1.0, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000; http://www. w3.org/2000/02/ATAG-FAQ Fact Sheet for Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1999; http://www. w3.org/1999/05/WCAG-REC-fact Gunderson, Jon, and Ian Jacobs, Techniques for User Agent Accessibility, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000a; http://www.w3.org/TR/UAAG10-TECHS -, and Eric Hansen, User Agent Accessibility Guidelines (UAAG) 1.0 (working draft), W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000b; http://www.w3.org/TR/UAAG10 Hoschka, Philipp, Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL), W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1998; http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-smil Jacobs, Ian, and Judy Brewer, Accessibility Features of CSS, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1999; http://www. w3.org/TR/CSS-access Kasday, Len, The WAVE: Pennsylvania's Initiative on Assistive Technology, Institute on Disabilities/UAP, Temple University, Philadelphia, 2000; http://www.temple.edu/inst\_disabilities/piat/wave Koivunen, Marja-Riitta, and Ian Jacobs, Accessibility Features of SMIL, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1999; http://www.w3.org/TR/SMIL-access Letourneau, Chuck, and Geoff Freed, Curriculum for Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000; http://www.w3.org/WAI/wcag-curric McCathie-Nevile, Charles, and Marja-Riitta Koivunen, Accessibility Features of SVG, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000; http://www.w3.org/TR/SVG-access Office for Government Online, Accessibility, Commonwealth of Australia, 2000; http://www.govonline. gov.au/projects/standards/accessibility.htm Oskoboiny, Gerald, Lynx-me, http://ugweb.cs.ualberta.ca/-gerald/lynx-me.cgi Patrick, Deval, Letter to U.S. Senator Tom Harkin, 1996; http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/foia/tal712.txt Raggett, Dave, Arnaud Le Hors, and Ian Jacobs, HTML 4.01 Specification, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1999; http://www.w3.org/TR/html401/ Ridpath, Chris, and Wendy Chisholm, Techniques for Accessibility Evaluation and Repair Tools, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000; http://www.w3.org/TR/AERT Technical Reports, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1995–2000; www.w3.org/TR Treasury Board of Canada, Secretariat, Common Look and Feel for the Internet, 2000; http://www. cio-dpi.gc.ca/clf-upe/index\_e.asp Treviranus, Jutta, Charles McCathie-Nevile, Ian Jacobs, and Jan Richards, Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines 1.0, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000a; http://www.w3.org/TR/ATAG10 , and , Techniques for Authoring Tool Accessibility, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000b; http://www.w3.org/TR/ATAG10-TECHS -, et al., A-Prompt, a Web Accessibility Verifier, University of Toronto, Adaptive Technology Resource Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 1999–2000; http://aprompt.snow.utoronto.ca Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1997–2000; http://www.w3.org/WAI Wireless Access Protocol Forum (WAP Forum), Wireless Access Protocol Forum Ltd., 1999–2000; http:// www.wapforum.com -, Quick Tips to Make Accessible Web Sites, W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 2000; http://www.w3.org/ WAI/References/QuickTips World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), W3C (MIT, INRIA, Keio), 1994–2000; http://www.w3.org World Wide Web 9 Conference, International WWW Conference Committee, 1999; http://www.www9.org