CHAPTER 67 # UNIVERSAL DESIGN IN FILM AND MEDIA Larry Goldberg, B.A. CPB/WGBH National Center for Accessible Media, Boston, Massachusetts ## 67.1 INTRODUCTION This chapter describes how universal design principles are applied to mass media, in particular film and television of the present and future. Though rarely referred to as “universal design" by the producers of the media or the facilitators of its accessibility for people with disabilities, activities which open up media to all demonstrate universal design concepts in clear and pragmatic ways. From print to silent film to radio, and then to television (both analog and digital) and the varieties of emerging multimedia, when made accessible for people with sensory or physical disabilities, these media become more useful for all users. In short, as in so many other areas, accessible, or inclusive, or universally designed media are simply better media. ## 67.2 BACKGROUND In film and other media, perhaps the best examples of universal design are those that are inadvertent or unintended by the creator of the technology or content. More than 100 years ago, the United States experienced the launch of a new medium and technology that foreshadowed the massive impacts of the information technologies of the late twentieth century. That medium was motion pictures, and from their first moments, movies for mass audiences demonstrated how quickly and pervasively a medium can affect society. The movies also had a purely unintended universal design aspect. In their inability to provide sound, “silent pictures" instead included title cards and subtitles, in essence the precursor of closed captions, that proved inclusive of audiences with hearing impairments. Of course, people who were blind or had visual impairments were as underserved as they are today (or were, until a new development in movie-going, discussed later in this chapter, was developed in the early 1990s). And, as is so common in today's phenomenally rapid pace of technology development, the next "upgrade" in movie technology—the “talkies" introduced in 1929—removed the heretofore inclusive feature for one group of users while adding improvements for others. All of this carly demonstration of universal design and its lack was inadvertent and unnoted by the designers and developers of the day. Until the closing days of the twentieth century, accessible and inclusive means of understanding and enjoying media, particularly for people with sensory impairments, followed the pattern of the transition and evolution of movie technology. That is, all access has been via retrofitted enhancement, more properly called "assistive technology" than “universal design." But as the 1990s came to a close, and as analog paradigms gave way to the all-encompassing digital domain of the new Information Age, built-in solutions and inadvertent inclusive design became more and more possible and even prominent. All forms of media have been affected by their migration from analog to digital, and the opportunities for accessibility have followed rapidly. ## 67.3 PRINT No medium has demonstrated such accessibility successes and failures as the world of print as it evolved technologically and arrived in the digital age. From the days of quill and ink to movable type and the printing press to electronic typesetting and distribution, print publishing has come ever closer to being inherently and automatically accessible to the very people most closed out by the medium—people who are blind or visually impaired. In each of the developments in print and publishing technology, an opportunity was presented to be more inclusive for individuals who require alternate means of accessing information, whether in large print, via audio output, or on a Braille display. When publishers of books, newspapers, periodicals, and other print forms began to mark up and typeset their materials on computers, software was developed and used which complicated the transference to alternate presentation formats. Quark Express and the other leading software tools for electronic typesetting added certain proprietary mark-up codes that required tedious reformatting to assure compatibility and readability by the tools in most common use by people who are blind or visually impaired. Nonetheless, such reformatting can and has been done so that, for instance, students who are blind can gain access to the electronic contents of textbooks used in the classroom. In 1992, the Media Access Research and Development Office of the WGBH Educational Foundation' in Boston was funded by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting to begin An Investigation into Making Daily Newspapers Accessible to Print-Disabled People. What emerged in March of 1993 was a report of "The Print Access Project," which discussed the recent history and future technological options for providing access to print materials, newspapers in particular, for what has now become an accepted terminology: print-disabled people. The implication of this language is that not only do people with visual impairments have difficulty gaining access to print materials, but so do people with dyslexia and other learning disabilities and people with certain mobility and physical impairments. While representing one of the most comprehensive surveys of the field at that time (astute readers will note that the date—March of 1993—is also notable as the beginning of the growth period of the Internet's World Wide Web), from this point on virtually all of the report's conclusions, and much of the worlds of computing, commerce, and common user access to global information, would require drastic reevaluation. The Mosaic browser was first being widely tested and distributed at that time, and one year later, Marc Andreesen and his colleagues would leave NCSA (the National Center for Supercomputing Applications) to form the Mosaic Communications Corporation (now Netscape). That 1993 report on print access covered such forms of print access as radio reading services, dial-in talking newspapers, audiotext, and computer-based information services such as Compuserve on-line, videotext and wire services, and the emerging digital newspapers that were experimenting with data delivery to the home via broadcasting and private carriers. Regarding news delivered via on-line computer services, the report noted: Generally, on-lines are commercial services: their information is available for a fee. These services vary in the amount of newspaper information they offer as well as the format in which it comes. Some services carry whole newspapers. CompuServe, for example, has a database with the full text of 48 major newspapers, but they are always a day or two old. Other services only offer access to "re-packaged" news. Prodigy rewrites news information gathered from Associated Press and other wire services; its subscribers have no direct access to newspapers at all. (WGBH Print Access Project, 1993, 13) As an indication of how the years have changed the landscape of access to print media, CompuServe and Netscape are now owned by America Online, which had only 500,000 subscribers in 1993, compared to today's 28 million in the first quarter of 2001—and Prodigy, which was once the world leader and a pioneer Internet Service Provider (ISP), had only 2.5 million subscribers at the start of 2001. The Yahoo! search engine lists thousands of local and national newspapers online, from the Shelbyville Daily Union in Illinois to the New York Times (which is updated on-line hourly and available via fax as well as on the Web) and the Wall Street Journal, one of the most successful subscription-based online newspapers. The Print Access Report's “Survey of Future News Options" examined radio-, telephone-, and computer-based print access technologies for the coming years, and, while missing the Web boat, did look over the horizon toward the still-anticipated news appliance of the future: Here we find real advances possible, not just in pathways for delivery but in major qualitative steps toward true access. The most specific vision for a future news delivery system comes from the Knight-Ridder newspaper chain and proceeds from the assumption that ink-on-paper newspapers are obsolescent. One device that could replace them is called a multimedia panel, a task-specific computer appliance capable of delivering voice, sound, video, and print. Designers envision something the size of a magazine, designed for reading and browsing material from sources like local, national and international newspapers. Information would come in to the panel as digital data, either by wire or fiber optic cable, or over the air as a broadcast or satellite signal. As long as it was connected or tuned in, the panel could remain constantly up to date with news, stock quotes, sports scores or whatever the user wanted, and could, for instance, be set to notify the user of incoming bulletins, news stories containing key words, or designated stock price changes, much as specialized on-line services can now be set up. (WGBH Print Access Project, 1993, 20) What is common to all of the exciting options for delivery and receipt of electronic "print" is that each technology has both inherent challenges and solutions for access for people who are blind or visually impaired. The New York Times on the Web (www.nytimes.com) is available free of charge and offers up-to-the-minute international, national, and local news, all formatted using the standard HyperText Markup Language (HTML). HTML is a flexible authoring standard with long-accepted guidelines for providing equal access for people who are blind or visually impaired who use screen-reader-equipped computers. However, the Times, like so many other information-bearing Web sites, errs in a few small but critical ways in how they design their Web site, resulting in a frustrating experience for print-disabled people who use personal computers. The accessibility barriers of the Times Web site include, among other problems, an inconsistent use of “alt text tags." These are key words and phrases that “hide behind" a Web site's graphics and which are read out loud to blind computer users by their screen-reading software. In addition, the Times' overreliance on columns creates a confusing audible display for people who are blind. The guidelines for proper “Web content" authoring are available from the World Wide Web Consortium (www.w3.org/wai) and are discussed in Chap. 66, “Access to the World Wide Web: Technical and Policy Perspectives," by Brewer. While radio-reading services and dial-up newspapers will be important means for access for a few more years by people who are print-disabled, in feverish development are the “information appliance," “e-book," and “digital ink" projects at Knight-Ridder, MIT's Media Lab, Microsoft, and elsewhere. Already two competing pioneering products, the Rocket eBook (www.rocket-ebook.com) and the SoftBook (www.softbook.com), have been bought by a single corporation, and Microsoft is in intensive development of its own “information appliance." While universal design issues are being introduced to the developers of these new products and services, and customizable user interfaces are readily achievable, the rush to market has resulted in first-generation versions which neglect to include speech output, equal access to navigation elements, and industry-standard protocols which facilitate interface with existing access devices and software. In the case of these new means of accessing print, the universal design community has shown its awareness of the challenges and has demonstrated its readiness to meet the problems head-on. The Daisy Consortium (www.daisy.org), the Open-eBook Authoring Group, Recordings for the Blind and Dvslexic, the Library of Congress' National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (NLS), Productivity Works (makers of pwWebSpeak), and other public and private organizations are deeply involved in awareness-raising and standards development which bode well for the successful application of universal design thinking in the digital print world. ## 67.4 RADIO Though for most people radio is an aural-only medium, universal design and access issues have arisen since radio's golden age in the 1920s through the 1940s. Clearly a medium of choice for people who are blind or visually impaired, radio became a means of access to other media for just such users. With the advent of radio reading services in the late 1950s, often on the FM subcarrier of public radio stations, this early voice transmission service became a valued means of access to publications read by volunteers at specific times throughout the day. Newspapers, magazines, TV guide listings, and other publications are still to this day read over these niche broadcast networks for reception by people with specially tuned radio receivers. But for people who are deaf or hard-of-hearing, radio has been yet another pervasive communications technology enjoyed by the masses but not by them. For an insight into why a hearing-impaired person might want access to radio, one must look past the top 40, classic rock, K-Rock, smooth jazz, oldies, classical, and other music formats and think about talk radio, news, and highly thought of public radio programs such as Morning Edition and All Things Considered. Could a deaf person gain access to these programs? In what circumstances would a person who couldn't hear want, or need, access? Certainly a daily text transcript of the Howard Stern or Don Imus program would help certain people join in on watercooler conversation about the most recent outrageous and controversial programs of the day. But more important, and more achievable due to another new and exciting digital broadcast service, is access to essential weather and traffic information for drivers who have trouble hearing. Imagine driving, with no means of communication, on your local freeway at 5:30) P.M. on a normal weekday, trying to decide which of three or four routes home would avoid the traffic snarls ahead. Or think of driving in the Midwest's “Tornado Alley" as the skies darken and having no access to the emergency information being broadcast on every channel on your car radio! These are the situations where a deaf person needs access to radio, and where Radio Broadcast Data Services (RBDS) could play an important role. RBDS is a technology that enables radio stations to send short text messages to specially equipped radios with small visual displays. The text message may consist of the name of the song being played or the format of the station (i.e., jazz, NPR, talk). About 600 stations throughout the country now are using RBDS, according to the National Association of Broadcasters. The text displays on these high-end radios are normally 8 to 16 characters, which scroll through a small LCD window. But there is nothing to preclude a longer scrolling message about weather or traffic emergencies that could be printed out in a car like the receipts generated in taxicabs or like the tape of a telephone device for the deaf (TTD). If implemented, this digital technology could solve a long-standing problem for deaf and hard-of-hearing drivers. The coming wave for radio, in the home or on the road, is digital, satellite-delivered radio signals that will provide hundreds of channels of music, talk, and audio services to miniature, receive-only dishes that may be as small as a half-dollar. The opportunities for people who are blind or visually impaired include multiple channels of radio-reading services, perhaps categorized by content and type of publication. With so many channels of high-quality audio services available, there will be room not only for transferring previously analog formats such as radio reading already mentioned, but also for video description, a service that has to date only been available via broadcast and cable TV as part of their Secondary Audio Program subcarriers or on special videotapes. The challenges for access to this new medium are numerous as well. With so many channels to choose from, how will a user navigate among the hundreds of choices? The electronic program guide is likely to be complex and virtually unusable for persons with visual impairments. Solutions are at hand, via the use of speech synthesizers, which are getting cheaper and smaller in terms of the memory space they utilize. For blind users as well as drivers would can't, or shouldn't, take their eyes off the road, a speech in/speech out interface for digital radio command and control makes the ultimate universal design sense. In Chap. 50, "Universal Design in Automobile Design," Steinfeld and Steinfeld highlight guidelines for communication tools in cars. But there are no guarantees that developers of these new services are taking heed of these barriers and opportunities to serve all potential users. ## 67.5 TELEVISION Television was first demonstrated to the public at the 1939 New York World's Fair. Soon after, regular, experimental TV broadcasts began. This milestone was preceded by at least a decade of laboratory experiments and trial and error. But it wasn't until 1972—33 years later—that the first television program was (open) captioned for deaf and hard-of-hearing viewers. Finally in 1980, the public was introduced to closed captioning—four decades after they were introduced to television itself. In 1985, the first public demonstration of video description for blind and visually impaired people was broadcast, and the world's most pervasive medium finally had the means to become universally available and accessible. ## Television—Closed Captioning Closed captioning's early progress was slow but steady in the United States (see “Captioning Milestones" at www.wgbh.org/caption). With significant support from grants awarded competitively by the U.S. Department of Education and with logistical and financial support as well by the four major broadcast networks (ABC, CBS, NBC, and PBS), the early years of closed captioning opened up access for hundreds of thousands of deaf and hard-of-hearing viewers who purchased set-top boxes known as “closed caption decoders." These stand-alone decoders were the antithesis of universal design—they were separately purchased, expensive, and cumbersome pieces of electronic hardware that were difficult to install and that often required troubleshooting for effective operation. In later years, though the size of the hardware began to shrink along with its cost (from an early price tag of \$300 to less than \$200), the complexities for users grew. As homes began to add VCRs and cable converter boxes in ever greater numbers, a user in the late 1980s and early 1990s was confronted by a rat's nest of cables and connectors behind the TV set. All this to achieve equal access to what a hearing viewer received via audio control at the touch of a button. The solution for Americans arrived on the heels of the drafting and passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990. And though the eventual outcome is now cited as one of the best examples of universal design in widespread use today (right after the sidewalk curbcut), it did take an act of Congress to achieve. With no mandate for closed captioning in the ADA due to political concerns, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa and Representative Ed Markey of Massachusetts drafted a bill which came to be known as the "Television Decoder (ircuitry Act of 1990)." With little fanfare at first, but with growing excitement among deaf and hard-of-hearing consumers and only token opposition by the TV manufacturing industry, the Decoder Act was passed. Recognizing that inclusion of caption decoding capabilities in the tens of millions of 'IV sets manufactured and sold each year would result in such economies of scale that the cost was almost too small to measure, Congress mandated that ...apparatus designed to receive television pictures broadcast simultaneously with sound be equipped with built-in decoder circuitry designed to display closed captioned television transmissions when such apparatus is manufactured in the United States or imported for use in the United States, and its television picture screen is thirteen inches or greater in size. ## EFFECTIVE DATE .. . this Act shall take effect on July 1, 1993. (TV Decoder Circuitry Act, 1990) And with that one short piece of legislation, decades of struggle with the inaccessibility of the world's most popular medium were wiped away for people who are deaf or hard-ofhearing. Or so the drafters of the law hoped at the time. Although the Decoder Act created a huge installed base of potential end-users in rapid fashion, the marketplace leverage of more captioned programs did not occur as widely as had been hoped for or expected. It has been estimated that from 1980), when the first caption decoder box was sold, until 1993, when the first caption-equipped TV set hit the stores, no more than 450,000 set-top decoders were sold. In the first full year of the Decoder Act (1994), some 10 million caption-display-capable TV sets were sold in the United States. Unfortunately, though the major broadcast and pay-cable networks were arranging to have many of their programs captioned, many local TV stations, syndicators, and basic cable networks still lagged far behind in their captioning efforts throughout the mid-1990s. In 1994, the first drafts of the law which eventually became the Telecommunications Act of 1996 began to circulate and included a little-noticed requirement for closed captioning of all TV programs. As the first major rewrite of the original Communications Act of 1934, the bill was vast and complex, engendering major turf battles between regional telephone companies and long-distance carriers, between broadcasters and cablecasters, and among many other major corporations with billions of dollars at stake in how Congress wrote the bill and how the Federal Communications Commission passed its subsequent regulations. Language requiring accessibility to telecommunications hardware, systems, and services and to video programming resided in the bill as some of the least controversial aspects. With each new draft, the caption mandates remained. Finally, after some of the most intense lobbying and horse trading Capitol Hill has ever seen, the Act was passed and signed by President Clinton on February 8, 1996. It contained the following words: ## SEC. 713. VIDEO PROGRAMMING ACCESSIBILITY (b) Accountability Criteria—Within 18 months after such date of enactment, the Commission shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to implement this section. Such regulations shall ensure that— (1) video programming first published or exhibited after the effective date of such regulations is fully accessible through the provision of closed captions, except as provided in subsection (d); and (2) video programming providers or owners maximize the accessibility of video programming first published or exhibited prior to the effective date of such regulations through the provision of closed captions, except as provided in subsection (d). (c) Deadlines for Captioning.—Šuch regulations shall include an appropriate schedule of deàdlines for the provision of closed captioning of video programming. (Telecommunications Act of 1996) Except for certain narrow exemptions, it was now the law that television would have an irrefutable deadline for near-100 percent accessibility for people who are deaf or hard-ofhearing. After a public rulemaking process by the FCC, the schedule was set: New programs. Programs first published or exhibited on or after January 1, 1998. New programs must be captioned over an eight-year period. The FCC set the following guidelines to increase gradually the amount of captioning: At least 25 percent of new programs by January 1, 2000 At least 50 percent of new programs by January 1, 2002 At least 75 percent of new programs by January 1, 2004 100 percent of new programs by January 1, 2006 Older or pre-rule programs. Programs published or exhibited before January 1, 1998. At least 30 percent of pre-rule programs aired by nonexempt networks must be captioned by January 1, 2003. Seventy-five percent of older programs must be captioned over a ten-year period (by January 1, 2008). Captioning was now moving toward becoming a normal and accepted practice in the postproduction and budgetary aspects of the creation of TV programs. At this point, it became necessary to begin tackling one lingering access issue for television and one new one: First, access to television for people who are blind or visually impaired still lagged significantly behind that which had been fought for and won by deaf and hard-of-hearing viewers. And second, digital TV had begun to emerge as a major new opportunity and series of challenges for continuing the hard-won gains of activists in the disability community. ## International Captioning and Subtitling While at least five incompatible technologies exist worldwide to broadcast captions or subtitles, there are two dominant systems—line-21 and World System Teletext. Captions and subtitles created using these technologies have a different appearance, use different amounts of bandwidth in the vertical blanking interval, and require different consumer and professional hardware to create, encode, and decode. Line-21 captioning, used in North America, is the most prevalent technology and is employed for hundreds of hours of TV programming weekly, both live and prerecorded. In the United States, "captions" commonly means text on-screen for deaf and hard-ofhearing viewers, while “subtitles"are generally taken to be words on-screen for speakers of languages other than English. However, in England and elsewhere in the world, TV text services for deaf and hard-of-hearing viewers are often called “subtitling." The ability to record a program off-the-air or to rent a video with embedded and recoverable closed captions or subtitles is considered to be an essential feature of any captioning or subtitling system. In markets like Asia, Europe, and North America where VCR penetration is high, a home-recordable system is a must. Because the speed at which data are transmitted in the line-21 system is relatively slow (approximately 60 characters per second) and the data are robust (not readily degradable), the line-21 system easily supports home video closed caption display. Teletext subtitles, on the other hand, are delivered using a much faster system (approximately 12 kilobytes per second). This speed allows for the transmission of more data and multiple streams of subtitles, but makes it very difficult for the viewer to record a program off-air with the data intact. It also makes renting or purchasing a closed-subtitled video for home use impossible. The technology employed in the United States and abroad to make television accessible to deaf and hard-of-hearing viewers shows great promise for building additional bridges among people who speak different languages. In markets like Latin America, dual-language subtitling can make a program simultaneously accessible in both Spanish and Portuguese. In Asia, where a satellite feed often serves a vast audience that speaks several languages and is eager to learn English, a multilingual broadcast can help reach millions of additional viewers. Most important, as international broadcasters like CNN and MTV seek to supply a single, basic program service for markets that speak different languages, multilingual broadcasts offer a practical and logical solution. This practice has already begun in the United States, where CBS broadcasts the newsmagazine, 60) Minutes, with both English and Spanish captions. ## Television—Video Description Video description (sometimes known as audio description, descriptive video, or narrative description) is a service that makes television programs accessible to people who are blind or visually impaired. Video description provides narrated descriptions of the key visual elements of visual media without interfering with the audio or dialog of a program or movie. The narration describes visual elements such as actions, settings, body language, and graphics. Video description began at WGBH in Boston, where it is known by its trademark, Descriptive Video Service® or DVS". DVS provides description for programs on the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), the Turner Classic Movie (TCM) cable channel, Hollywood movies on video, and other visual media. DVS was launched nationally in 1990) by the WGBH Educational Foundation; home of the world's first caption agency, the Caption Center. Another provider of video description is the Narrative Television Network of Tulsa, Oklahoma (NTN). Initial training of WGBH's describers was provided by audio description pioneer Margaret Pfanstiehl, founder of the Washington Ear, a dial-up newspaper service. Funding for much of the video description available in the United States today has been provided by the U.S. Department of Education. In order to use DVS, a viewer must have cable service for accessing TCM and eventually other cable networks or live within range of a PBS station that carries DVS. The viewer must also have a stereo TV or a stereo VCR that includes the Second Audio Program (SAP) feature, standard on most newer stereo televisions and video cassette recorders. Inexpensive receivers that convert TV sets to stereo with SAP can also be purchased. Viewers who subscribe to cable should ask the cable company to "pass through" stereo with SAP. NTN provides “open-described" programs which do not require the use of any specialized equipment because the added narration is heard by all viewers. NTN also provides some public domain described programming through its Web site: www.narrativetv.com. DVS is broadcast free to viewers by 160 participating public television stations reaching 80 percent of U.S. television households. To carry DVS, a station must be equipped to broadcast in stereo with SAP. While popular home entertainment in the form of VHS videos can be encoded with closed captions and decoded at the user's option, video description cannot be hidden or encoded in the VHS tape format. Therefore, a DVS Home Video service was created by WGBH with Federal funds; these videos have their descriptions recorded in the open and cannot be turned off. The videos are distributed outside the usual home video marketplace. Presently, more than 200 described movies and PBS programs are available for purchase by direct mail; DVS home videos are also available for loan at many public libraries. Video description, as a newer service introduced during a much more competitive media environment, was not afforded the same legislative and regulatory protections as closed captioning. The Telecommunications Act, while not setting out a mandate for video description as it did for captioning, directed the FCC to: commence an inquiry to examine the use of video descriptions on video programming in order to ensure the accessibility of video programming to persons with visual impairments, and report to Congress on its findings. The Commission's report shall assess appropriate methods and schedules for phasing video descriptions into the marketplace, technical and quality standards for video descriptions, a definition of programming for which video descriptions would apply, and other technical and legal issues that the Commission deems appropriate. Subsequent to a series of inquiries and reports, the FCC published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) in November 1999 as a first step toward a report and order to require the addition of video descriptions to a limited number of broadcast and cable-delivered programs. The NPRM was followed by a period of comments and replies that resulted in the release, on 7 August 2000, of a report and order (FCC 00-258, MM Docket No. 99-339), which will greatly increase the amount of described video programming available to consumers. Though a handful of petitions for reconsideration were filed by trade associations representing broadcasters and the cable industry, if the FCC's report and order stands as written, the new video description regulations will require, beginning with the calendar quarter 1 April–30 June 2002, 50 hours per quarter of described programming on the top four broadcast networks (ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox) and the top five cable networks (TNT. TBS, Nickelodeon, USA, and Lifetime). Video description has also found a home in the new DVD home video format, where the digital capacity affords the possibility of adding description tracks that can be chosen by the viewer. Like closed captioning, video description can be added to DVDs as one of the eight alternate language choices, and users can purchase mainstream DVDs instead of the specialized videos available presently only via mail order or at many public libraries. The trickle of DVDs with video description is just becoming available and should soon grow in number and availability. The Internet also offers new opportunities for adding description to video delivered via Web sites. These new technologies are discussed later, in the section on Multimedia and the Web. ## Digital Television A new television technology, in development for at least the past 10 years but still considered “emerging," provides a great opportunity to build in accessibility as early as possible during the design and development process. That technology is digital television—alternately referred to as advanced TV or high-definition TV. Work on incorporating and improving the closed captioning and video description capabilities of this new technology began shortly after the 1993 implementation of the TV Decoder Circuitry Act, partly driven by the forwardthinking language inserted in the Act: As new video technology is developed, the Commission shall take such action as the Commission determines appropriate to ensure that closed-captioning service continues to be available to consumers. (TV Decoder Circuitry Act) ## What is digital television (DTV)? The picture television viewers currently receive is based on an analog transmission system that is more than 50 years old. In December 1996 the Federal Communications Commission approved the U.S. standard for a new era of television—digital television. In a digital system, images and sound are captured using the same digital code found in computers—ones and zeroes. The digital revolution will not only dramatically improve the quality of the television picture and sound, but also makes possible the over-the-air delivery of several simultaneous services to viewers. This is due primarily to the three main benefits of the digital system: high-definition television, multicasting in standard definition television, and data transmission. (www.PBS.org) All across the country, beginning in the fall of 1999, new digital television (DTV) stations began transmission, promising crystal-clear wide-screen pictures, multichannel sound, and bold new services for entertainment and education. These early entrants to the DTV marketplace commenced operations even as the standards, hardware, and software were still in development. In fact, almost none of the new digital programming aired with closed captions or video descriptions in the early months of launch (and an equally small amount of consumer reception equipment) had the capability to display access features even if the programming had included them. A working group of companies from the television industry and closed-captioning field has deyeloped a closed captioning standard for the new digital TV system. Referred to as “ElA-708B," the standard outlined an exciting array of new capabilities, including consumer control of character size and shape, an improved “look and feel," and the ability to attach up to 64 different caption services for each program, such as alternate languages and captions edited for beginning readers. While many in industry could agrec on how such a system should work technically, there was not agreement within industry or among consumers as to how many of these new features would be required to be supported in the new digital TV reception equipment. Therefore, in October of 1999, the FCC released a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking regarding closed captioning requirements for digital television receivers. Final comments were received by the FCC in November 1999, and the exact configuration of consumer equipment was pending as of this writing. For more information on digital television and accessibility, see the Web site: www.dtvaccess.org. Digital television also shows great promise for enhanced services for people who are blind or visually impaired. Better-sounding description tracks and new delivery formats which could reduce production costs are only two of the enhancements that the ongoing development of digital television is likely to lead to throughout the first decade of the twenty-first century. With development continuing cven as products and programs are rolled out, improvements for accessibility and universal design will both be built-in and added-on as each new version and generation is released. ## 67.6 MULTIMEDIA Multimedia is simply the combination of more than one or two forms of media within a common technical environment. While it could be said that movies or television are multimedia because they combine pictures and sound, multimedia more often refers to computer-based software that gives users a dynamic and interactive environment for education and entertainment. The multiple media often consists of text, audio, video, graphics, and animation. The most common delivery platforms for multimedia have in the past been interactive videodisks and personal computers and more recently computers and CD-ROMs with World Wide Web links or computers controlling direct Web-based media. Currently, the graphic-rich content of most multimedia software prevents blind people from participating in the dynamic learning environment this technology has brought to the home, classroom, and workplace. Although technology is available to make computers accessible to blind people, no one piece of access technology works with all software or hardware products, and some products have access barriers that cannot be overcome by any existing access technology. The obvious solution is to build access into multimedia software so that only a very few affordable pieces of access technology are required to make the information available. Not only must the graphic environment be made understandable to blind students; the navigation must be usable as well. Experimental CD-ROM-based projects have demonstrated solutions that employ such technologies as Java, QuickTime, and accessible HyperText Markup Language (HTML) browsers. One such prototype built a new accessible interface and added digitized speech assists to an existing math game for elementary school children—“How the West Was One + Three × Four," by Sunburst Communications. A more advanced prototype was based on a simulation of photosynthesis, part of a series of biology simulations from LOGAL, Inc. Photosynthesis Explorer is a simulation in which students vary the light, temperature, humidity, and other influences on a plant and observe the resulting amounts of sugar and oxygen produced by the plant. Diagrams show where different chemicals enter and leave a leaf and also present an abstract view of the chemical pathway of photosynthesis. This prototype was built in Java for several reasons. Java is a programming language designed for Internet-based delivery but it is also useful for other kinds of distribution. Most important, Java is intended for cross-platform use, which means that programs can be written once and then run on different kinds of computers. This is crucial for educational software because some schools use Macintosh computers while others use Windows computers. Without Java software, companies must create two versions of each product. Having a crossplatform language also means that accessibility solutions for Java can meet the needs of users on both platforms. The real challenges for universal design and access in multimedia are caused by the fact that there is no single, unified platform for creation, distribution, and display. Solutions can make use of the cross-platform benefits of Java, but improvements will come through the raising of industry awareness and the distribution of more general guidelines for authoring accessible software. One example of substantive guidelines in this area was published by NCAM in October 2000 and are entitled Making Educational Software Accessible: Design Guidelines Including Math and Science Solutions. This document is available at www.ncam.wgbh.org/ cdrom; hard copies are available by e-mailing requests to to <Mary\_Watkins@wgbh.org>. ## 67.7 THE WEB Due to their reliance on unified standards for interconnection and global usability, the World Wide Web and other Internet technologies can overcome the barriers created by the plethora of multimedia technologies. The basic underlying code of the Web—HTML—and other Web standards such as XML, CSS, SMIL, and others, have been agreed upon by a wide range and large number of Web-based companies and organizations across the globe. While initial elements of these standards erected barriers for computer users who are blind or visually impaired, recent advances and guidelines issuing from the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) are confronting these barriers head-on. The World Wide Web Consortium is an international industry consortium dedicated to promoting the evolution and ensuring the interoperability of the World Wide Web by developing common protocols. As noted earlier, Web accessibility guidelines are discussed in Chap. 66. In particular the “Web Content Accessibility Guidelines" and “User Agent Accessibility Guidelines" are reliable sources for assuring accessibility of Web pages and Web browsers respectively. Both of these documents are available at www.w3.org/wai. One of the emerging technologies on the Web involves downloading or streaming audio, video, animation, and graphics. Significant economic activity is buzzing around this highprofile new technological development, but the real impact on consumers won't be felt until significant numbers of Web users have high-speed, large-bandwidth access to the Web. Many analysts are predicting that just such access is coming in the year 2000–2002 time period though cable modem, DSL, and satellite-delivered Internet access. With such large “data pipelines" to the home, classroom, and workplace, provision of radio- and TV-like computing experiences become more likely. Already on the Web are numerous sites offering audio and video on demand, such as Broadcast.com, QuickTime TV, and radio-tv.com. Content providers like CNN, Rolling Stone magazine, National Public Radio, and hundreds of others are transferring their analog media assets onto the Web. With this transference comes the usual and expected accessibility questions: Will a deaf person be able to watch Web videos with captions; will a blind person be able to navigate these media sites and hear the images described; and will Web-based multimedia support the addition of captions and descriptions like their analog predecessors? At least this last content question can be answered emphatically, yes. The major formats for providing media via the Web—QuickTime, Windows Media, and RealMedia—have builtin means for adding or pointing to text and ancillary audio for providing access for people with sensory disabilities. QText, Synchronized Accessible Media Interchange (SAMI), and Synchronized Multimedia Interchange Language (SMIL) are standards for authoring media in this new environment, and the developers of each have recognized the need to build in these sorts of supports. Apple's Quick Time gives a media producer the ability to add captions for deaf and hardof-hearing viewers, alternate-language subtitles, alternate-language audio tracks, and video description for people who are blind or visually impaired. These services are embedded in the media file and selectable by the user, who employs a piece of software known as a player. In the case of Apple, the player is known as the “QuickTime Player." As of version 4.1 of this standard, QuickTime offered rudimentary support of the SMIL standard. SMIL is a standard that has emerged from the World Wide Web Consortium. The SMIL standard enables a media producer to create a dynamic Web-based presentation which incorporates and synchronizes such media types as video, audio, text, graphics, and animation. A very popular media player that is based on the SMIL standard is the G2 from RealNetworks. This player has been downloaded millions of times in its free version and can accommodate added captions and descriptions when provided by media producers. As already noted, Apple's QuickTime, also freely available, will now support SMIL. Microsoft has developed its own similar standard, called SAMI (Synchronized Accessible Media Interchange), which provides accessibility supports for the Windows Media Player. The catch for all of these players and standards is that they rely on the media creators and distributors to add the captions and descriptions. Like analog TV, these services are not automatic and do require a certain degree of effort and expertise by skilled operators. A recently released, free software program called “MAGpie" will make the authoring of captions and descriptions for Web media easier. It is available at www.wgbh.org/ncam. ## 67.8 THEATRICAL MOTION PICTURES Finally, at the turn of the century, digital technology has been applied to the century-old, previously inaccessible medium of theatrical movies. In 1992, the Motion Picture Access Project was begun to research and develop ways of making movies in theaters accessible to deaf, hard-of-hearing, blind, and visually impaired people through closed captions and descriptive narration. The project was funded in part by a grant from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR), a division of the U.S. Department of Education to the WGBH Educational Foundation. What resulted was a patented digital technology (dubbed Rear Window™m) that makes it possible for movie exhibitors to provide closed captions for those who need or desire them without displaying them to the entire audience, and without the need for special prints or separate screenings. The Rear Window system displays reversed captions on a light-emitting diode (LED) text display which is mounted in the rear of a theater. Deaf and hard-of-hearing patrons use transparent plastic panels attached to their seats to reflect the captions so that they appear superimposed on the movie screen. The reflective panels are portable and adjustable, enabling the caption user to sit anywhere in the theater. The Rear Window system was codeveloped by WGBH and Rufus Butler Seder of Boston, Massachusetts. A companion system for blind moviegoers has also been developed. DVS Theatrical™m delivers descriptive narration via infrared or FM listening systems, enabling blind and visually impaired moviegoers to hear the descriptive narration on headsets without disturbing other audience members. The descriptions provide narrated information about key visual elements such as actions, settings, and scene changes, making movies more meaningful to people with vision loss. These technologies have been available in specialty theaters—such as large-format movie theaters and theme parks—for several years. The key to bringing access to movie theaters is the synchronization of captions and descriptions enabled by the digital sound system known as Digital Theater Systems (DTS). DTS provides multichannel digital audio on a CD-ROM. A reader attached to the film projector reads a timecode track printed on the film and signals the DTS player to play the audio in sync with the film. For the Motion Picture Access Project, DTS adapted its technology to include the caption and descriptive narration tracks on a separate CD-ROM, which plays alongside the other discs in the DTS player. In turn the DTS player sends the captions to the LED display and the descriptive narration to the infrared or FM emitter. ## 67.9 CONCLUSIONS When one considers universal design in relation to the world's media, it's hard to imagine any information technology being made accessible without the exploitation of digital technology itself. The flexibility offered by computer software and the malleability of digitally based services allows a high degree of adaptation for individual needs and profiles. The coming of the Digital Age has resulted in an exponential growth in the amount of new media and systems introduced annually and a concomitant growth in the vigilance needed to assure accessibility. In the United States, many of the leaps forward in accessibility of media have been accomplished through the intervention of federal law, regulations, or public-sector funding, or a combination of the three. Though marketplace pressures helped closed captioning become widespread even before the mandates of the Telecommunications Act, in many other circumstances it has been the guiding hand of government that has assured a level playing field for people with disabilities. The extremely competitive and constantly shifting international media environment will probably require regulatory interventions in the coming decades to assure accessibility of merging new media. As loathe as many are to consider government regulation of the Internet, for example, the vast riches available to fast-moving entrepreneurs unfortunately signal that public interest issues and public service uses of new media are often low priorities at best. In the final analysis, universal design principles must be applied to the education of the next generation of engineers, designers, software programmers, and media producers to ensure that at the very moment that each new technology is imagined, the creator's imagination is universal as well. ## 67.10 NOTE 1. The author was the founder and first director of this office, which subsequently became the CPB/WGBH National Center for Accessible Media (NCAM). ## 67.11 BIBLIOGRAPHY CD-ROM Access Project, guidelines and report on prototypes by Madeleine Rothberg and Tom Wlodkowski,www.ncam.wgbh.org/cdrom. Daisy Consortium: www.daisy.org. FCC Notice of Proposed Rulemaking regarding Closed Captioning Requirements for Digital Television Receivers—ET Docket No. 99-254. FCC Report and Order on Television Closed Captioning-47 CFR Part 79, FCC Report and Order MM. Docket No. 95-176, FCC 97-279. Federal Communications Commission's Disability Rights Office, www.fcc.gov/cib/dro. ## 67.14INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (NLS), www.loc.gov/nls/. Open eBook Initiative: www.openebook.org. Print Access Project: An Investigation into Making Daily Newspapers Accessible to Print-Disabled People, Media Access Research and Development Office, WGBH Educational Foundation, Boston, March 1993. Productivity Works, www.prodworks.com. Public Broadcasting Service, www.PBS.org. Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. LA. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (1996). Television Decoder Circuitry Act—104 STAT.960-961, Public Law 101-431—15 October 1990. World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), www.w3.org/wai. ## 67.12 RESOURCES Apple's QuickTime. www.apple.com/quicktime/ Caption Center. www.wgbh.org/caption CAST. www.cast.org CPB/WGBH National Center for Accessible Media (NCAM). www.wgbh.org/ncam Descriptive Video Service® (DVS®). www.wgbh.org/dvs Microsoft's Windows Media. www.microsoft.com/windows/windowsmedia/ Motion Picture Access Project. www.mopix.org Narrative Television Network. www.narrativetv.com RealNetworks' RealPlayer. www.real.com Trace Research and Development Center. www.tracecenter.org