CHAPTER 68 # USER-CENTERED DEPLOYMENT AND INTEGRATION OF SMART CARD TECHNOLOGY: THE DISTINCT PROJECT Jim S. Sandhu, M.Des.R.C.A., F.C.S.D., F.R.S.A., Churchill Fellow, and Alan Leibert Card Europe Limited, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom ## 68.1 INTRODUCTION This chapter describes the DISTINCT Project, which was initiated as a two-year project funded under the Integrated Applications of Digital Sites (IADS) Program of the European Commission. It started in February 1998 and officially ended in January 2000; however, due to its practical applications and continuing deployment strategy, in actuality it is an ongoing project. DISTINCT stands for Deployment and Integration of Smart Card Technology and Information Networks for Cross-Sector Telematics. Smart cards and multimedia delivery networks are the key and cover access, identification, payment, and booking of facilities or services encapsulating transport, education, health care libraries, administrations, and more. Universal design is at the heart of the project, which covers seven major demonstration and application sites across Europe. The vision of the project team was to focus on creating an open, democratic society, accessible to all citizens without discrimination. In such a society older and disabled people are valued as a resource, as active, participating, independent citizens and not a burden. DISTINCT has shown that maximizing access to services through the use of universal design principles can enhance social integration of marginalized groups. ## 68.2 BACKGROUND Recent telematic developments are reshaping many basic aspects of the world's social and economic foundations that have developed since the Industrial Revolution. The transition from an industrial society to an information society is accelerating due to convergence of the telecommunication, computer, consumer electronics, and media industries. Several technologies have now reached the stage where their widespread application is having a major impact on people. The ability to create, access, and transfer information electronically is beginning to remodel our concept of citizenship and the role of the designer in enhancing the process through universal design. To be competitive, companies and professionals are being forced to rethink their organization and operating structures in order to fit in with the changes initiated by telematics. These changes are closely linked with a new type of social and professional behavior: more individuality and more flexibility. The changes also offer an opportunity to the public sector to recover efficiency by providing its existing services more rapidly, by delivering new services more cheaply, and by outsourcing uneconomic services to specialists. More fundamentally, access to information technology is breaking up the traditional boundaries between the role of the state (local and national) and the market. The DISTINCT project, which was a two-year project funded by the European Commission, fits in with the type of trends and changes just described. More precisely, it fits into the Commission's Telematics Applications Program: Integrated Applications for Digital Sites, where design-for-all is central to all research and development projects. After the initial funding by the Commission up to January 2000), the project has been self-sustaining through local collaboration funding from universities, municipalities, and other service providers (transport, for example). ## 68.3 DISTINCT The project brought together many key developments from previous EU projects through the enhancement and integration of numerous services for the citizen. DISTINCT, which is ongoing through local efforts, uses the platforms of a citizen's “smart card" and multimedia delivery systems to achieve this integration. The applications that are deployed in the five main sites across Europe are wide and varied, with particular special reference to older and disabled people, and rural and urban telematics. The underlying assumption of DISTINCT is that public and commercial services are often fragmented, with many different professionals involved, and with little cooperation and coordination between services. Users invariably end up carrying a multitude of different identity formats in order to access these services. The DISTINCT smart card has made a valuable contribution in this area by serving as a single conduit to the services. Various multisite evaluation studies indicate not only cost-benefits of this approach, but also greater choice and independence for the citizen (see Web site links at end of chapter). The \$15 million project was coordinated by Newcastle University and focused on seven cities and regions in five countries: Newcastle upon Tyne (United Kingdom); Lapland, Espoo, and Vantaa (Finland); region of Zeeland (the Netherlands); city of Torino (Italy); and the city of Thessaloniki (Greece). The services, which are fully harmonized among the different sites, provide access to "democracy online," tourist and travel information, booking facilities, banking (the Netherlands to date), teleshopping, teleworking, libraries, education, distance learning, special-offer vouchers, information networks, public transport, road tolls, parking facilities, and health care services and support for older and disabled people. One major objective of DISTINCT was to try to integrate and harmonize these services—a key challenge to the application of universal design principles. ## Stakeholders and User Needs Assessment In universal design terms, the fundamental cross-site focus was: What requirements did the project need to address for integration of access to services? In view of the large consortium spread over five countries; the lack of harmonization and varying conceptual frameworks; the range of active stakeholders; and differences in language, political, economic, and social circumstances, this was a difficult question to answer. Over three months of intensive cross-site activity entailing surveys, interactive user forums, and through exchanges with professional and service providers, an extensive list of user requirements was established. These broadly follow universal design principles. Some of the key requirements include: • Customize services as precisely as possible for the individual or target group, based on profile and preferences. • Control, secure, and differentiate access to services (e.g., secured identification of user, agebased transport fares, etc.). • Ensure better quality of access to services in terms of man-machine interface requirements, multilingual access, and information based on physical and cognitive access requirements. • Provide support for structural relationships such as customer, financial, and social links. • Ensure direct, maximum communication for the individual. • Maximize direct distribution in terms of teleshopping. • Provide remote access to services to the home, in public buildings and on the streets to minimize travel. • Integrate functions in order to identify entitlement to other services. • Provide for active control over service provision by users. • Reduce costs in terms of efficiency gains through using smart cards. • Facilitate self-service in order to lower labor costs and waiting times. • Share the same access points. ## Universal Design and DISTINCT Interestingly, the key to DISTINCT access issues is not so much access to terminals, operating instructions, keypads, touchscreens, typefaces and legibility, and/or anthropometrics, as important as these are, but rather the methodology of encoding user requirements on the DISTINCT card. This may appear to remove the design focus to electronic data sets, but that is another new area that universal design has to operate within and therefore cannot really ignore. ## 68.4 THE AIM OF THE DISTINCT IDENTITY (DID) The aim of DID was to enable systems to recognize consumers as belonging to a specific closed user group (the DISTINCT group), which would enable special services to be supplied to that group by systems included under agreement between the partners in the project or parties associated with the project by agreement. In general, users identify themselves with smart cards using the DID. The DID is the essential data to uniquely identify the card, confirm that the card is part of a relationship scheme, identify the issuer, and also provide some essential information about the user-—for example, preferred language, special interface requirements, and mobility/physical access needs. Other more tailored information is optionally available in a standard DISTINCT format, although not all of this data will necessarily be held on the card. This optional DID data is referred to later in this chapter as the Distinct Profile and Preferences (DPP) extension. In practice some or all of the DPP extension identifying data may be spread across a smart card and a remotely accessed database. The DID allows the following tasks to be performed: • Identification of the user. • Identification of the unique DISTINCT reference number that will identify the DID country, site, and issuer, and through this the person to whom the DID was issued. • Identification of special needs, language profile, and preferences of the user, to allow the terminal to adapt as appropriate and possible. • Identification of services available on the card, and correlation with those services available at the terminal. Allow provision of “guest" services to the user, based upon services available at the terminal and background agreements between the local DISTINCT/service operator and that of the user's smart card. (For example, allow a visitor with a smart card containing a DID to use local library facilities—perhaps only if he or she has another library application on their card.) In line with universal design philosophy, the DID operates across all boundaries as well as in local on-line, remote on-line, and off-line environments. The implication is that the DID may be used as a mechanism to link services within a city or region, as well as across regions. Using the DID, a Turin-based smart card holder may inquire from his or her home site about services and facilities operating in Newcastle. The same person may then travel to Newcastle and use those services, as well as have access to their own services operating in Turin—all presented in the Italian language. ## Brief Outline of the Architecture of the DID The architecture of the DID sets down the definition of a set of mandatory and optional data elements that form the DID. The architecture describes and formally defines an Application Program Interface (API), which includes a function set to handle the DID and the structure and layout of the fields within the DID as presented at the interface. Using this concept, the API allows any system implementor to deal with the DID data regardless of whether it is card-based, in a remote database, or split across the two, as well as regardless of the physical configuration of the system and smart card. The architecture does not specify how the DID is to be implemented at the physical level. This option is entirely left open to the managers of each site, who may or may not wish to implement it onto an existing smart card with limited space availability. Thus the physical definition would allow existing smart card data elements to be mapped into the DID or new elements defined in any way that suits the system. ## Site-Specific Data Within the DID The DID is an identifier that is used to allow systems to recognize that the user has a token that is part of the DISTINCT environment. The DID additionally contains a unique reference number to identify the specific country and site of the DID issuer and the party to whom the DID was issued. Finally, the DID contains some data describing the profile and preferences (DPP) of the person to whom the DID was issued. The DPP extension contains the optional data describing the profile and preferences of the person to whom the DID was issued. It is central to DISTINCT that there are a number of common applications across sites where interoperability is desirable. The DID plays no part in the application itself, and application files on a smart card or elsewhere will be shared and mutually accessible by agreement between the parties. However, the DPP extension may be used to specify additional profile and preference information that is useful to the interoperating parties but is not included within the application level datasets. This data is known as site-specific data. It may be appended to the DID on a data element by data element basis to create a nonstandard DID. The mechanism and architecture of the DID makes allowance for this option and site implementors may choose to make use of the DID mechanism to create their own nonstandard version of the DID. This mechanism allows two sites to share additional data through the DID mechanism without upsetting the general concept or the ability for the card to be used at any other site in the normal way. All that will happen is that sites not subscribing to these additional data elements will not see them, and the normal DID will be presented with or without the DPP extension. The architecture makes provision for the extra buffer space that may be required to hold the DID in its extended form. ## Guidelines to a Harmonized Approach It could well be that new members already have a smart card in operation. Once again, the DID architecture allows them to join the fold and for the DID to be mapped onto their card in a unique manner. The degree of interoperability they achieve will then be a function of their ability to export their card-specific software drivers and the ability of others to retrofit these drivers into their systems. This has happened on a very large scale in the Netherlands. ## 68.5 THE DISTINCT ARCHITECTURE SPECIFICATION Tables 68.1 to 68.5 summarize the fields of the mandatory part of the DID as specified in the architecture and as expected to be available at the API through various function calls. All three of the mandatory fields within the DID Profile have to be defined. However, for personal data protection, the user can decide not to enter information into these fields, in which case the standard default conditions apply. All other fields are optional and are included in the extended DID Profile and Preference structures (see Tables 68.6 to 68.8). For ease of identification, these are logically referred to in this document as the DPP extension. TABLE 68.1 Summary of Mandatory Fields
<table><tr><td>Distinct ID</td><td>Mandatory</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>Version</td><td>Yes</td><td>Identifies specific versions of the DID which will map to specific field structure descriptions. In general will be used to describe different Profile and</td></tr><tr><td>Base</td><td>Yes</td><td>Preference structure layouts. Contains the basic fields of the DID that will always be present and accessible.</td></tr><tr><td>Validity</td><td>Yes</td><td>Contains validity date information.</td></tr><tr><td>Certificate DID profile</td><td>No</td><td>Contains a security certificate.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Yes</td><td>Contains profile information relating to language, information display requirements, and E&amp;D primary mobility codes.</td></tr><tr><td>DID preference</td><td>No</td><td>Contains preference information that may be used to enhance usability as well as enable application and data sharing.</td></tr></table> TABLE 68.2 DID Version
<table><tr><td>DID version</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>DID version</td><td>Identifies the version of the DID. It is to be decided how version numbering will be used in practice. The version number may be unique by consensus or mandate, or it may be</td></tr><tr><td>DID version data</td><td>unique only when combined with the DID issuer. Identifies the date of the version.</td></tr></table> TABLE 68.3 Country and Issuer
<table><tr><td>DID base</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>DID country</td><td>Identifies the country of the DID issuer.</td></tr><tr><td>DID issuer</td><td>Identifies the DID issuer. The DID country plus DID issuer fields uniquely identify the DID issuer.</td></tr><tr><td>DID card ID</td><td>A unique identifier for the card which may or may not map to the card serial supplied by the card manufacturer/issuer.</td></tr><tr><td>DID cardholder ID</td><td>A unique identifier for the cardholder within DID issuer.</td></tr></table> TABLE 68.4 Validity Dates
<table><tr><td>DID validity</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>DID creation date</td><td>Date of DID creation. This may be mapped to the card issue date, an application creation date, or any other relevant date on the card.</td></tr><tr><td>DID start of validity</td><td>Start of validity of the DID. This may be mapped to some other start date on the card.</td></tr><tr><td>DID end of validity</td><td>End of validity of the DID. This may be mapped to some other end date on the card.</td></tr></table> TABLE 68.5 Special Requirements
<table><tr><td>DID profile</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>DID disability need code</td><td>Defines interface requirements (software controlled).</td></tr><tr><td>DID physical access code*</td><td>Defines accessibility to terminal equipment (hardware construction).</td></tr><tr><td>DID language preference</td><td>Defines primary language preference.</td></tr></table> \* The DID physical access code is based on user access requirements and is used in the table to maintain compatibility with the formal DID architecture specification and documentation. TABLE 68.6 Summary of Profile and Preference Fields
<table><tr><td>Distinct PP* (DPP) extension</td><td>Mandatory</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>Profile</td><td>No</td><td>Contains profile information. Some of the fields in the profile are mandatory. These are contained within the main DID and are not listed here.</td></tr><tr><td>Preference</td><td>No</td><td>Contains optional preference fields.</td></tr></table> \* DISTINCT Profile and Preferences. TABLE 68.7 Cross-Site Optional Fields
<table><tr><td>DID profile—DPP extension data</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Cross-site common optional fields</td></tr><tr><td>Gender code Date or year of birth Second choice language code</td><td>Male or female If year only, day and month fields set to zero Defines secondary language preference Name of cardholder</td></tr></table> TABLE 68.8 Additional Need Codes
<table><tr><td>DID preference—DPP extension data</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Cross-site common optional fields</td></tr><tr><td>Pointer to additional need codes Sport code</td><td>Identifies a structure containing optional disability needs and access codes. Code and meaning to be determined Code and meaning to be determined</td></tr></table> ## Harmonized Card Specification In the context of the contactless card, the draft ISO14443 standard allows for two incompatible interface options (Types A and B), which means that where interoperability across these is concerned, contactless smart card readers will have to be able to cope with both standards. Presently, the Mifare interface standard (Type A) is the most widely used, and early contactless card issuers will probably standardize on this, whether a Combi card approach is taken or not. Existing applications within the DISTINCT project make use of both contact and contactless cards. ## Smart Card Data Size The DID minimum size depends upon how data fields are represented on the card. In addition, some fields may be mapped onto existing card fields such as card serial, card validity, and start and end dates. In the minimum case the DID may be mapped into the card serial, and the DID validity dates mapped into other validity dates on the card, leaving around 30 bytes required for the rest of the DID. In other cases with significant optional DPP extension Profile, Preference, and disability needs data, one could consider the complete overhead to take up to 300 bytes without certificates. It is doubtful that more space will be required if the DID is to usefully act as an aid to interoperability. However, it must be reiterated that the mandatory section of the DID is the only essential part for the smart card, if a smart-card-based DID solution is selected. The DPP extension may be held wholly or partially on the card or in an external database. ## Smart Card Standards The DISTINCT smartcard conforms to ISO 7816-4, which defines a common command set, and ISO 7816-5, which defines the application naming structure. Although contactless cards do not in general follow ISO 7816-3 (which defines the physical and electrical interface) but instead follow draft ISO 14443, they should conform to ISO 7816-4 and ISO 7816-5 (see Appendix at end of chapter for more details). ## DID and DPP Extension Field Structure It is assumed that the mandatory parts of the DID will be openly readable by all parties and are consequently grouped together into a single data area if so desired. However, the architecture will support disparate data as well as missing or inaccessible data. Table 68.9 is drawn from the architecture and shows a specific DID code structure for cards that have available space. It should be noted that the mandatory profile fields are mapped directly into the base structure. This policy means that where no other Profile and Preference data is present, the Profile and Preference structures and their pointers may be omitted where space is at a premium. If space is available, null pointers can be used. In addition, this layout also permits the essential DID data to be read directly. TABLE 68.9 Codes for Additional Space
<table><tr><td>Field</td><td>Length</td><td>Card field format</td><td>Card field length</td></tr><tr><td>Version</td><td>4 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit (nnn.n)</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Version date</td><td>Ddmmyyyy</td><td>16 bit binary</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Country*</td><td>2 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Issuer†</td><td>6 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>3 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Card ID</td><td>8 bytes</td><td>Any</td><td>8 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Card holder ID</td><td>16 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>16 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Creation date</td><td>Ddmmyyyy</td><td>.16 bit binary</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Start of validity</td><td>Ddmmyyyy</td><td>16 bit binary</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>End of validity</td><td>Ddmmyyyy</td><td>16 bit binary</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Disability need code</td><td>7 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>4 bytes§</td></tr><tr><td>User access reqts.</td><td>5 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>3 bytes$</td></tr><tr><td>Language preference</td><td>2 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Pointer to profile</td><td>2 byte file pointer</td><td>Pointer</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Pointer to preference</td><td>2 byte file pointer</td><td>Pointer</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Optional certificate</td><td>16 bytes</td><td>Binary</td><td>16 bytes</td></tr></table> \* ISO 3166 2 character alpha country code. ## Disability Needs Code Table 68.10 shows the disability needs coding structure. These codes affect the software within the terminal that controls the user interface. Coding is 4-bit BCD. The coding 0 in each of the digit positions in the table indicates that this feature is not a problem. The “R" digit is reserved for future use. TABLE 68.10 Disability Needs Codes
<table><tr><td>Field</td><td>Position</td><td>Meaning</td></tr><tr><td>Hearing</td><td>YXXXXXX R</td><td>1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe, 4 = totally deaf</td></tr><tr><td>Sight</td><td>R</td><td>XYXXXXX 1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe, 4 = totally blind</td></tr><tr><td>Sight color RG</td><td>R</td><td>XXYXXXX 1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Sight color BY</td><td>R</td><td>XXXYXXX 1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Reduced intellectual processing</td><td>R</td><td>XXXXYXX 1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Reduced short memory</td><td>R</td><td>XXXXXYX 1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Dyslexic reading</td><td>R</td><td>XXXXXXY 1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr></table> ## User Access Requirements Code Table 68.11 shows the user access requirements coding structure. These codes affect the terminal hardware construction and access to the terminal. Coding is 4-bit BCD. As in the Disability Needs Code, the coding 0 in each of the digit positions in the table would indicate that this feature is not a problem or not used. The “R” digit is reserved for future use. TABLE 68.11 Access Requirement Codes
<table><tr><td>Field</td><td>Position</td><td>Meaning</td></tr><tr><td>Wheelchair</td><td>YXXXX R</td><td>1 = manual, 2 = motorised</td></tr><tr><td>Upper limbs</td><td>XYXXX R</td><td>1 = left lacking, 2 = right lacking, 3 = both lacking</td></tr><tr><td>Reduced finger mobility</td><td>XXYXX R</td><td>1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Reduced reach</td><td>XXXYX R</td><td>1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Tremor</td><td>XXXXY R</td><td>1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr></table> ## Profile and Preference Extension Codes It could be that there are a number of common applications across sites where interoperability is desirable and mutually agreed. In these circumstances the DPP (or optional part of the DID) could be used to specify additional profile and preference information that is useful to the interoperating parties but is not included within the application datasets (see Table 68.12). TABLE 68.12 Profile and Preference Extension Codes
<table><tr><td>Field</td><td>Length</td><td>Card field format</td><td>Card field length</td></tr><tr><td>Gender code</td><td>1 character</td><td>Character &quot;M,&quot;“F&quot;</td><td>1 byte</td></tr><tr><td>Date or year of birth</td><td>Ddmmyyyy</td><td>Character</td><td>8 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Second choice</td><td>2 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>language code Last name</td><td>25 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>25 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Title</td><td>10 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>10 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Initials</td><td>6 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>6 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>First (given) names</td><td>20 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>20 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Street name</td><td>24 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>24 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>House number</td><td>5 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>5 bytes*</td></tr><tr><td>Addition to house</td><td>4 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>4 bytes*</td></tr><tr><td>number</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Postal code Place name</td><td>8 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>8 bytes†</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>24 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>24 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Telephone number</td><td>14 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>14 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Fax number Serious health</td><td>14 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>14 bytes 1 byte</td></tr><tr><td>problems</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Blood group</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte</td></tr><tr><td>Immunization emergency category</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte</td></tr><tr><td>Social security number</td><td>14 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>14 bytes†</td></tr><tr><td>Optional fields Optional certificate</td><td>16 bytes</td><td>Binary</td><td>16 bytes</td></tr></table> \* House number and addition to house number may be taken together where a house is named rather than numbered. † To be correlated with the relevant standard. To be confirmed. ## DPP Extension Codes In the case of site-specific data appended to the main DID within the DPP, the issue becomes much more case-by-case sensitive. (See Table 68.13.) The different fields may or may not be returned by agreement between the sites, the application providers, and the card holder. It could be that some DPP data elements are considered sensitive and are access-secured. The likelihood in this event will be that this data will be returned at the home site but not at a remote site. TABLE 68.13 DPP Extension Codes
<table><tr><td>Field</td><td>Length</td><td>Card field format</td><td>Card field length</td></tr><tr><td>Pointer to optional needs codes</td><td>2 byte file pointer</td><td>Pointer</td><td>2 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Sport code</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte*</td></tr><tr><td>Cultural/historic code</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte*</td></tr><tr><td>Entertainment code</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte*</td></tr><tr><td>Food and drinks code</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte*</td></tr><tr><td>Hobby code</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte*</td></tr><tr><td>Media category code</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte*</td></tr><tr><td>Mobility code</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte*</td></tr><tr><td>Loyalty code</td><td>2 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>1 byte*</td></tr><tr><td>Bank account number</td><td>10 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>5 bytes†</td></tr><tr><td>Bank sort code</td><td>6 digits</td><td>BCD 4 bits/digit</td><td>3 bytes</td></tr><tr><td>Customer ID</td><td>16 characters</td><td>Character</td><td>16 bytes*</td></tr><tr><td>Optional fields</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Optional certificate</td><td>16 bytes</td><td>Binary</td><td>16 bytes</td></tr></table> \* To be confirmed † To be correlated with the relevant standard ## Optional Disability Needs Codes This structure, if present, is pointed to from the DPP Extension Preference structure which must be present if the Optional Disability Needs Codes structure is present. However, it need only contain one field, which is the pointer to this structure. If the DPP Extension Preference structure is present but the Disability Needs Codes structure is not present, the pointer will be null. Coding is 4-bit BCD. As before, the coding 0 in each of the digit positions in the table indicates that this feature is not a problem or not used. In Table 68.14 a “Y” indicates the 4-bit position of the byte used by a given parameter, while “X” indicates the 4-bit position of the byte not used by the specified parameter. Where 4 bits are not used, they are coded “R" (“reserved for future use"). Where a whole byte is used as a binary field by a parameter, the coding in the table will be “YY." In this layout the specific card fields do not map exactly in format to those specified by the architecture at the API. This is because the API specification is for programmer convenience, as well as conforming to international standards and conventions where appropriate. At the card level, space is of the essence and inefficient data structures are avoided. The interface module will convert from the API to the card format and vice versa. The Preference fields are entirely optional, and the DPP Extension Preference structure is laid out similarly to the DPP extension Profile structure. The distinction between Profile and Preference is made to identify which data structure the data will be returned in at the API. In general, the separation is on the basis of Profile data being fixed while Preference data may vary over time. But this distinction is not absolute. All other data elements defined as potential data elements for the DPP extension are described as site-specific and outside of the formal definition. It will be up to each site/application provider to decide what additional information it wishes to make available through the mechanism of the DPP extension and to add this data to its DPP extension or DID definition on its cards. It will then make this data available via a supplied interface module and data dictionary definition. ## DID Mapping on Space-Limited Cards It will be apparent that the DID duplicates some data that may already exist on the card as card level data elements. They are duplicated in the DID, space permitting, for the sake of completeness and ease of use. However, where space is limited, it will be necessary to map directly to the existing data fields on the card, read the appropriate data through a series of separate Read commands to the card, possibly reformat the data, and then build the formal DID according to the DISTINCT architecture rules before passing it to the DID API. TABLE 68.14 Optional Needs Codes
<table><tr><td>Field</td><td>Position</td><td>Meaning</td></tr><tr><td>Auditory feedback</td><td>Byte 1 YX</td><td>1 = standard, 1 = loud</td></tr><tr><td>Instructional sessions</td><td>Byte 1 XY</td><td>1 = standard, 2 = extended</td></tr><tr><td>Auto gate opening and close</td><td>Byte 2 YX</td><td>Minutes (1–15)</td></tr><tr><td>Contactless operation in turnstiles</td><td>Byte 2 XY</td><td>Minutes (1–15)</td></tr><tr><td>Readability from wheelchair</td><td>Byte 3 YX</td><td>1 = standard, 2 = extended</td></tr><tr><td>Speech device</td><td>Byte 3 XY</td><td>1 = loudspeaker, 2 = handset, 3 = both</td></tr><tr><td>Pitch</td><td>Byte 4 YR</td><td>1 = male voice, 2 = female voice</td></tr><tr><td>Speech rate Sound amplification</td><td>Byte 5 YY Byte 6 YY</td><td>Words/minute (1–255) (1 byte) Most significant bit: 0 = positive value,</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1 = negative value; 7 least significant bits denote the offset amount in dBA from the terminal&#x27;s normal sound</td></tr><tr><td>High frequency amplification</td><td>Byte 7 YY</td><td>level (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Low frequency amplification</td><td>Byte 8 YY</td><td>As above (1 byte) As above (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Hearing aid communication</td><td>Byte 9 YX</td><td>1 = magnetic inductive coupling</td></tr><tr><td>Braille output</td><td>Byte 9 XY</td><td>1 = yes</td></tr><tr><td>Voice input</td><td>Byte 10 YX</td><td>1 = yes</td></tr><tr><td>Keyboard use</td><td>Byte 10 XY</td><td>1 = yes</td></tr><tr><td>PIN pad use</td><td>Byte 11 YX</td><td>1 = type 123, 2 = type 789</td></tr><tr><td>Button size</td><td>Byte 11 XY</td><td>1 = normal, 2 = medium, 3 = large, 4 =</td></tr><tr><td>Click type</td><td>Byte 12 YX</td><td>very large 1 = click up, 2 = click down</td></tr><tr><td>Sensitivity</td><td>Byte 12 XY</td><td>1 = low, 2 = normal, 3 = moderate,</td></tr><tr><td>Position of input device X</td><td>Byte 13 YY</td><td>4 = high X co-ordinate (1–256) (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Position of input device Y</td><td>Byte 14 YY</td><td>Y co-ordinate (1–256) (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Position of input device Z</td><td>Byte 15 YY</td><td>Z co-ordinate (1–256) (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Time out</td><td>Byte 16 YY</td><td>Time in decaseconds (1–256) (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Reduced concentration</td><td>Byte 17 YX</td><td>1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Reduced long-term memory</td><td>Byte 17 XY</td><td>1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Dialogue level</td><td>Byte 18 YX</td><td>1 = normal, 2 = simple, 3 = very simple</td></tr><tr><td>Text complexity</td><td>Byte 18 XY</td><td>1 = normal, 2 = simple, 3 = very simple</td></tr><tr><td>Text density</td><td>Byte 19 YX</td><td>1 = normal, 2 = low, 3 = very low</td></tr><tr><td>Symbols/icons</td><td>Byte 19 XY</td><td>1 = text only, 2 = text &amp; symbols,</td></tr><tr><td>Sign language</td><td>Byte 20 YX</td><td>3 = symbols only 1 = yes</td></tr><tr><td>Text color R</td><td>Byte 20 XY</td><td>Red coding (0–15)</td></tr><tr><td>Text color G</td><td>Byte 21 YX</td><td>Green coding (0–15)</td></tr><tr><td>Text color B</td><td>Byte 21 XY</td><td>Blue coding (0–15)</td></tr><tr><td>Background color R</td><td>Byte 22 YX</td><td>Red coding (0–15)</td></tr><tr><td>Background color G</td><td>Byte 22 XY</td><td>Green coding (0–15)</td></tr><tr><td>Background color B</td><td>Byte 23 YR</td><td>Blue coding (0–15)</td></tr><tr><td>Text size</td><td>Byte 24 YY</td><td>Millimeters (1–256) (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Position of output device X</td><td>Byte 25 YY</td><td>X co-ordinate (1–256) (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Position of output device Y</td><td>Byte 26 YY</td><td>Y co-ordinate (1–256) (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Position of output device Z</td><td>Byte 27 YY</td><td>Z co-ordinate (1–256) (1 byte)</td></tr><tr><td>Reduced field of vision</td><td>Byte 28 YX</td><td>1 = light, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Stamina</td><td>Byte 28 XY</td><td>1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Fainting/dizziness or seizures</td><td>Byte 29 YR</td><td>1 = mild, 2 = medium, 3 = severe</td></tr><tr><td>Optional certificate</td><td>16 Bytes</td><td></td></tr></table> ## Site-Specific Extensions to the DID It is apparent that application data is held within the application file structures on the smart card. In the case of an integrated application that is shared across sites, this data must be made available in order for the application to run successfully. The DID therefore acts primarily to identify that this is a card participating in the DIS-TINCT grouping and to provide base information about the issuer. From this a judgment can be made about whether a specific application can be run from this terminal. If so, then the DID can be logged for later accounting purposes, and it can be examined for further information such as language preference and disability information. The secondary purpose of the DID is to act as a standard communication vehicle whereby an application provider wishing to share an application can pass information that may be required but is not found within the application data itself. This information is passed as sitespecific data within the DID as optional extensions to the DID DPP extension. Although the sites within the DISTINCT project have indicated a large amount of possible data that might fit into this category, in practice it is likely that this data will be kept to a minimum in order to avoid access rights conflicts. Where optional site-specific data is commonly held and used across and within sites, it may be expedient to "standardize" on a specific structure by agreement and to publish this extended DID structure as a directory pertaining to a specific version of DID. This will correspond to the version number in the DID. It is expected that there will be relatively few versions of the DID and that the multiplicity of field level variations that will occur will be dealt with by agreement between sites and the passing of information about field layouts between them. The architecture supports the concept of unknown data and data-not-present such that fields not available could be left blank, while extra buffer space could be allocated for optional data returned at the API interface, whether or not the caller is aware of the presence of the optional data. ## Access Rights, Data Structures, and Security Management It is intended that site managers will organize their own access rights to data within the DID, based on separate file access rights as previously described. It must be noted that the ability to pass a test or provide a key to open access to data at one's home site may be different from that at a remote site, and due allowance must be made for this when permitting applications to be shared. The DID makes no provision for the secure passing of data across the API boundary, and the site managers are discouraged from attempting this. One way that some access rights can be managed and tests passed is from within the interface program code that sits between the application on the card and the DISTINCT API; that is, sitting wholly within the DISTINCT application domain. For example, code may be present to ask a cardholder to enter a PIN, subject of course to an entry device being available. In this case, the application provider wishing to share an application will make the appropriate code and facilities available as part of the distributed application interface. However, one aim of a harmonized approach is to try to avoid the need for the distribution of code and for a standard interface to be used. Given this, it is hoped that applications can be shared without such access controls being applied. It is hoped that it will be sufficient for the cardholder to signal his or her approval for access to nonsensitive data under their control as being implied by placing their card into the slot. All other more sensitive data will not be provided to remote sites. Of course, this may mean that applications operate in a more restricted manner in remote sites compared to home site operation. ## 68.6 EVALUATION Detailed descriptions of user evaluations for the demonstration phase covering all seven sites can be found on the Web sites listed at the end of this chapter. The evaluations focused not only on usability and access issues, but also on whether the card architecturc and coding worked in the various test sites. This was critical, given the cultural and linguistic diversity of these sites. It should be stressed that as DISTINCT smart cards continue to be deployed at an increasing pace, ongoing evaluations continue to take place covering new applications. ## 68.7 WHY DISTINCT AND NOT VISA The initial rationale for a card like DISTINCT was that it had to be based on local community needs in Europe. This necessarily meant a focus on public sector services and third-party payment as opposed to direct payment, as in the case of the VISA card. The latter entirely operates at the level of a versatile electronic purse. Although its commercial applications are constantly being expanded, its uses are still very much tied with the exchange of monetary value for a service. For organizational, political, and financial reasons, VISA has not ventured into services accessed by, for instance, a Citypass. In the context of European communities this means access to health, career, housing, leisure transport, library, school meals, training, education, and so forth. Up to the development of DISTINCT, most of these were provided by different bureaucracies with each individual user having a range of different means of identification—instead of just one. Moreover, this single-conduit approach ensurcs that special interface requirements such as large letters, speech output and mobility, and access needs are taken account of—attributes which few commercial cards seem to have. Another area where the highly commercial VISA card cannot enter is the direct exercise of citizenship. Some member countries of the European Union (especially the U.K. government) are seriously considering extending the use of the DISTINCT card for electronic voting, both at the local and national levels. ## 68.8 CONCLUSION The key to the project's importance is, for example, that in the short time it has been opcrating, 25 million commercial "Chipper" and “Knipchip" cards have been retrofitted with the DISTINCT ID in The Netherlands. In the United Kingdom the Newcastle site is fast enlarging its DISTINCT card base, which presently stands at over 50,000—covering health, education, shopping, career services, transport, and so forth. Card Europe, which is a consortium partner, is currently issuing 250,000 World Point Loyalty multiapplication cards based on DISTINCT. Similar activities are being undertaken in Italy, Finland, and Greece. In fact, the percolation and distribution of the DIŠTINCT card is exponential and will have a significant impact outside of Europe. The project has shown that it is possible to utilize and expand universal design principles in areas of increasing importance that were previously considered too remote for the design professions to tackle. DISTINCT is a prime example and proof that it can be done and that it can expand our understanding of universal design principles and the changing role of designers. As design is simply a mirror of its age, designers need to take the fast-expanding and increasingly pervasive information society into account. The project has also highlighted the consortium's vision of the Information Society as one of an open, democratic society, accessible to all citizens without discrimination in a way that has not been possible hitherto. In line with universal design the DISTINCT project can best be summed up in the words of the European Commission: . . . the challenge is to use the Information Society (IS) to strengthen social cohesion and enhance people's ability to participate fully in every aspect of social and economic life, to make it a tool for the creation of an inclusive society. The IS should be about people and it should be used for people and by people to unlock the power of information, not to create new, or reinforce existing inequalities between the information rich and the information poor. (Green Paper, “Living and Working in the Information Society," 1996) ## 68.9 APPENDIX ## Standards: Comité Européen de Normalisation Rue de Stassart 36 B-1050 Brussels, Belgium Tel: +32 2 519 6811 Fax: +32 2 519 6819. • EN 726. Requirements for IC cards and terminals for telecommunications use. PrEN 1332. Machine-readable cards, related device interfaces and operations. Part 1 Design principles and symbols for the user interface; Part 2 Dimension and location of tactile identifier for ID I cards; Part 3 Keypads; Part 4 Coding of user requirements for people with special needs. • EN 29241. Part 4 Keyboard requirements; Part II Usability statements. European Telecommunications Standards Institute B.P. 52, Route des Lucioles, Sophia-Antipolis, Valbonne F-06561 Alpes Maritimes, France Tel: +33 92 94 42 00 Fax: +33 93 65 47 16 • ETR 029. Access to telecommunications for people with special needs: recommendations for improving and adapting telecommunication terminals and services for people with impairments. • ETR 068. European standardization situation of telecommunication facilities for people with special needs. • DTR/HF-02009: 1996. Characteristics of telephone keypads. • ETS 300 381. Telephony for hearing-impaired people; inductive coupling of telephones, earphones to hearing aids. • /: /S 300 -488. Telephony lor hearing-impaired people; characteristics of telephone sets that provide additional teceiving amplification for the benefit of hearing-impaired. • / /8 00 o 79 Telephony tor the hearing-impaired; electrical coupling of telephone sets to hearing aids. • FTS 300 767. Human factors: telephone prepayment cards tactile identifier. • ET'R 039: 1992. Human factors standards for telecommunications applications. • / / R 0o8 /993 Furopean standardization situation of telecommunication facilities for people with special needs. • /CR / R 0. /994 Assignment of alphabetie letters to digits on push-button dialling keypads. • ET'R /60): 1995. Human factors aspects of multimedia telecommunications. • EI'R 165: 1995. Recommendation for a tactile identifier on machine-readable cards for telecommunication terminals. • P / R //F 0.003 199o. The mmplication of human aging for the design of telephone terminals. International Electrotechnical Commission 3 rue de Varembe, CH-1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland Tel: +41 22 73 40 150 fax: +41 22 73 33 843 • IEC'73. Colors of pushbuttons and their meanings. • //€ //8 4 Heating aids: magnetie field strength in audio frequency induction loops or hearing aid purposes. International Organization for Standardization 1 rue de Varembe, Case postale 56, CH-1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland Tèl: +41 22 749 0111 Fax: +41 22 733 3430 • 1SO) 7001: 1991. Public information symbols. • ISO) 7816. Identification cards—Integrated circuit cards with contacts. • /S7 92#1. Figonomue tequirements for office work with visual display terminals. • /SO) / (' 9995 Intormation technology: keyboard layout for text and office systems. •ISO)/IEC' 10536. Identification cards—contactless integrated circuit cards. International 'Tèlecommunications Union Place des Nations, CH-1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland 'Tèl: +41 22 730 5111 làax: +41 22 733 7256 • I'T'U E/18. Automatic international telephone credit cards. • //t t / 4 Human tactors aspects of public terminals generic operating procedures. • //U/ / / Hunan tactors aspects of public telecommunications terminals for people with disabutties • IT'U/ EI36. Tactile identifier on prepaid telephone cards. • ITU E161. Arrangement of figures, letters, and symbols on telephones. ## 68.10 BIBLIOGRAPHY Gill, J. M., Smart Cards, RNIB, 1996. Gill, J. M., Access Prohibited? Information for Designers of Publie Access Terminals, RNIB, 1997 Gill, J. M., The Use of Electronic Purses by Disabled People: What Are the Needs? RNIB, 1998 Roe, P. R. (ed.), Telecommunications for All, COSl 219, European Commission, 1995. ## 68.11 RESOURCES The DISTINCT project has a very extensive range of internal publications targeted at mem bers of the team and the European Commission. Due to commereial reasons these have not been widely publicized, as a number of contractual issues internal to the consortium are still being sorted out. However, a considerable number of these are available on various Web sites. For further detailed information on technical issues, deployment, usability, and user forums, please visit the following Web sites: www.newcastle.gov.uk/distweb www.distinct.org.uk www.tagish.co.uk/distinct/main www.cenorm.be/iss/workshop/distinetlD) www.cenorm.be/iss www.tag.co.uk/turtle