CHAPTER 69 # CREATING THE UNIVERSALLY DESIGNED CITY: PROSPECTS FOR THE NEW CENTURY Leslie Kanes Weisman, M.A. New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey ## 69.1 INTRODUCTION Balanced at the fulcrum of the millennium, humanity faces a future whose course has been set by the epic events of our recent past. How does the legacy of the twentieth century define the challenges and opportunities that our increasingly global society will face in the coming decades? What role will the growing international movement for universal design play in shaping our future world? This chapter addresses these questions in three ways: first, by discussing universal design as a vehicle for promoting human well-being, environmental wholeness, and the principles of participatory democracy; second, by expanding the concept, meaning, and context of disability to include the effects of substandard housing and infrastructure, unhealthy cities and buildings, and inadequate public transit and safety; and third. by speculating on three broad criteria that will define the universally designed city of the future. The chapter concludes with a discussion about the unique contributions that universal design can make as a part of both historic and contemporary efforts to create and promote healthy, inclusive, sustainable communities. ## 69.2 BACKGROUND As people throughout the world entered the year 2000 with celebration and ritual, they simultaneously brought along their own personal recollections of the past. For an entire generation of American baby boomers, whose values and lives were profoundly shaped by the antiwar, civil rights, environmental, and women's movements of the 1960s and 1970s, the twentieth century will be remembered as the century that fought a futile “war to end all wars;" struggled to abolish racism and apartheid, sexism, and environmental degradation; and bore witness to shocking human and ecological holocausts: appalling death camps and refugee camps, Nagasaki, Hiroshima, Viet Nam, Agent Orange, oil spills in the Gulf, Chernobyl, Bhopal, and Love Canal. But the twentieth century will also be remembered as a century of courage and triumph: the founding of the United Nations; the 1963 historic civil rights march on the U.S. Capitol; Woodstock, flower power, and the love generation; the first Earth Day that placed ecological issues on the public policy table in the United States; the first “Take Back the Night" march in San Francisco in 1978 in which 5000) women took to the streets at nightfall to protest violence against women: and the fall of the Berlin Wall in Germany and white supremacy in South Africa. It is within this milieu of human struggle to create a democratic, equitable, and sustainable existence that universal design is historically situated and discussed in this chapter. ## 69.3 THE SPATIAL CONTEXT OF DEMOCRACY Fundamental in any democratic society are the principles of nondiscrimination, equal opportunity, and personal empowerment. When the promise of democracy is compromised or withheld, the result is often social protest. Undoubtedly, civil rights, feminism, and environmentalism will be remembered as three of the most powerful and enduring social protest movements of the late twentieth century. Although not readily apparent, these three movements are interconnected in complex and profound ways that are embodied in physical and spatial forms that are universally designed. To understand how, it is important to recognize that in the industrialized world of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, virtually all design and technology were based upon the analysis and disassembling of organic wholes into fragmented parts. Cities and suburbs, workplaces and dwellings, architecture and nature evolved as detached spatial realms, supported by a social worldview that segregates and assigns different status and power to women and men, rich and poor, black and white, voung and old, gay and straight, able-bodied and disabled. When protest movements arise to oppose social inequalities and ecological imbalances like these, activists usually begin by seeking to eliminate discriminatory practices through legal remedies that impose fines and penalties and threaten legal prosecution for noncompliance—for example, civil rights laws like the U.S. Fair Housing Act (see Chap. 35, “Fair Housing: Toward Universal Design in Multifamily Housing," by Steinfeld and Shea) and the Americans with Disabilities Act (see Chap. 12, "U.S. Accessibility Codes and Standards: Challenges for Universal Design," by Salmen). As social movements mature, they begin to look beyond the "letter of the law" to the "spirit of the law," which emphasizes ethics and values, and promulgates systemic changes in attitudes, behaviors, and institutional structures. In this regard, the overarching, long-term contribution of contemporary social and environmental justice movements is not to be found, as many would assume, in the landmark civil rights and conservation laws that activists fought so hard to achieve, although these laws are certainly of great importance. But rather, it is in the fostering of a transformed global cultural and environmental consciousness and set of priorities. Slowly, people and their governments are beginning to move away from the politics of separation, fragmentation, and competing interests that created ecological breakdown and social injustice in the twentieth century. Slowly, the world is moving toward a politics of greater inclusion, connection, and regeneration that will restore healing and wholeness within the art of living in the twenty-first century. This paradigm shift represents, at the very least, a rightful and timely expression of "universal civility." and at the very most, an essential ethos for sustaining life in the coming decades. ## 69.4 THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT AS CULTURAL ARTIFACT As a moral philosophy, universal design holds great promise for the realization of this transformed vision of social life, because advocates and practitioners of universal design recognize that the world is an unjust place and that design has a significant role to play in eliminating human suffering and advancing greater human dignity. Universal design is particularly relevant to the environmental design fields—architecture, planning, and landscape architecture— because in its making, use, and design, the built environment shapes human experience, identity, and consciousness, and reinforces assumptions about culture and politics. Any serious effort to establish equitable and sustainable communities must involve redefining and restructuring both how people inhabit physical space and how designers teach and practice "place making." Whereas most environmental design disciplines, particularly architecture, have traditionally been male-centric, object-centered, and technologically focused, universal design situates education, theory, and practice within the wider public debate about human diversity. justice, and equity; links the design process and product to the imperatives of democracy; and seeks to understand and formalize how different people and cultures value their world and act within it. ## 69.5 CELEBRATING DIVERSITY Universal design upholds the democratic ideals of social equality and personal empowerment, because universal designers strive to create products and spatial environments that are designed to provide the same level of comfort, accessibility, and assistance to multiple users and multiple publics. Even though advocates of universal design recognize that it is nearly impossible to design all things for all people, the ultimate objective is to be as inclusive as possible. The first Principle of Universal Design, Equitable Use, mandates that no one be segregated, stigmatized, or disadvantaged by design (see Chap. 10, "The Principles of Universal Design." by Story; and Story, 1997). In contrast, architecture has traditionally defined the user, or the public in the case of urban planning, in very narrow terms based on a conception of the user/citizen, which is inherently masculine, and the public, which tends to be made up of middle-class white people living in nuclear families. Therefore, when architects and planners attend to the provision of housing, transportation, and community services, they have tended to design and plan for only a small segment of the population, thereby creating many problems for the ever-increasing numbers of people who do not fit into this assumed definition and life pattern. Universal design offers a different approach to designing and planning by recognizing both genders and the vast array of different ages, abilities, cultures, and lifestyles that use buildings and actually exist in communities. Universal design challenges designers across the environmental design disciplines to unearth and dispel the narrow assumptions and stereotypes about users and citizens that have misguided these professions for so long. It demands proactive involvement because policies and practices that are gender-, age-, race-, class-, and ability-neutral have historically perpetuated unequal access to housing, public transit, neighborhoods, and workplaces. ## 69.6 CHALLENGING DUALISTIC THINKING Universal design reminds us that there is no separation between mind and body, and between people and their environments. Universal design begins with the insight that the environment is not somehow a separate realm that exists beyond the ordinariness of everyday life. All of us—irrespective of gender, race, class, age, size, or ability—develop, grow, and change physically, emotionally, and intellectually throughout our lives. And at any point in our lives, personal self-esteem, identity, and well-being are deep!y affected by the ability to function in our physical surroundings with a sense of comfort, independence, and control. For the burgeoning numbers of older people and people with disabilities, these relationships are especially critical to life quality. In the 75 years from 1950) to 2025, the world's population of people who are 60 years old and over will have increased from 200) million to 1.2 billion, and from 8 to 14 percent of the total global population. In the same 75 years, the very old, those aged 80 and above, will have grown from 13 million to 137 million. In short, between 1950 and 2025, the total world population will have grown by approximately a factor of 3, the elderly by a factor of 6, and the very old by a factor of 10 (United Nations Department of Public Information, 1994). In the “age of aging." improved survival rates will cause a dramatic increase in the numbers of people with age-related disabilities, such as dementia, mobility, hearing, and vision impairments. Current United Nations estimates are in the range of 500 million, 80 percent in the developing countries (N Dow, 1995). Because the global aging population is soaring at an unprecedented rate, the demand for universally designed produets and living arrangements will accelerate concomitantly in the coming decades. ## 69.7 RACISM AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISK Universal design recognizes that there is no separation between human health, environmental health, and social justice. Extensive research has now fully documented that poor people and people of color have borne a disproportionate burden of environmental pollution and degradation. The geography of racism concentrates minority populations in areas where risks from industrialization are often extreme. For example, in the United States, the three superfund toxic waste sites accounting for more than 40 percent of the nation's total disposal capacity are close to or located in predominantly African-American and Hispanic neighborhoods. Consequently, these populations have higher instances of blood lead levels in children, respiratory disease, and certain cancers than does the population as a whole. Understandably, the primary environmental concern in low-income communities and communities of color is urban public health and safety, in contrast to the conservation of wildlife and the preservation of nature that concerns the white-dominated environmental movement (Seager, 1993). ## 69.8 RETHINKING DISABILITY Since the origin of the universal design movement resides in the pioneering actions and achievements of the disability community, it stands to reason that thinking and designing has emphasized ways of providing access and accommodation for people with disabilities, as well as older people who typically experience varying degrees of loss in physical, sensory, or cognitive ability as a normal part of aging. Feminist scholars have shown how knowledge is always of a particular group; how each of us always constructs, sees, and understands the world through our own culture's eyes and thinks within its assumptions (Ahrentzen, 1996). What, then, would happen if disability was defined from the different life experiences of homeless people: city dwellers who are bombarded by pollution and deteriorated infrastructure; women who live with the relentless fear of being assaulted in public places; children who are forced to play in streets with dangerous traffic; and people who are ghettoized by their poverty or race into deplorably substandard publie housing projeets and neighborhoods located near toxie waste sites? How would the differing points of view of these groups inform and expand our understanding of spatial diserimination and exelusion? How might these insights help the proponents of universal design to shape plans for urban life that will enable all people to associate freely with others; to assume a responsible role in a free society; and to live long, healthy, produetive, and meaningful lives? The following examination of the architectural, planning, environmental, and human consequences of substandard housing and infrastrueture, unhealthy cities and buildings, and inadequate public transit and safety will begin to direct us toward some of the speculative answers described later in this chapter. ## 69.9 SUBSTANDARD HOUSING AND INFRASTRUCTURE Housing shortages and poor housing conditions are literally life-threatening problems. Overcrowding in slums, shanty towns, refugee camps, and public housing projects worldwide causes transmission of infectious and parasitic diseases, psychological stress, exposure to air and water pollution, accidents, violence, and exposure to extremes in temperature. Substandard housing triggers asthma attacks in children by exposing them to irritants such as smoke, dust mites, molds, rats, cockroaches, and dry heat or no heat (McLead, 1998). Although lead-based paints have been banned from residential use in the United States since 1978, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development estimates that half of the country's housing still contains some lead-based paint, with some 3.8 million units identified as priority lead hazards because of the presence of deteriorating paint or high levels of lead dust in the air created by renovation work or from friction created from opening and closing windows. According to the Centers for Disease Control, about 1 million children in the United States between the ages of 1 and 5 have damaged brain and neurological function from inhaling or ingesting lead-based paint. Accidents associated with substandard housing cause some 5000 deaths annually in the United States. Some 54,000 Americans are admitted to the hospital each year from burns and fires alone, caused by tap water temperatures, and home heating burns and fires from wood stoves or kerosene heaters when oil or gas is too expensive. Because the poor who live in cold climates must make the frequent decision whether to eat or heat their homes, malnutrition in children is a common plight among low-income families who are forced to spend large amounts of their income on rent and utility bills, leaving little money left for food (Free, 1998). According to the U.S. National Center for Health Statistics, roughly 60,000 lives are lost each year due to problems associated with cold weather, including fires, carbon monoxide poisoning, pneumonia, influenza, and hypothermia (Colton, 1994). The health problems related to inadequate housing and infrastructure are by no means unique to North America. Of the 4.4 billion people in developing countries, nearly threefifths lack access to safe sewers, one-third have no access to clean water, one-quarter do not have adequate housing, and one-fifth have no access to modern health services of any kind. Of the estimated 2.7 million annual deaths from air pollution, 2.2 million are from indoor pollution—including smoke from dung and wood burned as fuel, which is more harmful than tobacco smoke. Eighty percent of the victims are rural poor in developing countries (WEDO. 1998). Substandard housing, unsafe water, and poor sanitation in densely populated cities are responsible for 10 million deaths worldwide each year. Waterborne diseases alone kill 4 million children annually (United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, 1996). The problem is getting worse because housing cannot keep up with an exploding urban population, which will double from 2.4 billion in 1995 to 5 billion in 2025. Currently, the world's urban population is growing 2.5 times faster than the rural population. In 1996, about 500 million urban dwellers were homeless or lived in inadequate housing (United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, 1996). A disproportionate number are women and children who are among the poorest and most vulnerable of the world's population. According to United Nations statistics, 70 percent of the world's 1.3 billion poorest people are female (WEDO, 1996). Worldwide poverty among women means that many can afford only limited infrastructural services such as pit latrines, public water hydrants, open drains, and unpaved roads. Lack of adequate sanitation increases women's health risks. Women's universally low wages mean that fewer housing units are affordable and that household income is frequently insufficient to meet eligibility requirements for subsidized housing. In many countries, women's legal standing denies them the right to own land, which means they cannot protect themselves and their children from domestic instability and violence or provide collateral to gain access to credit or capital. An estimated one-third of the world's households are now headed by women; in parts of Africa and many urban areas, especially in Latin America, the figure is greater than 50 percent, and in the squalid refugee camps of Central America and the disgraceful public housing projects of North America, the figure exceeds 90 percent. Women are segregated everywhere in appallingly overcrowded, hazardous, unsanitary dwellings that lack basic facilities because they are too poor to live anywhere else (Weisman, 1992). Add to these oppressive life circumstances the human suffering and physical damage to dwellings and communities in the late 1990s caused by military conflicts in Kosovo and elsewhere, and by natural disasters like floods in Bangladesh, earthquakes in Turkey, and hurricanes·in the Caribbean region and Eastern seaboard of the United States, and it is clear that in global terms, providing access to adequate housing and infrastructure for all people everywhere is among the biggest challenges facing the world in the twenty-first century. ## 69.10 UNHEALTHY CITIES AND BUILDINGS The disabilities caused by substandard housing and infrastructure that poor people, people of color, women, and children experience worldwide are the results of gender, race, and class oppression and massive urbanization. At the beginning of the twentieth century, only 1 in 10 people lived in cities. Today, one-half of all humanity lives in urban areas, and by 2030, urban populations will be twice the size of rural populations, most in the developing world (N'Dow, 1995). “As cities grow in absolute size and proportional importance, they play a larger part in shaping the global environment. Urbanization puts enormous stress on natural habitats, and as cities grow, their internal ecology changes: the world's urban centers are increasingly hazardous environments in which to live"(Seager, 1993). Worldwide, more than 1.1 billion people live in urban areas with unhealthy air. And while there are numerous sources of airborne pollution, in most urban areas motor vehicles have become the single largest source of local air pollution. Today, there are nearly 600 million cars and trucks in the world, and this number is growing by 35 million per year—more than one every second, 100,000 a day. Motor vehicles are responsible for nearly 50 percent of the emissions of smog precursors worldwide. The main pollutants from automobile exhausts are carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons, and lead. Identified health effects include pulmonary diseases like asthma and emphysema, cardiovascular diseases that lead to heart attacks and strokes, lung cancer, and mental retardation in children. Economic and environmental effects include damage to buildings, food crops, and forests. Another major health and environmental problem related to automobile emissions is global warming. Every gallon of gasoline that is burned releases over 20 pounds of carbon dioxide gas that traps the energy that reaches the earth from the sun. According to experts, this so-called greenhouse effect will cause global temperatures to rise 2º to 6° Fahrenheit over the next century—changing agricultural zones, disease areas, and natural habitats, raising sea levels, and increasing the ferocity of extreme weather events such as hurricanes, droughts, and floods. Reducing the emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases is critical to protecting human health and the stability of the global climate we all live in and depend upon (Nichols, 1998). Blame for much of the environmental damage occurring today, from climate destabilization and the destruction of forests and rivers, to air and water pollution, must be placed squarely at the doorsteps of modern buildings. As much as one-tenth of the global economy is dedicated to constructing, operating, and equipping buildings. In terms of materials, this economic activity uses one-sixth to one-half of the world's wood, minerals, water, and energy (Nichols, 1998). Other studies reveal that close to 70 percent of the sulfur oxides and some 50 percent of the carbon dioxide emissions that are causing global warming are produced through the generation of electricity used to power, heat, and cool our homes and offices, and the production processes of basic building materials such as steel, cement, lime, bricks, and aluminum. The construction industry also contributes to air pollution through emissions of dust, fibers, particles, and various toxic gases (Der-Petrossian, 1999). Many buildings do harm on the inside as well, by subjecting us to unhealthy air or alienating physical environments, making us both less productive and less healthy than we are capable of being. Sick building syndrome is the result of ventilation systems that subject occupants to stale air for hours on end, or harbor and spread unhealthy molds. Sealed, climatecontrolled buildings also trap volatile organic compounds (VOCs), particularly formaldehyde, that can seep out from adhesives and drying agents in furniture, paint, and carpets, often resulting in concentrations hundreds of times higher than those measured outside. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, sick building syndrome costs American society tens of billions of dollars each year in medical bills, absenteeism, and lost worker productivity (Roodman and Lenssen, 1994). Indoor air quality is inadequate in 30 percent of buildings around the world (Der-Petrossian, 1999). Sustainable cities, healthy buildings, economic equality, social justice, and environmental protection are inseparable from each other. And they are also inseparable from universal design's mandate to create products, buildings, and communities that promote health and prevent illness. ## 69.11 INADEQUATE PUBLIC TRANSIT AND SAFETY The unsustainable patterns of urban transportation each of us must deal with on a day-to-day basis, regardless of income or social status, have become more and more intolerable. Whether in a private car, public bus, or train, riding a bicycle, or simply walking, the time people around the world spend transporting themselves is longer, often up to 4 hours a day, and the psychological stress and health care costs are higher (Williams, 1998). For women, especially those who are older or have low incomes or disabilities, these costs are exacerbated by malecentric planning that ignores gender differences in the use of public transit in North America. A 1989 study by the Toronto Transit Commission showed that the majority of women in the city, some 66 percent, are transit captives, defined as people who do not have a driver's license, own a car, or have access to a car. In other words, captive riders are the opposite of choice riders, who are usually men who own or have access to a car but who choose to use public transit in order to save money or commuting time or to avoid the stress of traffic jams. This high proportion of women transit captives is based upon surveys of transit users by transit authorities. These surveys do not even measure the percentage of deep captives—people who never use the system and, instead, rely on friends and relatives for mobility—a group that is highly likely to include proportionately more women than men. Yet, despite these demographic data, most North American transit authorities, like Toronto, have assumed that a “fare is a fare and a rider is a rider" (Toronto Transit Commission, 1989; Wekerle et al., 1992). Transportation planners, who are mostly men, typically fail to see and subsequently address the needs of countless wage-earning mothers who take their children to school or drop them off at a day care center en route to their jobs, and pick them up—along with the dry cleaning and groceries—on their way home at night. Neither do they consider the needs of women who depend on public transit to get from the inner city to their jobs as domestic workers in the suburbs, or to their doctors' offices, schools and training programs, social services, and the homes of friends and family members. Neither the fare structure nor the scheduling and routing of buses and trains supports women's travel patterns. Instead, public transit is overwhelmingly designed to reflect a male model of journey-to-work, suburb-to-city, and city-to-city commuting patterns during peak rush hours. These same transit policies will have an increasingly adverse impact on the mobility of older people. Every 7 seconds, one of the 77 million baby boomers, born in the United States between 1945 and 1964, turns 50. The lives and identities of this generation of Americans are inextricably linked to the freedom and independence that comes with driving and owning automobiles. Research studies project that frailty, especially after the age of 74, and the diminished capacity in general of older people to drive safely, will cause the number of older adults killed annually in automobile accidents in the United States to rise from the 7000 fatalities that occurred in 1999 to 23,000 in 2030. According to transportation experts, “driving for aging boomers will become a major public safetv, health and consumer issue in the next [21st] century" (Cobb and Coughlin, 1999) No matter the age, evervone understands the high cost of losing mobility, and the subsequent loss of independence that leads to isolation, which hastens poor mental and physical health, which results in rapid decline and death. Perhaps the greatest challenge facing the transportation communitv today is to understand and respond to the changing mobility needs of not only the one in five people who are currently over 65, but the fastest-growing group over 85 years old. Present-dav public paratransit, door-to-door service is unreliable, usually requires a 24-hour advanced reservation, and publie funding is limited, so services are usually used by disabled people, although older people can qualify, and prioritized for medical and food shopping trips first. Although paratransit fares are generally comparable to regular transit, inflexible and inadequate service and poor communication about the limited services that actually are available leave many older adults who are unable or unwilling to drive stranded at home (Cobb and Coughlin, 1999). In addition to appropriately designed, affordable transportation systems, safety is especially important in creating accessible public space for vulnerable groups like women, children, and older and disabled people. Women, especially if they are older or disabled, are far more likely to fear crime and sexual assault than men, since they are far more frequently the victims of such violence, and will restrict their own and their children's activities as a result. According to a Canadian studv of urban victimization, 56 percent of women are afraid or very afraid of walking alone in their neighborhoods at night compared with 18 percent of men. The same study determined that 27 percent of women in Canada can expect to be sexually assaulted at some point in their lives, and that women are victims in 90 percent of the reported incidents of sexual assault (Toronto Transit Commission, 1989). A different national survey of Canadian women found that in 1993, one out of every two women in Canada had been physically or sexually assaulted at least once, and that the rate of incidence was significantly higher among women with disabilities-67 percent for women with physical disabilities and 98 percent for women with developmental disabilities (La France, 1999). If the fear of sexual harassment on the streets causes women stress, the very realistic fear of rape and assault keeps women off the streets at night, away from public parks and dangerous parts of town, and unconsciously afraid of half the human race. Women work very hard to avoid sexual assault in public places by using hundreds of avoidance strategies. They vary their walking routes, avoid making eye contact and talking to strangers, refrain from taking evening courses, and take a taxi instead of a bus at night despite the higher costs. They refuse jobs that involve late hours or working night shifts, and they shun recreational activities like jogging. seeing a movie alone, or even visiting friends (Wekerle et al., 1992). Many urban elderly women, especially those with limited education who live alone in apartments, feel so vulnerable to the dangers of public life that they rarely leave their homes at all, especially at night. Fear undermines women's autonomy and well-being by making them anxious, apprehensive, and isolated, and it limits their mobility and ability to participate fully in public life. City neighborhoods can also be threatening places for children, both physically and socially. Girls in particular are often confined to homes that cannot begin to meet the full range of their social and physical needs. In the deteriorated inner cities of the North and the crowded settlements of the South, children play in dangerous abandoned buildings and among piles of debris and open sewers, and take their chances with heavy traffic. In areas of political tension and violence, they face chronic anxiety, which can have long-term effects on their own social development (Bartlett, 1999). While universal design is not a substitute for systemic remedies to the social forces that isolate women, children, people who are disabled, and elderly people in their homes and place them at risk in the public realm, it can play a significant part in fostering or inhibiting their mobility and independence, and creating or preventing opportunities for assault. ## 69.12 FROM ACCESS TO INCLUSION: IMAGINING THE UNIVERSALLY DESIGNED CITY While the focus on accessibility and aging that gave rise to the universal design movement in the last decade of the twentieth century has begun to produce significant innovation in communication technologies and product and graphic design—fields in which there are few or no regulations that define bottom-line design standards—at the larger scales of buildings and communities the perception of universal design still remains limited to code compliance and wheelchair access. Compliance minimalism, as noted by Ostroff in Chap. 1, "Universal Design: The New Paradigm," has frequently meant the addition of ramps, widened doors, and "handicapped" parking, approaches that have rarely produced visually inspiring architecture and public spaces. If the movement for universal design is to effectively generate impacts in the new century that are worthy of its life-sustaining potential, universal design educators and practitioners must go beyond the "letter of the law" to the “spirit of the law"—to shift their focus from redressing human and environmental problems through remedial design to preventing problems through holistic, equitable design. If we were to define universal design as a values-based framework for design decision making, based on an ethic of inclusiveness and interdependence that values and celebrates human difference and acknowledges humanity's debt to the earth, how might this affect the way we design our neighborhoods and services, provide housing, and construct buildings? Three broad criteria will characterize and identify the universally designed city of the future: (1) establishing housing for all as a human right, (2) supporting human and environmental health, and (3) achieving safety and mobility in the public realm. ## 69.13 ESTABLISHING HOUSING FOR ALL AS A HUMAN RIGHT The universally designed city will promote and support human diversity and social equity by providing a wide spectrum of housing options that enable people of different incomes, ages, cultures, races, lifestyles, and household types to live within a single neighborhood or district. One-race, one-income-level, or one-family-type housing markets and neighborhoods will be replaced with integrated and balanced living patterns. Amended zoning laws will allow for communal living in single-family neighborhoods so that those with lesser financial resources may pool together and have more choices about where and how they live. The legalization of accessory apartments in single-family houses will allow designers to create new affordable rental apartments in the suburbs in patterns and densities that support household diversity and environmentally responsible land use development by leveraging new housing units out of existing housing stock, instead of building new construction on increasingly scarce open land. The passage of affordable energy bills will guarantee the sustainability of overall shelter, because people will be able to both afford their mortgage or rental payment and their monthly utility bills (Colton, 1994). Universally designed housing will be dynamic, not static, and changeable, adaptable, and recyclable over time in response to the changing needs of the people who use them. A household established for a family with young children will be able to be modified by the members of the family as they change and grow. Within the dwelling, the relationships and uses of various rooms will be nonspecific, lending themselves equally well to bedrooms, living rooms, workshops, or offices (Weisman, 1992). All homes will have electronic outlets high enough for older people to plug in appliances without bending down, and reinforcement in the lavatory walls near the commode and tub so that grab bars can be easily and inexpensively installed if an occupant needs them at some future time. In the universally designed city, all homes will be visitable by all people because they will feature level thresholds, zero-step entrances, a downstairs lavatory, and wider internal and external doors and corridors (Concrete Change, 1998). Persons with heart conditions or arthritis, or who are temporarily on crutches; those with baby carriages, shopping carts, or bicyeles; and children and adults of short or tall stature will benefit equally with persons whose mobility is affected from birth or by accident, illness, or aging in terms of comfort, convenience, and access to friends and family members. Cities cannot be inclusive without the guarantee of housing rights for all people. In the universally designed city, there will be no gated communities or room for intolerance of any kind. Housing rights will be established and upheld through the full participation of all social and economic groups, supported by local, municipal, and national governments working to increase the stock of affordable, centrally located land that can be accessed by poor and homeless people and other historically marginalized groups. Universally designed cities around the world will loudly and proudly proclaim themselves as “housing rights cities." They will publicly assert their intention to fully comply with the housing rights obligations incumbent on their nation that wilt be defined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in which every man, woman, and child will be guaranteed adequate housing, not as a matter of need, or as a "gift," but as an entitlement, a right, and a matter of simple human deceney and dignity (Leckie, 1998). ## 69.14 SUPPORTING HUMAN AND ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH 'The universally designed city will promote and support human and environmental health by reconfiguring suburban sprawl and dependence on automobiles, and by replacing dangerous, substandard housing with adequate, available, and affordable housing and infrastructure. In the universally designed eity there will be no environmental racism. 'The most vulnerable citizens will get the serviees they need to prevent health problems. A grassroots neighborhood wellness corps will coordinate with other community-based organizations to improve the physical environment to prevent environmentally based health problems like air pollution, water contamination, exposure to lead-based paint and asbestos, toxic dumping, and sick building syndrome. A neighborhood wellness center will provide preventative medical care for all residents. Publie buildings and private dwellings will be accessible for people with environmental sensitivities, because they will be built with nontoxic building materials, products, and technologies. Architeets and the construction industry will improve energy efficiency and reduce pollution by specifying loeal materials that are not dependent on limited, nonrenewable resources, by using local transport, by inereasing the use of recycled and agricultural and industrial waste matenals in the produetion of buildmng produets, and by incorporating insulation systems that enhance the thermal ettieieney ot buldings. Physical struetures and their sites will be designed to provide flexibility in their uses: A chureh might also serve as a public auditorium, the deck of a parking garage as a coneert space on summer nights. As the needs of the community change, buildings wilt be adapted accordingly; a warehouse might be converted to a shopping mall or apartments, a single-family house to a colleetive home. Arehitecture will be responsive and resistant to the effeets of local elimate and sustain the economy of local communities by employing the skills and labor of local people. In the universally designed city, older and lower-income adults will form incomegenerating neighborhood reeyeling teams that will transform refuse into cash by collecting, sottiung, and sellmng household and commeretal waste and used magazines and newspapers to local recyeling centers. Every neighborhood will contain a universal garden park, designed and maintained by a local universal garden society, which will welcome all people and accommodate their different baekgrounds, abilities, and experiences. 'The universal garden will provide conneetions with nature; healing; a context for horticultural therapy; a break from stress, reercation, gardening, pienies; places for children and adolescents to play in safety; and opportunities for neighbors to meet and work together (Bailey, 1999). Universal design will transform sprawling suburbs into communities of real and diverse neighborhoods that will conserve the natural environment and be compact, pedestrian friendly, and mixed use. Many activities of daily living will occur within walking distance. allowing independence for those who do not drive. Streets and public places will be comfortable and safe and encourage walking and biking, and enable neighbors to know each other. Public transit, pedestrian, and bicycle systems will maximize access and mobility for people of all ages, abilities, incomes, and lifestyles throughout a region while reducing dependence upon the automobile, thereby reducing pollution from auto emissions and reducing stress from traffic jams and long commutes. ## 69.15 ACHIEVING SAFETY AND MOBILITY IN THE PUBLIC REALM The universally designed city will promote and support independent mobility and safe access to public buildings and places. Neighborhoods will be well lit and both feel and be safe. In the long run, fear of crime and violence destroys one of the most important elements necessary for inclusive communities, the assumption that strangers on the street are potential allies, not assailants. Safety audits and walkabouts organized by local governments and police forces will be conducted regularly by diverse user groups—especially women, children, people who are disabled, and older people—to review and improve accessibility, standards of lighting, signage, and security in public parking garages, subways and train systems, bus routes, parks, streets and sidewalks, and buildings. The universally designed city will provide transportation systems that are safe, accessible, and affordable and that are scheduled and routed to support a wide range of different travel patterns. Because bus stops located in isolated areas are frightening places, transit authorities will permit drivers to do demand stops at night and on routes where there have been sexual assaults. Share-a-fare programs will transport those without transportation to jobs, health services, clinics and social services, schools, and training programs. For people who still cannot use the improved mass transit system, automobile access will be provided by a subsidized paratransit system that will offer demand-response service 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The universally designed city will be legible. Wayfinding will be easily accomplished regardless of age, culture, language skills, and physical abilities. Movement throughout public buildings and places and access to intelligent transportation systems will be facilitated by large-type signage and multisensory and multilingual information. All members of our larger human family will feel welcomed in the universally designed city because our “civic home" will provide clean and safe toilet facilities, water for washing and drinking, and places where children can rest without fear of being turned away as an essential and regular feature of collective public life. ## 69.16 BUILDING ON HISTORIC FOUNDATIONS The commitment to create safe, healthy, socially inclusive, ecologically sustainable buildings and communities is by no means unique to the proponents of universal design. Though the strategies for achieving these goals vary, they are at least partially found in numerous experiments, including the late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century garden cities and new towns that were planned in England; the socialist utopian communities that were established during the same era in Europe and North America; and in the United States at Radburn, located in Fairlawn, New Jersey, designed in 1929 as a comprehensively planned suburban community that would foster neighborly involvement and protect children from the dangers of the increasingly omnipresent automobile (Weisman, 1992). These sentiments and concerns are expressed in the contemporary manifesto of the Congress for the New Urbanism embodied in two builtneighborhood developments in Florida: Seaside, and Celebration Village owned by the Disney Corporation: and in the master planning documents of countless cities all across North America. Many of these aspirations were articulated by the solar and advocacy architects of the 1960s; the feminist architects, planners, and environmental researchers that emerged in the 1970s and 1980s; and are claimed today by a growing number of socially and environmentally responsible architects, interior designers, landscape architects, and planners. No single scheme, be it realized or imagined, past or present, comprehensively addresses the problems and possibilities deseribed in this chapter; but the one that comes the closest is the radical, visionary blueprint for designing a feminist neighborhood that architect and scholar Dolores Havden proposed in her pioneering essay, "What Would a Non-Sexist City Be Like? Speculations on Housing, Urban Design, and Human Work" (Hayden, 1980). Inspired bv the Radburn model, in which the designers Clarence Stein and Henry Wright flipped the traditional gridiron block inside out so that private houses faced inward toward shared park land, Havden prioritized "recyeling" existing antisocial, automobile-dependent, energv-consumptive suburban neighborhoods designed for male-headed nuclear families, over building new developments. In her plans, she joined together individual backyards to form publie commons and gardens; side vards and front lawns became fenced, private spaces; and private garages and sheds were converted to shared publie garages with a dial-a-ride van, laundries, day care facilities, community centers, kitehens serving take-out meals and mealson-wheels to homebound and elderly people, garden plots for growing food, a grocery and food cooperative, a home help office, and rental apartments. These services would be run as businesses for both customers and members of the community and, theoretically, create some 37 jobs for residents. Hayden envisioned that her projeet would be implemented by homemakers’ organizations made up of 40 households of women and men, thus the acronym HOMES (standing for Homemakers Organization for a More Egalitarian Society). Each HOMES group represented the composition of American households in 1980—15 percent single parents and their children, 40 percent two-worker couples and their children, 35 percent one-worker couples and their children, and 10) percent single residents -adding up to a total population of 69 adults and 64 children. Her nonprofit, cooperative plans were designed to relieve employed women from the sole responsibility for domestic life and child rearing (Hayden, 1980). Twenty years later, the existing for-profit traditional neighborhood development (TND) of Celebration Village, designed largely according to the paradigm of the “new urbanism," manages to avoid the issues of racial and economic diversity and gender equity raised by Dolores Hayden. On the positive side, Celebration Village does include a school, recreation, convenience shopping, and work within a short walk of homes, single-family houses that vary in size and price, rental apartments and small studios for live-in help above the garages, small lots that create higher densities and more shared open space, and curving streets designed to slow traffic and create safety for children. However, “it does so in the context of a rigid, controlled social machine of the type satirized in the movie The Truman Show—which may be satisfying to most of Celebration's current inhabitants but can hardly be taken as a model for the long term or on a wide scale in a nation founded on the right to cranky individualism" (Torre, 1999). In marked contrast to Celebration Village and its corporate developers, architects Kathryn McCamant and Charles Durrett have been successfully promoting cohousing in the United States since the late 1980s. Derived from the Danish bofaelleskab, which literally mcans livingtogetherness, cohousing communities in both Denmark and the United States are organized, planned, designed, and managed by the residents, in collaboration with architects and technical advisors, to anticipate changes in family structure and to support the lifestyles of couples, nuclear families, singles, single parents, and retirees (Weisman, 1992). Each household has a private residence, but also shares extensive common facilities with the larger group such as a kitchen and dining hall, children's playrooms, workshops, guestrooms, and laundry facilities. Although individual dwellings are designed to be self-sufficient and each has its own kitchen, the common facilities, particularly common dinners, are an important aspect of community life both for social and practical reasons (McCamant and Durrett, 1988). In Sweden, the servicehus, or family hotel, established in 1907 by the Swedish government to support workers and their families, provides residents with the benefits of cohousing but also offers housecleaning services, child care, maternity and well-baby clinics, medical care for elderly people, errand running for the sick, hobby rooms, youth clubs, plant watering during vacations, and gymnasia (Weisman, 1992). In Scandinavia and the Netherlands, housing arrangements for older people are frequently designed to extend their services and amenities, such as restaurants, bars, swimming pools, and meetings rooms, to people from the surrounding community (Regnier, 1994). In both Europe and the United States, cohousing developments have been built in cities and suburbs and range in size from 6 to 80 households (McCamant and Durrett, 1988). The first sustainably designed cohousing development in the United States, Winslow Cohousing. consists of 30 households of 80 people, 30 of them children. Like Radburn, Winslow is pedestrian based and children play safely in shared parks and gardens. The desire to create a sustainable neighborhood that balances architecture and nature and the autonomy of private dwellings with the advantages of community living was also central to the design of Village Homes, built in Davis, California. Architect/developer Michael Corbett laid out the streets primarily in an east-west direction and building lots in a north-south direction, so that most of the windows could be located on the south side of the houses to capture the warmth of the winter sun, while overhangs would keep out summer sun to avoid excessive cooling loads. The streets were made atypically narrow so that they would be easier to shade with trees that would keep the microclimate very comfortable. Corbett broke so many conventional rules—like building in higher densities on smaller lots to preserve more shared green space, including a community garden that produces food, and using natural creek ways and surface drainage, that it took 3 years to gain the approvals and financing needed to build the project. Today, Village Homes is an overwhelming success: Property values have risen dramatically; no one wants to move; and there is a long waiting list to buy into the development (Danitz and Zelov, 1994). At the urban scale, Jaime Lerner, an accomplished architect and three-time mayor, involved all the citizens of Curitiba in the transformation of their city into the ecological capital of Brazil by reducing the use of private cars and separating garbage. Curitiba's inexpensive transit system has been made so efficient that it has cut down on pollution, traffic congestion, and energy consumption. By increasing the frequency of service, designating exclusive bus lanes, using articulated buses with drop-down boarding ramps instead of stairs, and making boarding and disembarking quick, painless, and universally accessible with elevated boarding "tubes"that serve as glass shelters at bus stops, the buses have become an enjoyable and much more affordable alternative to cars. Both Steinfeld (in Chap. 24, "Universal Design in Mass Transportation") and Guimarães (in Chap. 57, "Universal Design Evaluation in Brazil: Development of Rating Scales") discuss Curitiba's advanced system. City planners from around the world have gone to Curitiba for advice on how to relieve their own traffic problems and to study Curitiba's “Garbage That Is Not Garbage" program. In 1989, Curitiba held a referendum for a voluntary program of recycling that would involve the entire population of 1.5 million, especially the poorer communities, after they had emphatically rejected a mandatory recycling program. To provide an incentive for people that they could understand, Mayor Lerner announced that the city would pay for bags of recyclable trash with bags of food or transit tokens. Organized through existing neighborhood associations, within months, 120,000 people from 55 communities were participating in the incentive programs. While the city collects 23 tons of recyclables a day, “private entrepreneurs" are col-Îecting over 100 tons (Danitz and Zelov, 1994). ## 69.17 MOVING THE DESIGN AGENDA FORWARD IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY These and countless unnamed examples of innovative historie and contemporary urban/suburban design affirm the faet that remapping the geography of our established social order, while certainly possible, is ineredibly eomplex and slow. 'The ideas for transforming the public realm set forth in this chapter are not just utopian fantasies; some already exist, while others have vet to be aetualized but mav prove to be survival imperatives. Who could have imagined at the turn of the last century looking out of the window of an aireraft flying aeross the United States at night? “Streetlights have spread like galaxies aeross this eontinent, reaehing far out into farmland and desert, elaiming rural spaces that onee seemed infinite. We are spending our nation's capital in sprawl, with potentially dire consequenees for our children and ourselves" (Ivy, 1999). Who among us ean imagine with certainty what will be 100 years from now? One thing is eertain, we will not ereate inelusive spatial patterns of living and working until society values those aspeets of human experienee that have been devalued through the marginalization of women, children, poor, disabłed, and older people, gay people, and people of color. Because our cities and buildings embody our common humanity, because they are a record of deeds done by those who have had the power to build, they will not be easily changed until the society that produeed them is changed. A demoeratie and sustainable vision for living can only be realized if it is shared by the majority of people and ehosen as a preferred way of life. So what does the movement for universal design bring to historie and ongoing efforts to ereate equitable, sustainable environments? Universal design ean have a unique and powerfully positive impact in two ways. First, universal design ean elevate design and its value in the publie consciousness. By improving the person-to-produet or person-to-environment interface, universal design enhances comfort, health, safety, and human performanee. The tangible results in a workplace, for example, might inelude a reduetion in human error, which impacts risk management, inereases in produetivity, reduetions in sick days and job turnover, and decreased insurance claims (see Chap. 45, “Offiee and Workplace Design," by Mueller). By promoting the benefits of universal designing to companies, their employees, and the general public, we are also promoting the importanee of good design and the value that designers bring to their elients and to society. Proponents of universal design are particularly well positioned to convince the publie and those who make decisions about what aetually gets built—the developers, city managers and mayors, real estate industry, corporations, and financial institutions—that design expertise should be used as a tool to ereate rather than respond to publie poliey, legal regulations, and building codes. Further, unhealthy and ugly buildings cost society greatly, both economically and in terms of our social existence, which is inereasingly charaeterized by so much violence that gated communities; security devices in our cars, homes, and workplaces; and restrietions on our ability to walk in publie parks and on city streets have beeome a way of life. Second, universal design education and praetiee has the potential to address social, cultural, and ecological sustainability as inseparable from teetonies and technologies, and to foster the practice of high ethical standards. While not the rule in landseape arehiteeture and urban planning, traditional arehiteetural praxis has often assumed that form making is an autonomous act that is divoreed from the notion of social responsibility and civic engagement. Universal designers resolve the inherently false dichotomy between these two opposing ideologies—architeeture as a formal art versus architeeture as a social art—by embracing creative work that is equally dedicated to both the making of formally beautiful products, buildmgs, and commumnities, and the making ot a bettet, mote just society through addressing human and environmental problems and coneerns. Universal design fosters ethieal behavior among design professionals because it fundamentally recognizes that when we design, we affect the lives of others by our decisions, and that we are therefore responsible and accountable to the people who will be affected by what we do. Ending the spread of placeless sprawl, the loss of wilderness and rural landscapes, and the increasing separation by race and income; restoring deteriorated and unhealthy cities, the fights to end environmental racism and gender discrimination, and working to create an environment in which the talents of children, and disabled and older people can find full expression and their needs be met, are all interrelated community building challenges. While physical design solutions alone will not solve the social and economic problems of the twentyfirst century, community stability, economic vitality, and environmental health cannot be sustained without a coherent and supportive physical framework (Congress for the New Urbanism, undated). If we are to design a society in which all people and all living things matter, in this new century we will have to move beyond the politics of human and environmental exploitation that defined the twentieth century. Universal design provides us with important guidelines for doing so by recognizing the interdependence among all of humanity, the natural world, and the products of human design, including the built and planned environment, and by teaching us to think, to act, and to design out of that recognition and understanding. ## 69.19 BIBLIOGRAPHY Ahrentzen, Sherry, "The F Word in Architecture: Feminist Analyses in/of/for Architecture," in Thomas A. Dutton and Lian Hurst Mann (eds.), Reconstructing Architecture: Critical Discourses and Social Practices, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN, 1996, pp. 86–86. Bailey, Ann, "A Universal Garden for Vancouver," Accessible BC (Summer 1999): 1, 1999. Bartlett, Sheridan, "How Urban Design Can Support Children's Rights," Habitat Debate 5(2): 18, 1999. Cobb, Roger W., and Joseph F. Coughlin, "Keeping Baby Boomer Mobile." Transition, 4(Summer 1999): 7–9, 32–33, 1999. Colton, Roger D., “Energy Policy Hurts the Poor," Shelterforce, 76(July/August 1994): 9, 1994. Concrete Change, An International Effort to Make All Homes Visitable, 1998; Web site: http:/ concretechange.home.mindspring.com. Congress for the New Urbanism, History and Membership, brochure, undated. Danitz, Brian, and Chris Zelov, “Ecological Design, Inventing the Future," San Luis Video Publishing, Los Osos, CA, 1994. Der-Petrossian, Baris, "Conflicts Between the Construction Industry and the Environment," Habitat Debate, 5(2): 8, 1999. Free, Karen, "Millions Are Worried Sick About Housing." Habitat World (August/September 1998): 7–8, 1998. Hayden, Dolores, "What Would a Non-Sexist City Be Like? Speculations on Housing, Urban Design and Human Work," Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, Supplement, 5(3): S170–S187, 1980. -, Redesigning the American Dream: The Future of Housing, Work, and Family Life, Norton, New York, 1984. Ivy, Robert, “Standing Up to Sprawl," editorial, Architectural Record, 188(1): 15, 1999. La France, Cathy, “Cowichan Valley Safer Futures Project," Accessible BC, (Summer 1999): 4, 1999. Leckie, Scott, "Cities Cannot Be Inclusive Without Housing Rights." Habitat Debate, 4(4): 22–23, 1998. McCamant, Kathryn, and Charles Durrett, Cohousing, A Contemporary Approach to Housing Ourselves, Habitat Press, Berkeley, CA, 1988, p. 10. McLead, Milana, "Remedy for Ill Health: Decent Shelter," Habitat World (August/September 1998): 2, 1998. N'Dow, Wally, “Address by Dr. Wally N'Dow, Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements," delivered at the International Council for Caring Communities Conference, 10 January 1995, United Nations, New York, 1995, p. 2. Nichols, Matthew, "Driving Ourselves to Death." Habitat Debatc, 4(2): 6: 7. 1998. Regnier, Victor A., Assisted Living Housing for the Elderly. Design Innovations from the United States and Europe, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1994, pp. 62–63. Roodman, David Malin, and Nicholas Lenssen. "Our Buildmngs. Ourselves," Worhd Watch (November/December 1994): 22–24, 1994. Seager, Joni, Earth Follies, Routledge, New York, 1993, pp. 183–184. Story, Molly Follette, “Is it Universal?" Inovation (Spring 1997): 30. 1997. Toronto Transit Commission. Moving Forward: Making fransit Safer for Women, loronto Mansit Com mission, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 1989, p. 19. Torre, Susana, "Expanding the Urban Design Agenda." in Joan Rothschild (ed.). Design d femintisn. Re-Visioning Spaces, Places, and Everyday Things, Rutgers University Piess, New Brunswick, NJ, 1999. pp. 37–38. United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, Global Report on Human Setlements Revcat: 500 Million Homeless or Poorly Housed in Cities Worldwide, paper published by the United Nations Con ference on Human Settlements, Istanbul. 'Turkey. 3- 14 June 1996, p. 1. United Nations Department of Public Information. A New Age for Old Age. paper publishied by the United Nations Department of Public Information. New York. 1994. Weisman, Leslie Kanes, Discrimination by Design: A Feminist Critique of the Man Made Environment, University of Illinois Press, Urbana, I1, 1992, pp. 138, 148- 154. 155. 177. Wekerle, Gerda R., and Carolyn Whitzman, Safe Cities: Guidelines for Planning, Design, and Manage ment, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1995. , and City of Toronto Planning and Development Staff. A Working Guide for Planning and Designing Safer Urban Environments, Safe City Committee of the City of Toronto Planning and Devet opment Department, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 1992, p. 2. Williams, Brian, "The Missing Link: Towards Sustainable Urban 'Transport," Habitat Debute, 4(2): 1. Women's Environment & Development Organization (WFDO). "Overview: Habitat I Women in the Cities," New's and View's, 9(1–2) (Junc-July 1996): 1, 1996. "WEDO Factsheet." New's and Views (November 1998): 11, 1998. Aalto, Alvar, 1.7, 27.+27.5 Abel, Cora Beth, 43.27, 60.4 Access: A Guide to Accessible Design for Designers, Builders, Facility Owners and Managers (Finkel), 36.3 Access Board, 1.8, 12.2, 12.3, 19.15, 20.5, 43.9, 43.23, 62.2, 65.10 Access to design professions, 51.21 Accessibility: aging and, 17.1-17.12 architecture and, 27.2–27.5 defined, 1.5, 12.1, 15.1, 28.3–28.4, 31.1 historical preservation and, 57.17-57.18 information technology and, 65.3–65.15 mass media and, 67.1–67.14 telecommunications technology and, 65.3–65.15 as universal design, 26.1–26.19 versus universal design, 12.1 U.S. courts and, 18.1–18.20 vision impairment and, 61.1–61.16 World Wide Web and, 66.1–66.13 Accessibility codes and standards: aging and, 17.1–17.12 American Standard A117.1-1961, 25.6 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and, 18.4–18.7 in Canada, 16.1–16.17 ergonomic data and, 12.6–12.7 future of, 12.7 in Germany, 13.3–13.5 history of, 12.3–12.5 interpretation of, 18,1–18.20 in Israel, 31.1–31.2 in Italy, 13.3–13.5, 15.2–15.4, 15.6–15.8 in Japan, 17.1–17.12, 30.4–30.8 in the Netherlands, 28.8–28.9 in Norway, 13.3–13.5 in Scotland, 13.3–13.5 in the United Kingdom, 13.3–13.5, 14.3-14.6 in the United States, 12.1–12.8, 18.1–18.20, 35.1–35.12 U.S. courts and, 18.1–18.20 Accessibility for the Disabled: A Design Manual for a Barrier-Free Environment (Solidere), 63.5–63.7 Accessibility for the Disabled in the Urban Environment in the ESCWA Region: Planning and Design Solutions (United Nations), 63.7 defined,12.2-12.3 in India, 32.4 in Israel, 31.1-31.2 in ltaly, 15.2–15.6, 20.1-20.4 in Japan, 17.2-17.4, 17.7, 17.10-17.11, 30.3-30.10 in the Netherlands, 28.10 technical requirements and, 15.4-15.0 in the United States, 3.4–3.5, 4.7, 0.0. 7.1-7.3,12.1-12.0, 17.2, IS118N14354110 U.S. courts and, 18.1-18.20 Accessibility needs, 7.1–7.13 Accessibility of Outdoor Environnent. Buildings and Houses (Nederlands Normalisatie Instituut), 28.11 Accessible and Usable Building Law (Japan), 17.1, 17.4–17.5, 17.7, 30.3, 30.5-30.8 Accessible and Usable Dwellings Projeet (Canada), 36.13 Accessible design: in Brazil, 24.21–24.23 in Canada, 16.1–16.9, 30.1–36.14 defined, 51.4, 65.4 in France, 27.1–27.23 in Hungary, 28.8 in India, 5.1–5.19 in 1srael, 31.1–31.11 in Italy, 15.1–15.23, 26.1–26.18 in Japan, 17.1–17.11, 21.1–21.12, 30,1-30.18 in Lebanon, 63.1–63.17 in the Netherlands, 28.1–28.17 in Norway, 29.1–29.12 in Singapore, 40.1–40.19 in the United Kingdom, 14.1–14.13 United Nations and, 11.1–11.10 in the United States, 1.5, 10.3 - 10.17, 12.1–12.8, 35.1–35.13, 46.1 46.19 as universal design, 15.2, 26.1-26.16 versus universal design, 12.1, 51.4 Accessible educational environments, 46.2-46.7, 46.946.18 Accessible housing: in Australia, 38.1–38.10 in Canada, 36.1-36.14 care apartment concept, 37.1–37.8 in Germany, 13.1–13.12, 39.1–39.24 in Italy, 13.1–13.12, 26.5-26.13 in Japan, 17.5–17.9 Awessible housmg (cows) 1itenme Homes concept, 14.1-1414 nem generaton umncrsat homevon cpt.34.33421 In Nowa, 13.1 1312 1n Scotand, 1.3.1 1.3.12.141 1080 m Smgapore, 40.1 40 19 m Swuzetland. 37.1 3'S m the Unued Kmgdham, 13.1 1.312 m the Unted States. 35.11 Acvesstble pubhe buakigs 1n Ftance, 27.1, 27.2, 21.8, 2714 2720 m ttaly, 15.0 15.8 m the Unted States 041 04 10 Acvesstble stiveta and neighhonhoonds. A8.1 38.22 disabhang tactors, 58.4 58 1 pumeiples of umnersal destgn and, 89 steet audus and. S8.12 S8.17 universal design and, N8.' 58.12, 58 18.58.20 Accesstble lramspoutatton l an (Japan). 17.10 Acves Phoraded (Dutch Counetl ot the Disabted).28.5.28.7.28.9.28.10) Aet Comncerming Suppont and Serte ton Persons wah Certam Fuetomnal Impairments (Sweden). 20.. Active Livmg Alltance (Canada), o.8 Activitios of dathy lmg (AD1). 2.8, 7.11 Acaahrng C'nveral Dexign (tmket and Gold). 10.11 ADA (Americans Wuth Disabtlutes Act) 3.4. 3.5. 4.7, 0.0, 7.1 7.3, 7.5. 12.1 12.0, 10.4,17.2, 18.1 18.15, 20.3, 25.0, 35.3, 43.4, 43.1–43.10, 43.22,43.27, 45.1, 40.0, 47.1, 49 10, ADAAG (Amerteans wuth Disabuhiutes Act Acvesstbuluty Gundetumnes), 1.5, 10.4, 12.3–12.4, 19.15,25.2, 25.0, 35.3. 42.2,47.3 47.5,01.4,02.2,04.3 ADAAG Review Fedetal Adisoy Comttee, 12.3 ADA Handbock (Hawouth, Ie), 4) 10) ADA implementatton m publie schools. accesstbuility issues, 02.2 02.4 case study, 02.4 02.1.3 compliance plamming prowess, 02.4 regulatory context, 02.1 022 univetsal destgn, 02.13–02 14 Adaptable design, 57.6 Adaptable housing: versus accessible housing, 38.2 in Australia, 38.1–38.2, 38.7–38.13 benefits of, 38.7–38.10 case studies, 38.10–38.13 defined, 38.2 Adaptable Housing Standards AS 4299 (Australia), 38.2 Adapted design, 57.6 Adaptive Environments Center (United States), 10.13, 43.27, 51.8, 60.1–60.15 Adaptive Environments Laboratory (United States), 43.27 ADA Standards for Accessible Design (United States), 1.5, 12.3, 12.6, 43.8 A Day's Journey Through Life© (gameboard/simulation), 52.5, 52.6 Adequate design, 57.6–57.7 Administration on Aging, 51.6, 51.7 Advocacy and Action Programme (Africa), 3.9 African Decade for Persons with Disabilities (2000–2009), 63.2 Agency for Promoting Tourism in Venice (Italy), 15.11 and accessibility design standards, 17.1-17.11 and accessible housing, 36.3–36.4, 40.1-40.19 and adaptable housing, 38.1–38.2, 38.7-38.13 and automobile design, 50.1–50.13 demographic trends, 1.8, 2.3, 3.10, 4.1, 4.8–4.10, 5.3, 38.2–38.3 with disabilities, 4.2, 4.9, 4.10, 4.21, 4.22, 38.1–38.16 and universal design, 1.8, 2.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.9, 3.10, 4.13, 4.14, 4.21, 38.13–38.14, 40.15–40.18 and urbanism, 17.1–17.2 and vision impairments, 61.2–61.3 Alexander, Christopher, 56.8 Ali, Muhammad, 47.13 Allio, René, 27.19 Alzheimer's disease: assisted living residences for, 8.6–8.9 design principles for caregivers, 8.3–8.6, 8.9–8.12, 22.5–22.11 developmental disabilities and, 38.5 overview, 8.1–8.2, 22.1–22.5 universal design and, 8.12–8.13, 22.11–22.22 American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), 43.24 American Coalition of Citizens with Disabilities, 43.5 American Institute of Architects (AIA) 18.7, 35.8, 43.9 American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, 31.3 American National Standards Institute (ANSI), 10.4, 12.2–12.3, 16.6 American National Standards Institute (ANSI) accessibility standard, 46.4 American Public Health Association (APHA), 23.18 American Standard A117.1-1961,25.6, 25.10 Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines. (see ADAAG) Americans with Disabilities Act. (see ADA) Amsterdam Treaty of the European Union, 3.5, 33.3 Andreesen, Marc, 67.2 Annotated Bibliography on Universal Design (BC Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing), 36.2 Apple Computer, 43.27 Applications Guide (Herman Miller, Inc.), 45.9, 45.10 Appointment of an Architect (RIBA), 44.2 Aragall, Frances, 60.11 Archea, John, 23.8 Archer, L. Bruce, 3.11 Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (ATBCB), 1.8, 12.2, 12.3, 19.15, 20.5, 43.9, 43.23, 62.2 Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (United States), 3.4, 12.3, 43.5, 46.4 Architectural Graphic Standards (Ramsey and Sleeper), 16.2 Areas of rescue assistance (ARA), 46.14 Arthur, Paul, 16.12, 16.14 Asian and Pacific Decade of Disabled Persons, 1993-2002 (United Nations), 17.11, 32.2, 40.2 Asian Training Centre on Ageing (ATCOA), 40.15 Asia-Pacific region: accessible design and accessibility, 40.2-40.7 contrasted with western cultures, 32.1–32.10 demographic trends, 32.2–32.3 general conditions, 32.3–32.4 housing for older persons, 40.1–40.19 legal and political climate, 32.4–32.5 social conditions, 32.5–32.9 universal design, 32.9, 32.10, 40.1, 40.15–40.18 universal design pilot projects, 59.1–59.20 Assistance Benefit Act (Sweden), 20.3 Assistive technology: evaluation criteria for, 49.2–49.4 universal design and, 49.9–49.10 Association of Citizens with Disabilities (Italy), 15.15 Atlanta Olympic Games (1996), 47.2, 47.6–47.9 Atlanta Paralympic Games (1996), 47.8 aging in place in adaptable housing, 38.1-38.16 aging with developmental disabilities, 38.1–38.16 case studies, 38.10–38.13 indigenous design studio project, 53.1=53.12,53.15 universal design, 38.13–38.14 universal design studio projects, 53.1-53.16 Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (ATAG 1.0), 66.3, 66.8 Automobile design, 50.1–50.13 case studies, 50.5, 50.11 design guidelines, 50.4, 50.5, 50.7–50.11 entering and exiting considerations, 50.2–50.4 in-vehicle information, 50.9–50.11 navigation, 50.7–50.8 perception of the environment, 50.5–50.7 safety considerations, 50.8–50.9 seating considerations, 50.4–50.5 universal design and, 50.1–50.2, 50.11–50.12 Autophotography, 56.8–56.9 Azine, Sheldon, 43.21 Bagnacavallo nursing home (Italy), 15.7 Bangkok Metropolitan Authority (BMA), 32.9 Bangkok universal design pilot project (Thailand), 59.12–59.14, 59.18 Barrier-free design: defined, 1.5, 36.2 in England, 13.1–13.14 in Europe, 1.5 in Germany, 13.1–13.14, 39.1–39.24 in Italy, 13.1–13.14 in Japan, 11.5 in Lebanon, 63.1–63.17 in Norway, 1.5, 13.1–13.14 in Scotland, 13.1–13.14 in Sweden, 1.5 in the United States, 1.5 Baselga di Piné intermediate school (Italy), 15.6–15.7 Bathroom and toilet facility design: in Germany, 13.8 history of, 42.3–42.4 in India, 5.15–5.17 in Italy, 26.6–26.12 in next-generation universal home, 34.15–34.16 in Norway, 13.8 Bathroom and toilet facility design (Cont.): in the United Kingdom, 13.8, 14.9–14.10,25.1–25.10 in the United States, 35.4–35.12, 42.1–42.24 universal bathrooms, 42.1–42.24 Bay Area Outreach and Recreation Program (BORP), 64.1 Bayes, Kenneth, 3.5 Beautiful Barrier Free, 43.28 Bedroom design: in England, 13.10 in Germany, 13.8, 13.10 in Italy, 26.6 in Norway, 13.10 in Scotland, 13.10 Beecher, Catherine, 52.2 Beijing universal design pilot project (China), 59.3–59.9, 59.15 Beirut Central District rehabilitation project (Lebanon), 63.1–63.17 Berry, Wendell, 3.13 Bhabha, Homi, 53.3, 53.15 Black, Misha, 3.11 Blaich, Robert, 4.6 Blockbuster-Sony Music Entertainment Centre (United States), 18.10 Boreskie, Michael, 16.12 Boston Foundation (United States), 60.6 Boston Redevelopment Authority, 60.1 Boston Society of Architects (BSA), 60.11 access standards, 25.10 Bottom-up methodology of universal design: American standard, 25.6 discrimination against women, 25.7–25.9 Brazil: BB School in Belo Horizonte, 57.7-57.10 Curitiba urban transit system, 24.21-24.23 people with sight impairments, 25.12–25.13 Bouwman, Mies, 28.4 products versus buildings, 25.1–25.2 universal design pyramid, 25.3–25.6 Rating Scale for Inclusive Design, 57.3-57.10 Braman, Lawrence, 60.6 universal design evaluation development, 57.1–57.21 Bramante, Donato, 16.2 Briefing approaches for inclusive universal design: developing an information base, 44.6 semistructured interviews, 44.4–44.6 steering group, 44.6–44.7 Brightman, Alan, 43.27 Bringa, Olav Rand, 1.9 Bristol street audits (United Kingdom) 58.12–58.20 Broward County sports arena (United States), 18.10 Brown, Linda, 43.4 Brown vs. the Board of Education (1954), 1.4, 43.4 Brundtland, Harlem, 33.3 Buckwalter, K., 22.4 Budorow, Constance, 60.6 Building and Construction Authority (Singapore), 40.12 Building Code of Australia (BCA), 38.7 Building codes: in Australia, 38.7 in Canada, 16.4–16.6 civil rights and, 12.5 local and state, 12.3–12.4 in New Zealand, 16.7 performance versus prescriptive, 12.5–12.6, 16.6, 16.7 in the United States, 12.1–12.8 Canadian Standards Association (CSA). 6.3,16.6 Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC), 16.11 Building Evaluation Techniques (Baird et al.), 9.14 Care apartment concept (Switzerland), 37.1-37.8 Building Performance Evaluation (BPE), 9.1, 9.2, 9.12, 9.13 Canadian Paraplegic Association, 16.6 Building Regulations (United Kingdom) 14.1, 14.2, 14.5, 14.11 Canadian Federal Task Force on Disability Issues, 16.8 Building Research Institute (Japan), 17.5 Building Standard Law (Japan), 17.2–17.4, 17.10, 17.11, 30.5 Canadian Commission on Building and Fire Codes (CCBFC), 16.5 Canadian Codes Centre (CCC), 16.7, 16.11 Swiss context, 37.2 Canadian Human Rights Act (CHRA), 16.7.16.8 Building Standards for the Handicapped 1965, Supplement No. 7 (Canada), 16.4 Canadian Centre of Disability Studies (CCDS), 6.4, 16.11 Burke, Marde, 41.13 Care for the Aged Insurance System (Japan), 17.10 Bus shelter design: in Italy, 26.17 in the United King case study, 37.3 Canadian Human Rights Commission (CHRC), 16.8 Butler, Nick, 4.6 Califano, Joseph, 43.5 Canada (Cont.): universal design, 16.1–16.15, 36.1-36.14 Canadian Institute for Barrier-Free Design (CIBFD), 6.2, 6.4–6.6, 6.8, 16.9, 36.2 user-friendly demonstration house, 36.13 Cambridge University Engineering Design Centre (United Kingdom), 4.22 Canadian Aging and Rehabilitation Product Development Corporation (ARCOR), 16.13, 16.14 Calkins, Margaret, 10.14 special features, 37.4–37.6 Cambridge University Interdisciplinary Research Centre on Ageing (United Kingdom), 4.22 Campbell, Robert, 43.16 accessibility laws and legislation, 16.4–16.7 seniors'residences, 36.3, 36.4 multifamily housing projects, 36.6-36.12 independent living movement, 16.4 building codes, 16.4–16.7 human rights legislation, 16.7–16.8 group living projects, 36.4–36.6 accessible housing, 36.1–36.14 Carroll, Caitriona, 14.11 Albuquerque Public Schools District (United States), 62.4–62.13 Bagnacavallo nursing home (Italy) 15.7 Baselga di Piné intermediate school (Italy), 15.6–15.7 BB School in Belo Horizonte (Brazil). 57.7-57.10 Bristol street audits (England), 58.12, 58.15-58.18 Beirut Central District (Lebanon), 63.1-63.17 Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie de la Villette (France), 27.14–27.17 Curitiba urban transit system (Brazil) 24.21–24.23 Edward W. Brooke Courthouse (United States), 43.14–43.17 Fair Housing bathroom designs (United States), 35.4–35.8 Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (United States), 43.17–43.21 Friendly House (Italy), 26.5–26.6 Case studies (Cont.): Grenoble tram system (France), 27.8–27.14 Celebration Village (United States), 69.14 Hearthstone assisted living residence (United States), 8.6–8.9 Centennial Olympic Games Guide for Guests with Disabilities (Paralyzed Veterans of America et al.), 47.14 Hula Nature Reserve (Israel), 31.4 Ibach Park (United States), 19.11–19.14 Interior design program at Eastern Michigan University (United States), 52.4–52.16 Center for Accessible Housing (United States), 43.27 Center for Accessible Technology (CforAT), 64.1 Langgrütstrasse care apartment (Switzerland), 37.3–37.6 Lear TransG concept vehicle (United States), 50.5 Center for Applied Special Technology (CAST), 46.3 Lifetime Homes (United Kingdom), 14.11-14.13 Center for Inclusive Design and Environmental Access (IDEA), 36.13, 41.3, 42.6, 42.14, 43.27 Lighthouse International headquarters building (United States), 61.8–61.13 Center for Independent Living (CIL), 64.1,64.8 Lille metro system (France), 27.8–27.10 Center for Universal Design (United States), 3.7, 9.7, 10.3, 10.4, 10.6, 10.13, 10.15, 10.16, 20.5, 22.11, 26.3, 27.22, 34.5, 43.28, 49.3 Lions Millennium Place (Canada), 36.6–36.7 Central Provident Fund (Singapore), 40.4 Liverpool Street Station (United Kingdom), 25.8–25.9 Centre for Aboriginal Programmes (Australia), 53.5 Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle (France), 27.17–27.20 Nomentano Market (Italy), 15.8 Centre on Accessible Environments (United Kingdom), 3.5 OnStar in-vehicle communications system, 50.11 Charter of Rights and Freedoms (Canada), 20.3 Chemetov, Paul, 27.17, 27.19 Child, Julia, 41.7 Patton Hall (United States), 43.11-43.14 Pinerolo neighborhood agreement (Italy), 15.17–15.18 Pistoia historic urban center (Italy), 15.10-15.11 Cisneros, Henry, 43.25 Rinku Park/Symbolic Green Park (Japan), 48.16–48.23 Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie de la Villette (France), 27.14–27.17 Saitama New City Center project (Japan), 30.11–30.16 Civic Meeting for Barrier-Free Environments for All Citizens in Sendai (Japan), 30.2 Sensory Garden, Oizumi Ryokuchi Park (Japan), 48.9–48.16 St. Georges Place (Canada), 36.7–36.8 Civil Rights Act of 1964 (United States) 12.2, 43.4 Takadanobaba District sidewalk improvement project (Japan), 30.16-30.18 Tel Dan National Park (Israel), 31.4 Casson, Hugh, 3.11 Trento park and sport facilities (Italy) 15.11–15.13 User-Friendly Demonstration Home (Canada), 36.13 Venice urban pedestrian pathways (Italy), 15.11 Civil rights and universal design, 43.1–43.31 civil rights based on disability, 43.4–43.5 civil rights based on race, 43.4 civil rights origins, 43.1 William Rudd House (Canada), 36.4–36.6 Zürich care apartment (Switzerland) 37.1-37.8 Zajac Norgate House (Canada), 36.9–36.12 Case Studies on Universal Design (Mueller), 10.13 Cloudesley chair (as example of universal design), 4.4 Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1988, 43.6 Coalition of Provincial Organizations of the Handicapped (Canada), 16.4 Cohen, Uriel, 51.7 Code on Barrier-Free Accessibility in Buildings (Singapore), 32.3, 40.5–40.6, 40.12 Coleman, Roger, 1.4, 1.8, 4.12, 5.14 Colonel Wright School (United States), 46.7 Commission for Social Development (United Nations), 11.2–11.3, 11.8-11.9 Commission on Sustainable Development (United Nations), 33.11 Colwell, David, 4.16, 4.17 Commonwealth Disability Discrimination Act (Australia), 38.2 Communauté Urbaine de Lille (France), 27.8–27.10 Computer Technologies Program (CTP), 64.1 Concrete changes, 43.24–43.25 Conference on Environment and Development (United Nations), 33.4 Conference on Human Rights (United Nations), 11.2 Congress for New Urbanists (CNU), 43.25 Connell, Bettye Rose, 10.7 Cost of Accessible Housing (U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development), 35.13 Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities Task Force, 43.7 Constitution Law of 1988 (Brazil), 57.2 Consumer Education and Ręsearch Centre (India), 5.15 Council of Canadians with Disabilities, 6.4 Consumer Product Safety Commission (United States), 23.4 Cooley, Mike, 4.4, 4.7 Cornford, Chris, 3.11 Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum (United States), 56.3 Council on Higher Education Accreditation (CHEA), 52.4 Corbett, Michael, 69.15 Corbusier, Le, 16.2, 28.13 Cousins, Norman, 43.28 Covington, George, 41.7 Cowans, Julie, 14.11 Crisp and Clear (periodical), 1.11 Critères d’accessibilité aux présentations du musée (Grosbois and Araneda), 27.4 Crocker, Allen, 60.6 Cultural futures at University of Western Australia, 53.1–53.16 Curitiba urban transit system (Brazil), 24.21–24.23, 57.3, 69.15 Curriculum for Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (Letourneau et al.), 66.11 Dardailler, Daniel, 66.2 Darton, David, 14.11 Darwin, Robin, 3.11 da Vinci, Leonardo, 16.2, 27.3 Decade of People with Disabilities (United Nations), 32.2 Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (United Nations), 11.2 Declaration on the Rights and Responsibilities of Older Persons (International Federation on Aging), 3.9 DeJong, Gerben, 16.4 Designing for the Disabled (Goldsmith), 27.4, 28.5 Delft University of Technology (Netherlands), 28.12 Delouvrier, Paul, 27.14, 27.16 Dementia: assisted living residences for people with, 8.6–8.9 design principles for caregivers, 8.3–8.6, 8.9–8.12, 22.5–22.11 developmental disabilities and, 38.5 Demographic trends, 1.3, 4.1, 4.2, 4.9, 4.10, 5.3, 27.1, 27.2, 34.3–34.4, 39.3, 39.4, 40.5, 49.11–49.12, 61.2, 69.5–69.10 Department of Justice (DOJ), 12.2, 12.4, 12.5, 43.9 Deployment and Integration of Smart Card Technology and Information Networks for Cross-Sector Telematics (DISTINCT Project), 68.1–68.17 universal design and, 8.12–8.13, 22.11-22.22 DesignAge program (United Kingdom). 4.3, 4.7, 4.11–4.13, 4.16–4.21 Department of Trade and Industry (United Kingdom), 4.22 Design Business Association (United Kingdom), 4.13 Designers West (periodical), 43.27 Design Exchange (Canada), 16.10 Design for All conference (Spain), 27.22 Design for all, 1.5, 1.7–1.8, 3.4, 27.1, 27.5–27.7, 28.1, 28.17 Design for Need conference (United Kingdom), 4.7 Design for Our Future Selves program (United Kingdom), 4.1–4.22 Design for the Real World (Papanek), 5.11 Designing for the 21st Century: An International Conference on Universal Design (1998), 43.28, 49.9, 52.16 Design Guidelines for Accessible Outdoor Recreation Facilities (Parks Canada), 20.6 Design Guidelines for Urban Parks/Accessible Facilities for People with Disabilities (Japan), 21.1 Design Guidelines of Buildings and Facilities Toward Realizing a Welfare City (Japan), 17.2–17.3 Design Guidelines of Dwellings for the Aging Society (Japan), 17.5 Designing for Accessibility (Herman Miller, Inc.), 45.7 Designing for Dementia (Calkins), 8.1 Designing for the 21st Century II: An International Conference on Universal Design, 65.14 Designing for Our Future Selves (Coleman), 4.12, 5.14 Design Research Unit (United Kingdom), 3.5 Design Studio (Schön), 53.7 Deutsche Industrie Norm (DIN) standards for barrier-free housing (Germany), 39.1 Developing economies, 32.1–32.11 Developmental disabilities: and adaptable housing, 38.2 aging in place with, 38.1–38.16 and Alzheimer's disease, 38.5 and cancer, 38.5 defined, 38.3 and dementia, 38.5 and fall injuries, 38.6–38.7 and hearing impairment, 38.5 and osteoporosis, 38.5–38.6 and polypharmacy, 38.6 and vision impairment, 38.5 Deutsche Industrie Norm (DIN), 13.3 de Wolfe, Elsie, 52.2 Dhody, K. M., 32.8 Dhoti (as example of universal design), 5.4 Dietrich, Eric, 60.6 Division for Populations with Special Needs (Israel), 31.3–31.4, 31.7 Diffrient, Niels, 41.7 di Giorgio, Francesco, 27.3 DISTINCT Project, 3.8, 68.1–68.17 DISTINCT architecture specification, 68.5-68.14 DISTINCT identity (DID), 68.3–68.5 DISTINCT versus VISA, 68.14 Digital television (DTV), 67.9–67.10 Digital theater systems (DTS), 67.13 D'Innocenzo, Assunta, 1.9 Dion, Betty, 6.5 Disabilities: and aging, 4.2, 4.9–4.11, 4.21, 4.22, 49.11–49.12 and design, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 45.1–45.11 developmental, 38.1 Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers (DBTACs), 43.9 Draper, Dorothy, 52.3 Disability Discrimination Act (Australia), 20.3, 66.4 Disability Discrimination Act of 1995 (United Kingdom), 1.11, 3.5, 20.3, 20.5, 25.10 Disability Rights Advocates (DRA), 64.1 Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund (DREDF), 35.8, 64.1 Disabled People's Association (Singapore), 32.4 Disabled Peoples' International, 6.4, 11.3 Dr. Tong Louie Living Laboratory (Canada), 16.11, 36.3 Disproportionality Rule, 12.4 DraWare project, 54.1–54.16 Dürer, Albrecht, 27.3 Durrett, Charles, 69.14 Dutch Council of the Disabled, 28.5. 28.7-28.10 Dutch Governmental Building Agency (Rgd), 28.8, 28.9 Dutch Governmental Coordinating Commission for the Promotion of Accessibility (CCPT), 28.8 Dutch National Building Code, 28.7 Dutch National Federation of Housing Associations, 28.7 Dwelling Design Guidelines for the Aging Society (Japan), 17.1, 17.11 Dybwad, Gunnar, 3.5, 43.26 Eastern Paralyzed Veterans Association, 47.14 Eastwood, Clint, 43.8 Eco, Umberto, 5.9 Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (United Nations), 17.11, 32.9, 40.2, 59.1–59.20 Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA), 63.4 Economic and Social Council (United Nations), 11.3, 11.9 Ed Roberts Campus (ERC) universal design project, 44.2, 64.1–64.10 Education: accessible design in educational environments, 46.2–46.7 ADA implementation in public schools, 62.1–62.14 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and, 46.5–46.8 Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) and, 46.4 best practices, 46.9–46.18 DraWare project (Ireland), 54.1–54.16 Education of All Handicapped Children Act, 46.3 four stages of accessibility, 46.2–46.3 history of, 46.1–46.8 inclusive educational environments, 46.8-46.9 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 46.3 Education (Cont.): industry/university design collaboration project (Japan), 55.1–55.17 interior design program at Eastern Michigan University, 52.4-52.18 Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 46.3, 46.4 Section 504 of Rehabilitation Act, 46.446.6 universal design and, 46.1–46.19 universal design as a tool in design education, 54.1–54.16 universal design education in the United States, 51.3–51.24 universal design in educational environments, 46.1–46.19 universal design in the interior design curriculum, 52.1–52.18 universal design studio projects (Australia), 53.1–53.12, 53.15 Education of All Handicapped Children Act (United States), 46.3 Edward W. Brooke Courthouse (United States), 43.14–43.16 Electronic and Information Technology Access Advisory Committee, 65.10 Empathic research model, 2.4–2.7 Enforcing the ADA: Looking Back on a Decade of Progress (DOJ), 43.8 entertainment racity design: Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) and, 47.3–47.5 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and, 47.1 integrated wheelchair seating, 47.9–47.12 key accessibility issues, 47.3–47.5 Environmental air quality, 1.4 Environmental Design for Aging Research Group (EDARG), 52.5 Environmental health, 69.12 Equal Citizenship for Canadians with Disabilities (Scott Task Force), 16.8 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), 45.2 Equal Rights for People with Disabilities Law (Israel), 31.2, 31.10, 31.11 Equal Rights for People with Disabilities Law—Part 2 (Israel), 31.2 European Charter on Sustainable Design and Construction (Sustainable Design International), 33.4–33.7, 33.10, 33.14 European Commission, 3.13 European Concept for Accessibility, 1.5, 25.3, 28.8, 28.10 European Design for Aging Network (DAN), 4.21 European Energy Charter Treaty (1994), 3.3.3 European Institute for Design and Disability, 1.11, 3.7, 4.21, 26.4 European Manual for an Accessible Built Environment (Wijk), 28.8 European Union (EU), 3.10, 33.2–33.6, 39.5-39.6 Exemplars of Universal Design (CD-ROM), 1.11, 43.22 Expert-Group Meeting on Barrier-Free Designs (United Nations), 30.2 Fainsilber, Adrien, 27.14 Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (United States): bathroom design and, 35.4–35.8 cost-effectiveness of, 35.8–35.11 implementing in practice, 35.3-35.4 overview, 35.1–35.4 universal design and, 35.2 Fair Housing Act of 1968, 43.4, 43.6 Fair Housing Amendments Act (FHAA) of 1988, 12.3, 34.4, 35.1, 43.6, 43.7, 43.27, 57.6 Fair housing bathroom designs, 35.4–35.8 Fair Housing Means Universal Design (videotape), 35.13 Farber, Betsey, 2.8, 43.23, 49.9 Farber, Sam, 2.8, 43.28, 49.9 Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 43.23–43.24 Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 43.17–43.21 Feedback/feedforward-based performance evaluation, 9.2-9.3 Fetterman, Jim, 43.21 Finkel, Gail, 6.5 Finnish Association of Sports for the Disabled, 20.8 First All-Japan Civic Meeting for Wheelchair Users (1973), 30.2 Fiskars scissors (as examples of universal design), 1.7, 27.5–27.7 Fletcher, Valerie, 1.9, 10.15 Foro Boario neighborhood agreement (Italy), 15.17–15.18 Foundation for Interior Design Education and Research (FIDER), 16.9, 52.3 Framework Convention on Climate Change (United Nations), 33.1 Framework Law on Disability (Italy), 15.2 accessibility in public buildings, 27.1–27.2, 27.14–27.20 accessibility in public transportation, 27.1, 27.8–27.14 Frederick, Christine, 52.2 Friendly House (Italy), 26.5–26.6 Frye, John, 16.15 Gallatin Airport Terminal (United States), 18.3 Gattis, Robert, 43.9 Geis, Gilbert, 1.9, 18.1–18.20 General Electric Real Life Design project, 41.6, 43.26 Germany: barrier-free housing, 39.1–39.24 demographic trends, 39.3-39.4 financial subsidy policies, 39.6 funding agencies, 39.6–39.15 housing compared with other European countries, 13.1-13.12 product development, 39.15-39.19 universal design, 39.19–39.20 Gerontological Society of America (GSA), 51.6 Gerontology Research Centre (Canada), 16.11,36.2–36.3 Gilbreth, Frank, 52.2 Gilbreth, Lilian, 52.2 Gill, John, 4.9 Global Universal Design Educator's Online News (Web site), 1.11 Goldberg, Steve, 61.8 Goldsmith, Selwyn, 1.9, 3.5, 27.4 Gomez-Moreno, Ana, 60.6 Goody, Clancy & Associates, 43.11, 43.14 Goody, Joan, 51.12 Graeff, Robert, 42.12 Gramsci, Antonio, 53.2 Grange, Kenneth, 4.6 Graves, Robert, 56.2 Grayson, Paul, 60.6 Greater London Enterprise Board (United Kingdom), 4.4 Grenoble tram system (France), 1.7, 27.8–27.14 Grinde, Kate, 53.11 Grosbois, Louis-Pierre, 1.7, 27.7, 27.16, 27.23 Grunewald, Karl, 3.5 Hahn, Harlan, 6.2 Hall, G., 22.4 Handbook for Accessibility (Wijk), 28.10, 28.11 Handicaps Welfare Association (Singapore), 40.13, 40.15 Harkin, Tom, 67.6 Harrison, James B., 1.8 Harrison, John, 4.12 Harrison, Marc, 41.7, 43.26 Hawkins, Ed, 41.13 Hayden, Dolores, 69.14 Hearing Aid Compatibility Act of 1988, 49.11, 65.5 Hearing impairment, 38.5 Hearthstone assisted living residence (United States), 8.6–9 Heinrich Wilke GmbH (Germany), 4.14, 4.15 Helen Hamlyn Foundation (United Kingdom), 4.3, 4.5–4.7 Helen Hamlyn Research Centre (United Kingdom), 4.20, 4.21 Hellmuth, Obata & Kassabaum (HOK), 43.20, 43.21 HelpAge International, 40.15 Henley Centre for Forecasting (United Kingdom), 4.12 Herman Miller, Inc., 45.7–45.10 Hlafter, John, 43.14 Hogan, Thomas F., 18.8–18.9 Holland. (see Netherlands) Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 3.3 Homeswest (Australia), 53.2 Housing and Development Board (Singapore), 40.4–40.7, 40.9–40.14 Housing Loan Corporation (Japan), 17.5 Housing Quality Assurance Law (Japan), 17.11 Howell, Sandra, 51.6 Huidobro, Borja, 27.17 Hula Nature Reserve (Israel), 31.4 Human Development Report (United Nations), 33.1 Human Resources Development Canada Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities, 6.4 HyperText Markup Language (HTML), 67.3 IADS (Integrated Applications of Digi tal Sites) Program, 68.1 Ibach Park (United States), 19.11–19.14 Ikeda, Chitose, 1.4 Images of Excellence (slide collection), 10.13, 43.22 project briefing approaches, 44.2 Inclusive design: Ed Roberts Campus project (United States), 64.1–64.10 University of Reading project (England), 44.1–44.9 Inclusive universal design process, 44.1-44.9 Immersion exercises, 2.4–2.6 rating scales, 57.3–57.10 universal design and, 44.4–44.8 Independent Living Foundation (Canada), 6.6 Independent living (IL) movement, 6.2, 16.4 India: accessibility laws and legislation, 32.4 culture, 5.4–5.6 demographic trends, 5.3 India (Cont.): economics, 5.7, 5.8, 5.14 governmental policies, 5.13 mythological influence, 5.4–5.6 religion, 5.14, 5.15 socioculture, 5.6 traditions, 5.3, 5.4 universal design and, 5.1–5.19 Indigenous design studio project, University of Western Australia, 53.1–53.12. 53.15 Individual Accessibility Needs, 7.1–7.13 Individuality, 7.9–7.11 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 46.3 Industrial Design Society of America (IDSA), 43.25 Information technology: cross-disability accessible design, 65.10-65.13 prioritizing accessible design options, 65.7–65.10 Injury Control Resource Information Network (United States), 23.3 Injury in America: A Continuing Public Health Problem (Committee on Trauma Research), 23.18 Institute for Research in Construction (Canada), 16.6, 16.11 International Year of Older Persons. 1999 (United Nations). 40.4 Israel Human Rights Center for People with Disabilities, 31.2 Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique (France), 66.3 Integrated Applications of Digital Sites (IADS) Program, 68.1 In Unison: A Canadian Approach to Disability Issues (Government of Canada et al.). 20.3 Interior Decoration as a Profession for Women (Wheeler and Tiffany), 52.2 International Year of Disabled Persons 1982 (United Nations), 11.2, 16.4, 17.2. 30.3. 32.2 International Standards Organization. 10.4 International Facility Management Association Foundation. 56.8 Israeli Center for Assistive Technology and Aging (GeronTech), 31.3 Interior design: defined, 52.3 International Federation on Ageing, 1.8, 3.9 Ireland: Public housing energy survey, 33.8 Sessions House energy survey, 33.8 International Gerontechnology Society. 4.21 universal design and, 52.1–52.2, 52.9–52.16 challenges and opportunities, 31.10 Israeli Center for Accessibility (SHEKEL), 31.3 evolution of, 52.2–52.4 International Residential Code™. 23.18 Interministerial Committee on the Ageing Population (Singapore), 40.10 International Decade of Disabled Persons, 1983-1992 (United Nations), 17.2 Israel Museum, 31.3 universal design, 31.8–31.10 training program at Eastern Michigan University, 52.4–52.16 history of accessibility, 31.2, 31.3 International Building Performance Evaluation (IBPE), 9.15 recent initiatives. 31.4–31.8 International Classification of Functioning and Disability (World Health Organization), 33.1 Is Your Business Open to All? (Ringaert et al.), 6.8 International Council for Research and Innovation in Building and Construction, 33.4 International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities, and Handicaps (World Health Organization), 6.4, 11.4 Israel Railroad Authority, 31.9 accessibility codes and standards, 15.2–15.4 accessibility laws and legislation, 13.3, 15.2-15.6 accessible design guidelines, 15.6–15.16 Bagnacavallo nursing home, 15.7 Baselga di Piné intermediate school, 15.6–15.7 Friendly House, 26.5, 26.6 housing compared with other European countries, 13.1–13.12 Nomentano Market, 15.8 Pietralata Vecchia neighborhood agreement, 15.18–15.19 Pinerolo neighborhood agreement. 15.17-15.18 Pistoia historic urban center, 15.10-15.11 Rome urban pedestrian pathway, 15.11 Italy (Cont.): Trento park and sport facilities, 15.11-15.13 universaldesign, 15.16–15.19,26.1–26.18 Venice urban pedestrian pathways, 15.11 Ivy, William, 43.29 accessibility laws and legislation, 17.2 17.5.17.7,17.10, 17.11. 30.4-30.10 aging and accessibility standards, 17.1-17.11 aging and urbanism, 17.1–17.2 barrier-free design, 1.5 civil rights movement for people with disabilities, 30.2–30.4 industry/university research collaboration project, 55.1–55.17 landscape design, 48.1-48.25 manufactured housing, 17.5 public parks, 21.1–21.12, 48.1–48.25 urban/suburban design, 30.11–30.18 Japanese Guidelines for Universal Design in Parks (Ministry of Construction), 21.1-21.12 Japanese with Disabilities Act, 17.4 Johnson, Carol, 49.11 Johnson, Lyndon, 43.4 Johnson, Michael, 47.9 Jones, Louise, 52.5 Jones, Mike, 10.7 Jones, Stan, 51.15 Joseph, Isaac, 27.7 Joseph Rowntree Foundation (United Kingdom), 14.3, 14.7, 14.11, 14.13 Joseph Rowntree Foundation for Lifetime Homes (United Kingdom), 13.4 Joseph Rowntree Housing Trust (United Kingdom), 14.3, 14.7 Joyner-Kersee, Jackie, 47.9 Kailes, J. I., 38.3 Kallmann McKinnell and Wood (KMW), 43.14, 43.16 Karmulinunga Communities (Australia), 53.1.53.5 Kawai, Takanori, 41.14 Keane, Jan, 61.8 Keio University (Japan), 66.3 Kennard, William E., 43.24 Kent, Fred, 60.6 Kent, Susan, 56.9 King, Martin Luther, 43.4 Kitchen design: in Italy, 26.6 in next-generation universal home, 34.11–34.15 Kitchen design (Cont.): in the United Kingdom, 4.4 in the United States, 34.11–34.15. 41.1-41.18 universal appliances, 41.1, 41.12–41.18 universal kitchens, 41.1-41.18 Klass, Katherine, 56.7 Koncelik, Joseph A., 36.13 Kose, Satoshi, 1.8 Kulkarni, Makarand, 5.15 Laboratoire de Sociologie de l'Education (France), 27.19 Laboratory for Computer Science. MIT (United States), 66.3 Landscape design, 48.1-48.25 basic design considerations, 48.448.9 case studies, 48.3–48.23 universal design and, 48.23 Langgrütstrasse care apartment (Switzerland), 37.3-37.6 Laslett, Peter, 4.11 Lasoff, Sue, 43.21 Law for the Disabled—Payments and Rehabilitation (Israel), 31.1 Law of Local Authorities (Israel), 31.1, 31.2 Law of Parking for the Disabled (Israel). 31.1, 31.2 Law on Measures for the Disabled (Japan), 17.4 Lawton, M. P., 22.4 Lazarus, Mary Ann, 43.21 Lebanese Company for the Development and Reconstruction of Beirut Central District, 63.4 Lebanese National Council for the Disabled, 63.5 Lebanon: Beirut Central District rehabilitation project, 63.1–63.17 Leibrock, Cynthia, 41.7 Leighton House (United Kingdom), 4.16, 4.17 Leisure Tracking Survey (United Kingdom), 4.12 Lerner, Jaime, 69.15 Levine, Sally, 60.8 Lifchez, Ray, 43.27, 51.7 Life expectancy: in Australia, 38.2 developmental disabilities and, 38.2 Down's syndrome and, 38.2 trends, 27.2 in the United Kingdom, 4.1, 4.2 Lifetime Homes (United Kingdom), 14.1-14.13 examples, 14.11–14.13 government regulations, 14.5–14.6 lessons learned, 14.7–14.11 standards, 14.3–14.5 Lighthouse International. 61.1-61.16 Lighthouse International headquarters renovation, 61.8-61.13 Lille mctro system (France). 1.7. 27.8-27.10 Lindquist, Bengt, 11.10 Lions Millennium Place (Canada). 36636 Listening to Shadows (motion picture), 5.10 Liverpool Street Station (United King dom), 25.8–25.9 Living in an Accessible City: From Uses to Design (Grosbois et al.). 27.7 Local Law for Accessibility and Usability (Japan), 30.5, 30.6 London Innovation Ltd., 4.4. 4.5 Lusher. R. H., 1.5. 43.4. 51.22 Mace. Ron, 1.5. 2.4, 3.5. 5.3. 10.3, 10.7. 16.3, 34.4, 34.5, 41.7, 43.26, 43.27, 49.9, 51.4, 51.21, 51.22, 55.2 Magistretti, Vico, 4.6 Magna Carta for Disabled Persons (Philippines), 5.13 Majority world: demographic trends, 5.3 design interventions, 5.9–5.11 governmental policies, 5.13 mythological influence, 5.4-5.6 politics of inclusion, 5.8–5.9 problems and concerns, 5.7, 5.8 religion, 5.14, 5.15 sociocultural factors, 5.6 terminology, 5.2 universal design and, 5.1–5.19 Manitoba League of Persons with Disabilities (Canada), 6.4, 6.8 Manley, Sandra, 1.9, 10.14 Markey, Ed, 67.6 Maslow, Abraham, 8.9 Mason, Florence, 56.9 Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (MAAB), 60.4, 60.5, 60.12 Massachusetts Convention Center Authority (MCCA). 60.11 Mass rapid transport system (Singapore). 32.9 Mass transit rail subway system (Hong Kong), 32.9 Mazumdar, Sanjoy, 1.9, 18.1–18.20 McCamant, Kathryn, 69.14 MCI Center sports arena (United States), 18.7–18.9 McLaughlin, H., 56.9–56.11 Media design: historical background, 67.1–67.2 multimcdia, 67.10–67.11 print media, 67.2–67.4 radio, 67.4–67.5 television, 67.5–67.10 Media design (Cont.): theatrical motion pictures, 67.12–67.13 World Wide Web, 66.1–66.13. 67.11-67.12 Meeting Part M of the Building Regulations and Designing Lifetime Homes (Joseph Rowntree Foundation), 14.7 Mellor, David, 4.6 Menino, Thomas M., 60.3 Meyer, Allan, 60.11 MILBAT, 31.3 Millennium Products Initiative (United Kingdom), 1.11 Minh-Ha, Trinh T., 53.8 Mini-Gym (as example of universal design), 4.4 Minimum Guidelines and Requirements for Accessible Design (MGRAD), 12.3 Ministry of Community Development (Singapore), 40.7 Ministry of Health (Singapore), 40.5 Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing (Canada), 36.2 Ministry of the Environment (Norway), 1.9, 29.3, 29.5, 29.6, 29.11, 29.12 Ministry of Transportation (Israel), 31.8 Mitchell, Joyce Williams, 60.10 Miyake, Yoshisuke, 48.2 Mobility and Barrier-Free Transportation Law (Japan), 30.5 Modern Architecture (Wagner), 27.2 Modern Maturity (periodical), 43.24 Moffat, Tracy, 53.9 Moore, Patricia, 1.8, 41.7, 43.72, 43.28 Moore, Robin, 43.27 Morini, Annalisa, 1.9 Mortgage Bankers Association (United States), 35.8 Motion picture theater design: Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) and, 47.3–47.5 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and, 47.1 integrated wheelchair seating. 47.947.12 key accessibility issues, 47.3–47.5 Mueller, James, 10.7, 43.25, 43.28, 45.3 Muir, Jean, 4.6 Mullick, Abir, 10.7 Multifamily housing: Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines, 35.1-35.12 universal design and, 35.1–35.13 Multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS), 46.14 Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle (France), 27.8, 27.17–27.20 Nadasdi, Amy, 56.4 Nahemow, L., 22.4 Namentano Market (Italy), 15.8 National Access Consultant Introductory Workshops (Canada), 6.4 National Architectural Accrediting Board (NAAB), 43.9, 51.21 National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), 43.4 National Association of Home Builders (NAHB), 23.14, 23.17–23.18, 35.8, 43.25 National Building Code (Netherlands), 28.7 National Building Code of Canada, 16.4–16.6, 36.2 National Building Museum (United States), 10.13 National Center for a Barrier-Free Environment (United States), 43.27 National Centre for the Promotion of Employment for the Disabled People (India), 5.13 National Council for Interior Design Qualification (NCIDQ), 52.3 National Council for the Welfare of Disabled Persons (Philippines), 5.13 National Council on Disability, 43.8 National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (United States), 23.4, 23.6–23.8 National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), 10.13, 43.22, 51.8 National Federation of Housing Associations (Netherlands), 28.7 National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), 23.7–23.8 National Health Service (United Kingdom), 4.5 National House Building Council (United Kingdom), 14.2 National Institute of Population Problems (Japan), 17.5 National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR), 10.4, 12.6, 42.2, 42.6, 42.14, 43.9, 43.22–43.23, 49.2, 60.12, 67.12 National Kitchen and Bath Association (NKBA), 41.5, 42.6, 42.11, 43.26 National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (NLS), 67.4 National Research Council of Canada, 16.6, 16.11 National Safety Council (NSC), 23.6 National Survey on Recreation and the Environment (Teasley), 20.1 Neater Eater (as example of universal design), 4.4 NEC Design Group/Tama Art University research collaboration project: curricula, 55.6–55.10 process, 55.1–55.6 NEC Design Group/Tama Art University research collaboration project (Cont.): results, 55.6–55.14 universal design and, 55.14–55.16 Needs, 7.1-7.9 Netherlands: accessibility and, 28.1–28.17 universal design and, 28.1–28.17 New Delhi universal design pilot project (India), 59.9–59.12, 59.15 New Design for Old (exhibition), 4.5–4.6 NEWT project (European Commission), 3.8 Next-generation universal home project, 34.3-34.21 controls, alarms, and home automation, 34.16–34.18 demographic factors, 34.3–34.4 entrances, 34.9–34.11 key features, 34.5–34.19 kitchen and laundry areas, 34.11–34.15 legislative background, 34.3–34.4 storage, 34.19 universal design and, 34.4–34.5 Nice Coloured Girls (motion picture), 53.9 Nielsen, Bev, 36.11 Niemeyer, Oscar, 57.15 Nietzsche, Friedrich, 28.17 Ninth International World Wide Web Conference, 2000 (WWW9), 66.3 Nomentano Market (Italy), 15.8 Norman, Donald A., 27.22, 43.29 Norway: barrier-free design, 1.5 housing compared with other European countries, 13.1–13.12 lessons learned, 29.10–29.11 pilot projects, 29.5, 29.6 planning for accessibility, 29.3–29.5 planning for universal design, 1.5, 29.1–29.12 Norwegian Building Research Institute, 13.3 Norwegian Society for the Handicapped, 13.3 Norwegian State Housing Bank, 13.3 Nugent, Tim, 25.6, 25.7 Nurmesniemi, Antti, 4.6 Nurmesniemi, Vuokko, 4.6 O'Brien, Robert, 43.16 Office design, 45.1–45.11 Office of the Disability Ombudsman (Sweden), 20.3 Olympic Games (Atlanta), 47.2, 47.6–47.9 OnStar in-vehicle communications/assistance system, 50.11 ORAR (outdoor recreation access route), 20.11 Organic Law for Mentally and Physically Disabled People (Japan), 30.2 Orioles Park at Camden Yards (United States), 47.6–47.7, 49.10–49.11 Ostroff, Elaine, 1.4, 3.5, 6.3, 10.7, 10.16, 41.7, 43.27, 51.8, 51.9, 51.21, 60.4, 60.13 Ototake, Hirotada, 32.9 Our Common Future (World Commission on Environment and Development), 33.3 Outdoor play areas: case study, 19.11–19.14 performance criteria, 19.3-19.11 universal design and, 19.1–19.15 Outdoor recreation areas: evolution of accessibility movement, 20.3–20.5 examples and ideas, 20.14–20.17 guidelines, 20.5–20.14 universal design and, 20.14–20.20 OXO Good Grips™M kitchen utensils (as examples of universal design), 2.8, 4.5, 35.2, 49.9, 49.12 OXO International, 49.9 Paciello, Mike, 66.2 Paine, Thomas, 3.4 Palermo, Lark, 43.15–43.17 Palmer, Bill, 43.21 Papanek, Victor, 4.7, 5.11, 5.14 Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA), 18.7–18.8, 35.8, 47.7, 47.14 Parks: basic design considerations, 48.4–48.9 case studies, 48.9–48.23 circulation planning, 21.7–21.9 harmony with nature, 21.8 meeting diverse user needs, 21.4–21.7 recreation programs, 21.9–21.11 universal design and, 21.1–21.12, 48.23 Partial accessibility, 15.4 Part M building regulation (United Kingdom), 25.2, 25.4, 25.5, 25.8 Passini, Romedi, 16.12 Pastalan, Leon, 52.5 Patton Hall, Princeton University (United States), 43.11–43.14 Pearce, Jane, 53.8 Pedersen, Annette, 1.10 Personal Space (Sommer), 52.3 Person-centered design, 33.7 Persons with Disabilities Act of 1995 (India), 5.13, 32.4 Peterson, Mary Jo, 41.6, 43.26 Pietralata Vecchia neighborhood agreement (Italy), 15.18–15.19 Pinerolo neighborhood agreement (Italy), 15.17–15.18 Pirkl, James, 3.5, 36.2, 41.7 Pistoia historic urban center (Italy), 15.10–15.11 Planning and Construction Law (Israel), 31.2 Plan of Work (RIBA), 44.2 Play areas: case study, 19.11–19.14 performance criteria, 19.3–19.11 universal design and, 19.1–19.15 Playthings for the Handicapped Child (exhibition), 3.11 Polypharmacy, 38.6 Pope, Alexander, 5.10 Post-occupancy evaluation (POE): in Beirut Central District rehabilitation project, 63.9–63.12 benefits and limitations, 9.11 case studies, 56.8–56.10, 63.9–63.12 context, 9.9 examples, 56.9–56.10, 63.9–63.12 overview, 9.8–9.9 process model, 9.10–9.11 purposes and types, 9.10 universal design perspective, 56.1–56.12 Post-occupancy evaluation (POE) methods: annotated plan, 56.5 behavioral mapping techniques, 56.5 cognitive mapping, 56.5 interviews, 56.4–56.5 observations, walk-throughs, and checklists, 56.6 participant workshops, 56.6 still and video photography, 56.6, 56.8, 56.9 surveys, 56.4 user participation, 56.4 Preferences for Everyday Living Inventory (Van Haitsma), 7.11 Preiser, Wolfgang, 7.1, 9.7, 9.11, 9.14, 9.15, 56.6, 56.7 President's Committee on the Employment of the Handicapped (United States), 1.5 Principles for Older Persons (United Nations), 3.10 Principles of Universal Design, 3.9, 9.7, 9.15, 10.1–10.17, 26.3, 43.28, 49.3, 49.4–49.8, 56.3–56.4, 57.11 applications, 10.13–10.14 defined, 10.7–10.8 examples, 10.8–10.12, 49.4–49.8, 60.4 future development, 10.15–10.16 history, 10.4–10.6 international challenges, 10.16–10.17 listed, 10.6, 20.5, 20.17, 26.3, 26.4, 27.22, 49.4–49.8 Principles of universal design (Cont.): in post-occupancy evaluation (POE), 56.3–56.4 in South Boston Waterfront development, 60.4 Process Protocol (Kagioglou et al.), 44.2 Product design, 49.1–49.14 Products and Plans for Universal Homes (Home Planners), 34.20 Professional Builder (periodical), 43.7 Professional Environmental Assessment Protocol (United States), 7.3, 7.5 Professional Practice in Facility Programming (Petronis), 62.5 Proffitt, Mark A., 10.14 Project briefing approaches for inclusive universal design: developing an information base, 44.6 semistructured interviews, 44.4–44.6 steering group, 44.6–44.7 Promotion of Nonhandicapping Physical Environments for Disabled Persons: Guidelines (UN Guidelines), 40.3 Pryke, Gavin, 4.6 Public parks. (see Parks) Pulte Home Corporation, 43.7 Quality of life (QOL), 7.4–7.5 Quick Tips to Make Accessible Web Sites (World Wide Web Consortium), 66.11 Radio Broadcast Data Services (RBDS), 67.4 Rating scales for inclusive design, 57.1–57.21 Raynes, Coco, 43.28 Raynsford, Nick, 14.3, 14.5 Real Life Design (GE Appliances), 43.26 Recordings for the Blind and Dyslexic, 67.4 Recreation Access Advisory Committee (RAAC), 20.5 Recreation opportunity spectrum (ROS), 20.4, 20.6 Redefining the Architecture Professsion (video), 56.2 Reeves, Christopher, 47.13 Regulations on National Parks and Nature Sites (Israel), 31.2 Regulatory Negotiation Committee on Accessibility Guidelines for Outdoor Developed Areas (United States), 20.6 Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (United States), 3.4, 12.3, 43.4, 45.2, 46.3, 46.4 Rehabilitation Amendments Act of 1986 (United States), 3.4 Rehabilitation and Engineering Research Center (United States), 9.15 Rehabilitation International, 6.4 Reno, Janet, 43.8, 49.11 Research: empathic immersion project, 2.4–2.6 industry/university research collaboration project (Japan), 55.1–55.17 Research Group for Inclusive Environments (United Kingdom), 44.1 Revised Building Regulations (United Kingdom), 14.5–14.7 Rgd. (see Dutch Governmental Building Agency) Rgd Accessibility Guide (Dutch Ministry of Housing et al.), 28.9–28.11 Rights of Man (Paine), 3.4 Ringaert, Laurie, 1.10 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (United Nations), 33.3, 33.4 Roberts, Ed, 64.2 Robinson, Deborah, 43.14 Rose Garden sports arena (United States), 18.9–18.10 Rosen, Derrek, 41.13 Royal College of Art (France), 4.1, 4.3, 4.6–4.8, 4.11, 4.16–4.19, 26.4 Royal Designers for Industry (United Kingdom), 4.6 Royal National Institute for the Blind (United Kingdom), 4.9 Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures & Commerce (United Kingdom), 4.6 Rushing, Byron, 60.6 Ryan, Debbie, 60.12 Ryff, Carol, 7.4 Safeway Stores (United Kingdom), 4.17-4.19 Said, Edward, 53.6 Saitama New City Center project (Japan), 30.11–30.16 Sakata, Kohki, 48.11 Salmen, John P. S., 1.8–1.9, 10.4 Sandhu, Jim S., 1.8, 44.1 Sanford, Jon, 10.7, 10.14 Saree (as example of universal design), 5.4,5.5 Sartre, Jean-Paul, 5.14 Sautet, Paul, 27.7 Schaeffer, William, 47.7 Schön, Donald, 53.7 School of Architecture at the Technion (Israel), 31.9 housing compared with other European countries, 13.1–13.12 Lifetime Homes, 14.1–14.13 Section 255 of the Telecommunications Act, 65.5 Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 43.4–43.7, 62.1 Section 508 of the 1988 Amendments to the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 49.11, 65.5, 66.5 Sekulski, Ronald, 52.5 Serendipities: Language and Lunacy (Eco), 5.9 Sessions House Energy Survey (Ireland), 33.8 Shibley, Robert, 51.17, 60.6 Simpson, Patrick, 36.13 Singapore: accessible design and accessibility, 32.3, 32.4, 40.2–40.4 aging and accessibility, 40.5, 40.7–40.13, 40.15 housing for older persons, 40.1–40.19 public and private initiatives, 40.14 research and development, 40.14-40.15 studio apartment pilot program, 40.9, 40.10 universal design, 40.15–40.18 Singapore Institute of Architects (SIA), 40.13 Smart card technology, 68.1–68.17 Smith, Eleanor, 43.26 Smith, Tom W., 34.3 Social Security Disability Income program (SSDI), 45.1 Sommer, Robert, 52.3 Soni, Ranchodbhai, 5.10 South Boston Waterfront development, 60.1–60.15 Special rapporteur (United Nations) 11.8, 11.9 Spinetto, Stephen, 60.6, 60.10 Sports facility design: Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) and, 47.3–47.5 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and, 18.1–18.20, 47.1 court cases, 18.1–18.20 integrated wheelchair seating, 18.1–18.20, 47.2–47.8 key accessibility issues, 18.1–18.20, 47.3–47.5 SSDI (Social Security Disability Income program), 45.1 St. Georges Place (Canada), 36.7–36.8 Stairway design: injuries and their prevention, 23.3-23.17 life safety standards and guidelines, 23.1-23.20 in next-generation universal home, 34.18–34.19 Stairway design (Cont.): program and organizational transitions, 23.17–23.18 semantics, 23.2 universal design and, 23.18 Stairways and Falls (video), 23.16 Standard CP96: Access for the Disabled to Buildings (United Kingdom), 25.7 Standard Rules (United Nations): accessibility and, 11.5–11.7 background, 11.1–11.2 implementation, 11.7–11.9 origins, 11.2, 11.3 status, 11.3, 11.4 structure, 11.4–11.9 universal design and, 11.1–11.2 Stein, Clarence, 69.14 Steinfeld, Aaron, 1.4, 1.7 Steinfeld, Edward, 1.4, 1.7, 10.7, 12.1, 43.26 Story, Molly, 10.7 Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 52.2 Strategies for Teaching Universal Design (Adaptive Environments), 51.8, 60.6 Strelitz, Ziona, 56.1 Stull, Donald, 60.6 Supreme Court (United States): Brown vs. the Board of Education (1954), 1.4 Grove City College vs. Bell (1984), 43.6 University of Alabama vs. Garrett (2000), 43.10 discussed, 33.1–33.16 European Charter and, 33.4–33.7, 33.10,33.14 sustainable buildings and, 33.9 sustainable built environment and, 33.10–33.11 sustainable design and, 33.14 targeted research and, 33.11–33.14 Sustainable Development and the Future of Construction (Sustainable Design International), 33.5 Takadanobaba sidewalk improvement project (Japan), 30.16–30.18 Takayanagi, Noriko, 1.4 Tama Art University/NEC Design Group research collaboration project: curricula, 55.6–55.10 process, 55.1–55.6 results, 55.10–55.14 universal design and, 55.14–55.16 Techniques for Accessibility Evaluation and Repair Tools (Ridpath et al.), 66.10 Techniques for Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (Chisholm et al.), 66.6 Technology Networks Initiative (United Kingdom), 4.4 Tel Dan National Park (Israel), 31.4 Telecommunication Access Advisory Committee (United States), 65.10 Telecommunications Act of 1996 (United States), 10.15, 43.28, 49.2, 49.10, 49.11, 67.6 Telecommunications for the Disabled Act of 1982 (United States), 49.11 Telecommunication technology: cross-disability accessible design, 65.10–65.13 prioritizing accessible design options, 65.7–65.10 universal design and, 65.5–65.10 Telematics, 3.6 Television Decoder Circuitry Act of 1990 (United States), 49.11, 67.6 Ten Ten Sinclair (Canada), 16.3 Terrien, George, 60.6 Thatcher, Margaret, 4.4 The House in Good Taste (deWolfe), 52.2 Third world, 5.2 Thorpe, Jevon, 1.11 Through the Looking Glass (TLG), 64.1, 64.8 Ticket to Work and Self-Sufficiency Act (United States), 45.1 Time-Saver Standards: Architectural Design Data (Watson et al.), 9.7 TMS Partnership (United Kingdom), 4.12 Toilet seat (as example of universal design), 5.15–5.17 Towards a Barrier Free Europe for People with Disabilities (European Commission), 33.14 Towards Universal Design (video), 51.8 Trace Research and Development Center (United States), 43.27, 49.10, 65.3–65.15 Transgenerational design: defined, 36.2 universal design and, 1.5 Transit-oriented development (TOD), 64.3–64.4 in Brazil, 24.21–24.23, 57.12–57.17 in France, 27.1, 27.8–27.14 in Hong Kong, 32.9 in Israel, 31.9 in Italy, 15.13–15.16, 26.17 parking facilities and boarding areas, 57.12–57.17 terminal information systems, 24.7–24.8 terminal level changes, 24.8–24.9 terminal platform safety, 24.15–24.17 terminal ticketing and security, 24.19–24.21 Transportation design (Cont.): terminal travel distances, 24.9–24.10 terminal vehicle loading, 24.10–24.14 terminal wayfinding, 24.4 in the United Kingdom, 4.13–4.14 universal design and, 24.3–24.24 vehicle design, 24.17–24.19 Transport de l’agglomération de Grenoble (France), 27.10, 27.13 Treatise on Domestic Economy (Beecher), 52.2 Tschumi, Bernard, 27.14 TURTLE project (European Commission), 3.8 Tye, Alan, 4.6 Umbrella Organization of Associations for the Disabled (Israel), 31.2 UN ESCAP (Economic and Social Commision for Asia and the Pacific), 17.11, 32.9, 40.2, 59.1–59.20 Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS), 12.3, 46.4, 62.2 United Kingdom: accessibility codes and standards, 13.3–13.5, 14.3–14.6 accessible bathrooms and toilet facilities, 13.8, 14.9–14.10, 25.1–25.16 accessible housing, 13.1–13.12, 14.1-14.13 accessible streets and neighborhoods, 58.3–58.22 accessible transportation, 4.13–4.14 bottom-up methodology, 25.1–25.16 demographic trends, 4.1, 4.2, 4.8 Lifetime Homes, 14.1–14.13 universal bathrooms and toilet facilities, 25.1–25.16 universal design, 4.1–4.22, 14.1–14.13, 25.1–25.16 United Nations: Asian and Pacific Decade of Disabled Persons (1993-2002), 17.11, 32.2, 40.2 Commission for Social Development, 11.2–11.3, 11.8, 11.9 Commission on Sustainable Development, 33.11 Conference on Environment and Development (1992), 33.4 Conference on Human Rights (1969), 11.2 Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (1969), 11.2 Disability Unit, 11.2 Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 17.11, 32.9, 40.2 Economic and Social Council, 11.3, 11.9 United Nations (Cont.): Expert-Group Meeting on Barrier-Free Designs (1974), 30.2 Framework Convention on Climate Change, 33.1 Human Development Report (1998), 33.1 International Decade of Disabled Persons (1983-1992), 17.2 International Year of Disabled Persons (1982), 11.2, 17.2, 32.2 International Year of Older Persons (1999), 40.4 Special Rapporteur, 11.8, 11.9 Standard Rules for the Equalization of Opportunity for Persons with Disabilities, 11.1–11.10 Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), 11.2 World Plan of Action Concerning Disabled Persons, 11.2, 11.3 United States: accessibility codes and standards, 12.1–12.8, 18.1–18.20, 35.1–35.12 accessibility laws and legislation, 3.4–3.5, 4.7, 6.6, 7.1–7.3, 12.1–12.6, 17.2, 18.1–18.20, 35.1 accessible bathrooms and toilet facilities, 35.4–35.10 accessible design, 10.3–10.17, 12.1–12.8, 35.1–35.13, 46.1–46.19 accessible entertainment facilities, 47.1–47.5, 47.9–47.16 accessible housing, 35.1–35.13 accessible public buildings, 61.4–61.15 accessible sports facilities, 47.1–47.9 building codes, 12.1–12.8 courts and accessibility, 18.1–18.20 fair housing accessibility guidelines, 35.1–35.13 individual accessibility needs, 7.1–7.13 universal bathrooms, 42.1–42.24 universal design, 10.3–10.17, 19.1–19.15, 35.1–35.13, 64.1–64.10 universal design practice, 43.1–43.31 universal kitchens and appliances, 41.1-41.18 Universal Access to Outdoor Recreation (U.S. Forest Service), 43.28 Universal appliances, 41.8–41.18 design guidelines, 41.11–41.12 examples, 41.12–41.15 future of, 41.15–41.16 Universal bathrooms, 42.1–42.24 design guidelines, 42.6–42.11 examples, 42.11–42.21 future of, 42.21–42.22 historic development, 42.3–42.4 IDEA Center bathrooms, 42.14–42.21 Metaform bathroom system, 42.13-42.14 Universal bathrooms (Cont.): need for, 42.4–42.6 universal design and, 42.1 Universal Declaration of Human Rights (United Nations), 11.2 Universal design: accessibility as, 12.1 versus accessible design, 51.4 aging and, 1.8, 2.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.9, 3.10, 4.13, 4.14, 4.21, 4.22, 40.1–40.19 Alzheimer's disease and, 8.1–8.14, 22.1–22.23 in Asia, 32.9–32.10, 40.1–40.19 assistive technology and, 49.9–49.10 audit process, 6.8, 6.9, 6.11 in Australia, 38.13–38.14, 53.1–53.16 in automobiles, 50.1–50.13 in bathrooms and toilet facilities, 25.1–25.16, 42.1 bottom-up methodology, 25.1–25.16 in Brazil, 57.1–57.21 in Canada, 16.1–16.15, 36.1–36.14 care apartment concept, 37.1–37.8 catalysts for, 43.26–43.28 characteristics of, 3.6, 3.7 children and, 3.10–3.12 civil rights and, 43.1–43.31 cost effectiveness of, 35.8–35.10 culture and, 5.4–5.6 defined, 1.3, 1–5, 3.4, 7.1, 10.3, 12.1, 16.1, 20.5, 25.1, 34.4, 36.1, 40.1, 49.1–49.2, 51.4, 51.16, 51.22, 53.2, 65.4 dementia and, 8.1–8.14, 22.1–22.22 in design education, 54.1–54.16 in the DISTINCT Program, 68.1 in the Ed Roberts Campus, 64.1 in educational facilities, 46.1–46.19, 53.1-53.16 empathic research model, 2.4–2.7 in entertainment facilities, 47.1–47.5, 47.9–47.15 environmental concerns and, 1.4 examples of, 43.10–43.21 fair housing accessibility guidelines and, 35.1–35.13 in film and media, 67.1–67.14 in France, 27.1–27.23 in Germany, 39.1–39.24 goals of, 64.3–64.4 government policies and, 1.8–1.9, 12.1–12.8, 18.1–18.20 history of, 3.4–3.6 in housing, 34.4–34.5 human brain and, 8.1–8.14 inclusive design and, 1.5 in India, 5.1–5.19 individual accessibility needs and, 7.1-7.13 in information technology, 65.3–65.15 integrated approach, 3.3–3.13 Universal design (Cont.): in Israel, 31.1–31.11 in Italy, 15.1–15.23, 26.1–26.18 in Japan, 17.1–17.11, 21.1–21.12, 30.18 in kitchens, 41.1–41.18 life span design and, 1.5 in the majority world (third world), 5.1-5.19 in mass transportation, 24.3–24.24 in multifamily housing, 35.1–35.13 in the Netherlands, 28.1–28.17 new developments, 1.11 as new paradigm, 1.3–1.12 in next-generation universal home, 34.3-34.21 in Norway, 29.1–29.12 obstacles to, 3.9, 3.12 in the office and workplace, 45.1–45.11 in outdoor play areas, 19.1–19.15 in outdoor recreation areas, 20.1–20.22 overview, 1.3–1.12 in parks, 21.1–21.12, 48.1–48.25 performance measures, 10.15, 10.16 in post-occupancy evaluations (POEs), 56.1–56.12 principles of, 3.9, 9.15, 10.1–10.17, 26.3, 27.22 projects and products, 4.4–4.6, 4.13–4.20, 35.4–35.11, 49.1–49.14 in public parks, 21.1–21.12, 48.1–48.25 in Singapore, 40.1, 40.15–40.18 in South Boston Waterfront development, 60.1–60.15 in sports facilities, 47.1–47.9, 47.12–47.15 in streets and public spaces, 58.3–58.22 sustainability of, 3.8, 3.9 in Switzerland, 37.1–37.8 in telecommunications technology, 65.3–65.15 transgenerational design and, 1.5 in transportation, 24.3–24.24 in the United Kingdom, 4.1–4.22, 14.1–14.13, 25.1–25.16 in the United States, 10.3–10.17, 12.1–12.8, 35.1–35.13, 43.1–43.31 urban environment and, 15.8–15.13 in urban parks, 21.1–21.12 usability, 66.3 user/expert involvement, 1.10, 6.1–6.14, 10.16 vision impairment and, 61.1–61.16 Universal Design (periodical), 1.11 Universal Design: Access to Daily Living Conference (1992), 51.8 Universal Design: A Manual of Practical Guidance for Architects (Goldsmith), 25.14 Universal Design, Planning, and Design for All (Norwegian State Council on Disability), 27.22 Universal Design Education Project (UDEP), 43.29, 51.8–51.9, 51.11, 51.12, 51.14–51.17, 52.5–52.16, 60.5 framework, 9.12–9.14 process models, 9.7–9, 11 techniques, 9.15–9.16 training, 9.15 Universal Design File: Designing for People of All Ages and Abilities (Story et al.), 10.13, 49.4 Universal Design Handbook (Preiser and Ostroff): international themes, 1.7–1.10 structure of, 1.6–1.7 Universal Design Institute (Canada), 6.1, 6.2, 6.4, 6.6, 6.8, 6.12, 6.13, 16.9, 16.11, 36.2, 36.13 Universal Design in the City Conference (Canada), 16.9 Universal Design Newsletter, 1.11, 43.28 Universal Design Studio Project (Australia), 53.1–53.5, 53.12–53.15 Universal Home Project, 34.3-34.21 bathrooms, 34.15–34.16 controls, alarms, and home automation, 34.16–34.18 demographic factors, 34.3–34.4 entrances, 34.9–34.11 key features, 34.5–34.19 kitchen and laundry, 34.11–34.15 legislative background, 34.3–34.4 Universality, 7.9–7.11 examples, 41.6–41.8 future of, 41.15–41.16 General Electric Real Life Design project, 41.6–41.7, 41.16 Rhode Island School of Design Universal Kitchen, 41.7–41.8, 41.16 universal appliances, 41.8–41.15 Whirlpool Kitchen 2000, 41.12 Universal man, 16.2 Universal mass media: historical background, 67.1–67.2 multimedia, 67.10–67.11 print media, 67.2–67.4 radio, 67.4–67.5 television, 67.5–67.10 theatrical motion pictures, 67.12–67.13 World Wide Web, 66.1–66.13, 67.11-67.12 Universal products, 49.1–49.14 Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (Brazil), 57.1, 57.8–57.10 University of Liverpool group learning methods project (United Kingdom), 53.5 University of Reading inclusive universal design project (United Kingdom), 44.1-44.9 University of the Third Age (United Kingdom), 4.11 University of Western Australia universal design studio projects, 53.1–53.16 Unlimited by Design (exhibition), 16.10, 41.8, 42.14 Urban Parks Access Committee (Japan), 21.2 Urban Redevelopment Authority (Singapore), 40.5 Urban/suburban design: Beirut Central District (Lebanon), 63.1–63.17 Celebration Village (United States), 69.14 Curitiba (Brazil), 69.15 guidelines for, 15.8 Market Nomentano (Italy), 15.8 parks and, 21.1–21.12 Pedestrian pathway (Italy), 15.11 Pistoia historic urban center (Italy), 15.10–15.11 Radburn (United States), 69.13–69.14 Seaside (United States), 69.14 South Boston Waterfront development (United States), 60.1–60.15 universal design and, 1.9–1.10 Village Homes development (United States), 69.15 Winslow Cohousing development (United States), 69.15 U.S. Access Board, 43.23 U.S. Forest Service, 20.4 U.S. Park Service, 43.23 U.S. Supreme Court: Brown vs. the Board of Education (1954), 1.4 Grove City College vs. Bell, 43.6 University of Alabama vs. Garrett (2000), 43.10 User Agent Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (UAAG 1.0), 66.3, 66.8, 66.9 User/experts, 6.1–6.13, 10.16 in Canada, 6.4–6.13 defined, 6.3 User-friendly demonstration home (Canada), 36.13 User involvement, 51.19 Vanderheiden, Gregg, 1.8, 10.7, 43.27 Vescovo, Fabrizio, 26.5 Veteran's Law—Returning to Work (Israel), 31.1 Video description television (DVS), 67.8 Vignelli, Lella, 4.6 Vignelli, Massimo, 4.6 Village Homes development (United States), 69.15 Vinci, Leonardo da. (see da Vinci, Leonardo) Vinoly, Rafael, 60.11 Vision impairment: aging and, 61.2–61.3 case study, 61.8–61.13 demographics, 61.1–61.2 guidelines for accessible design, 61.4–61.8 universal design and, 61.14–61.15 Visitability, 15.4, 26.4–26.5, 43.25, 57.5–57.6 in Brazil, 57.5–57.6 in Italy, 26.4–26.5 Vitruvius, Marcus, 1.7, 9.6, 16.2, 27.1, 27.2, 27.4 Vocational Rehabilitation Amendments Act of 1954 (United States), 43.4 Volatile organic compounds (VOCs), 46.14 von Foerster, H., 9.3–9.4 Voting Rights Act of 1965 (United States), 43.4 Votteler, Arno, 4.15 Wagner, Otto, 27.2 Walker, Andrew, 60.11 Walker, Lily, 53.1 Walsh, Aileen, 53.8 Walsh, C. J., 1.10, 33.8 Washburn, Andy, 43.9 Wayfinding, 69.13 Wayfinding in Architecture (Passini), 16.12 Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), 66.2–66.8, 66.10, 66.11 Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, 66.2 Weisman, Leslie Kanes, 1.4, 1.10, 5.8 Weitzel, Ron, 34.20 Welch, Polly, 9.15, 22.2, 60.6 Wellcome Foundation (United Kingdom), 4.6 Western Australian universal design studio projects: indigenous design studio (1996-1997), 53.1–53.12, 53.15 Western Australian universal design studio projects (Cont.): universal design studio (1999), 53.12–53.15 Wheeler, Candice, 52.2 Whirlwind Wheelchairs International (WWI), 64.1, 64.8 Whitehouse, Roger, 61.8 Wijk, Maarten, 1.9 William Rudd House (Canada), 36.4–36.6 Williams, Victoria, 60.10 Wingwall, Alice, 46.10 Winnipeg Access Advisory Committee (Canada), 6.8 Winnipeg Access Audit (Canada), 6.8 Winslow cohousing development (United States), 69.15 Wireless Access Protocol Forum (WAP forum), 66.3 Wolfensberger, W., 38.3 Women's Advisory Committees (Netherlands), 28.11 Wood, Bruce, 43.17 Woodland, Tanis, 6.4 Workplace design, 45.1–45.11 Workplace Ergonomics Workbook (Mueller), 45.3–45.6 Workplace Issues: Universal Design and the ADA (Knoll Group), 45.10 Workplace Workbook 2.0 (Mueller), 45.7 World Architecture (periodical), 43.21 World Blind Union, 11.3, 11.10 World Federation of the Deaf, 11.3 World Health Organization (WHO), 3.5, 11.4 World Institute on Disability (WID), 64.1 World Plan of Action Concerning Disabled Persons (United Nations), 11.2–11.3 World Wide Web: accessibility, 66.1–66.4 core technologies, 66.10 education and outreach, 66.11 guidelines, 66.5–66.10 policy context, 66.4–66.5 tools, 66.10 World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 66.2, 66.3, 66.5, 66.8–66.11 Wright, Henry, 69.14 Yuenwah, San, 59.1 Yuri Rubinsky Insight Foundation, 66.2 Zajac Norgate House (Canada), 36.9-36.12 Zimderoff, David, 41.14