Copyright © 2007 by Donald A. Norman Hardcover first published in 2007 by Basic Books, A Member of the Perseus Books Group Paperback first published in 2009 by Basic Books All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoeve without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information, address Basic Books, 387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016–8810. Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the United States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 255–1514, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com . Designed by Timm Bryson Set in 11.5 point Minion Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Norman, Donald A. The design of future things / Donald A. Norman. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN-13: 978-0-465-00227-6 ISBN-10: 0-465-00227-7 1. Design, Industrial—Psychological aspects. 2. Human engineering. I. Title. TS171.4.N668 2007 745.2—dc22 2007035377 Paperback ISBN: 978-0-465-00228-3 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 ## BOOKS BY DONALD A . NORMAN ## Textbooks Memory and Attention: An Introduction to Human Information Processing. (First edition, 1969; second edition 1976.) Human Information Processing. (With Peter Lindsay: First edition, 1972; second edition 1977.) ## Scientific Monographs Models of Human Memory. (Edited, 1970.) Explorations in Cognition. (With David E. Rumelhart and the LNR Research Group, 1975.) Perspectives on Cognitive Science. (Edited, 1981.) User Centered System Design: New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction . (Edited with Steve Draper, 1986.) ## Trade Books Learning and Memory, 1982. The Psychology of Everyday Things, 1988. The Design of Everyday Things, 1990 and 2002. (Paperback version of The Psychology of Everyday Things.) Turn Signals Are the Facial Expressions of Automobiles, 1992. Things That Make Us Smart, 1993. The Invisible Computer: Why Good Products Can Fail, the Personal Computer Is So Complex, and Information Appliances Are the Solution, 1998 Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things, 2004 ## CD-ROM First Person: Donald A. Norman. Defending Human Attributes in the Age of the Machine, 1994.