# MOTORIST TRAPPED IN TRAFFIC CIRCLE 14 HOURS April 1. Hampstead, MA. Motorist Peter Newone said he felt as if a nightmare had just ended. Newone, 53, was driving his newly purchased luxury car when he entered the traffic circle in the city center around 9 a.m. yesterday, Friday. The car was equipped with the latest safety features, including a new feature called Lane Keeping. “It just wouldn’t let me get out of the circle,” said Newone. “I was in the inner-most lane, and every time I tried to get out, the steering wheel refused to budge and a voice kept saying over and over, ‘warning, right lane is occupied.’ I was there until 11 at night, when it finally let me out,” Newone said from his hospital bed, his voice still shaky. “I managed to get out of the circle and to the side of the road, and then I don’t remember what happened.” Police say they found Newone collapsed in his car, incoherent. He was taken to the Memorial Hospital for observation and diagnosed with extreme shock and dehydration. He was released early this morning. A representative of the automobile company said that they could not explain this behavior. “Our cars are very carefully tested,” said Mr. Namron, “and this feature has been most thoroughly vetted by our technicians. It is an essential safety feature and it is designed so that it never exerts more than 80% of the torque required, so the driver can always overrule the system. We designed it that way as a safety precaution. We grieve for Mr. Newone, but we are asking our physicians to do their own evaluation of his condition.” Police say they have never heard of a similar situation. Mr. Newone evidently encountered a rare occurrence of continual traffic at that location: there was a special ceremony in the local school system which kept traffic high all day, and then there was an unusual combination of sports events, a football game, and then a late concert, so traffic was unusually heavy all day and evening. Attempts to get statements from relevant government officials were unsuccessful. The National Transportation Safety Board, which is supposed to investigate all unusual automobile incidents, says that this is not officially an accident, so it does not fit into their domain. Federal and state transportation officials were not available for comment. Cautious cars, cantankerous kitchens, demanding devices. Cautious cars? We already have them, cautious and sometimes frightened. Cantankerous kitchens? Not yet, but they are coming. Demanding devices? Oh, yes, our products are getting smarter, more intelligent, and more demanding, or, if you like, bossy. This trend brings with it many special problems and unexplored areas of applied psychology. In particular, our devices are now part of a human-machine social ecosystem, and therefore they need social graces, superior communicative skills, and even emotions—machine emotions, to be sure, but emotions nonetheless. If you think that the technologies in your home are too complex, too difficult to use, just wait until you see what the next generation brings: bossy, demanding technologies, technologies that not only take control of your life but blame you for their shortcomings. It is tempting to fill this book with horror stories, real ones that are happening today plus imagined ones that could conceivably come about if current trends continue, such as the imaginary story of Mr. Newone. Consider poor Mr. Newone, stuck in the traffic circle for fourteen hours. Could this really happen? The only real clue that the story isn’t true is the date, April 1, because I wrote this story specifically for the yearly April Fool’s edition of the RISKS digest, an electronic newsletter devoted to the study of accidents and errors in the world of high technology. The technologies described in the article are real, already available on commercially sold automobiles. In theory, just as the spokesperson in the story says, they only provide 80 percent of the torque required to stay in the lane, so Mr. Newone presumably could have overcome that force easily. Suppose he were unusually timid, however, and as soon as he felt the resisting force on the steering wheel, he would immediately give in. Or what if there were some error in the mechanics, electronics, or programming of the system, causing 100 percent of the force to be deployed, not 80 percent. Could that happen? Who knows, but the fact that it is so plausible is worrisome. # We Have Become the Tools of Our Tools But lo! men have become the tools of their tools. —Henry Thoreau, Walden When Henry Thoreau wrote that “men have become the tools of their tools,” he was referring to the relatively simple tools of the 1850s, such as the axe, farming implements, and carpentry. Even in his time, however, tools defined people’s lives. “I see young men, my townsmen, whose misfortune it is to have inherited farms, houses, barns, cattle, and farming tools; for these are more easily acquired than got rid of.” Today, we complain about the maintenance all our technology requires, for it seems never ending. Thoreau would have sympathized, for even in 1854 he compared the daily toil of his neighbors unfavorably to the twelve labors of Hercules: “The twelve labors of Hercules were trifling in comparison with those which my neighbors have undertaken; for they were only twelve, and had an end.” Today, I would rephrase Thoreau’s lament as “People have become slaves to their technology, servants of their tools.” The sentiment is the same. And not only must we serve our tools, faithfully using them throughout the day, maintaining them, polishing them, comforting them, but we also blithely follow their prescriptions, even when they lead us to disaster. It’s too late to go back: we can no longer live without the tools of technology. Technology is often blamed as the culprit: “technology is confusing and frustrating,” goes the standard cry. Yet, the complaint is misguided: most of our technology works well, including the tool Thoreau was using to write his complaint. For that matter, Thoreau himself was a technologist, a maker of tools, for he helped improve the technology in the manufacture of pencils for his family’s pencil business. Yes, a pencil is a technology. ## Tech·nol·o·gy (noun ): New stuff that doesn’t work very well or that works in mysterious, unknown ways. In the common vernacular, the word “technology” is mostly applied to the new things in our life, especially those that are exotic or weird, mysterious or intimidating. Being impressive helps. A rocket ship, surgical robots, the internet—that’s technology. But a paper and pencil? Clothes? Cooking utensils? Contrary to the folk definition, the term technology really refers to any systematic application of knowledge to fashion the artifacts, materials, and procedures of our lives. It applies to any artificial tool or method. So, our clothing is the result of technology, as is our written language, much of our culture; even music and art can be thought of as either technologies or products that could not exist without the technologies of musical instruments, drawing surfaces, paints, brushes, pencils, and other tools of the artists and musicians. Until recently, technology has been pretty much under control. Even as technology gained more intelligence, it was still an intelligence that could be understood. After all, people devised it, and people exerted control: starting, stopping, aiming, and directing. No longer. Automation has taken over many tasks, some thankless— consider the automated equipment that keeps our sewers running properly and some not so thankless—think of the automated teller machines that put many bank clerks out of work. These automated activities raise major issues for society. Important though this might be, however, my focus here is on those situations where the automation doesn’t quite take over, where people are left to pick up the pieces when the automation fails. This is where major stresses occur and where the major dangers, accidents, and deaths result. Consider the automobile, which, as the New York Times notes, “has become a computer on wheels.” What is all that computer power being used for? Everything. Controlling the heating and air conditioning with separate controls for the driver and each passenger. Controlling the entertainment system, with a separate audio and video channel for each passenger, including high-definition display screens and surround sound. Communication systems for telephone, text messaging, e-mail. Navigation systems that tell you where you are, where you are going, what the traffic conditions are, where the closest restaurants, gas stations, hotels, and entertainment spots are located, and paying for road tolls, drive-through restaurants, and downloaded movies and music. Much of the automation, of course, is used to control the car. Some things are completely automated, so the driver and passengers are completely unaware of them: the timing of critical events such as spark, valve opening and closing, fuel injection, engine cooling, power-assisted brakes and steering. Some of the automation, including braking and stability systems, is partially controllable and noticeable. Some of the technology interacts with the driver: navigational systems, cruise control, lane-keeping systems, even automatic parking. And this barely scratches the surface of what exists today, and what is planned for the future. Precrash warning systems now use their forward-looking radar to predict when the automobile is apt to get into a crash, preparing themselves for the eventuality. Seats straighten up, seat belts tighten, and the brakes get ready. Some cars have television cameras that monitor the driver, and if the driver does not appear to be looking straight ahead, they warn the driver with lights and buzzers. If the driver still fails to respond, they apply the brakes automatically. Someday, we might imagine the following interchange at a court trial: Prosecutor: “I now call the next witness. Mr. Automobile, is it your sworn testimony that just before the crash the defendant was not watching the road?” Automobile: “Correct. He was looking to his right the whole time, even after I signaled and warned him of the danger.” Prosecutor: “And what did the defendant try to do to you?” Automobile: “He tried to erase my memory, but I have an encrypted, tamper-proof storage system.” Your car will soon chat with neighboring cars, exchanging all sorts of interesting information. Cars will communicate with one another through wireless networks, technically called “ad hoc” networks because they form as needed, letting them warn one another about what’s down the road. Just as automobiles and trucks from the oncoming lane sometimes warn you of police vehicles by flashing their lights (or sending messages over their twoway radios and cell phones), future automobiles will tell oncoming autos about traffic and highway conditions, obstacles, collisions, bad weather, and all sorts of other things, some useful, some not, while simultaneously learning about what they can expect to encounter. Cars may even exchange more than that, including information the inhabitants might consider personal and private. Gossiping cars. When two cars talk to one another, what do they talk about? Why, the weather, or traffic patterns, or how to negotiate the intersection they are both approaching at high speed. At least, that’s what the researchers are working on. But you can also bet that clever advertisers are thinking about the potential. Each billboard can have its own wireless network, broadcasting its wares to the car. Imagine a billboard or store checking with the navigation system to see just what the car’s destination is, perhaps to suggest a restaurant, hotel, or shopping center. What if it could take control of the navigation system, reprogramming it to instruct the driver to turn into the advertiser’s establishment? When the day comes that the steering is under the car’s control, the car might very well decide to take you to the restaurant of its choice, possibly even preordering your favorite food for you. “What,” the car might say to you, “you mean you don’t want your favorite food every day, every meal? Strange—why is it your favorite, then?” What about an overload of advertisements or viruses inserted into the telephones, computers, and navigation system in the auto? Is this possible? Never underestimate the cleverness of advertisers, or mischief makers, or criminals. Once systems are networked together, it is amazing what unexpected events can transpire. The technology experts say it is not a matter of if but of when. It is always a race, and no matter what the good guys do, the bad guys always figure out a way to wreak havoc. ## Hitting the Conference Circuit Old MacDonald had a conference, ee-eye, ee-eye oh. Here a conference, there a conference, everywhere a conference. One nice thing about academic life: there are always conferences in exotic locations. Florence in the summer, Hyderabad in the winter (but certainly never in the summer). Stanford in the spring, Daejon in the fall. There is a large industry in providing exotic conference centers. The conferences and centers are not just for show: real work actually gets accomplished. The money sometimes comes from governmental granting agencies or foundations, sometimes from organizations such as the United Nations or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, sometimes from private industry. Whatever the source of the funds, the grantors keep a strict eye out for results—positive, substantive results, like books, research reports, inventions, devices, desired breakthroughs. Of course, this guarantees that the call for papers will glorify the wonders that will soon result from these expected breakthroughs, and the resulting conference reports will be optimistic to a fault. The exceptions, of course, are those conferences run by the humanists and philosophers whose conference call will emphasize the approaching dangers from all these expected breakthroughs. I find myself invited to events held by both sides—those expecting the technology of the future to free us and those expecting it to degrade and enslave us. My take is to deemphasize both claims. Technology will not set us free. It will never solve all the problems of humankind. Moreover, for all the problems that are solved, new ones will arise. Neither will the technology enslave us, at least not any more than it already does. Once we get used to it, the daily requirements of our technologies do not feel like enslavement. Mostly, they feel like improvements. Most people wash their hands several times a day, bathing frequently, and changing clothes daily. This wasn’t the case in earlier eras: is this enslavement? We prepare our meals with cooking and eating utensils made of complex materials, on stoves heated by electricity or gas, produced far away through advanced technological means and transported to our homes through complex networks of pipes and wires. Is this enslavement? Not to me. I believe that the new technologies will mainly befuddle and confuse, frustrate and annoy us, even while delivering some of the promised benefits. After deployment, technologies always deliver benefits never contemplated by their designers and developers, along with problems and difficulties never conceived of. There is many a cry that we should not release new technologies into the world until we have thought through all the benefits and disadvantages, carefully weighing the one against the other. Sounds good. Alas, it is quite impossible. The unexpected consequences of technologies always outweigh the expected ones, both the positive and the negative. And if they are unexpected, how can we plan for them? Want to know what the future will be about? Keep an eye on those conferences. Nothing is going to happen in the future, not in technology anyway, without huge early-warning signs in the research laboratories of the world, all duly announced in the scientific journals, at a host of conferences, and through the establishment of centers for research. It usually takes a long time, decades, for ideas to move from conception to product, and that time is engaged in continual interaction with others pursuing similar ideas. Along the way, industrial forces take sufficient interest that the work starts to become commercialized, at which point it becomes invisible, hidden inside corporate research and development centers, carefully guarded. Beyond those locked doors, however, there is the public world of conferences. And there a lot is going on, all under many labels: assistance, smart, and intelligent; ubiquitous computers, invisible ones, or perhaps ones still in the process of disappearing; ambient technologies intended to fit seamlessly into a life, but only if the life itself has been altered to make the seams invisible. Here are selected quotations from two conference announcements, just so you get the drift: ## INTERACTION CHALLENGES FOR INTELLIGENT ASSISTANTS, STANFORD UNIVERSITY, CA, USA In an increasingly complex world, a new wave of intelligent artificial assistants has the potential to simplify and amplify our everyday personal and professional lives. These assistants will help us in mundane tasks from purchasing groceries to organizing meetings; in background tasks from providing reminders to monitoring our health; and in complex, open-ended tasks from writing a report to locating survivors in a collapsed building. Some will offer tutelage or provide recommendations. Whether robotic embodiments or software processes, these assistive agents will help us manage our time and budgets, knowledge and workflow as they assist us in our homes, offices, cars, and public spaces. ## INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) FOR HUMAN COMPUTING. HYDERABAD, INDIA, JANUARY Human Computing is about next-generation anticipatory interfaces that should be about humans, built for humans, and based on models of humans. They should go beyond the traditional keyboard and mouse to include natural, human-like interactive functions, including understanding and emulating behavioral and social signaling. “Humanlike interactive functions”: the very phrase suggests secretive, mysterious nonbeings out to do our bidding. Socially assistive robots that will teach, entertain, and safeguard our children and entertain and safeguard our elderly (presumably, they no longer need teaching), ensuring that they take their medicine, don’t do dangerous activities, and if they fall down, either the robots will help them up or, at least, call for help. Yes, the development of intelligent devices that can read our minds, cater to all our wishes (even before we are aware of them), and take care of the young, the elderly, the hospitalized, and even the rest of us, is a growing industry. Robots to talk with you, robots to cook for you, robots this and robots that. “Smart home” research projects show up all over the world. The reality is a lot less than the dreams. Artificially intelligent agents are the mainstay of many a computer game, but that doesn’t count as real assistance in everyday lives. And yes, the technology behind the ever popular line of robotic vacuum cleaners can be expanded indefinitely to all tasks that simply require navigating over a designated area with sufficient thoroughness: cleaning a swimming pool, sweeping leaves from a yard or mowing the grass. The reality is that intelligent devices can indeed interact well with the physical world or other intelligent devices. It is when they must interact with real people that the difficulties begin. Intelligent devices do work well in controlled settings where the task is well specified, such as washing clothes. They also are very effective in industrial settings, where not only is the task well specified, but the people who control and supervise them are well trained, spending hours learning how the devices work, often spending considerable time in simulators, where many of the failures can be experienced and appropriate responses learned. But there are profound differences between intelligent devices in industrial settings and the very same technologies in the home. First, the technologies are apt to be different, for although industry can afford to spend tens of thousands of dollars on automation, home owners are usually only willing to spend tens or hundreds of dollars. Second, in industrial settings, the people are extremely well trained, whereas in the home and in the automobile, they are relatively untrained. Third, in most industrial settings, when difficulties arise, there is considerable time before damage might be done. In the automobile, the time is measured in seconds. Intelligent devices have made great progress in the control of automobiles, airplanes, and ships. They make sense for machines with fixed tasks. They work well in the world of computer agents, where they need only some intelligence and an image to display on the screen; real, physical bodies are not needed. They are successful in games and entertainment, controlling dolls, robotic pets, and characters in computer games. In these environments, not only do occasional misunderstandings and failures not matter, but they can add to the fun. In the world of entertainment, a wellexecuted failure can be even more satisfying than success. Tools that rely on statistical inference are also widely popular and successful. Some online stores recommend books, movies, music, or even kitchen appliances by finding products that people similar to you in taste seem to like, then recommending those items to you. The system works reasonably well. Despite the multiple conferences and the well-formed beliefs of scientists throughout the world, making devices that truly interact with us in useful ways is far beyond our capabilities. Why? Oh, for lots of reasons. Some are for physical reasons: devices—or robots—that can go up and down stairs, walk around the natural environment, and pick up, manipulate, and control real, naturally occurring objects are still far beyond our capabilities. Some reasons are lack of knowledge: the science of understanding human behavior is growing rapidly, but even so, what we do not know far exceeds what we do. Our ability to create natural interaction is very limited. ## Cars That Drive Themselves, Houses That Clean Themselves, Entertainment Systems That Decide How You Shall Be Entertained What’s next? Clearly, we are headed for cars that drive themselves; washing machines that determine the color and material of clothes, adjusting themselves automatically; cooking appliances that mix, heat, and stir, making the entire meal, after selecting the foods you should eat, having collaborated with the refrigerator and your medical records. Entertainment systems will select your music for you and prerecord television shows and movies they determine might be of interest, automatically deducting the charges from your bank account. Houses will take care of the temperature settings, of watering the lawn. Robot cleaners and lawn mowers will vacuum, mop, dust, and, of course, mow the lawn. Much of this has already happened. Most of this will soon happen. Of all the areas of automation that impact our everyday lives, the most advanced is that of the automobile. So, let’s take a quick look at what is happening here, although the level of automation required to give the family vehicle full driving capability still remains far in the future. Some people estimate it will take twenty to fifty years, and chances are that this estimate will still be accurate no matter when you read this. In some circumstances, cars can—and already do—drive themselves. How do we automate sensibly, controlling some parts of the driving experience but ensuring that drivers are kept alert and informed? “In the loop,” is the way this is described in aviation safety. How do we warn drivers who are about to change lanes that there is another vehicle in the way, or that there is an obstacle in the road or a car approaching from an intersecting side street, which is not yet visible to the driver? What should be done when two cars arrive at an intersection on a collision course, and one car decides the best way to avoid a crash is to accelerate past the danger zone at the same time as the driver decides the best solution is to brake? Should the car ignore the pressure on the brake pedal and just accelerate? Should a car prevent its driver from changing lanes when another vehicle is in the other lane? Should the car prevent the driver from exceeding the speed limit, or from going slower than the minimum limit, or from getting too close to the car ahead? All of these questions and more face automobile engineers and designers today. In many of these situations, asking the driver what to do, or even giving the driver the relevant information, is seldom possible: there simply isn’t enough time. Cars today can almost drive themselves. Take adaptive cruise control, which adjusts the auto’s speed according to its distance from the car in front. Add lane-keeping control and automatic toll-payment systems, and the car can drive itself, following the roadway and debiting the driver’s bank account. Lane keeping is not (yet) completely reliable, and in chapter 1 , I discussed some of the problems with adaptive cruise control, but these systems will improve in reliability and be available at greatly lowered costs, so that they will eventually be installed in all car models. When cars start communicating among themselves (something that is already happening in experimental deployment), safety will increase even more. The technology does not have to be perfect to improve safety: human drivers are far from perfect. Put all these components together, and, oops, we are training drivers to be inattentive. Their cars will be able to drive on highways for hours with little need for driver interaction: the driver could even fall asleep. This already happens in aviation: the automatic pilots are so good that pilots have indeed fallen asleep. A friend, a physicist who worked for a navy research laboratory, once told me that he was in an airplane doing experiments for the navy, flying over the ocean for several hours. When the tests were finished, his group called the cockpit to tell the pilots. There was no response, so they went forward to talk to them: the pilots were asleep. Falling asleep isn’t recommended for airplane pilots, but it is usually safe because of the efficiency of the automatic flight controls, especially when flying in an uncrowded air space, with good weather, and with plenty of fuel. This is not the case for automobile drivers. Studies have shown that the chance of accident increases severely if the driver’s eyes are away from the road for more than two seconds. And the driver doesn’t have to be asleep: two seconds looking away from the road or fiddling with the radio is enough. In many of the classical fields studied by engineering psychologists and human factors engineers, there is a well-known and well-studied problem called overautomation : the equipment is so good that people don’t need to be as attentive. In theory, people are supposed to supervise the automation, always watching over operations, always ready to step in if things go wrong, but this kind of supervision is very difficult when the automation works so well. In the case of some manufacturing or process control plants, there may be very little for the human operators to do for days. As a result, people simply cannot maintain their attention. ## Swarms and Platoons Birds flock, bees swarm, and fish school. They are fun to watch, moving in precise formation, swooping here, banking there, splitting up to avoid obstacles, smoothly rejoining on the other side. It is precision action; they move in synchrony, close to one another, all obeying the leader precisely, immediately, without collision. Except there is no leader. Swarming behavior, as well as its analog among flocks of birds, schools of fish, and stampeding herds of cattle, results when each animal obeys a remarkably simple set of behavioral rules. Each individual creature avoids collisions with the other animals and objects that might be in its path, tries to keep close to all of the others— without touching them, of course—and keeps moving in the same direction as its neighbors. Communication within the swarm, school, or flock is limited to perceptual information: sight, sound, pressure waves (e.g., lateral-line detectors in fish) and smell (e.g., in ants). In artificial systems, we can use more informative communication. Suppose we had a group of automobiles traveling down a highway, connected through a wireless communication network. Aha! The cars could actually travel in a swarm. Natural, biological swarms are reactive: its members react to each other’s behavior. Artificial swarms, however, such as a group of cars, can be predictive because cars can communicate their intended behavior, so others can react, even before anything happens. Imagine a swarm of cars, where each car is completely automatic, communicating with the other cars in the vicinity. They could cruise down the highway rapidly and safely. They wouldn’t have to keep much separation between themselves either—a few feet or a meter would do. If the lead car intended to slow or brake, it could tell the others, and within thousandths of a second, they would slow down or brake as well. With human drivers, we must keep a large separation to give people time to react and decide what to do: with automatic swarms, the time to react is measured in milliseconds. With swarms, we wouldn’t need traffic lanes. After all, these are needed only to help drivers avoid collision. Swarms don’t collide, so no lanes are required. We wouldn’t need traffic lanes, stop signs, or traffic lights, either. At an intersection, the swarm would simply follow its rules to avoid crashing into crossing traffic. Each car would adjust its speed and position, some slowing, some speeding, so intersecting streams of traffic would magically cross one another, with no car ever hitting another. For this, the swarm rules would have to be modified somewhat to make sure that a car on a cross street wouldn’t start following its new neighbor instead of its original ones, but that wouldn’t be hard to do. What about pedestrians? In theory, the rule of avoiding collisions would work here as well. A pedestrian would simply walk across the street. The swarming vehicles would slow, speed, and swerve, just enough so as always to leave a clear space for the pedestrian. It would be a rather terrifying experience, requiring incredible trust on the pedestrian’s part, but in theory it could be done. What if a car needed to leave the swarm or to go to a destination different from that of its swarm mates? The driver would tell his or her car of this intention, and the car would in turn communicate it to the other vehicles. Or the driver would use the turn signal to tell the car of the wish to change lanes, and the car would inform all the neighboring vehicles. To get into the lane on the right, the car just ahead in the right lane would speed up slightly, the one just behind in the right lane would slow down slightly, making space. Tapping the brake pedal would signal the intention to slow down or stop, and the other cars would get out of the way. Different swarms might even share information. Thus, a swarm going in one direction might share information with a swarm going in the other direction, giving it useful information about what might lie ahead. Alternatively, if the density of vehicles were high enough, information might trickle backwards from the lead car to those behind, telling the following vehicles of accidents, traffic, or other relevant driving information. Swarms are still the stuff of research laboratories. Instituting swarmlike behavior in real cars creates major challenges. One is understanding how this could work when not all cars will be equipped with the wireless communication equipment that is required for swarming. Another is figuring out how to handle the many varieties of automobiles on the road, some with fully automatic control and wireless communication equipment, some with outdated equipment, and some with no equipment at all or with malfunctioning equipment. Would the cars have to figure out who was the least capable in the bunch and then all revert to that behavior? Nobody has answers to these questions. And there is more. Suppose an antisocial driver came upon a swarm filling up all the space on the road. If the antisocial car preferred to go at a much faster speed, it would only have to accelerate and drive straight through the swarm, confident that all the other cars would automatically get out of the way. This would work fine for one discrepant vehicle but could lead to disaster if others were doing the same thing at the same time. Not all vehicles will have the same abilities. When some cars are still driven manually, we will need to consider realistic driver behavior, due to mixed levels of skill or mixed levels of attentiveness, drowsiness, or distraction. Heavy trucks have slower response times and longer stopping distances than cars. Different cars have a wide variety of stopping, acceleration, and turning capabilities. Despite the drawbacks, swarming has lots of benefits. Because swarming cars can travel very closely to one another, more cars can fit on a given highway, relieving traffic considerably. Moreover, normal traffic slows down as the density increases: swarms would not have to slow down until the density reached far higher levels. Cars traveling close together help reduce wind resistance. (This is why bicycle racers cluster together: the “drafting” behavior of bikers reduces air resistance.) Even so, don’t expect to see swarms for quite awhile. Platoons, now that is another story. A platoon is a simplified swarm, working in one dimension. In a platoon, one vehicle follows the one just in front, mimicking its speed precisely. When a sequence of cars travels in a platoon, a driver is only needed for the first vehicle: the others just tag along. Some of the swarm benefits apply here as well: increased density of traffic and reduced energy through drafting. Experimental studies, some done on public highways, show a dramatic increase in traffic capacity for a given highway. Platoons, like swarms, face the most difficulty when drivers enter or exit and when there are mixed-mode cars, and some with and, some without automatic communication capability. Of course, drivers who wish to exploit the system or simply to cause disruption can do so, both in platoons and swarms. Platoons and swarms are only a few of the many forms of automation now being considered for the modern automobile. Platooning, in fact, comes free with some forms of adaptive cruise control. After all, if the cruise control can slow the vehicle’s speed when a car moves in front, then the car automatically will track the car in front as it changes speed, as long as it stays under the speed set into the cruise control. In heavy traffic, the car will follow the one in front closely, increasing separation as speed increases. For a fully automatic system, the separation between the two cars could be small, with no need to increase the distance by much as speed increased. Without people in control, the traffic would flow much more smoothly and efficiently, that is, as long as everything worked perfectly, as long as no unexpected events occurred. Efficient platooning cannot be done without fully automatic braking, steering, and speed control. Moreover, it requires a guaranteed high-degree of reliability—perfect reliability some would say, reliability so high that it would never be questioned. As with swarms, however, it is not at all obvious how such platooning could be introduced into the existing highway system, given that we already have a huge number of vehicles incapable of platooning. How would we separate the automated from the nonautomated ones? How would a driver enter or exit the platoon? What if something went wrong? Swarming works just fine in the laboratory, but it is difficult to imagine on the highway. Platooning may be more feasible. I can imagine special lanes restricted to platooning cars, perhaps enforcing an equipment check on the communication and control capabilities of each vehicle before it is allowed into the platoon. Platooning will speed traffic and reduce congestion while also saving fuel. Sounds like a winning proposition. The complexity, of course, comes in the transition: getting cars safely into and out of the platoon and enforcing the equipment requirements. ## The Problem of Inappropriate Automation I once argued that the current state of automation was fundamentally unsound because it was in the dangerous middle ground, neither fully automated nor fully manual. Either have no automation or full automation, I argued, but what we have today is halfway automation. Even worse, the system takes over when the going is easy and gives up, usually without any warning, when the going gets tough—just the reverse of what you would want. If an airplane pilot or car driver is aware of the vehicle’s state, the environment, and the location and condition of all other vehicles and, moreover, is continually reacting and interpreting this information, the person is an essential part of the control loop: perceiving the situation, deciding upon an appropriate action to take, executing that action, and then monitoring the result. You are “in the loop” every time you drive your car with care, paying full attention to all that is happening around you. For that matter, you are in the loop while cooking, washing, or even playing a video game, as long as you are continually involved in judging the situation, deciding what to do, and evaluating the result. A closely related concept is that of situation awareness , which refers to a person’s knowledge of the context, the current state of things, and what might happen next. In theory, a person could still be in the loop, stay fully aware of the situation, even with completely automated equipment, by continually monitoring the vehicle’s actions and assessing the situation, being ready to step in when needed. This passive observation is not very rewarding, however, especially as airplane pilots and automobile drivers might have to maintain this state for many hours on long-distance trips. In experimental psychology, this situation is often called vigilance , and the experimental and theoretical studies of vigilance demonstrate deterioration in performance with time. People just can’t keep focused on mindless tasks for very long. When people are “out of the loop,” they are no longer informed. If something goes wrong and immediate response is required, they cannot provide it effectively. Instead, considerable time and effort is required to get back “into the loop,” and by then, it may be too late. A second problem with automated equipment is the tendency to rely on the automation, even when there are difficulties with it. Two British psychologists, Neville Stanton and Mark Young of Brunel University, studied drivers using adaptive cruise control in an automobile simulator. They found that when the automation worked, things were fine, but when the adaptive cruise control failed, the drivers had more accidents than did drivers without the fancy technology. This is a common finding: safety equipment does indeed increase safety, until it fails. When people learn to rely upon automation, they are not only out of the loop but often too trusting of the automation. When it fails, they are less likely to catch problems than they would be if they didn’t have automated equipment at all. This phenomenon has been found in every domain studied, be it among airline pilots, train operators, or automobile drivers. This tendency to follow instructions provided by automated equipment has its bizarre side as well. The residents of Wiltshire, England, have discovered a lucrative business: towing automobiles out of the River Avon, after drivers have followed the instructions of their navigation systems, even though common sense should have told them they were about to drive into a river. Similarly, even experienced airline pilots sometimes trust their equipment more than they should. The cruise ship Royal Majesty went aground because its crew had too much faith in its intelligent navigation system. All automobile manufacturers are concerned about these issues. In addition to addressing actual safety in this modern, litigious society, they worry that even the slightest problem may cause massive lawsuits against them. So, how do they respond? Cautiously, very cautiously. Driving a vehicle at high speeds over crowded highways is hazardous: there are over 1.2 million deaths and 50 million injuries each year in the world. This is truly a situation where our reliance on a machine, the automobile, exposes all of us to unnecessary risk—one that is helpful, invaluable to the population of the world, and deadly. Yes, we could train drivers better, but part of the problem is that driving is inherently dangerous. When problems arise, they do so quickly, with little time to respond. Every driver experiences wavering levels of attention—a natural human condition. Even in the best of cases, driving is a dangerous activity. If one cannot automate fully, then the automation that is possible must be applied with great care, sometimes not being invoked, sometimes requiring more human participation than is really needed in order to keep the human drivers informed and attentive. Full manual control of automobiles is dangerous. Fully automatic control will be safer. The difficulty lies in the transition toward full automation, when only some things will be automated, when different vehicles will have different capabilities, and when even the automation that is installed will be limited in capability. I fear that while the partial automation of driving will lead to fewer accidents, the accidents that do happen will be greater in magnitude, involve more cars, and exact a higher toll. The joint relationship between machines and their humans must be approached with caution.