Chapter 1 16 “The Sensor features detect . . .” Manual for General Electric Spacemaker Electric Oven, DE68–02560A, January 2006. 17–18 “Human brains and computing machines will be coupled together very tightly . . .” (Licklider, 1960). 22 “H-Metaphor.” (Flemisch, et al., 2003; Goodrich, Schutte, Flemisch, & Williams, 2006) 25 “Charles Stross’s science fiction novel Accelerando.” (Stross, 2005) 27–28 “Researchers say robots soon will be able to perform many tasks for people . . .” (Mason, 2007). 28 “Symposium on Affective Smart Environment.” Excerpted from an e-mailed conference announcement. Material has been deleted, and the acronym “Ami” has been spelled out as Ambient Intelligence; see www.di.uniba.it/intint/ase07.html . 29 “Researchers at the MIT Media Lab.” (Lee, Bonanni, Espinosa, Lieberman, & Selker, 2006) 29–30 “KitchenSense is a sensor-rich networked kitchen research platform . . .” (Lee, et al., 2006). 31 “Minority Report was fiction, but the technology depicted . . .” (Rothkerch, 2002). 37 “But these studies have dealt with industrial and military settings . . .” These studies go under many names. Some important summaries of the research are contained in Parasuraman & Riley, 1997; Salvendy, 2005; Sheridan, 2002. 42 “The ‘triune’ brain . . .” (MacLean, 1990; MacLean & Kral, 1973). 43 “In my book Emotional Design . . .” The scientific version of this work is in a paper with Andrew Ortony and Bill Revelle (Ortony, Norman, & Revelle, 2005). My book is Norman(2004). 49–50 “Alan and Barbara begin with . . .” (Clark, 1996, p. 12). 61 “the pitch of the vacuum cleaner’s motor naturally rises . . .” Gotcha. Did you turn here because you thought the pitch should be lower when the vacuum cleaner is stuck? Nope, it rises. The motor is not working harder: it is working more easily because with the clogged hose, no air passes through the hose, and in the absence of air resistance, the motor can turn more rapidly. Don’t believe me? Try it. 62 “behaviorally implicit communication . . .” (and succeeding quotations) (Castlefranchi, 2006). 66 “The research team of Will Hill, Jim Hollan, Dave Wroblewski, and Tim McCandless . . .” (Hill et al. 1992). 67 “an important book, Semiotic Engineering . . .” (de Souza, 2005). 67 “The term affordance . . .” (Gibson, 1979). 68–69 “The floor slopes gently . . .” (Ouroussoff, 2006). “a topic of active research by scientists at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s (NASA) Langley Research Center in Virginia and the Institut für Verkehrsführung und Fahrzeugsteuerun in Braunschweig, Germany” (Flemisch et al., 2003). 73 “The Playbook enables human operators . . .” (Miller et al., 2005). Note that the use of the term “Playbook” for this purpose is a trademark of Smart Information Flow Technologies, Minneapolis, Minnesota. “One of the pilots of an airplane . . .” (from Levin, 2006). The confidential report by the pilot is from the reports of NASA’s Aviation Safety Reporting System (see asrs.arc.nasa.gov/overview.htm ). “Making driving seem more dangerous could make it safer” (Hamilton-Baillie & Jones, 2005; McNichol, 2004). “Risk homeostasis is the term given to this phenomenon in the literature on safety . . . introduced in the 1980s by the Dutch psychologist Gerald Wilde” (Wilde, 1982). “what the Dutch traffic engineer Hans Monderman . . .” (Elliott, McColl, & Kennedy, 2003; Hamilton-Baillie & Jones, 2005; McNichol, 2004). “Proponents of this method use the name ‘Shared Space’” (see www.shared-space.org ). Shared space is also the name of an international project funded by the European Union through the Interreg North Sea Program. “Shared Space. That is the name of a new approach . . .” (from the Shared Space website: www.shared-space.org ). “British researchers Elliott, McColl, and Kennedy propose . . .” (Elliott et al., 2003). The quotation is taken from Kennedy (2006). “The leading causes of accidental injuries and death in the home . . .” (National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, 2002). “just as dangerous as driving while drunk” (Strayer, Drews, & Crouch, 2006). “Consider the ‘Cobot,’ or ‘Collaborative Robot . . .’” (Colgate, Wannasuphoprasit, & Peshkin, 1996). “The smartest things are those that complement . . .” (e-mail from Michael Peshkin, December 21, 2001; slightly edited). “One of the most exciting capabilities . . .” (Colgate et al., 1996). Slightly edited to delete academic jargon and make the text more readable. The original text gave credit to Rosenberg (1994) for the hard wall and Kelley & Salcudean (1994) for the “Magic Mouse.” 91–92 “Motorist Trapped in Traffic Circle 14 Hours,” fake news story written by D. Norman for the yearly April Fools edition of the computer newsletter, RISKS Digest, devoted to accidents, errors, and poor design of computer systems. 94 “But lo! men have become the tools of their tools” (Thoreau & Cramer, 1854/2004). 95 “Thoreau himself was a technologist . . .” (Petroski, 1998). 96 “has become a computer on wheels” (Lohr, August 23, 2005). Also see “A Techie, Absolutely, and More: Computer Majors Adding Other Skills to Land Jobs (New York Times, C1–C2). 113 “I once argued that the current state of automation . . .” (Norman, 1990). 115 “When the adaptive cruise control failed . . .” (Marinakos, Sheridan, & Multer, 2005). Here Marinakos et al. are referring to a study by Stanton and Young (1998). 115 “about to drive into a river” (Times online, www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,2–2142179,00.html , April 20, 2006). Sat-Nav dunks dozy drivers in deep water. By Simon de Bruxelles. Accessed June 18, 2006. 115 “The cruise ship Royal Majesty . . .” (Degani, 2004; National Transportation Safety Board, 1997). 120 “One journalist described . . .” (AAAS, 1997). 121 “Here are some more comments by Mozer himself . . .” (Mozer, 2005). Reprinted with permission of John Wiley & Sons. 124 “The research team in Microsoft’s Cambridge laboratories . . .” (Taylor et al. 2007). 128 “In the Georgia Institute of Technology’s Aware Home” . . . (from the Georgia Tech “Everyday Computing” website at www.static.cc.gatech.edu/fce/ecl/projects/dejaVu/cc/index.html ). 131 “Automation always looks good on paper . . . . Sometimes you need real people” (Johnson, 2005). 132 “Shoshana Zuboff, a social psychologist . . .” (Zuboff, 1988). 138 “‘I’m at a meeting in Viña del Mar, Chile . . .’” (E-mail from Jonathan Grudin of Microsoft, May 2007). Quoted with permission. 148 “In the words of Weiser and Brown . . .” (Weiser & Brown, 1997). 155 “What if the everyday objects around us came to life?” (Maes, 2005). 156 “Once upon a time, in a different century and a faraway place . . .” The writing eventually was published as The Psychology of Everyday Things, later retitled The Design of Everyday Things (Norman, 1988, as The Psychology of Everyday Things; 2002 as The Design of Everyday Things ). 160 “Robots are coming . . .” Some of this material about robots in everyday life has been rewritten from my article for Interactions, a publication of the Association for Computing Machinery. 163 The Diamond Age: Or, A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer (Stephenson, 1995). 166 “Experience does change the brain” (Hill & Schneider, 2006). 168 “People Propose . . .” Epigraph from my 1993 book Things That Make Us Smart (Norman, 1993). 171 “Design: The deliberate shaping . . .” This definition was developed after a long discussion with John Heskett, who defined design as “the unique human capacity to shape and make our environment in ways that satisfy our needs and give meaning to our lives.” 174 “a future that is emotionally appealing and engaging.” I borrowed these terms from David Keyson’s chapter, “The Experience of Intelligent Products.” His chapter arrived in my email inbox as I was finishing this last chapter. How apropos. (Keyson, 2007, p. 956). ## Afterword 183 “Humans are . . . large, expensive to maintain” (Kaufman et al., 1995, cited in Anderson, 2007). 188 “Fordism” (Hughes, 1989). 188 “Asimov’s prime directive.” This seems like a clear reference to the human writer, Isaac Asimov’s “Laws of Robotics” (Asimov, 1950). Interesting that they should pay such attention to them. 189 “And may Ford shine brightly upon you.” This seems to be a reference to Henry Ford, who developed the first mass-produced assembly lines. This would be a takeoff of the use of Ford’s name in Huxley’s Brave New World (Huxley, 1932). Come to think of it, that’s what these machines are planning for us: Huxley’s brave new world. Horrible thought. Acknowledgments 207 Taming HAL (Degani, 2004).