## References Aarts, E., & Encarnação, J. L. (Eds.). (2006). True visions: The emergence of ambient intelligence. New York: Springer. Aarts, E., & Marzano, S. (2003). The new everyday: Views on ambient intelligence. Rotterdam, the Netherlands: 010 Publishers. American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (1997). World’s “smartest” house created by CU-Boulder team. Available at www.eurekalert.org/pub\_releases/1997–11/UoCa-WHCB–131197.php . Anderson, R. J. (2007). Security engineering: A guide to building dependable distributed systems. New York: Wiley. Asimov, I. (1950). I, Robot. London: D. Dobson. Bishop, R. (2005a). Intelligent vehicle technology and trends. Artech House ITS Library. Norwood, MA: Artech House. \_. (2005b). Intelligent vehicle source website. Bishop Consulting. Available at www.ivsource.net . Castlefranchi, C. (2006). From conversation to interaction via behavioral communication: For a semiotic design of objects, environments, and behaviors. In S. Bagnara & G. Crampton-Smith (Eds.), Theories and practice in interaction design, 157–79. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Colgate, J. E., Wannasuphoprasit, W., & Peshkin, M. A. (1996). Cobots: Robots for collaboration with human operators. Proceedings of the International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exhibition, DSC-Vol. 58, 433–39. de Souza, C. S. (2005). The semiotic engineering of human computer interaction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Degani, A. (2004). Chapter 8: The Grounding of the Royal Majesty . In A. Degani (Ed.), Taming HAL: Designing Interfaces beyond 2001. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. For the National Transportation Safety Board’s report, see www.ntsb.gov/publictn/1997/MAR9701.pdf . Eby, D. W., & Kantowitz, B. (2005). Human factors and ergonomics in motor vehicle transportation. In G. Salvendy (Ed.), Handbook of human factors and ergonomics (3rd ed., pp. 1538–1569). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Eccles, D.W., & Groth, P.T. (2006). Agent coordination and communication in sociotechnological systems: Design and measurement issues. Interacting with Computers, 18, 1170–1185. Elliott, M. A., McColl, V. A., & Kennedy, J. V. (2003). Road design measures to reduce drivers’ speed via “psychological” processes: A literature review. (No. TRL Report TRL564). Crowthorne, UK: TRL Limited. Endsley, M. R. (1996). Automation and situation awareness. In R. Parasuraman & M. Mouloua (Eds.), Automation and human performance: Theory and applications, 163–81. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Available at www.satechnologies.com/Papers/pdf/SA&Auto-Chp.pdf . Endsley, M. R., Bolté, B., & Jones, D. G. (2003). Designing for situation awareness: An approach to user-centered design . New York: Taylor & Francis. Endsley, M. R., & Garland, D. J. (2000). Situation awareness: Analysis and measurement. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Flemisch, F. O., Adams, C. A., Conway, C. S. R., Goodrich, K. H., Palmer, M. T., & Schutte, P. C. (2003). The H-metaphor as a guideline for vehicle automation and interaction. (NASA/TM— 2003–212672). Hampton, VA: NASA Langley Research Center. Available at http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20040031835\_2004015850.pdf . Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Goodrich, K. H., Schutte, P. C., Flemisch, F. O., & Williams, R. A. (2006). Application of the Hmode, a design and interaction concept for highly automated vehicles, to aircraft. 25th IEEE/AIAA Digital Avionics Systems Conference 1–13. Piscataway, NJ: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Hamilton-Baillie, B., & Jones, P. (2005, May). Improving traffic behaviour and safety through urban design. Civil Engineering, 158 (5), 39–47. Hancock, P. A., & Parasuraman, R. (1992). Human factors and safety in the design of intelligent vehicle highway systems (IVHS). Journal of Safety Research, 23 (4), 181–98. Hill, W., Hollan, J. D., Wroblewski, D., & McCandless, T. (1992). Edit wear and read wear: Text and hypertext. Proceedings of the 1992 ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’92). New York: ACM Press. Hill, N. M., & Schneider, W. (2006). Brain changes in the development of expertise: Neuroanatomical and neurophysiological evidence about skill-based adaptations. In K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. J. Feltovich, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance, 655–84. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Hollnagel, E., & Woods, D. D. (2005). Joint cognitive systems: Foundations of cognitive systems engineering. New York: Taylor & Francis. Hollnagel, E., Woods, D. D., & Leveson, N. (2006). Resilience engineering: Concepts and precepts. London: Ashgate. Hughes, T. P. (1989). American genesis: A century of invention and technological enthusiasm, 1870– 1970. New York: Viking Penguin. Huxley, A. (1932). Brave new world. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Doran & Company. Available at http://huxley.net/bnw/index.html . Johnson, K. (2005, August 27). Rube Goldberg finally leaves Denver airport.New York Times ,1. Ju, W., & Leifer, L. (In press, 2008). The design of implicit interactions. Design Issues: Special Issue on Design Research in Interaction Design. Kaufman, C., Perlman, R., & Speciner, M. (1995). Network Security Private Communication in a Public World. Englewood, NJ: Prentice Hall. Kelley, A. J., & Salcudean, S. E. (1994). On the development of a force-feedback mouse and its integration into a graphical user interface. In C. J. Radcliffe (Ed.), International mechanical engineering congress and exposition (Vol. DSC 55–1, 287–94). Chicago: ASME. Kennedy, J.V. (2005). Psychological traffic calming. Proceedings of the 70th Road Safety Congress. Http://www.rospa.com/roadsafety/conferences/congress2005/info/kennedy.pdf Keyson, D. (2007). The experience of intelligent products. In H. N. J. Schifferstein & P. Hekkert (Eds.), Product experience: Perspectives on human-product interaction. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Klein, G., Woods, D. D., Bradshaw, J., Hoffman, R. R., & Feltovich, P. J. (2004, November/December). Ten challenges for making automation a “team player” in joint humanagent activity. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 19 (6), 91–95. A Lee, C. H., Bonanni, L., Espinosa, J. H., Lieberman, H., & Selker, T. (2006). Augmenting kitchen appliances with a shared context using knowledge about daily events. Proceedings of Intelligent User Interfaces 2006. Lee, J., & Moray, N. (1994). Trust, self-confidence, and operators’ adaptation to automation. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 40 (1), 153–84. Lee, J.D. (2005). Human Factors and ergonomics in automation design. In G. Salvendy (Ed.), Handbook of human factors and ergonomics (3rd ed., pp. 1570–1596, but especially see 1580– 1590). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Lee, J. D., & See, K. A. (2004). Trust in automation: Designing for appropriate reliance. Human Factors, 46 (1), 50–80. Levin, A. (2006, updated June 30). Airways in USA are the safest ever. USA Today. Available at www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2006–06–29-air-safety-cover\_x.htm . Licklider, J. C. R. (1960, March). Man-computer symbiosis. IRE Transactions in Electronics, HFE– 1, 4–11. Available at http://medg.lcs.mit.edu/people/psz/Licklider.html . Lohr, S. (2005, August 23). A techie, absolutely, and more: Computer majors adding other skills to land jobs. New York Times, C1–C2. MacLean, P. D. (1990). The triune brain in evolution.New York: Plenum Press. MacLean, P. D., & Kral, V. A. (1973). A triune concept of the brain and behaviour. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Maes, P. (2005, July/August). Attentive objects: Enriching people’s natural interaction with everyday objects. Interactions, 12 (4), 45–48. Marinakos, H., Sheridan, T. B., & Multer, J. (2005). Effects of supervisory train control technology on operator attention. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Railroad Administration. Available at www.volpe.dot.gov/opsad/docs/dot-fra-ord–0410.pdf . Mason, B. (2007, February 18). Man’s best friend just might be a machine: Researchers say robots soon will be able to perform many tasks for people, from child care to driving for the elderly. ContraCostaTimes.com . Available at www.contracostatimes.com/mld/cctimes/news/local/states/california/ 16727757.htm . McNichol, T. (2004, December). Roads gone wild: No street signs. No crosswalks. No accidents. Surprise: Making driving seem more dangerous could make it safer. Wired, 12. Available at www.wired.com/wired/archive/12.12/traffic.html . Miller, C., Funk, H., Wu, P., Goldman, R., Meisner, J., & Chapman, M. (2005). The Playbook approach to adaptive automation. Available at http://rpgoldman.realtime.com/papers/MFWGMC-HFES2005.pdf . Mozer, M. C. (2005). Lessons from an adaptive house. In D. Cook & R. Das. (Eds.), Smart environments: Technologies, protocols, and applications, 273–94. Hoboken, NJ: J. Wiley & Sons. National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. (2002). CDC industry research agenda. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available at www.cdc.gov/ncipc/pubres/research\_agenda/Research%20Agenda.pdf . National Transportation Safety Board. (1997). Marine accident report grounding of the Panamanian passenger ship Royal Majesty on Rose and Crown Shoal near Nantucket, Massachusetts, June 10, 1995. (No. NTSB Report No: MAR–97–01, adopted on 4/2/1997). Washington, DC: National Transportation Safety Board. Available at www.ntsb.gov/publictn/1997/MAR9701.pdf . Nickerson, R. S. (2006). Reviews of human factors and ergonomics. Wiley series in systems engineering and management. Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. Norman, D. A. (1990). The “problem” of automation: Inappropriate feedback and interaction, not “over-automation”. In D. E. Broadbent, A. Baddeley, & J. T. Reason (Eds.), Human factors in hazardous situations, 585–93. Oxford: Oxford University Press. \_. (1993). Things that make us smart. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing. \_. (1998). The invisible computer: Why good products can fail, the personal computer is so complex, and information appliances are the solution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. \_. (2002). The design of everyday things. New York: Basic Books. (Originally published as The psychology of everyday things. New York: Basic Books, 1988.) \_. (2004). Emotional design: Why we love (or hate) everyday things. New York: Basic Books. Ortony, A., Norman, D. A., & Revelle, W. (2005). The role of affect and proto-affect in effective functioning. In J.-M. Fellous & M. A. Arbib (Eds.), Who needs emotions? The brain meets the robot, 173–202. New York: Oxford University Press. Ouroussoff, N. (2006, July 30). A church in France is almost a triumph for Le Corbusier.New York Times. Owens, D.A., Helmers, G., & Silvak, M. (1993). Intelligent vehicle highway systems: A call for usercentered design. ergonomics, 36(4), 363–369. Parasuraman, R., & Miller, C. (2004). Trust and etiquette in a high-criticality automated systems. Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery, 47(4), 51–55. Parasuraman, R., & Mouloua, M. (1996). Automation and human performance: Theory and applications. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Parasuraman, R., & Riley, V. (1997). Humans and automation: Use, misuse, disuse, abuse. Human Factors, 39 (2), 230–53. Petroski, H. (1998). The pencil: A history of design and circumstance (P. Henry, Ed.). New York: Knopf. Plato. (1961). Plato: Collected dialogues. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Reeves, B., & Nass, C. I. (1996). The media equation: How people treat computers, television, and new media like real people and places. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications (and New York: Cambridge University Press). Rosenberg, L. B. (1994). Virtual fixtures: Perceptual overlays enhance operator performance in telepresence tasks. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford, CA. Rothkerch, I. (2002). Will the future really look like Minority Report? Jet packs? Mag-lev cars? Two of Spielberg’s experts explain how they invented 2054. Salon.com . Available at http://dir.salon.com/story/ent/movies/int/2002/07/10/underkoffler\_ belker/index.html . Salvendy, G. (Ed.). (2005). Handbook of human factors and ergonomics (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Schifferstein, H. N. J., & Hekkert, P. (Eds.). (2007). Product experience: Perspectives on humanproduct interaction. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Sheridan, T. B. (2002). Humans and automation: System design and research issues. Wiley series in systems engineering and management. Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. Sheridan, T. B., & Parasuraman, R. (2006). Human-automation interaction. In R. S. Nickerson (Ed.), Reviews of human factors and ergonomics. Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. Stanton, N. A., & Young, M. S. (1998). Vehicle automation and driving performance. Ergonomics, 41(7) , 1014–28. Stephenson, N. (1995). The diamond age: Or, a young lady’s illustrated primer. New York: Bantam Books. Strayer, D. L., Drews, F. A., & Crouch, D. J. (2006). A comparison of the cell phone driver and the drunk driver. Human Factors, 48 (2), 381–91. Stross, C. (2005). Accelerando. New York: Ace Books. Taylor, A. S., Harper, R., Swan, L., Izadi, S., Sellen, A., & Perry, M. (2005). Homes that make us smart. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 11(5), 383–394. Thoreau, H. D., & Cramer, J. S. (1854/2004). Walden: A fully annotated edition. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Weiser, M. (1991, September). The computer for the 21st century. Scientific American, 265, 94–104. Weiser, M., & Brown, J. S. (1995). Designing calm technology. Available at www.ubiq.com/weiser/calmtech/calmtech.htm . . (1997). The coming age of calm technology. In P. J. Denning & R. M Beyond calculation: The next fifty years of computing. New York: Spring Wilde, G. J. S. (1982). The theory of risk homeostasis: Implications for safety and health. Risk Analysis, 4, 209–25. Woods, D. D., & Hollnagel, E. (2006). Joint cognitive systems: Patterns in cognitive systems engineering. New York: Taylor & Francis. Zuboff, S. (1988). In the age of the smart machine: The future of work and power. New York: Basic Books.