# WHAT EXACTLY CAN THE # BAUHAUS BRING US? Xu Jiang President of China Academy of Art What is the Bauhaus?The answer may be unclear to the general audience, but it is among the professional “ABC" for those people setting foot in design and architecture majors. The influence of the Bauhaus can be seen everywhere in our cities today. Actually, Bauhaus is a German word in which "bau" means "to build" and "haus” stands for “house”. If you ask about Bauhaus in Germany, you will be led to architecture shops or marketplaces nearby. Only by asking about the Bauhaus School will the Germans, with a half surprised and half satisfied smile on their faces, understand what you are interested in is the historical school of Bauhaus. Properly speaking, the Bauhaus refers to the Bauhaus School founded last century in Weimar, Germany. Although it only existed for 14 years, it today enjoys a widespread reputation. Most of its ideas and the associated stories of its key figures are among the legends of history being used in the textbooks of design and architecture. There are three museums and a great number of research institutions of the Bauhaus in Germany. After World War Il, the talents of the Bauhaus participated in the modernized construction of Chicago, which formed the "New Bauhaus" in history. In 2011, in order to push forward the construction of the “Design Capital" and fundamentally improve the quality of “made-in-China" productions, the Hangzhou Municipal and the Hangzhou government provided the China Academy of Art with a huge investment to acquire some 7,000 pieces of systematic collections of international design works, including hundreds of the original works created by the artists from the Bauhaus. TheBauhaus exhibition and its book series provided at this time are the academic project of systematic integration and introduction for the design ideas and art. With so many material and financial resources invested, some people may ask: What exactly can Bauhaus bring us? First of all, the Bauhaus will bring us a certain kind of fundamentally innovative idea. Though the Bauhaus was not large, it was the catalyst for the melding of thoughts. At the entrance of the Bauhaus Museum at the China Academy of Art, there stands an oversized image, a woodcut of a typical German rhombic cathedral, which is a