reflection of the Bauhaus declaration made by the Bauhaus master Lyonel Feininger. On March 20, 1919, Walter Gropius vowed in The Bauhaus Declaration that "We are to set up a new designers' organization, in which nosense of occupational hierarchy between craftsman and artist exists. We will builda “Future Palace” to combine architecture, sculpture and painting at the same time, and take it to the top of the world through hundreds of thousands of art workers." This declaration reveals the guiding principle of the Bauhaus to combine art and technology, emphasizing both handcraft and art, and uniting creation and manufacture, The eagerness for the future palace makes the Bauhaus an idea, a source of new thought, and an artistic movement to change history. It seems that the declaration of the Bauhaus is known for all today, but the spread, construction and realization of its spirits still have a long way to go. In addition, Bauhaus will bring to primary and fundamental aesthetic thinking. The Bauhaus School created the earliest design culture for the public with its challenging and reforming spirit. The reformation of the approach to materials and beautification of the structure was/is emphasized to create a movement toward simplification. The idea of “less is more” in construction pushed forward the standard of the machine aesthetic, advocated the soul of the industrial design and marked a new Utopia of aesthetics. Some people say that we need Steve Jobs today instead of Bauhaus. However, what they do not know is that the beauty of iPhone' s thick shell with comfortable tactility is basically originated from the idea of “less is more" and people' saesthetics have actuallybeen formed through the physical experience brought by theproducts created under the influence of this idea. What s more, the Bauhaus will give rise to revolutionary thinking for education. On the one hand, the Bauhaus paid attention to the openness and impact of thoughts. On the other hand, it empathized with the training and practices of handcraft. The students did material work and trained toward unification of body and heart to understand the meaning of construction and to make dauntless creations in the numerous Bauhaus workshops. The sketch teachingof the Basel Design School was popular in the design education of China thirty years ago, while the origin of the educational system was from the education plan of Johannes Itten, a master of Bauhaus. The revolution in primary education takes us back to the Bauhaus era to see its broad perspective, spirituality and cultural connotation of primary education. It also makes us worried for the predominant departmental teaching and the improvidence inherent in the separation and disconnection within occupational education. The Bauhaus is a mysterious package and it holds a toolbox of universal thoughts. In 1945, Walter Gropius presented a speech on "community restructure" in Chicago. He stressed that there was no segmentation for architecture, society, politics and education, and that community planning should start from cultivating the "social soil" , while the improvement of the city should start from the nearby community centers. The “Future Palace" that Gropius mentioned is experiencing profound changes and ischanging the world aroundus.