## 本文参考文献 [1]柳冠中.事理学论纲[M].长沙：中南大学出版社，2006 [2] 唐林涛.工业设计方法[M].北京：中国建筑工业出版社，2006 [3] Salvatore D. Introduction to International Economics, Study Guide. New York: Wiley, 2005. [4] Hawken P. Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next Industrial Revolution. New York: Hachette Book Group, 2008. [5] Alexander C. Notes on the Synthesis of Form. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1964. [6] Baran P. Monopoly Capital: An Essay on the American Economic and Social Order. New York:Monthly Review Press, 1966. [7] Burdek B E. Design: The History, Theory and Practice of Product Design. Basel: Birkh User Architecture, 2005. [8]Simon H A. The Sciences of the Artificial. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981. [9] Papanek V. Design for The Real World. 2nd ed. Chicago: Academy Chicago Publishers, 2005. [10] Verganti R. Design Driven Innovation: Changing the Rules of Competition by Radically Innovating What Things Mean. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press, 2009. [11] Gantz C. The Industrialization of Design: A History from the Steam Age to Today. Jefferson NC:McFarland,2010. [12] Perroux F. Development Mini-Set M: Theories of Development: A New Concept of Development: Basic Tenets. Routledge Library Editions. Abingdon: Routledge, 2011. [13] International Council of Societies of Industrial Design. Definition Of Design [EB/OL]. [2006- 06-01].http://www.icsid.org/about/about/articles31.htm. [14] Crushed Cars. Chris Jordan Photographic Arts [EB/OL]. [2008-05-08]. http://trendland.com/ chris-jordan-photographic-arts.