# Ac knowledg ments

Education of many varieties, generosity of every sort, friendships in several places, and support on all levels have allowed this book to take its shape. It is tempting to trace its roots to the House on the Hill, where colored beads and Benthamite strictures may have sparked a preschooler’s interest in British design reform. Its beginnings are more clearly evident, however, in the education I received at St. Mary’s Episcopal School in Memphis, which proved to be the perfect place for a nice Jewish girl to become enchanted with the Victorians and their values. Subsequent training at Emory, York, and Johns Hopkins Universities went a long way toward shattering some of my girlish notions about the Victorians, but in the process they became all the more compelling.

It is fitting that this book embodies the genealogy of an education, for it is, in many ways, a history of just that. Grand Designs is also a study of institutions, the ideas that grow inside them, the currents that flow against them, and the afterlives that develop beyond them. As such, it has facilitated an appreciation for my own afiliations, both past and present. I am very much a beneficiary of the intellectual vibrancy and true friendship that characterized the overlapping cohorts in British history, nineteenth-century studies, and women’s studies at Johns Hopkins University. I remain especially thankful for the continuing friendship and collegiality of Rachel Ablow, Nadja Durbach, Karen Fang, Alison Fletcher, Elke Heckner, and Natalie Zacek.

Postdoctoral fellowships at the Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women at Brown University and the Huntington Library, Gardens, and Art Museum in San Marino provided important opportunities for this project to mature. For their direction of fellowship programs, I am grateful to Ellen Rooney, Elizabeth Weed, Roy Ritchie, and their stafs. I wish to thank those fellows, friends, and scholars who enlivened my experiences on both coasts, especially Susan Amussen, Elizabeth Barboza, Gail Bederman, Christy Burns, Juilee Decker, Dian Kriz, Mary Ann O’ Donnell, and Andrea Volpe. This project and I have also benefited from the financial and intellectual support of the North American Conference on British Studies; the Winterthur Library, Museum, and Gardens; the Yale Center for British Art; and the Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art.

It has been a treat—intellectual, aesthetic, and tactile—to work with incomparable collections at the aforementioned institutions. For these opportunities, I wish to thank the stafs of the Huntington Library, the Winterthur Library, and the Yale Center for British Art. Across the Atlantic, I am particularly grateful to the librarians and archivists at the National Art Library and the Archive of Art and Design. Thanks are due, too, to the stafs of several other collections, including, but not limited to, the British Library, the Kensington Local Studies Library, the National Archives, the National Gallery Archives, and the New York Public Library.

The discussions that transpire at the cofee table and the conference session often find their ways into print only years later. I am glad, at long last, to be able to ofer my thanks to several colleagues and mentors who have helped give shape to this book, some deliberately and others unwittingly. On this score, I am indebted to Timothy Alborn, Sally Alexander, Jefrey Auerbach, Bryan Callahan, Nina Caputo, Rafael Cardoso Denis, Anna Clark, Dan Cohen, Deborah Cohen, Charles Delheim, Toby Ditz, Brigid Doherty, James Epstein, Pamela Fletcher, Margot Finn, Oz Frankel, Ellen Handy, David Harvey, Anne Helmreich, Ian Hunter, Dian Kriz, Fred Leventhal, Vernon Lidke, Dianne Sachko Macleod, Peter Mandler, Mary Catherine Moran, John Plotz, Jordana Pomeroy, Mary Poovey, Tori Smith, Peter Stansky, Gareth Stedman Jones, Whitney Walton and Martin Wiener. Thanks are due as well to the many conferences and universities that have provided productive venues for discussing works in progress.

At Florida International University, I have been lucky—very lucky— to have the sort of colleagues, past and present, who would literally go to battle for me. They and their families have provided invaluable collegiality, impeccable hospitality, and even shelter from storms. In truth, they and the departmental staf all deserve mention by name for good deeds, goodwill, and good humor. For help with this book, however, I must especially thank Darden Pyron for his authorial exhortations, Alan Kahan for his keen reading, Victor Uribe for his efective advocacy, David Cook for his assiduous follow-up, and Mark Szuchman for his generous funding. I would also like to recognize Rebecca Friedman, Kirsten Wood, and Aurora Morcillo for their encouragement in the endgame. Ken Lipartito has been a peerless advocate, mentor, colleague, and friend. Without him and Elisabeth, I can honestly say, I wouldn’t be where I am today. Had it not been for Mickey Wolfson’s inimitable collection of design and propaganda arts, I might not have made it to Miami. And, for their assistance and partnership, I am sincerely grateful to the entire staf of the Wolfsonian-FIU. Finally, I wish to thank the Department of History, the College of Arts and Sciences, the Ofice of the Provost, and the Florida International University Foundation for funding this project.

I have been the beneficiary of tremendous generosity from four scholars and friends who came enough before me to clear a path but not too soon for it to grow over. Their support has opened up crucial opportunities for funding, publication, and more. My wish to locate the origins of this project in my toddler years notwithstanding, it was, in truth, Louise Purbrick’s wonderful dissertation on the display of design that provided a decisive and enduring inspiration. An inimitable impresario, Tim Barringer has made British art an ever broader tent that has welcomed me and other historians, too. I consider it a privilege to have shared extended time in Baltimore with Antoinette Burton during the headiest days of the new imperial history, which she did so much to pioneer. It has been an honor and a pleasure to be Erika’s doppelgänger, especially since this role has allowed me to declare—in the best of humor and on more than one occasion—that “I’m not Rappaport.”

Accolades are due to Jordanna Bailkin, who has been the ideal companion from day one for excursions into libraries, restaurants, and, of course, museums. And my most heartfelt appreciation goes to Judith Walkowitz, whose unwavering belief in me and this project has been as essential as it has been long-standing. Myriad innovations in telecommunications have allowed us to log countless hours of conversations over the past decade. Without these discussions, this book would not have taken its present shape. Nor would it have turned out in the end to be such fun.

There are many people who deserve recognition for their help in the publication process. For their assistance in the image rush, I am grateful to Nicholas Blaga, Jean-Robert Durbin, Melissa Gold Fournier, Emily Guthrie, Paul Johnson, Alan Jutzi, John Knaub, Francis Luca, Elaine Morris, and Mil Willis. Sincerest thanks are due to the two anonymous readers for Duke University Press for their keen and constructive suggestions. The enthusiasm of the series editors, Danny Walkowitz and Barbara Weinstein, was absolutely invaluable. Finally, I wish to thank my editors, Valerie Millholland and Miriam Angress, as well as assistant managing editor Katharine Baker and designer Cherie Westmoreland, for the genial and professional attentiveness that they have given to me and this book.

Many friends outside the academy have ofered welcome diversion and good humor at times when I needed it. Finally, my family has provided critical support as it has grown and changed, to my great delight, over the course of writing this book. My sister Mirm and my new brother-inlaw Bryfy provided infectious energy and enthusiastic encouragement at crucial junctures. I cannot imagine this book—or many other things— without my husband Alex Lichtenstein. This project came to fruition as we came to know one another. It was reborn in California, where he read aloud from nineteenth-century newspapers so that I could transcribe them; it grew in Texas, where he ofered his inimitable critiques of drafts; and it achieved completion in Florida, where he made every milestone his own, so much so that he wanted to be here with me to put it in the mail. Hannah and Max have leavened scholarship with irreverence, wit, and curiosity. Finally, my most overdue thanks are for my parents, who know the academic life well and encouraged an uncanny career choice through thick and thin. With the Victorians chronicled in these pages, my father shares an afection for good writing and rational thinking, and, along with them, my mother believes in the edifying qualities of hard work and good taste. But their particular brand of compassion, humanity, generosity, and humor may be more characteristic of other places and other times. For all of this and more, I dedicate this book to them.