# Introduction

On a May evening in 1865, Benjamin Lucraft, a cabinetmaker, made a rousing speech at the South Kensington Museum. Opened to acclaim in 1857, this predecessor to the Victoria and Albert Museum boasted a formidable collection. Its riches included Indian silks, English paintings, and French porcelain. With these holdings, this state-sponsored museum located in a West London suburb aspired to transform its visitors into elevated subjects, skilled producers, and discerning consumers. Those local worthies who joined Lucraft at the 1865 meeting deemed the museum’s mission so important that they hoped to enhance access for the working classes. After the dignitaries had spoken, Lucraft, a selfdescribed “artisan,” assumed the stage. He endorsed the museum, for it had made him a “better workman.” Its rare cabinetry allowed him to study the finest masterpieces of European civilization. Its gothic treasures helped him to provide his customers with the best goods they desired. Finally, its pastoral environs provided a welcome respite from London’s gritty East End, where he and his brethren lived and toiled. For the good of his class and the good of the nation, Lucraft exhorted his listeners to make collections such as South Kensington’s ever more available to the “working man.”1

Had it not been for a weighty parliamentary report compiled thirty years before, Lucraft might never have ascended the stage at the South Kensington Museum. In 1835 and 1836, the Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures had elevated artisanal producers such as Lucraft and the goods they made into objects of national concern. Those who testified had complained of shoddy calicoes, inelegant cutlery, and garish wallpaper. One exemplary witness was James Morrison, a member of Parliament (mp) and proprietor of a London firm that dealt in such fancy goods as shawls, silks, ribbons, and gloves. While England’s manufactures were sturdy, Morrison reported, they were notably inferior in design. To Morrison, the causes of these shortcomings were all too clear. Britain lacked the drawing schools, museum culture, and copyright protection enjoyed on the Continent, especially in France. It was, he argued, an “absolute necessity” to address these travesties in the face of the influx of overseas goods, the invasion of foreign designers, and the industrialization of the Continent.2 Countless others endorsed Morrison’s conclusions about the deplorable “taste in design” that plagued Great Britain in the 1830s.3 The time had come, they agreed, to improve “the hand and the eye” of the people, especially the artisanal and industrial classes.4 Although they did not speak before the committee themselves, these forerunners of Benjamin Lucraft gave every possible indication that they were eager and ready to receive such an education.

The agenda set by Morrison and the select committee provided the inspiration for the mid-nineteenth-century movement for design reform examined in this book, which is, essentially, a prehistory of the Victoria and Albert Museum. Its beginning in the mid-1830s preceded the better-known arts and crafts movement by half a century. Like the arts and crafts movement, which sought to cure the ills of industrialization, it placed labor and aesthetics at its center. Unlike the arts and crafts movement, which eschewed a broad marketplace, it was concerned with large-scale economic reform. This was the case from the outset, when the Government School of Design opened in London in 1837 to teach Lucraft’s forbears how to make patterns for manufactures. Between 1839 and 1842, a second supply-side intervention aimed to correct degenerate practices of trade by extending industrial copyright laws and so to protect manufacturers and merchants such as Morrison.

At midcentury, this reforming movement would attain a larger stage and aspire to grander designs. The turning point was the Great Exhibition of 1851, which employed spectacular display to put the ornamental manufactures of Britain and the world on view. The results were twofold. On the one hand, the exhibition celebrated Britain’s industrial progress; on the other, it cast renewed doubt on the nation’s aesthetic prowess. Given these concerns, reformers’ priorities shifted to demandside improvement following the exhibition. This was evident at the Museum of Ornamental Art, which opened just one year after the exhibition with the hope of bettering consumer taste. Design reform’s midcentury eforts would culminate with the 1857 opening of the South Kensington Museum, which was pioneered by the utilitarian reformer Henry Cole. There design reform attained a roomier estate and a larger mission. It was no longer concerned simply with improving production or reforming consumption. Instead, the South Kensington Museum engaged in the spiritual elevation of the nation’s populace and with the grand enterprise of imperial collecting. The institution would grow and flourish in a new suburban location, where it was rechristened the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1899.

The South Kensington Museum’s status as a hub of imperial display is made luminously clear in an 1882 tribute penned by Moncure Daniel Conway, an American abolitionist and unitarian who was a longtime London resident. By the time Conway published Travels in South Kensington, the museum had become a venerable institution. This fixture on the museological landscape of the metropolis boasted the world’s largest array of the industrial arts or, as the institution variously referred to its holdings, of “ornamental art,” “practical art,” “decorative art,” and “applied art.”5 Its cabinets overflowed with Italian lace, Indian jewelry, and Chinese porcelain, which provided exotic complements to England’s arts. Filled with goods redolent of oriental luxury, the hallways of South Kensington evoked faraway lands for the American writer. In a familiar Victorian conceit, Conway argued that it was possible to travel the earth without leaving the museum. As he touted the collection’s virtues, Conway invited readers to join him on a leisurely ramble through the institution and, ultimately, across the globe.6 Conway’s fanciful text is a tribute to collecting, pleasure, and display. Only rarely and incidentally do the concerns about trade voiced by Morrison or the preoccupations with labor articulated by Lucraft intrude.7

Conway’s view of the South Kensington Museum as a fantastical treasure trove devoted to displaying the globe has become a prevalent one. It ratifies understandings of the late nineteenth century as an era of visual pleasure and imperial spectacle.8 Moreover, it endorses a narrative of the midcentury design reform campaign as a movement from marketplace to museum or, at least, from supply to demand. Bookends on an epoch of aesthetic improvement that spanned nearly half a century, the methodical select committee report and Conway’s whimsical travelogue epitomize these diferences. The select committee report is a product of the 1830s, when questions of economy, production, and utility came to the fore in an industrializing and reforming Britain. Published in 1882, Conway’s travelogue is the fruit of an era whose immediate preoccupations seemed to lie elsewhere, namely, with connoisseurship, travel, and empire. These transitions were reflective of broader nineteenthcentury transformations in aesthetics, economics, and public culture.9 In fact, they have come to dominate histories of the period, especially those written under the rubric of cultural history, which has highlighted exhibitions, museums, and department stores—along with the increasingly mobile populations that frequented them—as hallmarks of the late nineteenth century’s modernity.10

Grand Designs provides an alternate view of the South Kensington Museum and the broader cultural landscape of which it was a part. By examining midcentury design reform, this study exposes the links between markets and museums and between aesthetics and economics. It demonstrates that nineteenth-century cultural institutions such as the South Kensington Museum arose out of a complex and long-standing engagement with labor and trade.11 As it propounds this view, Grand Designs expands on the cast of characters that has taken center stage in a well-rehearsed story of design reform, not to mention in the midnineteenth-century public arena. Design reform, of course, concerned artists, consumers, museumgoers, and civil servants such as the middleclass reformer Henry Cole. But these figures, often the protagonists of cultural history, toiled and campaigned alongside a broader range of characters. Grand Designs restores merchants such as Morrison and artisans such as Lucraft—long the protagonists of social history—as leading actors in a saga of aesthetic reform and cultural formation. Alongside these metropolitan figures, it incorporates Manchester manufacturers and provincial critics who clung fiercely to the nineteenth-century liberal faith in unfettered markets. Finally, it brings into view those imperial laborers from the Indian subcontinent who dazzled visitors to the Great Exhibition and the South Kensington Museum with visions of oriental splendor.

By resuscitating these historical actors, Grand Designs argues that marketplace concerns about trade, labor, and manufacturing resided at the “heart of Victorian public discourse,” not to mention the reform campaigns and civic institutions of the era.12 In the process, it seeks to challenge orthodoxies in museum studies, imperial history, and Victorian culture. Ultimately, Grand Designs suggests a reconsideration of the very contours of historical practice at a moment when critics are calling for a new synthesis of social and cultural history.

## the museum and the marketplace

Because it has occupied a place of prominence in old and new cultural histories, the South Kensington Museum provides an ideal venue for embarking on the intellectual project described above. South Kensington has long been considered a landmark institution of Britain’s midnineteenth-century cultural revolution. This revolution accompanied the better-known political, economic, and social transformations of the day. In fact, liberal political reform provided its very conditions of possibility, for the committee that spurred it on was forged by members of a reformed Parliament, most notably the radical William Ewart, and sustained by middle-class civil servants, especially the utilitarian Henry Cole.13 The nascent relationship between art and government in the nineteenth century has been a concern of institutional, cultural, and architectural historians since the 1970s. As they examined state patronage and imperial city building, they placed South Kensington at the center of a nineteenth-century reform movement that shaped aesthetic education and grand collections alike.14

More recently, new directives from the fields of cultural studies, museum studies, and political history have encouraged scholars to reconsider the relationship between art and government.15 One of the most influential theorists for this revitalization of inquiry has been Michel Foucault, who urged scholars to understand nineteenth-century liberal reforms as eforts to manage populations that were increasingly reaping the spoils of democracy.16 Building on Foucault and adding in a measure of Gramsci, the cultural critic Tony Bennett showed that museums and exhibitions were ideal vessels for this project. With their spectacular displays, they brought populations at the threshold of political representation under the succoring arm of the state. In the process, they promoted order, obedience, and social solidarity. To capture this understanding, Bennett introduced the notion of the “exhibitionary complex” in a seminal 1988 essay. With its collections designed to educate and amaze, Bennett argued, the South Kensington Museum represented the exhibitionary complex par excellence.17 Over the past decade and a half, Bennett’s schema has served as a springboard for studies of art institutions that have examined the cultural manifestations of state formation and nation building.18 But these works have not, for the most part, espoused the dynamic view of labor that is advanced in the pages of this book.

The nation to which the South Kensington Museum ministered was avowedly imperial, especially as the nineteenth century wore on. This is evident in Moncure Daniel Conway’s tribute, which located South Kensington squarely within a trajectory of Victorian high imperialism. The American writer employed the familiar narrative conceits of orientalism as he portrayed London, and the South Kensington Museum especially, as the heart of an empire.19 South Kensington attained its greatest stature as the storehouse of empire when an Indian section, filled with jewels, thrones, and firearms, debuted there in 1880. Like the world’s fairs that contributed to its collections, the South Kensington Museum has attracted considerable attention from practitioners of the new imperial history. Once an embattled enterprise, this now established scholarly movement has examined the cultural manifestations of imperialism in the metropole to great efect.20 Working in this vein, several scholars have analyzed the objects of empire aggregated at South Kensington, not to mention the museum’s collection policies.21 In the process, they have portrayed South Kensington as the epitome of the “imperial archive,” to use the words of Thomas Richards, devoted at once to classifying the goods and kindling the imagination of empire.22 Grand Designs builds on these insights, but it also shifts attention from the consumption and display of overseas goods to their manufacture and trade.

The exhibitionary complex suggests that the late-nineteenth-century preoccupation with collecting had everything to do with managing an expanding political sphere. The imperial archive indicates that collections were integral to stimulating an appetite for an exotic yet governable empire. Together these concepts have become a shorthand for South Kensington and the spectacular urban landscape of which it was a part. Whether implicitly or explicitly, they guide the many assessments of the museum that have filled anthologies, catalogues, and even exhibitions over the past decade or so.23 Grand Designs moves beyond these two shibboleths, as it foregrounds the concerns with labor and trade that were so pervasive in the 1835 select committee report, not to mention in Benjamin Lucraft’s 1865 speech.24 To begin, this book ofers a more animated view than that implied by Tony Bennett’s exhibitionary complex. Rather than a top-down formation, it shows that the exhibitionary complex was a contested locale, at least in its rendition at South Kensington. There Lucraft and his ilk used their positions as laborers to gain access to museum collections. Similarly, this book ofers a new understanding of the imperial archive and imperial culture more generally, as it explores the role played by oriental labor within midcentury design reform. The South Kensington Museum brought oriental production, especially as it was embodied in the figure of the Indian laborer, to the attention of its visitors. At the museum and its predecessors, those Indian wares that contributed to the spectacle of empire informed notions of honest labor and good design.

As it brings labor and trade to the fore, Grand Designs locates South Kensington and the preceding innovations squarely within the “culture of industrial capitalism.”25 Whether as discursive categories or material concerns, I argue, trade and labor played decisive roles in shaping South Kensington and the cultural terrain of Victorian Britain more generally, driving the form of its collections, providing a logic for its geography, and even informing the character of its critiques. As it carries out this line of argument, Grand Designs participates in an ongoing reconsideration and revision of historical categories. Specifically, it brings aesthetics and the marketplace—two concerns that are often severed by the disciplinary conventions of contemporary historiography—into a common analytical frame. In the mid–nineteenth century, design reform was no mere defensive bulwark against changes in production, trade, and industry. This book shows instead that preoccupations with trade and labor lay at the heart of Victorian public debates and cultural institutions. Moreover, it demonstrates that marketplace actors—whether artisans, tradesmen, or manufacturers—were protagonists in the design reform movement that culminated at South Kensington.26

By advancing this argument, Grand Designs joins scholarship on the culture of the market that has developed over the past two decades. Notable works in history and literary criticism have sought to understand the far-reaching cultural efects of market development in Europe and the

Americas, especially during the long transition to industrial capitalism from the sixteenth century to the nineteenth.27 Influential scholarship has linked the birth of market societies to such wide-ranging matters as theatricality, humanitarian sensibilities, abstract space, and aesthetic theory.28 In the process, it has illuminated the “reciprocal influence and interpenetration” of cultural practice and economic activity.29

Because nineteenth-century design reform in Britain operated at the crossroads of aesthetics and economics, and at the interstices of production and pleasure, it ofers an intriguing and fruitful opportunity to engage with market culture. The story of midcentury design reform builds on the insights of scholars who have uncovered the complicated relationships between economic change, aesthetic innovation, and cultural formation. But it also deepens the understandings ofered by earlier works that privileged discourse, theory, and abstraction over everyday commerce, daily life, and material possessions.30 Notably, this book demonstrates that market developments gave rise to the very aesthetic conundrums and economic anxieties that design reform sought to redress. Waged between 1839 and 1842, the campaign for design copyright extension, discussed in chapter two, provides a case in point. During the early nineteenth century, calico printers and merchants complained that the rise of mechanization and the growth of the export trade facilitated “design piracy.” This practice, whereby some printers stole the designs of their more venerated counterparts, threatened a struggling British tradition of original design, not to mention the very health of the calico trade. To rectify this matter, advocates of extension looked to the strong arm of the law for protection. Marketplace changes produced demandside conundrums as well, as chapter four demonstrates. During the early 1850s, Henry Cole would argue, the democratization of consumption led to the aesthetic decay of manufactures. In order to rehabilitate such household goods as wallpapers, carpets, and chintzes, Cole and his circle enumerated a series of taste principles, many of which were derived from Indian design. At the Museum of Ornamental Art, founded in 1852, they put decorative objects, both good and bad, on display. By so doing, they hoped to teach consumers from the middle classes, broadly construed, the rules of good taste. In the process, they aimed to cure the ills of the marketplace through aesthetic reform.

Provincial printers, metropolitan merchandisers, and London artisans joined in these contentious campaigns. To insert themselves into the discussions, they looked for authority to their trades. In the process, these market actors, traditionally the protagonists of social history, attained influence by drawing on earlier radical discourses of the property of skill identified by John Rule.31 That is, by portraying themselves as venerable manufacturers, honorable merchants, and skilled laborers, they gained entry into philosophical and aesthetic debates of national import. Their positions as producers aforded them a measure of cultural capital, to use the words of Pierre Bourdieu.32 This was especially the case for artisans such as Lucraft who sought access to the South Kensington Museum. He derived the power and authority to speak at the May 1865 meeting expressly by framing himself as a craftsman. Not incidentally, Lucraft’s predecessors had themselves looked to design reform’s pedagogical innovations to gain cultural capital. This was especially evident at the School of Design, discussed in chapter one. There artisans clamored to learn to draw not just from geometrical illustrations but also from the figure. By so doing, they sought to gain a training reserved traditionally for artists and so to secure their places in an industrial marketplace that threatened to degrade their skills. Often, the school itself forestalled their aspirations. As it chronicles these episodes, Grand Designs demonstrates the importance of artisanal skill, artistic prowess, and aesthetic knowledge as forms of cultural capital.

Artisanal skill, artistic prowess, and aesthetic knowledge all assumed center stage at the Great Exhibition of 1851, which represents a turning point in the midcentury campaign chronicled in this book. The Great Exhibition brought the industrial arts, including English cutlery, French porcelain, and Indian jewelry, to a public unprecedented in its scope. Among these, we can count not only the six million exhibitiongoers but also the immeasurable numbers who read the catalogues produced for the event. There is a long-standing notion that the mid-nineteenth-century design reform campaign began in earnest at the Great Exhibition of 1851, but this study places the first world’s fair in a longer, broader trajectory of aesthetic improvement.33 In the process, it challenges two prevailing orthodoxies about the exhibition, namely, that it was the epitome of mechanized production and the apotheosis of spectacular society.

To begin, Grand Designs demonstrates the centrality of artisanal labor at the Great Exhibition. Although the machinery courts occupied a place of prominence at the Crystal Palace, the great show valorized artisanal skill and hand labor, too. Some have argued that these tendencies foreshadowed Britain’s industrial decline later in the century.34 Regardless, they are particularly evident in the discussions of the goods from France, famed for its artistic workmen, and the riches from India, esteemed for its craft tradition. This brings us to a second challenge. Current orthodoxy has it that the Great Exhibition inaugurated the society of the spectacle, that modern form of representation in which, the theorist Guy Debord once argued, the fetishized commodity reigned supreme. At the exhibition, and in spectacular society more generally, the understanding goes, the commodity spoke for itself and obscured its own conditions of production.35 Grand Designs joins recent work that refines this formulation. To do so, it looks to the catalogues, journals, and periodicals that discussed the Crystal Palace’s displays. These texts ultimately produced a popular discourse of design that relied on idealized laborers—whether English, French, or colonial—for its expression.

These reassessments of the exhibition and spectacular society have broader consequences for the master narratives of the nineteenth century. A tendency to privilege 1851, the year of the exhibition, is evident not just in scholarship on Victorian museums and design but in British cultural history at large.36 As Louise Purbrick and Tim Barringer have both observed, this foregrounding of 1851 marks a change from earlier traditions in social and economic history, which took 1848, the year of rebellion and revolution, as a watershed. With this shift has often come a privileging of cultural innovation over the class politics that were once so prevalent within nineteenth-century historiography.37 The dominating story of the nineteenth century has thus become the move to a spectacular modernity characterized by commodity display and consumerism. This has replaced a narrative of the continuing, if frustrated, attempts of labor to adjust itself to industrial capitalist regimes of production. Because of its very chronology and the concerns it entertained, the movement that engendered South Kensington provides an ideal opportunity to create a revised account of the nineteenth century, which understands trade and labor not simply as economic enterprises but as central concerns of Victorian culture.38

As it reconsiders the nineteenth century, this book joins in a broader critical assessment of Victorianism’s organizing notions.39 Together design reform, the Great Exhibition, and the South Kensington Museum provide fertile ground on which to do so. In the popular imagination, mid-nineteenth-century design, with its florid ornament suggestive of wealth, propriety, and stability, has long stoked an appetite for Victorian things, even as its aesthetic stock has ebbed and flowed with the changing assessments of critics and the museum establishment. It was, notably, at the Great Exhibition of 1851 that the term Victorian was first used as the self-conscious marker of an age.40 Moreover, museum scholarship and public exhibitions have recently enshrined the South Kensington Museum as the “most Victorian” of nineteenth-century institutions and perhaps the most imitated and influential as well.41 Observed in 2001, the sesquicentennial of the Great Exhibition and the centennial of the death of Queen Victoria together prompted a reexamination of Victorianism, not to mention numerous retrospectives on the field of Victorian studies. One important line of assessment reviewed the prevailing modes of academic inquiry for Victorian studies in the English-speaking academy. The Victorians provided ready candidates for exploration by social historians in the 1960s and 1970s, as many scholars have noted. More recently, however, the field has become the province of literary studies, the new cultural history, and the linguistic turn.42

When it comes to nineteenth-century British historiography, these twists and turns themselves constitute a saga of heady debates that fill journals, monographs, and even personal correspondences.43 Beginning in the early 1980s, important advances came from notable historians of labor and radicalism, including Gareth Stedman Jones and Patrick Joyce.44 Along with scholars of modern France, they critiqued an earlier variety of cultural history that had itself challenged crude basesuperstructure models of social formation.45 Namely, Raymond Williams had sought to address culture as a “whole way of life” and E. P. Thompson to understand social class as a “relationship and a process.”46 Critics of these frameworks, especially Thompson’s, questioned the assumption that texts are transparent communicators of historical experience. They argued for a new history of political culture based in language. In the process, class, once an “objective historical category,” became for many scholars a “cultural, historical, or discursive construct.”47 Ultimately, these developments led some historians to reject the very category of class, whether as a cultural or economic afiliation.48 They also fed a broader neglect of the leading materialist concerns of social history, including labor, mechanization, capitalism, and skill.49

In a related yet distinct project, feminist historians, including Joan Scott, Judith Walkowitz, and Carolyn Steedman, challenged the underlying assumptions of social history as they pioneered the cultural turn. Not only did they bring gender to the fore as a social and cultural category. They also demonstrated how representational practices themselves acted as the agents of historical change. Finally, they called attention to consciousness and subjectivity as historical concerns.50 One collective efect of these innovations—feminist, linguistic, and cultural—has been a move away from the topics that flourished under the hand of social history, including work and industry, in favor of such issues as identity and performativity.51 With its rich archives of texts and images, the Victorian era has proven especially facilitative of this move. As testimony to the force of these developments, Martin Hewitt notes that cultural history has, of late, become the “spine of Victorian studies.”52

Recently, several historians have advocated a new synthesis of cultural method and social concerns. For instance, James Epstein has advocated “taking the turn without forgetting what we still have to learn” from earlier historical traditions.53 Grand Designs takes up this directive as it integrates the long-standing preoccupations of social history with the current methods of cultural studies, most notably an analysis of a range of texts and images. Moreover, it allows us to see how some of the leading characters of social history—namely, artisans, manufacturers, and tradesmen—found their ways into cultural institutions, where they became consumers and critics themselves. By framing themselves as market actors, they pressed for an extended copyright, questioned aesthetic directives, and critiqued the museological geography of Victorian London. In keeping with the dictates of an age of equipoise, these interlocutors sought not so much to oppose the innovations that grew out of the Report of the Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures as to stake out their own interests within this project.54 This said, their pleas for inclusion on the cultural landscape complicate notions of the monolithic rise of a liberal project of design reform, not to mention of a liberal state more generally.55 On the one hand, design reform transitioned from a radical project that sought to give artisans cultural capital into a liberal one that stressed market responsibility and social obedience. But, on the other, this was never an unchallenged movement, as the contests over such diverse matters as collecting, aesthetic hierarchy, curriculum, and geography that are chronicled in this book will show.

At issue here, finally, is not just the story of design reform, the chronology of nineteenth-century Britain, or the linguistic turn, but the very contours of historical practice. Grand Designs is part of a movement “beyond the cultural turn.” Victoria Bonnell and Lynn Hunt have noted that cultural history has tended toward the “obliteration of the social” in its attempt to escape a crudely materialist determinism. In the face of this development, some have exhorted scholars to return to the “hard surfaces of life” and to reafirm the concerns of social history.56 What is needed, I contend, is a reappraisal of the priorities and interpretive possibilities of cultural history. Design reform provides an ideal subject for taking up this task. Because they traverse the domains of production, consumption, and display, design reform’s literal objects of concern require that we restore a “sense of social embeddedness” to cultural history.57

## from the school of design to the south kensington museum

In the chapters that follow, I take up the challenge issued long ago by Moncure Daniel Conway, who called for an examination of the “great revolution” in aesthetic culture that began at the School of Design and culminated at the South Kensington Museum. To narrate the institution’s rise, Conway recommended that South Kensington’s future chroniclers sift through the Report of the Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures, personal correspondence, and committee minutes.58 Grand Designs engages with this archive, which by now is as voluminous as it is well trod. In the process, it seeks to unite a number of previously studied episodes in aesthetic reform into a seamless institutional narrative.59 It also accompanies an account of design reform from above with an analysis of design reform from the outside and below. To do so, it considers a larger body of print and visual culture.60 This includes drawing manuals and workmen’s periodicals that whetted an appetite for aesthetic improvement among Lucraft’s predecessors; afordable catalogues, many of them illustrated, that aided the growth of a public culture of display; and neighborhood newspapers that allowed artisans and tradesmen to enter national debates as producers and purveyors of goods, not to mention as consumers of culture. Together these texts allow us to see design reform as a series of contests, whether metropolitan, local, or national, that addressed the issues of artisanal skill, cultural capital, and aesthetic acumen in the face of the rise of commodity capitalism. In the process, they enable a reconfiguration of our accounts of Victorian cultural formation that pays heed to social history’s categories, concerns, and champions.

Our tale begins at the Government School of Design, whose early career I chronicle in chapter one, “Configuring Design: Artisans, Aesthetics, and Aspiration in Early Victorian Britain.” Opened in London in 1837, the School of Design marked the first attempt to address the complaints lodged before the Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures. The school began modestly, counting a handful of students in its entering class, but it grew by midcentury into a network of institutions instructing fifteen thousand pupils. Its economic aims were as grand as its institutional aspirations. By educating putative designers, the school aspired to salvage a marketplace that was marred by shoddy industrial wares. For all of the hope bestowed on artisanal training at the school, however, there was little consensus about what constituted a proper curriculum for training in design. Instructors, bureaucrats, students, and artists thus engaged in a series of vitriolic disputes. The most explosive issue had to do with whether students should study the human figure, then the apogee of fine art. Those who argued in its favor, including the renegade artist Benjamin Robert Haydon, saw art education as the road to manly ennoblement. Skeptics such as Director William Dyce, himself a painter, regarded design as a modest vocation. The figure dispute precipitated resignations, impassioned letters, and even a suicide. It also sparked revolts among those students who brought their own aspirations for improvement to the school and its provincial outpost at Manchester. As it chronicles these fracases, chapter one shows that the figure question was more than a rarefied aesthetic matter. At stake instead were broader matters of cultural capital and aesthetic hierarchy for artisans in a changing marketplace and a nascent reforming regime.

Manufacturers and merchants argued that the infant School of Design would prove useless without a companionate efort devoted to curing design piracy. This evil pervaded Britain’s industrial towns, where unscrupulous manufacturers, traders, and laborers stole patterns from their more illustrious rivals. It was especially rampant in the Lancashire trade in printed cottons, or calicoes, purchased by consumers in Britain and overseas. To the chagrin of honorable printers, accelerating mechanization and expanding commerce made this practice ever more prevalent, as the shabby and garish patterns flooding the market evinced. In the face of this blight, an unlikely coalition of manufacturers, economists, and members of Parliament galvanized a campaign between 1839 and 1842 to extend the three-month copyright to a year. Extending the copyright, proponents argued, would not only prevent piracy. It would also enhance a tradition of original design that they equated with a moral marketplace. As they made their case, those calico printers who favored extension engaged in a process of self-fashioning in which they framed themselves as bearers of an artisanal tradition and defenders of the national patrimony. Chapter two, “Originality and Sin: Calico, Capitalism, and Copyright of Designs, 1839–1851,” examines their eforts, which met a boisterous opposition from a coterie of Manchester economists and manufacturers. These opponents placed their faith not in original design but rather in the free marketplace. The debate between these antagonistic interests provides a window onto the aesthetic conundrums that arose from changes in productive practice within a commercial and industrial society.

Before midcentury, design reform concerned a select few artists, civil servants, manufacturers, and artisans who were preoccupied largely with supply-side matters. The Great Exhibition of 1851 would bring the industrial arts to a constituency of unprecedented proportions by transforming the strategies of design reform. At this first world’s fair, progenitors Henry Cole and Prince Albert placed a matchless display of raw materials, machinery, and industrial arts on display for the millions to see. By so doing, they hoped to uphold the virtues of skilled labor and to celebrate the glories of a moral marketplace, just like the early Victorian design reformers had. These continuities notwithstanding, their methods of improvement difered starkly from the preceding eforts. Rather than educating a select group of artisans or curing the ailments of a particular trade, the exhibition’s leadership sought to elevate the public taste through spectacular display. Chapter three, “Commodification and Its Discontents: Labor, Print Culture, and Industrial Art at the Great Exhibition of 1851,” addresses this shift. At the same time, it challenges dominant understandings that suggest that the commodity displaced labor as the preeminent mode of representation at the exhibition. To be sure, the finished goods from Britain, its empire, and the globe attracted considerable attention at the Crystal Palace. But these installations—and especially the ornamental art manufactures—also featured prominently in the sizable print corpus that accompanied the exhibition. In exhibition catalogues, artisans and craftsmen assumed center stage. To bring the industrial art wares to life, exhibition literature invoked ideal laboring figures, including the English operative, the French artisan, and the Indian craftsman. Rather than eliminating labor from view, the exhibition’s texts ultimately located it at the center of Victorian discourse. The great spectacle thus invigorated labor as a discursive category that would be available to many diferent interests in the ensuing decades. Most notably, in the exhibition’s perorations on labor, working men such as Lucraft would soon find a measure of cultural capital that allowed them to stake their claim to the national collections.

For all of its success among the general public, the Great Exhibition left contemporary aesthetes with the unsettling awareness that Britain failed to rival its continental counterparts, and even its imperial possessions, in the industrial arts. It thus signaled to reformer Henry Cole and his London-based circle the necessity of a revised approach. Ever the pragmatist, Cole looked to a new audience and new strategies. Rather than focusing on supply, Cole argued for demand-side reform, thereby anticipating the priorities of neoclassical economic theory, which would privilege consumption above production just a few decades later.61 Cole’s new collection in London’s West End, the Museum of Ornamental Art, placed the consumer front and center. Chapter four, “Principled Disagreements: The Museum of Ornamental Art and Its Critics, 1852–1856,” examines this museum, which sought to educate consumers by promulgating the “correct principles” of design. Based on the aesthetic thought of the preceding decades, these principles were available in the museum’s Catalogue, which ofered digestible consumer directives through a series of aphorisms. If they learned these principles, Cole envisioned, buyers from the middle classes would become educated market actors. His most expressly didactic display was a Gallery of False Principles, which gibbeted travesties in home furnishings, including rugs, wallpapers, and chintzes. Together, Cole’s principles, his market assumptions, and his strategies for showing became the focus of a vehement debate that took place in tracts, short stories, and newspapers. There, detractors who championed laissez-faire dismissed the aesthetic principles as fatuous. By so doing, these challengers hearkened back to the sentiments of copyright’s opponents, who had argued that the free market was the true arbiter of good taste and good design. Like these predecessors, the museum’s critics employed an equally vitriolic rhetoric, which was evident in their attacks on the Gallery of False Principles, also known as the

Chamber of Horrors. In the face of these attacks, the chamber would be short-lived, lasting only a year. Although it proved ephemeral, the larger museum did not. It was, in fact, the immediate predecessor to the South Kensington Museum and later the Victoria and Albert.

In 1857, Cole moved the Museum of Ornamental Art just a few miles west to his newly constituted South Kensington estate, where it would become the centerpiece of a new district. With the move came yet more transitions in the grand logic of collecting and the broader project of design reform. At South Kensington, Cole flanked extravagant displays of ornamental art with other collections, most notably a gallery of British paintings. With considerable aplomb, he sought to lure the national collections of art and natural history to South Kensington over the coming years. At South Kensington, Cole frequently carried out his centralizing ambitions in the name of the working man, and especially the skilled artisan, who was quickly becoming an object of political and cultural reform. Men such as Lucraft did not hesitate to point out, however, that the museum stood far from the dwellings of metropolitan laborers. In the face of this geographical iniquity, they maintained that their status as producers entitled them to the cultural wealth of the nation. When they made such claims, they drew on the concerns articulated in the Report of the Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures; they also looked to the virtues popularized at the Great Exhibition. Their challenges spurred Cole to establish a satellite collection in the working-class neighborhood of Bethnal Green, which was home to thousands of laborers. I chronicle these developments in the final chapter of Grand Designs, “Cultural Locations: South Kensington, Bethnal Green, and the Working Man, 1857–1872.”

When they made claims on the collections at South Kensington, working men like Benjamin Lucraft recalled the priorities of the School of Design, which had opened in 1837. This first inroad to state-sponsored reform placed artisans front and center as it sought to improve their productive practices. By so doing, it aimed to exert a salutary influence on the industrial arts. This would prove to be a more complicated and contentious enterprise than the School’s progenitors had envisioned. The project of improving production impinged, it turned out, on matters of individual aspiration and cultural capital. These were especially potent concerns in an era of industrial transition, liberal reform, and popular radicalism. Disputes about hierarchies of aesthetics and class manifested themselves in the myriad curricular struggles that plagued the School in its early years, as the institution looked to design education for the purpose of market improvement. Let us see what sorts of questions and conflicts arose when early Victorian artists, manufacturers, civil servants, and artisans tried to configure design.