## The Question of Genesis The <sup>fi</sup>rst book in Arabic script to be printed with movable type in any Arabic-speaking country appeared in Aleppo, in 1706.<sup>1</sup> The psalter Kitab al-zabur al-sharıf was printed by the Christian deacon ᶜAbdallah Zakhir under the guidance of Athanasius Dabbas, the Melkite Patriarch of Antioch. This casual venture in an Ottoman province, though duly recorded in historical annals,<sup>2</sup> has been given less scholarly attention than the printing project launched two decades later in the Ottoman capital by the enterprising Ibrahim Müteferrika, a Christian convert to Islam. In 1727, in the wake of a firman by Sultan Ahmet III, which permitted printing in Arabic script in the empire, Müteferrika was given an imperial clearance to launch his own press. It took him two years to publish the <sup>fi</sup>rst work, a Turkish rendition of an eleventh-century Arabic lexicon in two volumes, and more printed books followed. Müteferrika’s enterprise has been the focus of extensive historical discussion, in which he has often been hailed as “the <sup>fi</sup>rst Ottoman printer.”<sup>3</sup> Zakhir and Müteferrika were pioneers, but neither of them could claim the honor of being the world’s <sup>fi</sup>rst-ever printer in Arabic letters. Their initiatives were preceded by printing schemes in Europe, begun in the early sixteenth century. Presses in Italy, France, the Netherlands, Germany, and England produced printed works in several Islamic languages, including printings of the Qur’an, for religious-missionary, scholarly, and sometimes commercial purposes, copies of which reached Ottoman collections.<sup>4</sup> Zakhir and Müteferrika were also preceded by printers in the empire itself, non-Muslim subjects of the sultan who produced books in their own languages and scripts. Jewish exiles from Spain opened Hebrew printing shops in Istanbul as early as the mid-1490s, and Jews later set up presses in Salonika, Edirne, Izmir, and Safad. A press in Armenian opened in Istanbul in 1567 and one in Greek in 1627. We also know of printing in a Mount Lebanon monastery which produced at least one item, a prayer book in Arabic (in the Syriac/karshunı script), in 1610, and of several other small plants owned by Jews or Christians elsewhere in the empire.<sup>5</sup> Such sporadic endeavors by non-Muslim minorities aside, it was only in the early eighteenth century that books began to be printed in the languages of Islam under an Islamic-Ottoman rule; to wit, two centuries and a half after Gutenberg. Mass Arabic printing in the Ottoman Empire was also slower to evolve than its European antecedent, gaining real momentum only in the nineteenth century. Zakhir’s 1706 printing initiative yielded a total of eight religious tracts in a modest edition before closing forever <sup>fi</sup>ve years later. Müteferrika produced sixteen books in some 10,000 copies altogether in his more famous print shop, until his death in 1746 and the folding of his press. Another eight titles with a similar print-run appeared in the Ottoman capital between that last point and the end of the century.<sup>6</sup> On the whole, then, twenty-four books in a total of ca. 13,000 copies were produced in Istanbul from 1727 to 1800, a period stretching over more than seven decades and marked by long intervals of inactivity. Another twenty-nine titles with a comparable number of copies were produced during that time in Syria and Lebanon, according to one count.<sup>7</sup> It was a humble yield. If Zakhir and Müteferrika blazed a trail for Ottoman and Arab printing, that trail remained largely deserted for many more years thereafter. The expectation implied in the 1727 firman licensing printing – that a whole new era in text production would soon follow<sup>8</sup> – turned out to be premature; the venture that ensued marked no historic turning point. The appearance of the “<sup>fi</sup>rst Ottoman printer” in the eighteenth century has recently been described as a kind of historic accident, “a pure chance” in an environment that was not ready for him. The history of printing in the Turkish- and Arabic-speaking parts of the Ottoman Empire would begin in earnest only in the subsequent century. The scope of book production once the machines started rolling under Ottoman sway – thousands of copies within a few years – was impressive for the region. But it looks strikingly modest when contrasted with the pace of European printing in the decades after Gutenberg. There, almost overnight a network of print shops spread all over western and central Europe, from Lisbon to Krakow and from Naples to Stockholm. During the <sup>fi</sup>ve decades up to 1500 CE (the “incunabula” phase), some 30,000 titles in an estimated <sup>fi</sup>fteen to twenty million copies were printed in Europe<sup>10</sup> – conceivably more than all the books produced by man in six millennia of writing. Thereafter, the numbers continued to increase exponentially. Printing came to play a vital role in Europe’s grand historic developments, including the late Renaissance, the Protestant Reformation, and the scienti<sup>fi</sup>c revolution, the expansion of literacy, and the emergence of reading publics. While its actual role in these changes is a matter of controversy among scholars,<sup>11</sup> even those who tend to play it down acknowledge its major contribution to mankind. The considerable gap in timing and pace between the two scenes seems to beg some “why” questions: Why did the Ottoman Empire refrain from adopting printing in its own languages before the eighteenth century, despite being amply aware of its existence? Why did the advent of printing, once it had begun under Ottoman rule, generate no excited momentum similar to that of <sup>fi</sup>fteenth-century Europe? Why did it take another century for the endeavor initiated by Zakhir and Müteferrika – its bene<sup>fi</sup>ts now explicitly acknowledged – to become a mass enterprise? And, we may also ask, what caused the heirs of these two pioneers to be so much more successful in the following century? Before embarking on exploring these questions, let us brie<sup>fl</sup>y consider the methodological validity of such an exploration. Would studying Ottoman printing by contrasting it with the European antecedent help us in comprehending the Ottoman case? Wouldn’t our habitual, almost axiomatic, association of printing with progress perforce impose on us a prejudiced outlook that would preclude a fair-minded appraisal of the Ottoman scene? It has recently been suggested that studying Ottoman printing by asking the above “why” questions would be “ahistorical,” in that it would “predicate Ottoman printing on the European experience of print”: Applying criteria molded by one historic case to another historic case, such an approach would inevitably produce a distorted understanding of the latter.<sup>12</sup> Would it not be more useful, then, to probe the emergence of Ottoman printing as a facet of Ottoman history, studied from within, with no relation to the European model? It seems to me that examining Ottoman printing history against the backdrop of the European experience might become ahistorical only if one is oblivious to the methodological pitfalls on the way, which are, admittedly, more real than visible. The risk of such unawareness is ever there when studying a society other than one’s own, even when no comparison between cultures is openly attempted, let alone when a comparison is at the heart of the probe. The biased attitude typical of the study of another society through one’s own sociocultural prism had, until recently, marred much of the European scholarship on the Muslim world. Among other things, it had been re<sup>fl</sup>ected in European views on the “late entry” of printing into the region: Deeming printing as a clear mark of progress and its absence as regression, scholars have tended to interpret the Ottoman shunning of printing as opting for backwardness and to regard their subsequent adoption of printing as a “belated” embracing of modernity. As historian Orlin Sabev has observed, educated Westerners – who “cannot imagine a society without printing” – had been exploring a quandary of their own making when erroneously assuming that the Ottomans were preoccupied with a “dilemma, to print or not to print.”<sup>13</sup> Perpetual awareness of our cultural <sup>fi</sup>lters should help us in skirting such dangers. We ought to check and recheck our alertness at every turn – a demanding but attainable requirement. If keen and alert, there would be nothing ahistorical in our comparative inquiry. Grand comparisons between civilizations are too exciting and gratifying to avoid and should not be given up because of avertible methodological hazards. They have much to offer to the inquisitive researcher and often yield insights unobtainable otherwise. Historian David Landes, who chose to investigate the enigmatic absence of scienti<sup>fi</sup>c and industrial revolutions in China’s history, ascribed his choice of topic to a simple, healthy historical curiosity: “Why should one not expect China to be interested in economic growth and development? . . . to want to do more work with less labor?” Why, we may likewise ask, would the Ottoman state and its subjects in the Middle East turn their backs for such a long time on a device which had proven to hold so many bene<sup>fi</sup>ts in neighboring Europe? The questions about the long absence of mass printing in the Ottoman Empire are among the historic dilemmas related to the major disparities between European and Middle Eastern civilizations, like those that concern feudalism, nationalism, or democracy. They invite judicious comparisons between their divergent historic courses and choices. These are everelusive questions and their probing is intricate. But, as Landes has noted, “that is what history is all about.”<sup>14</sup> Asking why a certain development, known in one society, did not occur in another entails more methodological dif<sup>fi</sup>culties. The sources of a studied society do not usually discuss phenomena or ideas that were not a part of its own experience, and rarely explicate their absence. Such is the case with printing in the pre-eighteenth-century Middle East. The local sources, so rich on so many other matters, say little about the foreign technology and do not care to expound the choice not to adopt it for several centuries. The historian is thus left to rely on indirect evidence and on inferences as much as, or more than, on explicit testimonies and come up with explanations that are inevitably tentative. This will be all too obvious in the discussion below. ## The “Late Début”: Opting for the Sidelines? Until recently, historians did not examine the reasons for the Ottoman disinterest in printing very closely. Scholars who discussed that historic fact usually did so hastily and were content with certain simplistic explanations. Grounded in some crude assumptions regarding Muslim culture and the Ottoman Empire, their super<sup>fi</sup>cial treatment of the issue was uncritically recycled in the literature. It re<sup>fl</sup>ected the long-familiar problematic tendency to ascribe one’s own concepts and priorities to another society under scrutiny. The standard account attributed the Muslim-Ottoman choice to avoid printing to three main causes: government objection, ᶜulama’ disapproval, and opposition by the many book copyists in the capital. Ottoman sultans were said to have been wary lest printing introduce alien concepts and habits that would weaken the Islamic order on which their power and the imperial order rested. Two sultans, Bayezid II and Selim I, were reported to have issued firmans (edicts), in 1485 and 1515, respectively, which explicitly prohibited the use of printing in the languages of Islam under penalty of death, and these presumably remained in force in subsequent centuries. The ᶜulama’, for their part, were believed to have been opposed to the foreign technology mostly on conservative religious grounds. To them, printing represented a bidᶜa, objectionable innovation of the worst kind, the kind borrowed from in<sup>fi</sup>dels. For these guardians of the faith, it was “veneration of the Arabic language as the medium for revealing the word of God” that made them “oppose the use of a metal object, coming from Christendom, to reproduce the honored language of revelation,” one scholar has suggested.<sup>15</sup> Like the sultans, they must also have been concerned about the threat the imported medium held to their standing as the overseers of all written guidance to the community. Müteferrika’s words about the ᶜulama’ fearing that printing would place “more than the necessary amount of books” into circulation were taken as an accurate expression of their stance.<sup>16</sup> In the centralized empire, such a shared opposition by sultans and ᶜulama’ should have suf<sup>fi</sup>ced to prevent the entry of printing by an order from above. But there was also opposition from below, by the Istanbul scribes and book copyists. They made up a sizeable group – 80,000 strong in the late seventeenth century, according to one testimony<sup>17</sup> – and hence in<sup>fl</sup>uential enough to pressure the government to ban the tool that would undercut their livelihood. Both the government and the ᶜulama’ had high esteem for the scribes and copyists as a vital brick in the edi<sup>fi</sup>ce of the existing order, and both were keen to protect them. Other possible reasons for the “belated” genesis of Ottoman printing were also mentioned, as subsidiary complements to those noted above: economic factors – the high cost of establishing a press and the dearth of public demand, given the society’s widespread illiteracy and poverty; and, somewhat more hazily, cultural factors – a time-honored preference for oral expression, coupled with a reverence for the written word and for the craft of calligraphy. Both would impede the adoption of printing. 18 On the whole, this multilayered explanation seemed to make sense, and for a long time scholars accepted it as adequate. It was comfortably consonant with modernization theories, which regarded printing as a key to progress and its absence as a mark of underdevelopment. By depriving itself from its bene<sup>fi</sup>ts, it was assumed, the Muslim Ottoman state opted to remain on the sidelines of human progress, way behind Europe, which was racing ahead. To some observers, this was yet another proof of Muslim societies being intellectually and scienti<sup>fi</sup>cally “inert” in recent centuries.<sup>19</sup> Only rarely did scholars question the soundness of the explanation or the credibility of its underlying historic evidence.<sup>20</sup> It was thus presented in the article on printing (“Matbaᶜa”) in the authoritative Encyclopaedia of Islam, second edition, and was perpetuated as a matter of course in the historical literature, including works as recent as the present decade.<sup>21</sup> “One can avoid the need to explain a great deal by relying on this conviction,” historian Ian Proudfoot has observed.<sup>22</sup> A closer look at this reading of the issue brings up questions which the above explanation leaves unresolved. One may wonder, how come government disapproval and ᶜulama’ resentment suf<sup>fi</sup>ced to prevent printing by Muslims throughout that vast empire for centuries, while in Europe printing thrived despite similar obstacles. One may also wonder, with regard to the scribes and copiers – who would naturally strive to avert the danger posed by printing – what made those in the Ottoman Empire more effective than the corresponding class in Europe, who had also tried to check the danger to their livelihood and soon lost the battle. In the same vein, illiteracy and poverty, two obstacles to mass production and consumption of written texts, were not unique to the Middle East. They also prevailed in Europe, which was overwhelmingly illiterate when printing appeared and for a long time thereafter and in large part also indigent, but these did not prevent the remarkable success of the printing press. Finally, perhaps most puzzling about the standard interpretation is the historic fact that the Zakhir and Müteferrika initiatives of the early eighteenth century had no follow-up for many decades. State approval and ᶜulama’ consent were already there, as were the eager entrepreneur and the machinery; but the enterprise failed to take off. Why? This last puzzle is not accounted for by the regular explanations. Perhaps other, more subtle, factors were at play here, beyond the calculated interests of the usual actors. In recent years, especially in the last decade, scholars have begun to look into these questions more critically. Doubts have been raised concerning the alleged imperial ban on printing, casting it as, apparently, a myth. It has been noted that no copies of the presumed decrees by Bayezid II and Selim I have been found in the archives so far, and that the assumption that these two sultans – who were generally known for their favorable view of learning – should issue such a command was unlikely. To be sure, the notion that Ottoman rulers would be distrustful of printing has not in itself been disputed. What has been is the use of this notion as a blanket explanation for the absence of Muslim printing, without trying to probe the roots of that possible distrust. Doubts have also been raised about the likelihood that <sup>fi</sup>fteenth- and sixteenth-century decrees should effectively retain their prohibitive force until the eighteenth century all over the vast and diverse empire.<sup>23</sup> Similar skepticism has been voiced about the notion of ᶜulama’ opposition to printing. It has been argued that the sources studied so far contain no unequivocal evidence of their hostility to printing and that, moreover, when the practice was seriously considered in the eighteenth century, the stance of many ᶜulama’ was rather supportive. It could also be shown that, historically, they tended to approve of novel technologies more often than not.<sup>24</sup> “Instead of stating that the ᶜulama’ were against printing, we may note that printing was opposed by some ᶜulama’,” one scholar has suggested.<sup>25</sup> The assumption that printing was rejected from above, through dictates by the community’s rulers and spiritual guides, has thus been rendered questionable. Likewise, the common wisdom on the copyists as a major obstacle to Ottoman printing has been cast in doubt.<sup>26</sup> That this sector had a genuine interest in blocking the entry of printing is obvious, but historians are required to prove, not just conjecture, that these practitioners had suf<sup>fi</sup>cient in<sup>fl</sup>uence, as an organized guild or otherwise, to attain such a goal. Recent studies have reminded us that we still do not know enough about the role of Ottoman guilds to reach such conclusions, and that the little we do know seems to indicate that copyists might not have been thus organized.<sup>27</sup> Similarly, the idea that Muslim reverence for the scriptures and the sacred language led them to object to printing has come under attack. Historians have criticized the notion of “a purported timeless Muslim suspicion of the written word”; there was “no general ‘sacred refusal to print’,” Dana Sajdi has argued, presenting examples of Islamic block-printing of various texts, including the Qur’an itself from the tenth century onward.<sup>28</sup> An explanation that once seemed satisfactory has thus been rendered shaky. But if it was not sultanic reluctance, ᶜulama’ dogmatism, pressures by copyists, or the overriding sacredness of writing, what explains the long abstention of the Ottomans from printing? The dif<sup>fi</sup>culty in devising an answer is exacerbated by the silence of local sources on the matter. “We have never set much store on strange and ingenious objects, nor do we need any more of your country’s manufactures,” the emperor of China told King George III of England in 1793, stating his mind explicitly.<sup>29</sup> We know of no like remark by an Ottoman ruler. The recent search by scholars has revealed no more than a handful of references to printing by Muslims before the eighteenth century. We know of two Ottoman authors who addressed the matter sketchily, both in the seventeenth century: Ibrahim Peçevi (1574–1649), who in his history of the empire brie<sup>fl</sup>y mentioned the European practice of printing, noting its technical bene<sup>fi</sup>ts; and Katip Çelebi (1609–1657), who in his universal history (Cihannüma) referred to printing in ancient China. Both of them dealt with printing in foreign contexts; neither considered its relevance to Ottoman needs, nor did they openly recommend its adoption.<sup>30</sup> At about the same time, in another corner of the region, Muhammad bin ᶜAbd al-Wahhab al-Wazır al-Ghasanı wrote an account of his 1690 trip to Spain as an of<sup>fi</sup>cial Moroccan emissary, in which he noted the existence of print shops and newspapers there, presenting them as odd curiosities of the in<sup>fi</sup>dels.<sup>31</sup> Such <sup>fl</sup>eeting references – there might have been a few more here and there – tell us little about Muslim views on printing as a practical option, beyond re<sup>fl</sup>ecting indifference to it. This resonant silence leaves the striking gap between the Muslim world and Europe with regard to printing an open question for anyone to speculate on, cursorily or systematically. ## Another Explanation: Printing Redundant A sound analysis of the absence of mass printing in the Middle East should take into account cultural, religious, social, and political factors. All of these should be considered, even though their respective weight might be hard to assess. Let us <sup>fi</sup>rst look at the essence of these different ingredients and then try to understand how they worked to delay the entry of mass printing. A good place to begin is the cultural sphere. It is a commonplace that Muslim societies accorded a limited role to writing and written texts in the community’s routine functioning. To examine this view more closely, we must go beyond simplistic notions such as the Arab “superior oral tradition” and the invariable sacredness of anything inscribed in Arabic. Speech and writing were two modes of retaining and transmitting knowledge which complemented, not negated, each other. There was a role division between them, one that changed according to function. Vocal utterance of written texts was essential in religious contexts: God was believed to have delivered His message to His community in speech, and sacred and doctrinal writings were deemed most valid when cited out loud. This preference for oral usage was extended to other kinds of texts, sometimes only partly sacred and at other times not at all. Such was the case with legal testimonies, which were considered weightier than written ones. Likewise, in Muslim learning and the imparting of traditional knowledge, special value was placed on audible recitation, usually regarded as superior to silent reading, even when written copies were at hand.<sup>32</sup> Poetry and literary prose, too, were considered to be at their fullest expression when read out loud. Legal court testimonies, madrasa teaching, and poetry recitation, all had their respective rationales for preferring speech over writing, and in all of them orality was of the essence. As already noted, the special value placed on the spoken word led some observers to assume that, in Muslim tradition, the penchant for the oral was so overriding as to treat writing as a lesser medium. Muslims, it has been suggested, “were always fundamentally skeptical of the written word.”<sup>33</sup> This is surely a rash generalization, for had this been the case, their written legacy in every <sup>fi</sup>eld of knowledge would not have been as rich as it is. While venerating vocal articulation for speci<sup>fi</sup>c purposes, these societies had equally high esteem for books and writing, as indispensable devices for retaining knowledge, teaching, and disseminating ideas of every kind. The old tradition of book copying and collecting hardly needs to be elaborated here. The status of books underwent changes in different historic periods,<sup>34</sup> hence there is no simple way of characterizing their overall role in Muslim cultural life. But it is certainly true that reverence for the oral and high esteem for the written had existed side by side, at least from the tenth century onward, without one of them obviating the other. If so, we may also assume that it was not veneration for the spoken word as such which barred a technology designed for mass production of books. It could have contributed a good deal to our inquiry if we could somehow measure the proportion of written to oral modes in society's practices during the era before printing. Available evidence, however – or rather, that which has so far come to light – allows for no more than a very general and loose impression of that relationship. The problem of evidence is especially acute with regard to praxes that leave no recorded traces, such as reading (as we shall see later on) or interpersonal oral communication. From this restricted vantage point, it seems that the number of people who read and wrote prior to the entry of printing was rather small. Those who did engage in these activities often did so while ful<sup>fi</sup>lling speci<sup>fi</sup>c public roles: primarily the ᶜulama’, including those in the various legal and educational institutions, who were entrusted with retaining the community’s legal and spiritual heritage; and state of<sup>fi</sup>cials and scribes, who performed administrative and clerical tasks. There were also book copyists, who made their living from rendering services to the public; individual scholars, who wrote chronicles, theological tracts, poetry, and more; and sometimes common people such as farmers, soldiers, merchants, and even a barber – the “nouveau literates” in Dana Sajdi’s study<sup>35</sup> – who had acquired reading skills and sometimes had enough curiosity in them to read and even write. All of these together must have made up a minority section of the community, apparently no more than a thin social layer. The rest were essentially illiterate and remained beyond the circle of such activities. It was not a rigid division but rather a porous line: Entering the circle was open to anyone with suf<sup>fi</sup>cient motivation to do so; few actually did. The society did not regard reading and writing as useful skills for everyone to acquire and offered training in them to its members rather unsystematically, or sporadically. This was taken to be the right order of things. For the most part, then, written knowledge was the designated territory of speci<sup>fi</sup>ed groups, not quite exclusive yet distinct. Those outside their ranks had little use for it or for the skills to access it. “In the Ottoman intellectual world,” historian Metin Kunt has observed, “learning was by nature elitist both by the limited number of people with real understanding and penetrating minds, and by the limited number [sic] of worthy and useful reading matter.”<sup>36</sup> How big, or small, was the “limited number” of enlightened people and of worthy texts it is impossible to quantify, but as an intuitive consideration that underscores their fewness, the observation seems sensible. Most daily functions throughout the community were performed by oral/aural channels, from transmitting state messages to the subjects and circulating news across society to leisure-time activities, based as they were on listening, not reading. These channels served the community well, and the modest quantities of written texts it needed to various ends could be adequately produced by handwriting. It was, in Kunt’s words, “a classic case of old technology too ef<sup>fi</sup>cient to be easily displaced by a new technology too cumbersome and too expensive to become an immediate alternative.”<sup>37</sup> The above explanation concerns practical considerations as much as cultural ones. Another possible cause was more strictly cultural, and a rather nebulous one at that: dislike for printing on esthetic grounds. That users of Arabic had special esteem for the written letters of their language and for the practice of inscribing them is a worn-out notion, whose sense has often been extended beyond its reasonable bounds. It is valid when related to sacred texts: These were to be produced conscientiously, not light-heartedly, and to be marked by grace and elegance. This, however, is merely one facet of the matter. Only a small part of all written Arabic texts, a tiny fraction, were thus revered; the rest were texts of lesser stature, whose production or copying did not require such careful attention. Works of scholarship and wisdom, e.g., in philosophy or medicine, if neatly executed would be treasured both for their contents and as precious objects. Otherwise, they, like countless other items of nonsacred nature – e.g., state documents or commercial paperwork – would be deemed only as valuable as is the information they carry, with no regard for their decorative quality. The esthetic norms of Arabic writing, then, featured a gamut rather than one rigid standard. European-printed Arabic books which entered the region usually failed to meet the upper level of this gamut of norms and did not represent an especially attractive option of text reproduction. Their printing was less pretty than manuscript writing, “a travesty of scribal form” as one scholar put it.<sup>38</sup> Evidence from different times and places in the Muslim world indicated a preference for manuscript over printed versions of the same books: from Antoine Galland’s famous seventeenthcentury report out of Istanbul,<sup>39</sup> through eighteenth-century accounts from that same city and from the Yemeni highlands, to an early nineteenthcentury testimony from Muslim eastern Asia.<sup>40</sup> Like some of the other factors examined here, the esthetic factor is easier to point out than to appraise; in a way, it is more elusive than the other social and cultural causes. Still, it does seem to have played a role in delaying the entry of printing into the region and slowing down its assimilation, as the testimonies quoted above seem to suggest. This problem would be alleviated in part with the invention of lithography in Europe at the close of the eighteenth century, based as it was on handproduced texts. Allowing adherence to the Arabic standards of calligraphic beauty through the use of skilled scribes, lithography was adopted in some Muslim countries in the nineteenth century – mostly India, East Asia, Iran, certain parts of North Africa, and to some extent Egypt. In other Ottoman Arab provinces, however, typographical print remained predominant.<sup>41</sup> The dislike for the visual quality of its products would persist for some time, and we may guess, if not yet prove, that it encumbered the acclimatization of printing in these parts. An order in which all writing needs were effectively served by existing methods, along with dislike for the imported printed exemplars, together placed a barrier between Middle Eastern society and printing. The public acceptance of this basic order rendered unlikely a popular demand for written texts beyond the modest quantities that could be adequately produced by hand. This limited demand is a vital part of the explanation for the absence of printing in the Ottoman Empire for several centuries after Gutenberg. It stood in stark contrast to the state of affairs in western and central Europe before the dawn of printing, where a rise in the use of written texts of many kinds had been felt from the late twelfth century onward. City merchants and artisans who used business records, university students who needed school texts, lawyers in need of law books, of<sup>fi</sup>cials serving in state and city administration, members of the nobility who collected books for their prestige – all needed an enhanced production of texts. The demand was <sup>fi</sup>rst addressed by expanding copying ventures, an increasingly thriving trade in the century before printing, whose members became numerous enough to be organized in guilds in some places. By the time printing was adopted in Europe, a considerable consumer market was already in place there, waiting for its products.<sup>42</sup> This kind of public demand had no parallel in the Middle East, certainly not on a comparable scale.<sup>43</sup> To this, one may add the intuitive religious suspicion of innovations, especially, again, those of alien origin. The suspicion often proved to be surmountable, but it was a hurdle all the same (needless to say, such distrust of things foreign was hardly a unique Middle Eastern trait). Muslim societies had overcome such misgivings when a foreign novelty appeared to be pro<sup>fi</sup>table, as in the cases of paper and <sup>fi</sup>rearms. But when the new device was deemed unnecessary and unappealing, the fact that it came from the outside and re<sup>fl</sup>ected alien norms was an additional cause for distaste.<sup>44</sup> Another context in which the issue should be examined is political. That the government and religious leaders were wary of embracing a device that could prove problematic in the long run is probably true. But there is an important complement to this political argument, which becomes apparent when we examine the matter in conjunction with the European precedent. When printing spread in Europe, it posed a threat to the authority of kings and other potentates, a potential threat at <sup>fi</sup>rst and very real threat later on. Printing also posed a threat to the public standing of the Catholic Church, which became all too manifest with the Protestant Reformation if not earlier. Both the rulers and the Church invested efforts in trying to check or at least control the proliferation of printing and its products, but with limited success. Mighty forces were at play in pushing the new technology forward. Alongside the demand from below by students, merchants, and others was the initiative of entrepreneurial burghers with money and time who were driven by the economic promise of the expanding market, as well as religious groups seeking means to curb Church power. These actors had an essential interest in printing and publishing and served as a powerful dynamo in advancing them, skirting the impediments placed by the various authorities and eventually winning the day. Historic developments in early modern western and central Europe permitted more freedom of action for such enterprising subjects and citizens. The contemporary Ottoman Empire was different: A highly centralized system, it was effectively run on the universally accepted principle of subject obedience to authority. It was a well-functioning machine, whose success was plainly proven in encounters with its foes between the <sup>fi</sup>fteenth and late seventeenth centuries. Such a reality was not conducive to the emergence of entrepreneurial initiatives that would advance autonomous projects from below, let alone projects with potentially disruptive implications for the state, as could be seen in the case of Europe. The aversion to printing by sultans and ᶜulama’ had its parallels in western and central Europe; the public political norms that rendered their control 45 effective did not. All of these factors combined would explain the basic apathy which the Ottoman state and the societies under its sway displayed toward printing prior to the nineteenth century. It was distrust from above along with – and perhaps more importantly – lack of interest from below. Until the nineteenth century, Middle Eastern societies had no use for machines that multiplied written texts at high speed. They were not convinced by the European-printed samples they saw, which to them were inferior to locally made manuscripts, and were distrustful of their alien origin. The attitude toward Western technology in premodern China has been depicted as a “superior indifference to Western things.”<sup>46</sup> The portrayal seems equally apt in the case of Ottoman subjects, who were certainly indifferent and quite probably felt superior to Europe. Even if there had been independent endeavors in this regard, the political order and social conventions would have sti<sup>fl</sup>ed them. It is easy to see that the old explanations (to which many still subscribe) and the one laid out here are grounded in the same basic assumption: that the differences between Middle Eastern and European attitudes to printing from the mid-<sup>fi</sup>fteenth to the early nineteenth century re<sup>fl</sup>ected substantial cultural and philosophical disparities. The difference between the two sets of explanations is largely one of accent. The common accounts, which attribute the absence of Ottoman printing to state and ᶜulama’ prohibition that re<sup>fl</sup>ected concern about their own standing and an overall aversion to innovation, imply a kind of intrinsic cultural dogmatism that yielded an unenlightened Ottoman society. Alternatively, it could be more bene<sup>fi</sup>cial to look at the cultural preferences of that society, vindicated as they were by a fairly smooth functioning of the sociopolitical and religious order and by a victorious empire during the two or three centuries after Gutenberg. From this perspective, the choice not to adopt the foreign, unneeded technology would seem perfectly sensible. Finally, let us remind ourselves that all of this is no more than an attempt to explain an absence, and as such must be regarded as tentative. So long as no direct evidence comes to light that explicitly elucidates this absence, we will have to make do with such provisional explanations. Direct testimonies on the matter may not be found in the future. For a society that operated by what seemed to be a winning formula, there was little need to explain why a super<sup>fl</sup>uous device was not adopted. Only when the empire’s lot began to change in later times did the Ottoman view of printing start changing as well. Only then did its guardians and their subjects <sup>fi</sup>nd it advisable to consider the foreign technique more seriously.