As the eighteenth century turned into the nineteenth, the Ottoman and Arab benign disregard for printing began to crack and give way to a different attitude. The new century would witness a gradual and eventually extensive Arab adoption of printing, the birth of a publishing industry, and the emergence of massive reading in Arab societies, changes that would further accelerate in the following century. These developments were central pillars in the historic movement known as the Arab nahda, a term that will appear repeatedly in this and later chapters. Before proceeding further, it would be worthwhile to take a brief look at this notion and its relation to our subject. “The Arab nahda” is a loose construct with a range of meanings. Used <sup>fl</sup>atly with no additional speci<sup>fi</sup>cation, it is taken as a name for the vigorous “awakening,” or “revival,” of intellectual and literary activity that took place in certain Ottoman–Arab provinces during the latter decades of Ottoman rule. Among its prominent marks were an increase in literary and linguistic creativity and an excited journalistic enterprise. Opening up new intellectual vistas, this enterprise engaged members of the society’s educated classes in a vivid written discourse on questions of modernity and cultural identity and encouraged the spread of learning and literacy. “Nahda” is also used in a different, essentially political sense to denote the vocal quest for national liberation, political rights, and individual freedom that ensued, or rather emanated from, the cultural ferment of that period. There is no clear division between the cultural and the political; usually they are closely intertwined. Even when considering themes that appear to be purely cultural, political implications are always there. Such, for instance, are questions concerning the role of foreign (as distinct from local) actors in generating the changes, or the share of non-Muslim minority members (vs. that of Muslims) in advancing them, which are essential to the cultural exploration but also bear obvious political allusions. The same is true when the nahda’s historic time framework, especially its inception, is considered: Did it start at the beginning of the nineteenth century, or even earlier (and hence was the fruit of a local-inner endeavor), or after mid-century (and hence was largely a product of foreign initiatives)?<sup>1</sup> Like all historic developments, especially those with major sociocultural implications, the Arab nahda had been portended in various ways long before its coming into full blossoming. Selecting a point of departure that would best serve its exploration is thus the historian’s choice. This study, it is important to clarify, is not intended as a study of the nahda. Although the nahda will repeatedly be invoked here as a framework of reference, the probe will be addressed, more narrowly, only to certain aspects of $\mathbf { i t } ,$ namely, the advent of printing, publishing, and massive reading. These were indispensable changes in facilitating the nahda. Other major aspects of $\mathbf { i t } ,$ even in its strictly cultural sense, are not a part of the discussion here. Thus I will not consider the contents of intellectual thought and the public discourse on broad issues such as modernity and communal identity. Nor will I examine the emergence of cultural fora, or political ones for that matter, such as associations and parties. The story here starts when printing in Arabic and the use of printed materials on a massive scale begins: In the early 1820s in Egypt and, more dynamically, after mid-century in Lebanon. Examining the nahda from this speci<sup>fi</sup>c angle is meant to cast a new light on it as a broad cultural development and to allow a more balanced appreciation of its unfolding. As we have seen, Ottoman societies had been exposed to printing prior to 1800, to an extent which at <sup>fi</sup>rst glance might seem considerable. This included printing by Jews, Greeks, Armenians, and Christian Arabs; the Zakhir and Müteferrika enterprises; and the ongoing importation of Arabic and Turkish printed books from Europe. Sultan Ahmet III’s firman from 1727 inspired some more activity, in Istanbul and Syria, which yielded a few dozen titles in small editions until the end of that century. To these we might add the famous French printing project in Egypt, from 1798 to 1801: The machines Bonaparte brought there produced a steady stream of proclamations in Arabic and French that were publicly circulated, two regular French periodicals for the occupying troops, and more.<sup>2</sup> On the whole, then, the region did have some initial experience with the technology and its products. Still, none of these initiatives or even all of them together may be said to have started a new era in this regard in the Ottoman Middle East. Printing had not become a tool of state administration, nor had it affected popular practices, communications, or access to knowledge on any signi<sup>fi</sup>cant scale. Had we traveled back in time to the year 1800, or even a decade or two later, and landed in Istanbul or any Arab provincial town, we would have been unable to locate printing as a tool of much weight. All Arab printing activities up to that point amounted to a set of unrelated episodes which foretold no necessary continuity. The Zakhir, Müteferrika, and Bonaparte ventures were scattered instances of a start with no substantial continuation. At that early stage, the general circumstances of the empire and its Arab territories were not conducive to turning printing into the agent of change it would later become. Historic changes during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, notably – though not solely – a shift in the international balance of powers, altered Ottoman military, political, and cultural attitudes, including the view of printing. The old “superior indifference” to all things Western came to be coupled with, and then replaced by, attentiveness and receptivity. The change was seen on two planes: on the state level from above and on the popular level from below. During the eighteenth century, the Ottoman government was signaling its growing readiness to listen to external voices and to explore technological and organizational innovations. By the end of the century, its leadership was engaged in early attempts to restructure traditional systems along novel lines. This ushered in the extensive Ottoman reforms of the empire’s last century, a major drama whose details are well known. Having explicitly sanctioned printing in Arabic script, the government in Istanbul gradually came to appreciate the potential bene<sup>fi</sup>ts of the device for its own administration and to employ it more regularly. A similar initiative was launched independently in one of its provinces, Egypt, whose resourceful ruler introduced printing along with many other changes. Both in Istanbul and in Cairo, the nineteenth century was a period of government-initiated reforms, from army to education, from industry to architecture, in a bid to bolster the state in the face of mounting foreign and domestic pressures. The adoption of printing with its apparent plusses was a part of these efforts. The initiative was not limited to the government. The changes of the time and the reforms designed to address them generated activity from below that was largely motivated by a public need for information and guidance. Navigating the changing waters required a new compass, as the old means of conveying news and views were becoming inadequate. This thirst for orientation, it was becoming increasingly clear, could best be met in print. Both rulers and their subjects were thus abandoning the old disinterest in printing. This chapter presents an overview of the emergence of mass printing and publishing in the Arabic-speaking Ottoman provinces during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Similar changes took place simultaneously in the Turkish-speaking parts, which are not included in the present exploration.<sup>3</sup> In both places, printing gradually became a routine tool of state bureaucracy and the community’s political, social, and cultural life. The <sup>fi</sup>rst potentate to take action was the governor of Ottoman Egypt, whose enterprise was the most signi<sup>fi</sup>cant printing project in the region during the <sup>fi</sup>rst half of the century. Modest steps were also taken elsewhere, mostly by Christians in the Lebanon area encouraged by missionaries, which would gain momentum after mid-century. These two schemes evolved independently of each other and reached similar regional importance by the third quarter of the century. Egypt and Lebanon were the region’s leading centers of book and journal production, and it was there too that a set of diffusion channels for the printed products as well as mass reading audiences <sup>fi</sup>rst emerged, with smaller offshoots in other provinces. Historic changes toward the end of the century triggered a massive emigration of Lebanese to Egypt, including many educated and creative individuals who had been exposed to or involved in the world of publishing in their land of origin. This development produced an Egyptian–Lebanese con<sup>fl</sup>uence of intellectual enterprise, which largely enhanced overall production. Egypt became the capital of Arabic publishing and would remain so until long after the end of the period explored here. ## Change Top-Down: Mehmet ᶜAlı¯’s Print Shops Mehmet (Muhammad) $^ \mathrm { c A l } _ { 3 }$ a typical Ottoman potentate, governed the province of Egypt for nearly half a century (r. 1805–1848). His farsighted reforms changed Egypt’s realities in more ways than one and sowed the seeds for more changes to come. Introducing printing to the country was one such move, initially designed to upgrade the performance of his state apparatus and army and to sustain his ambitious schooling endeavor. Printing facilitated the mass production of school texts, aided the translation of hundreds of books for the use of state cadres, and expedited communication among the different administrative units. Inspiring private publishing ventures was apparently an unintended outcome of the Pasha’s printing project, which, along with the new schooling scheme, also laid the foundations for the future emergence of a reading public. Whether or not Mehmet ᶜAlı’s enterprise should be regarded as the starting point of the region’s Arabic printing industry is an open question: On one hand, it may be argued, his projects had no direct sequel and hence cannot be considered a true beginning; on the other, however, they did provide some indispensable footings for subsequent changes. Although this study is concerned with the emergence of printing as a social and cultural development rather than with state schemes, an outline account of the story must begin with Mehmet ᶜAlı’s initiative. The story of his press has been repeatedly told in detail,<sup>4</sup> and we can make do with brie<sup>fl</sup>y laying out its main contours. Curious about foreign printed works, Mehmet ᶜAlı ordered the acquisition of many of them (“he set up collecting [European] books with the keenness of a bibliomaniac,” one observer noted), including European newspapers which were read out to him.<sup>5</sup> He acknowledged the bene<sup>fi</sup>ts of printing elaborated in Sultan Ahmet III’s firman a century earlier; but, unlike the sultan, he also moved to do something about it. In 1815, he sent the Syrian-Christian Niqula Masabkı (or Musabikı) – a former employee at the French press in Cairo – to Milan to practice the printer’s craft and purchase printing machines. Four years later, upon Masabkı’s return with the necessary skills and gear, Mehmet ᶜAlı ordered the building of a press in Bulaq, a northern suburb of Cairo. The Bulaq press machines began rolling in late 1820 or early 1821 and the <sup>fi</sup>rst printed book came out in 1822. During the following decade, another thirteen presses were set up in government of<sup>fi</sup>ces and army headquarters in Cairo and Alexandria. By the end of Mehmet ᶜAlı’s tenure, these shops had turned out hundreds of books, mostly in Arabic and Turkish, along with innumerable public notices, administrative circulars, and diplomatic documents. They also published several periodical state bulletins, an utter novelty, including the <sup>fi</sup>rst Arabic newspaper, al-Waqa’iᶜ al-Misriyya (“Egyptian Events”), which was launched in 1828. Mehmet ᶜAlı is reported to have ascribed much importance to his presses, regarded them as a mark of progress, and boasted about them to his foreign guests.<sup>6</sup> Two prominent features of the Pasha’s printing project were its exterior source of inspiration and its having been instituted from above. The foreign origins were plainly visible: The model for emulation, the technical knowhow, the practical training, and the equipment itself all were of European origin. So were the original versions of many of the printed books, which were translated from Western languages into Arabic and Turkish. Among the scores of translated works were many that dealt, in unprecedented detail, with the history, geography, politics, and culture of non-Muslim countries, in Europe and elsewhere (symbolically, the <sup>fi</sup>rst book printed in Bulaq was Dizionario Italiano e Arabo). In that, the press was akin to many of the Pasha’s other projects, launched as they were with foreign assistance and tools. The other conspicuous feature of the venture was its being a top-down scheme, with the ruler as initiator and his state presses printing nearly everything in the country.<sup>7</sup> The government de<sup>fi</sup>ned printing objectives and marked the intended audience. The bulk of publications were produced to serve state-designated needs: school texts, military manuals, guidebooks for the various reform units, and a host of dispatches to the different executive departments. The of<sup>fi</sup>cial bulletin was the epitome of this approach: a periodic compilation of mostly administrative notices, designed to keep the of<sup>fi</sup>cialdom updated, with a modest domestic circulation of 600 copies per issue. 8 An important study on the subject is Egyptian bibliographer ᶜAyida Ibrahım Nusayr’s work on nineteenth-century book publishing in Egypt, <sup>˙</sup>which is a detailed survey of the system’s functioning and its products. Nusayr has traced a remarkable yield of 867 titles printed in Mehmet ᶜAlı’s Egypt, with an estimated total print run of 724,500 copies. This was a weighty output, manyfold bigger than the total number of books printed anywhere in the Ottoman Empire prior to the nineteenth century, including Müteferrika’s production. The great majority of these were educational textbooks and practical guides for the different state units. There were also works – about a quarter of the total – that dealt with issues of potential interest to a broader readership, including locally written tracts on religious subjects, history, literature, and language; and translations of European works, as already noted.<sup>9</sup> But state publishing under the Pasha was primarily designed for a select circle of consumers, mostly of<sup>fi</sup>cials and graduates of the new government schools. Save for a small group of educated men, the general populace, vastly illiterate, was left out of it. Public enlightenment of the kind that would concern nahda leaders later on in the century was scarcely considered in Mehmet ᶜAlı’s Egypt. Inevitably, the ruler’s priorities and the people’s minuscule level of education constrained the public impact of his enterprise. It would take decades of schooling for more substantial segments of the general public to become involved in the cultural awakening. An important development borne by the state initiative was the birth, in the early or mid-1830s, of private printing in Egypt. Private individuals began to take advantage of the option offered by the Bulaq press, to print their own selected works under contract (iltizam) with it. As Kathryn Schwartz has recently shown, this was an extension of the manuscript-age practice of hiring a copyist to produce or reproduce a text, with the state now serving as production agent.<sup>10</sup> In addition, private printing shops also appeared during this period alongside the state-run ones; Nusayr has traced seven of them, which by her count printed as many as ninety-six titles between them until mid-century.<sup>11</sup> Such undertakings, though few and subject to close government control, portended the onset of printing from below, a mode that would gain momentum later on and would become the backbone of the Arab literary awakening. Like the ruler’s initiatives, these endeavors by his subjects represented a shift in the attitude to printing. Egyptian printing, as well as most other state reforms, began to slow down in the early 1840s, for different historic reasons. Fewer books than before came out of the presses during this decade and the of<sup>fi</sup>cial newspaper dwindled to erratic appearance.<sup>12</sup> A visitor to the country at the end of that decade would quite likely get the impression that printing activity there had been relegated to history. Reduced activity marked not just the latter years of Mehmet ᶜAlı’s rule but also the tenure of his next three successors. In yet another shift, in the mid-1860s, a renewed publishing endeavor would begin again, soon to gather powerful momentum. With a hindsight that was unavailable to the visitor of the late 1840s, we may appreciate the Pasha’s vital role in laying the foundations for Egypt’s future printing industry: securing its place in the centralized state; introducing the machinery; training a cadre of printers in both the state and private plants; and – through his schooling projects – facilitating the naissance of a market of literate consumers. Mehmet ᶜAlı also created the <sup>fi</sup>rst precedent of a periodical publication and running it for years, however irregularly. Finally, an aspect of his enterprise which anticipated a prominent feature of the nahda was setting Egypt as a regional center of publishing activity. Egyptian printing became reputed in the neighboring provinces, and already in the 1830s we hear of a demand for Egyptianprinted books in Syria and Palestine, books that were supplied in hundreds of copies.<sup>13</sup> The seeds sown in this period went in Mehmet ᶜAlı’s closing years into hibernation, to <sup>fl</sup>ower a quarter-of-a-century later under the rule of his grandson. Meanwhile, a new phase in this history would start in Beirut and Mount Lebanon. ## Enterprise from Below in Beirut and Mount Lebanon With no extraordinary governor of the Egyptian Pasha’s caliber, other Ottoman–Arab provinces experienced no comparable initiative from above in their printing history. But there were other creative actors, whose efforts eventually yielded similar results: foreigners, primarily Christian missionaries, who used printing in their proselytizing endeavor; and local entrepreneurs, some of them pupils of missionaries, who viewed the new medium as a promising lever for advancing their own and their society’s interests. Already in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, a bout of literary creativeness had taken place in Aleppo under evangelist inspiration, making that city perhaps the most important locus of Arab cultural activity then. The printer ᶜAbdallah Zakhir, for one, was among the city’s prominent products.<sup>14</sup> In the history of Arab printing, however, it was not Aleppo but rather Beirut, along with other towns of Mount Lebanon – an area to which I shall henceforth refer, conveniently if somewhat anachronistically, as “Lebanon” – that would become the regional center of activity. In the second half of the nineteenth century, Lebanon emerged as a publishing and cultural hub of the entire region. Around the middle of that century, the lands of the eastern Mediterranean were becoming a theater of accelerated action by international and local interests. The changes their activities triggered in every sphere had a direct bearing on the developments that will concern us here and we will examine their impact in due course. One mark of this enhanced activity was the growing presence of Western agents, who brought with them new ideas, techniques, implements, and sociocultural norms. European evangelists were followed by consuls, traders, army and navy men, engineers, consultants, tourists, and adventurers. Here we are mainly interested in the <sup>fi</sup>rst group of these foreigners, the missionaries. How central their role was in introducing printing and publishing to the region is a matter of controversy among scholars: While many historians tend to regard them as key inspirers of modern educational and cultural change, including the entry of printing, others play down that role and underscore instead the contribution of local actors in these developments.<sup>15</sup> Obviously, the issue is one of appraisal rather than accurate calculation. For our purposes, it is not necessary to decide either way; suf<sup>fi</sup>ce it to say that the roles played by foreign and local actors were both indispensable. This will become amply clear later on. Religious propagandists – Anglicans, American Protestants, French Jesuits, Russian Orthodox, and some others – arrived in the region in order to spread their faith. An essential vehicle for that was education, by which the message was imparted to the local inhabitants via the young generation (we shall later meet a few prominent graduates of their schools). Another channel was circulating pious books and tracts, a practice employed by evangelists in Muslim countries and elsewhere from the late sixteenth century onward.<sup>16</sup> It was also used in Ottoman territories, where the government, tolerantly if not quite enthusiastically, permitted their circulation.<sup>17</sup> In the more technologically advanced nineteenth century, however, there were important new features to this endeavor. For one thing, in addition to being bearers of a sacred message, religious propagandists were also children of post-Napoleonic France and the post-Revolutionary United States. As agents of the changing West, they brought with them a host of new ideas and standards beside the pious call. For another, for the <sup>fi</sup>rst time since the début of Arabic printing in Europe, Western propagandists now brought printing equipment to the area itself and began producing their publications there, rather than importing the printed works from abroad. The <sup>fi</sup>rst to bring in such machinery were evangelists of the Anglican Church Missionary Society (CMS), who set up their post not in an Arabic-speaking province but on the Isle of Malta, in 1815. The island was selected due to its pivotal geographic position and its having been under British rule since 1800. The CMS instituted a printing press there, believing that it would serve its mission better than importing printed literature, but also that it was “desirable to encourage Printing Establishments among the People of the Mediterranean” by erecting a model in their neighborhood.<sup>18</sup> Printing gear and Arabic fonts were brought from London and the press began turning out Arabic books in 1826. Over one hundred book editions, mostly in Arabic and Turkish, were printed there until 1842, including religious works, school texts in various <sup>fi</sup>elds, and even translations of English literary works. There were also several journals.<sup>19</sup> Unlike Mehmet ᶜAlı, the Malta printers were eager to spread their works to a circle of readers as wide as possible throughout the area. They therefore produced large quantities of them: More than 150,000 copies of Arabic and Turkish books and 6,800 newspaper copies from Malta are estimated to have been distributed in the Arab regions during these years, most of them in Lebanon and Egypt and the rest in Syria, Palestine, Iraq, the Maghreb, and even the Hijaz.<sup>20</sup> These were remarkable <sup>fi</sup>gures for the time. Until the mid-1830s, the Malta press and that of Mehmet ᶜAlı were the only two sources of Arabic printed texts in the region. At that point, a third actor appeared on the stage, the Boston-based Presbyterian mission, better known as the ABCFM (American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions). ABCFM agents came to Malta at the same time as their CMS counterparts with a plan to establish an Arabic press there and with the necessary equipment, but for various reasons failed to carry out their plan. In 1834, they moved with their machines to Beirut, and in the following year began producing books in Arabic.<sup>21</sup> Dif<sup>fi</sup>culties – un<sup>fi</sup>t fonts, the absence of trained printers – slowed down their work at <sup>fi</sup>rst and limited it to short religious treatises and school books. In the mid-1840s, following a machinery upgrade and personnel changes, they embarked on a more energetic activity which made “the American Press,” as it came to be known, a celebrated institution in Beirut. Another group of missionaries to start printing there before mid-century were French Jesuits, who had been proselytizing in Lebanon for the previous two centuries. Challenged by the Protestant initiative, they set up their own lithographic press there in 1848 and began producing mostly Catholic religious tracts.<sup>22</sup> They soon became the American mission’s main rivals in the race for religious-cultural in<sup>fl</sup>uence in the country. European evangelists also established presses elsewhere in the neighborhood: in Jerusalem (Franciscans in 1846, Anglicans in 1848), Mosul (Dominicans in 1857), and other places later on.<sup>23</sup> But none of these became as proli<sup>fi</sup>c and in<sup>fl</sup>uential as the presses of Beirut, which after mid-century was emerging as the capital of Arabic printing. The missionaries found a fertile ground for their work and a pool of eager local partners in Lebanon. A non-Muslim island in a Muslim ocean, Lebanese Christians displayed the resourcefulness of a minority on the defensive and openness to the call coming from beyond their immediate surroundings. Some Christian groups had had ties with their European coreligionists for centuries: the Maronites and Greek-Catholics (Melkites) with Rome and France, the Greek-Orthodox with Russia, ties that would become tighter in the nineteenth century. Rivalries among communities and splinter groups often marred the country’s public atmosphere, but also had a positive result: They prompted them to uplift their education level. Another ingredient in the Lebanese readiness for cultural change, beside the intuitive openness to Europe and the competition among Christians, was a legacy of literary creativity which by mid-century was already several decades old. Since the late eighteenth century, educated Christians were engaging in a diligent study of the Arabic language and in chronicle writing. Some of them were graduates of the Maronite seminary at ᶜAyn Waraqa (founded 1789), an institution that imparted broad-base education, high-level articulation, and knowledge of languages. Amir Bashır II, the ruler of Mount Lebanon for over half a century (r. 1788–1840), gathered in his Bayt al-Dın court several of these gifted writers, among them men who may be regarded as precursors of the nahda: Nasıf al-Yazijı, Butrus Karama, Niqula Turk, and Tannus al-Shidyaq.<sup>24</sup> In the early part of the century, their literary activity stirred intellectual ferment in Lebanon. It was a modest activity at that stage; but it would prepare the ground for the engagement with the Western agents and turning it into an “Arab awakening.” By mid-century, Beirut had become a place of spirited cultural activity, with an evident promise for more. A literary-scienti<sup>fi</sup>c society, al-jamᶜiyya al-suriyya li-iktisab al-ᶜulum wa’l-funun, was founded jointly by American missionaries and local Christians in 1847. For the next <sup>fi</sup>ve years, its members met regularly for lectures and discussions of issues in arts and sciences. It also had a library with several hundred volumes in several languages.<sup>25</sup> Private presses were popping up in the city, printing books of prose and poetry by local authors; and new bookshops opened for selling them along with titles imported from Egypt and Europe.<sup>26</sup> Periodical publications too became a part of the scene. When an émigré from Aleppo launched a newspaper in Istanbul in the mid-1850s – the very <sup>fi</sup>rst private Arabic paper anywhere – copies of it reached Lebanon, as did, most likely, copies of other foreign journals in several languages.<sup>27</sup> Public appetite for this kind of publications led to the birth, in January 1858, of a local Arabic newspaper in the city itself, Khalıl al-Khurı’s Hadıqat al-<sup>˙</sup> Akhbar, which would become a durable product that would last into the twentieth century. Before too long, it was followed by a host of other journals that became popular conduits of new ideas and platforms for readers’ exchanges. The ease with which one could now have their thoughts widely circulated further encouraged written productivity. Progress in education, to which the missions and the local communities were equally keen to contribute, was another essential facet of the changing cultural reality. By the mid-1870s, Beirut was a scene of lively writing, printing, publishing, and journalistic activity, with expanding marketing and diffusion mechanisms and a growing readership. At that point, the city already had some ten private presses that had issued scores of books, both locally authored and translated, in thousands of copies; some twenty newspapers and journals; and over ten bookshops selling local and imported works.<sup>28</sup> Unique in the region in these regards, Lebanon became a mecca for readers of Arabic from Fez to Baghdad and beyond the Middle East. ## Center and Periphery As literary endeavor was gaining momentum in Lebanon, Egypt was leaving its interval of cultural idleness behind and moving on to an era of energetic activity under Mehmet ᶜAlı’s grandson. Khedive Ismaᶜıl (r. 1863–1879), an avid modernizer with a penchant for means of communication, labored to upgrade them in his realm so as to develop the country and bolster his rule. He built roads, railways, and ports, introduced telegraph, initiated postal services and news agencies, revitalized the of<sup>fi</sup>cial state bulletin, and authorized the opening of private presses and – for the <sup>fi</sup>rst time – private newspapers by his subjects. He also gave a considerable boost to state schooling. In this atmosphere of government enterprise, Egypt could again make strides in printing and publishing by relying on its own educated class, graduates of the schooling system set up by Mehmet ᶜAlı. This renewed momentum coincided with another historic development which gave it a further lift: a mass in<sup>fl</sup>ux of skilled Syrians and Lebanese, who left their country in big numbers during the last third of the nineteenth century due to unfavorable political, social, and economic circumstances. Those who had previously engaged in publishing, or wished to do so, had an additional reason to leave: the rigid regime of Sultan ᶜAbdülhamid II (r. 1876–1909), with its policy of silencing and punishment which sti<sup>fl</sup>ed written expression. Syrian and Lebanese immigrants, overwhelmingly Christian, went mostly to North and South America and to France. They also came in big numbers to Egypt, which was now emerging as a land of opportunities. For Syrians and Lebanese, moving there had the advantage of changing location without leaving their cultural and linguistic element.<sup>29</sup> Educated and enterprising, the newcomers soon became the yeast in the Egyptian dough. They wrote, printed, and published Arabic books and journals and inspired a written discourse among learned readers across the region. They also played a central role in developing the channels necessary for circulating the printed products – bookshops, distribution agencies, advertising – and made up a sizeable segment of the consuming audience. Simultaneously, educated Egyptians took an increasing part in this endeavor alongside the newcomers. By the year 1900, Egyptians and Lebanese had founded over 100 printing presses in Egypt; had published no fewer than 7,700 books in over six million copies during the previous three decades; and had issued as many as 372 newspapers during the same time.<sup>30</sup> Further boosted by the onset of a culturally tolerant British occupation in 1882, the Egyptian–Lebanese convergence created a regional literary center of gravity on the banks of the Nile that will remain the heart of Arab intellectual creativity well beyond World War I. Meanwhile, in the other Arabic-speaking provinces of Syria, Palestine, Iraq, and the Arabian Peninsula, political conditions constricted activity in this <sup>fi</sup>eld and kept it at a scanty minimum. A stringent censorship by the suspicious Hamidian regime checked creativity in these parts for over three decades. In Lebanon, printed production that had begun prior to ᶜAbdülhamid’s tenure was emasculated under his rule, prompting many writers to leave, as we have seen, and imposing restraint and fright on those who chose to stay. Elsewhere, where no such activity had been under way, the distrustful government prevented its emergence almost completely. Here and there printers were permitted to operate on a modest scale, or operated without a license; here and there, again, timid and poor-quality newspapers or books and pamphlets with innocuous substance were allowed to appear and circulate. Printing and publishing in these places began in earnest only after the 1908 Young Turk Revolution had changed the rules of the game and heralded a more liberal era. Only then did a surge of animated publishing activity occur in the cities of the Fertile Crescent and the Arabian Peninsula, just a few years before World War I. In Lebanon, the publishing endeavor which had been devitalized under ᶜAbdülhamid likewise resumed its vitality then, with greater vigor. But nowhere in these new loci of publishing, nor yet in Lebanon, could the activity match, in scope or quality, the products that were coming out of Egypt, with its pool of talent and decades of experience. It is important to note, however, that the provinces where big-scale publishing began only after 1908 had been affected by the adoption of printing in the region long before that time. Playing the largely passive role of consumers, the mostly urban educated classes in these other places were exposed to the sounds coming out of Egypt and Lebanon, which gradually altered their cultural world to an appreciable measure. Arabicspeaking societies had long represented one potential market for anything written in that language. Now, upon the appearance of printed works in the region, members of these classes started reaching out to the new products. We have already noted the demand for Egyptian-printed books in Syria and Palestine as early as the 1830s. Residents of other provinces purchased and read Egyptian and Lebanese books and journals, built up collections, and often responded to what they had read by sending letters to journal editors, circumventing the suspicious Ottoman censors when necessary and possible. Egyptian and Lebanese publishers, for their part, worked to distribute their products in the region’s faraway places, appointed circulation agents in remote locations, and delivered books and journals to shops there. A network of lively written exchanges emerged, with a dual spring of production and a set of arteries extending from there to the region’s remotest corners. The advent of publishing, then, involved more changes than just the birth of a printing industry. At the opposite end of the production machinery, the consumer public was undergoing a shift in size and makeup, turning from a minuscule elite faction into an ever-bigger and more varied crowd. With their surroundings changing in front of their eyes, speakers of Arabic, turning into readers of Arabic, came to adopt the habit of resorting to written knowledge for contending with the new dilemmas. Past misgivings about printing were gradually abandoned not only by the rulers and members of the religious elite but also by the public at large. This was one of the nahda’s most signi<sup>fi</sup>cant achievements, arguably the single most important one. It was a chicken-and-egg process: The availability and growing utility of printed texts encouraged the acquisition of reading skills; and the expansion of the reading market, in turn, promoted more production. As the nineteenth century drew to a close, the number of Arab readers everywhere was on the ascent, more so in urban areas than in the countryside, more so near the centers of production than away from them. An important aspect of the changes was the development of modern diffusion arrangements that allowed the <sup>fl</sup>ow of the massive printed output from publishers to their clients. They comprised various mediatory mechanisms, from book and newspaper selling facilities, through mail delivery arrangements, to public-reading services and modern advertising ventures. Such tools, old, upgraded, or entirely new, represented vital threads of the cultural change fabric. By the end of the Ottoman era, the segment of Arabic-speaking society exposed to books was several-fold bigger than half a century earlier, and growing. Exposure to journals and newspapers was even wider, at times becoming something of a popular addiction. As ever in such historic processes, the ubiquity of printed works and the public interest in them grew faster than people’s acquisition of independent reading skills, an inevitable gap that was typical of the transition phase. To bridge across it, the society fell back on the familiar practice of vocal group reading, which markedly increased popular access to the texts most in demand, primarily newspapers. Printing also in<sup>fl</sup>uenced people’s daily life in various other ways. A host of printed items of everyday use from money bills to train tickets came to alter the routine of a society that hitherto had touched written items far more sparingly. These colorful aspects of the printinginspired transformation will be probed in the chapters that follow.