In the previous two chapters, I examined Arab printers and publishers and their products. Later chapters will look into the consuming public of these works, the readership, which likewise grew dramatically within the same historic period. The proliferation of written works and the growth of their consumer market were two sides of a coin, that of enhanced Arab literary activity during the <sup>fi</sup>nal Ottoman half-century. As with all coins, in between the two visible sides laid an interlocking layer that joined them together – a vital layer that permitted the <sup>fl</sup>ow of products from printers to readers. Its constituents were many: middlemen of all stripes, technological mechanisms, working procedures, and several functional institutions. This intermediary tier has been the focus of inquiry by students of book history in Europe and the West in recent years. But it has been largely overlooked in the Middle East, where it has received still less attention than either the publishers or the readers. An indispensable link with a signi<sup>fi</sup>cant imprint on the quality and rhythm of change, it warrants a closer consideration. In the present chapter and in the next, I will look at some of its main constituents. A mediating layer of this kind has been part of every system in which written texts were meant to reach an audience. It had existed, on a small scale, during the manuscript era as well, comprising a range of book traders and sellers. But printing, with its massive scope and hurried tempo, vastly increased the need for it as well as its complexity. As Robert Darnton has shown in one of his most quoted studies in bookhistory,<sup>1</sup> the route from the author’s desk to his readers was long and lined up with many stations. Darnton’s famous “communication circuit,” largely based on his research of eighteenth-century France, has proven most valuable as an organizing model for the study of diffusion in other times and places. Beyond the writer’s door, Darnton has reminded us, were printers, proofreaders, binders, shippers, warehouse keepers, wholesale book dealers and small bookshop owners, distribution agents, post-of<sup>fi</sup>ce personnel, mailmen and local deliverymen, street newspaper vendors, and more. A set of support mechanisms, such as advertisement; promotion techniques, such as subscription and readers’ clubs; and institutions that permitted access to books, such as libraries and reading rooms, were all just as essential to the dissemination process. These middlemen and the various services they ran determined whether distribution was slow or dynamic; whether publications reached the periphery and countryside or remained con<sup>fi</sup>ned to the major urban centers; whether access to them in a given neighborhood was smooth or problematic; whether authors and publishers got their due pay on time, or at all; and, in the case of periodicals, whether their <sup>fl</sup>ow was orderly or interrupted. In the Middle East as elsewhere, modest mediating agencies linking writer and reader had existed before printing and had been adequately effective for serving the limited circles of customers that needed access to written texts. Here as elsewhere, these limited old services would become ineffectual when faced with the heightened <sup>fl</sup>ow of writings once printing had begun. To remain useful, the infrastructure linking publishers and customers had to expand as dynamically as both production and readership. In adjusting these services to the changing needs, new kinds of occupations related to book diffusion came into being, traditional ones were modi<sup>fi</sup>ed, and new methods and practices were devised. Arabicspeaking societies and their pool of reading elites were spread across vast territories from Morocco to the Persian border and beyond – unlike Europe, with its many realms of distinct languages – and this meant a consumer market that required stretched-out circulation services if they were to reach remote corners. In the developments discussed below, the entire Arabic-speaking area is considered as one distribution zone, one body with two beating hearts, one in Egypt and the other in Lebanon, from which arteries were extended to the various parts of the region. Functional transport and communication systems were critical to delivery. They had long determined the pace and span of the <sup>fl</sup>ow of information in the region, the traf<sup>fi</sup>c of of<sup>fi</sup>cial letters, notices, and books and the written exchanges of views and polemics. The advent of printing coincided with rapid developments in these areas, and in other infrastructure systems, borne by the grand changes of the nineteenth century. “Of all economic activities in the Middle East,” noted Charles Issawi, an astute observer of the region, “transport was the one most deeply revolutionized in the course of the 19th century”; Issawi also extended the assessment to communication means such as telegraph and telephone.<sup>2</sup> These shifts would facilitate more effective diffusion of publications from the early days of Arab printing. It would be worthwhile to look brie<sup>fl</sup>y at their general contours before examining speci<sup>fi</sup>c developments in distribution. Hardly a unique Middle Eastern occurrence, rapid changes in mobility was a global historic phenomenon in the nineteenth century. Technological advancement made movement by land and water ever faster in many parts of the world, <sup>fi</sup>rst in Europe and North America and then elsewhere, and telegraph facilitated prompt communication across vast distances everywhere. Rendered easier and faster, human movement for many purposes increased in scale, amounting to what some scholars have described as a “culture of mobility.” So did the scope of trade.<sup>3</sup> Ottoman territories were naturally affected by these developments. As early as the 1830s, British, French, and Austrian steam-powered ships were navigating the eastern Mediterranean, carrying men, goods, and mail from European to Ottoman harbors and among the region’s seaports.<sup>4</sup> These services increased in volume and frequency after mid-century. The tonnage of ships calling at the Alexandria port, for example, witnessed a twenty-<sup>fi</sup>ve-fold increase between 1830 and 1913; in Beirut it grew forty-two-fold during the same period.<sup>5</sup> Local seaport facilities were upgraded, and communities of foreign settlers formed around terminal towns of these routes. River navigation, primarily in the Nile, Euphrates, and Tigris, was being modernized during the second third of the century and likewise allowed faster and more reliable travel. These last goals were attained on a still grander scale by the digging of the Suez Canal, inaugurated in 1869. Concurrently, land transport was enhanced. Rail traf<sup>fi</sup>c, begun in Egypt in the 1850s, expanded there dynamically thereafter. In Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine, it began during the last two decades of the century, and between Syria/Palestine and the Hijaz after its end. Railways connected not only main cities – e.g., Alexandria–Cairo–Suez (1850s), Jaffa–Jerusalem (1892), Beirut–Damascus (1895), and Damascus-Maᶜan–Medina (1908) – but also suburbs, smaller towns, and countryside locations, often via narrow-gauge rails. Just as important, railways linked the region to Europe, with lines that, from the 1880s onward, connected Paris, Vienna, Munich, and other cities with the imperial center in Istanbul. Railroads were coupled with land roads, which facilitated the replacement of sluggish animal-back traf<sup>fi</sup>c with faster cart and carriage movement. The early initiatives appeared, again, in Mehmet ᶜAlı’s Egypt, most famously with the Cairo–Suez road (1830s), and continued under his heirs. In Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine, they began during the second half of the century, e.g., the Beirut–Damascus road (early 1860s) and Jaffa– Jerusalem road (late 1860s). By the close of the century, the region’s sea and river traf<sup>fi</sup>c was dominated by steam navigation. Carriages and even some motorized cars were now traversing about 20,000 km of paved roads that crisscrossed the Ottoman territories, and trains connected towns along some 5,000 km of rails. Numerous small spots hitherto inaccessible came to be integrated into the burgeoning networks, and everything moved faster. The slow passage by sailboats and beasts was gradually relegated to the region’s fringes and peripheral spots. In the busy centers, it was relegated to history.<sup>6</sup> With better transport came better communications. The boosting of sea and land traf<sup>fi</sup>c facilitated the development of postal services in the region. A limited, horseback-operated Ottoman system had existed since the 1830s, serving the empire’s key cities. After mid-century, several foreign postal systems were granted concessions to operate in its territories: French, Austrian, Russian, Italian, and German, competing with the Ottoman system and with each other in service speed and quality. An autonomous Egyptian service was also launched in the mid-1860s. Relying on the extending transportation networks, these services spread out grids with scores of stations throughout the region, in big and small, even isolated, towns – such as ᶜAsluj, Majdal, and Samah in Palestine<sup>7</sup> – which tied them to each other and to the world. Telegraph was introduced in the empire in the mid-1850s, and its entry was quickly followed by what one scholar has depicted as “an orgy of extended telegraph construction,” comprising Ottoman and imperialist initiatives.<sup>8</sup> A cable network of 6,490 km in 1863 had by 1904 swelled to 36,640 km throughout the empire. Parts of this network were spread in the Arab provinces, linking the main cities in Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, Iraq, and the Hijaz to the imperial center in Istanbul. To these should be added another 14,700 km of cables in the province of Egypt (which was connected to Europe via Malta by submarine cables).<sup>9</sup> The entry of telegraph into the empire and its provinces was a development of major implications. Its main effect was enhancing state governability and control by rendering the center’s links with the periphery speedier and more direct than before. Telegraph also served essential strategic and economic interests of the European powers. For us, however, its important contribution was in enhancing public communications: Telegraph would allow reception of up-to-date news and their distribution in print, either through direct access to a terminal or by using the services of news agencies, which began to enter the region in the 1860s.<sup>10</sup> Telegraph was followed sometime later by telephone, which <sup>fi</sup>rst appeared in the region in the early 1880s and became common in of<sup>fi</sup>cial and business use after the turn of the century.<sup>11</sup> The entry of steam navigation, railways, paved roads, telegraph, and telephone within a few short decades stimulated profound changes in all spheres of life. In the <sup>fi</sup>eld of printed communication, their impact was nothing short of revolutionary.<sup>12</sup> We may now return to the diffusion of printed texts and its agents. As we have seen in Chapter 2, before the advent of printing, people used to get their books from local booksellers or stationers or access them in public libraries. When books became mass products, the need for their enhanced diffusion was met by upgrading the old conduits and by devising new techniques. The rest of the present chapter will deal with mechanisms of the former, older kind. Newer methods will be examined in Chapter 5. ## Booksellers and Bookshops The selling of Arabic books has a history as long as that of authoring them. This history is yet to be systematically explored, a knotty task especially with regard to the preprinting era, given the paucity of evidence. But if fractional, available sources do reveal the general outlines of the old routine of book selling and buying. The key <sup>fi</sup>gure in the book trade was the warraq (or kutubı), the retailer who would carry a stock of texts in his vending spot and handle speci<sup>fi</sup>c orders by obtaining the requested items from afar or producing a copy. Special book markets, typically clusters of book-dealer booths, operated in big cities such as Cairo, Baghdad, Basra, Aleppo, and Damascus at least since the eleventh century and in Istanbul at least since the mid-sixteenth. The sources tell us of manuscript dealers traveling across the Islamic countries with their treasures; of special “book criers” announcing the sale of manuscripts in city streets and markets; and of precious, high-quality books being sold to the wealthy by auction (nida’). Booksellers are reported to have been sometimes organized in guilds, headed by a shaykh, together with book copiers and binders. Handwritten, hand-illustrated, and hand-bound works varied in value and price according to their authors’ prestige, their commonness or 13 rareness, and their physical and esthetic quality. Like other businesses, the Arab book trade before printing had its ebbs and <sup>fl</sup>ows. The available evidence suggests that, by the time printing arrived in the Arab Middle East, books were a commodity in small demand on the whole, notwithstanding a certain rise in public interest in some places during the previous century or two.<sup>14</sup> Writing from Cairo in the 1830s, Edward W. Lane reported the presence of eight book dealers in that city, not a small number for a town of some 240,000 inhabitants at the time; but, he noted, “their shops are but ill-stocked.” Lane’s description of their trade leaves an impression of a humble business with a small, perhaps selective, clientele: “Whenever a valuable book comes into the possession of one of these persons, he goes around with it to his regular customers,” looking for a buyer.<sup>15</sup> Around the same time in Syria, John Bowring was struck by the fact that he “could not <sup>fi</sup>nd a bookseller in Damascus or Aleppo” and was told that “no scribe could now get his living in copying MSS for sale.”<sup>16</sup> Similarly, a survey of Jerusalem shops in the late 1860s, before the mass arrival of printed products, found only two booksellers among 1,932 registered businesses, a Jew and an Armenian.<sup>17</sup> The situation in other cities in the region was apparently similar. Arabic newspapers, <sup>fi</sup>rst appearing in the late 1850s, are a major source for us on book diffusion, mostly through adverts for printed books and for their vendors, which they carried from the very start. The early papers mentioned several booksellers in the region: <sup>fi</sup>ve or six in Beirut, one in Damascus, one in Aleppo, and one in Alexandria.<sup>18</sup> There could have been a few others here and there which did not advertise themselves, including the eight Cairo shops mentioned in Lane’s account.<sup>19</sup> For most of these, we know nothing but their names; quite likely they were old-style warraqın, who could now carry printed books as well. There were also a couple of businesses in Beirut, whose published notices at that point seemed to portend an upcoming change. A bookshop owned by one Fathallah Tajir, advertising itself in 1859, noted that it had been in operation there “for a long time.” The shop offered locally printed books as well as items in Arabic and Turkish imported from Cairo and even from Paris. No fewer than forty-four books were listed in one of its announcements, many of them rather expensive (100 ghirsh apiece, or more), creating an impression of a somewhat exclusive business – a little like the Cairo manuscript dealers in Lane’s account, several decades earlier.<sup>20</sup> Another dealership in that town, whose owner was khawaja Ilyas (or Lyas) Fawaz, publicized itself regularly in the early Lebanese press with lists of books for sale, all of them of local printing and more modest prices. Neither of the two shops provided its address or location, suggesting that they were both well known to the city’s potential buyers.<sup>21</sup> Sometime later, in 1867, a Beirut bookshop owned by a Frenchman announced the sale of both local and imported books and journals.<sup>22</sup> These, and a handful of similar shops in the region’s urban areas, were in place to handle the limited output of locally printed books and some foreign imports that <sup>fi</sup>rst arrived in small quantities. It was a modest volume, quite unlike that which was soon to gush into the region. When Arabic books and journals began to <sup>fl</sup>ow out of the presses in bigger quantities, the few existing dealerships could at <sup>fi</sup>rst handle the <sup>fl</sup>ow. Announcements on the sale of books through a range of other outlets, however, were fast multiplying and suggesting that the old bookshops were too few for meeting the challenge. A common practice in these early years – we hear about it mostly in the Beirut press, the source of much of our evidence for that period – was a sale of books by merchants who normally traded in other kinds of goods. They now added books to the products they vended, apparently as a provisional practice. Such, for instance, seems to have been the case with one ᶜAbd al-Qadir effendi al-Anja, who happened to have “a quantity (kamiyya) of [copies of] kitab tabaqat shuᶜara’ al-ᶜarab by Iskandar Agha Abkaryus”; he put them “on sale for 25 ghirsh [apiece] in the shop (dukkan) of al-sayyid Muhyyi al-Dın al-Kubba in the butter (sammana) market” in Beirut.<sup>23</sup> The butter market dukkan of al-sayyid al-Kubba was, quite likely, not a bookshop, but it was a facility that could be used to that end for lack of a more suitable place. Al-Anja, who had obtained a stock of copies of the book – how, he did not say<sup>24</sup> – offered them for sale in the place he found most expedient. In like manner, notices in the Beirut press of the early years advised potential buyers to get their books in a dukkan, mahall, or makhzin of this or <sup>˙</sup>that seller, all generic terms for “shop” or “depot” of any kind.<sup>25</sup> The institution of maktaba, or bookshop – as distinct from all other shops – was then still in the future, as was the term denoting it. Such other stores were often located in bazaars or business centers. Like alsayyid Kubba’s depot in the butter market, places where books were sold were “in the perfumers’ market (suq al-ᶜattarın)”; “in [an unspeci<sup>fi</sup>ed] shop (dukkan) near the khan of al-khawajat Bustrus”; or in another one, “near the palace (saraya) gate,” a common business locale.<sup>26</sup> Sellers mentioned in book adverts were often identi<sup>fi</sup>ed by titles that could be their names or, just as well, indicate their trade. Books were sold by al-saᶜatı (literally watchmaker), al-dukhanı, al-tunbakujı (both tobacconist), al-hakkak (lapidary), al-tarabıshı (tarbush maker), al-hallaq (barber), al-tajir (merchant), and the like (sometimes the title appeared in addition to a threebarrel name, e.g., “Muhammad effendi Khalıfa al-tarabıshı,” which makes the last part more likely the men’s vocation).<sup>27</sup> At other times, potential buyers were advised to get books “ᶜinda so and so,” that is, “in [the place of] . . .,” without further elaboration, presumably because these men and their location were public knowledge. Let us look more closely at one example. Ibrahım Bek al-Najjar, the qa’imaqam and chief physician of the Ottoman imperial troops in Beirut around mid-century, was also the author of several works. Having written a book on the history of the Ottoman state, entitled Misbah al-sarı wa-nuzhat al-qarı, he had it printed in 1855 and wished to market it. In 1858, when the just-born paper Hadıqat al-Akhbar offered a new channel for mass publicizing among readers of Arabic, al-Najjar approached the paper to promote his book. The paper announced the availability of the work through its own Beirut of<sup>fi</sup>ce, as well as “ᶜinda ᶜAlwan effendi al-Ghurr in the perfumers’ market, ᶜinda al-khawajat ᶜArab and Malha near the palace gate, and ᶜinda al-khawaja Ilyas Fawaz” in Beirut. Only the last one is known to have been a book dealer. Buyers were also advised, just as laconically, to get it “ᶜinda al-khawaja Dımitrı Hamawı in Damascus” and “ᶜinda al-khawaja Shukrallah Nasrallah <sup>˙ ˙</sup>Khurı in Aleppo.”<sup>28</sup> Their locations in these cities were not indicated, presumably because their businesses (of unspeci<sup>fi</sup>ed nature) were known to the public or to potential book buyers. Five years later, the same book was still on sale, now “in the dukkan of the khawaja Habıb al-Jalakh and Iskandar Khurshıd al-Saᶜatı” in Beirut.<sup>29</sup> Circulating books through nonbook businesses was a useful practice, given the scarcity of bookshops. We may imagine vendors of various other goods, aware of the new merchandise and perhaps of a nascent public demand for it, adding books to the choice of items they would try to sell. The practice continued for some time while new shops that traded mainly in books and journals were coming into being, which gradually sidelined and then eliminated the former provisional solutions. In smaller places, where demand for printed works remained low, such mixed businesses persisted longer; thus in Tanta (Egypt) in 1900, books were offered for <sup>˙ ˙</sup>sale “in the al-Ittihad pharmacy (ijzakhana).”<sup>30</sup> There were also shops whose main business was with books, journals, and newspapers, and sometimes related items such as stationery and school needs, but which also carried other goods in order to supplement their income. In a way, this was a step forward in the evolvement of modern Arab bookshops. Now it was books and journals, not foods or perfumes, with which the shop mainly dealt, and other items were supplementary. Amın Hindiyya’s shop in Cairo is a good example of this. It would eventually grow into a thriving business, a bookshop-cum-publishing house which would put out several books, including at least one of Hindiyya’s own writing (see Chapter 2). But back in the late 1880s, when Hindiyya opened it in the Muskı quarter, making a living from retailing books and newspapers was dif<sup>fi</sup>cult, given the limited public demand. To make ends meet, the young Hindiyya also offered a range of other items: In addition to “Arabic, Turkish, Persian, French and English books, scienti<sup>fi</sup>c, literary, legal, historical, entertaining, and more,” from Istanbul, Syria, and Egypt, his shop also carried “writing tools, such as paper, ink, pencils, and school needs,” as well as, more interestingly, “tarbushes, <sup>fi</sup>tting silk buttons, light slacks (dublın), and double-sided bath robes (tuqumat <sup>˙</sup>hammam).”<sup>31</sup> Tarbushes and bath robes in a bookshop – this was the typical mark of the trade then. Other businesses in those infancy days of book diffusion sold just about everything: cloths, foods, home utensils, and more. The Cairo “Egyptian Bookshop” carried oil paintings in addition to books, journals, and stationery; Mikha’ıl Rahma, a bookseller in Beirut, also sold “exquisite pictures and other ornaments”; a bookshop in the tanners’ market in Hamah (Syria) offered “superb tea” for sale; and so did khawaja Ibrahım Ghandur’s shop (mahall) in Jaffa, where buyers could <sup>fi</sup>nd local newspapers along with “the best brands of English tea.”<sup>32</sup> The phenomenon was a familiar feature of the nascent printedbook business, in the Middle East and elsewhere. Edmund Crull, an early eighteenth-century bookseller in England, also sold “pills and powders for physical purposes as well as food and medicine for mental”; and in mid-nineteenth-century Ontario, books were vended in a “generalpurpose store” which also carried shoes, spades, sugar, and pork.<sup>33</sup> Written goods alone would be an inadequate source for sustaining a business then. As shops engaging mostly in book and journal selling began to emerge in the region, a term was devised to denote this business in its new dress: maktaba (pl. maktabat or makatib). The word was coined around midcentury, its literal sense being “a place of writings.” It was <sup>fi</sup>rst applied to libraries and book collections, and then was extended to shops selling books, journals, and other items related to reading and writing.<sup>34</sup> Singling out written products from other goods sold in “shops,” it lent bookselling the speci<sup>fi</sup>city it deserved under the changing circumstances. In the 1870s, maktaba began to be used with reference to bookshops along with the older, more generic terms; by the mid-1880s, it had effectively replaced all the others.<sup>35</sup> As well as designating a bookshop, maktaba came to be applied to a set of other institutions and practices, some of them innovations in the region. A library or book collection, a stationer’s business, a booklending shop, a publishing house, a newspaper-vending place, all came to be identi<sup>fi</sup>ed as maktaba, with the inevitable uncertainty that such laxity entailed. While contributing to speci<sup>fi</sup>city, then, the new term also generated ambiguity, which would delude later-time observers of these institutions. The terminological <sup>fl</sup>uidity re<sup>fl</sup>ected the looseness that marked some of the new practices related to the making and diffusion of Arab books and journals. As we shall see, businesses calling themselves maktaba often combined two or more functions, engaging in publishing (sometimes even possessing their own presses)<sup>36</sup> or running booklending operations, in addition to retailing books and journals. Often they would carry writing tools, of<sup>fi</sup>ce implements, school needs, postage stamps, and the like, goods whose potential customers would usually be book and journal buyers, that is, educated people or those in the process of getting education. Stationery was a natural match for books and newspapers, in the Middle East as in other places. A maktaba could be a tiny newspaper-vending kiosk or a big store with a selection of printed items and an ambitious distribution project. The smaller ones apparently resembled modest warraq shops of the old style, keeping to the previous plain setting while dealing with goods of a new kind. The most common maktabas everywhere were of this kind, usually one-man ventures whose owners tried to make ends meet by relying on the expanding printing industry and growing public interest. Bigger places sometimes grew into grand enterprises that had their own order-catalogs, networks of agents, promotion apparatuses, and regional, even international, ties. New bookshops were set up in different parts of towns throughout the region. They appeared in market alleys (suqs) of old city quarters, around central mosques, in the city-gate vicinity, near the big commercial khans, and, toward the end of the century, in the newer sections of fastexpanding towns, outside the walls. Here they were sometimes grouped in one area, reminiscent of the historic manuscript sellers of the old urban markets (and of similar clusters in European cities). Such, for example, were Cairo’s Clot Bey street (north of Ezbekiyya gardens), where we hear of at least six bookshops in the 1880s and 1890s, and Fajjala (Faggala) street (north of Ramsıs square), which became a hub of book publishing and selling around the turn of the century. Such was also Beirut’s suq alhamıdiyya, around the same time.<sup>37</sup> Let us visit one small shop of this kind, whose opening seems to have made a difference in the cultural setting of its vicinity. The bookshop ᶜAbdallah al-Rifaᶜı launched in 1902 in Tripoli, Lebanon, was apparently the <sup>fi</sup>rst of its kind in that city.<sup>38</sup> Tripoli, a seaport town 85 km north of Beirut, had a mostly Muslim population of ca. 25,000 at the time. With no good road or railroad connecting it to Beirut(there was a trade route leading east, to the country’s interior), it was a peripheral place on the margins of Arab cultural developments. Still, the town was not cut off from the changes that affected the region’s other parts. Missionaries, both Catholic and Protestant, who arrived there around the middle of the nineteenth century established several schools that exposed their pupils to new concepts. Printing was introduced in 1893 by Muhammad Kamil al-Buhayrı, whose matbaᶜat al-balagha remained Tripoli’s main (though <sup>˙ ˙</sup>not only) press until the end of the Ottoman era.<sup>39</sup> Buhayrı also started a weekly newspaper that year, Tarabulus al-Sham, which became the press’s principal project and Tripoli’s only periodical for the next <sup>fi</sup>fteen years.<sup>40</sup> The town had its educated class, whose members became attentive to the sounds of the nahda resonating from the south. During the last quarter of the century, some of them attempted to form and run literaryscienti<sup>fi</sup>c societies, with partial success. Quite a few of the city’s learned subscribed to Arabic journals published elsewhere, whose agents operated in the town from as early as 1859. Many Tripoli names appeared among those who sent letters to the editors of such journals and exchanged views with readers in other places (over forty names of Tripoli residents appeared in the “readers’ questions” sections of the two leading periodicals, al-Muqtataf and al-Hilal, from 1883 to 1907). Scores of others subscribed to Butrus al-Bustanı’s encyclopedia, Da’irat <sup>˙</sup>al-maᶜarif.<sup>41</sup> Members of the Tripoli educated class could access Arabic books and journals in different ways, but buying them in a local shop was not one of them, prior to ᶜAbdallah al-Rifaᶜı’s initiative. Rifaᶜı, of whose background we know little, must have assessed that there would be a favorable market in his city for printed goods, which were <sup>fl</sup>owing in at an increasing pace from Beirut and other places. He began selling books from his home or from another shop he might have had sometime before opening his book business. In book adverts appearing in Beirut prior to the opening of his shop, potential buyers were advised to obtain them, among other places, “from Shaykh ᶜAbdallah effendi Rifaᶜı in Tripoli.”<sup>42</sup> In April 1902, Rifaᶜı published the following announcement in the Beirut newspaper Thamarat al-Funun: By God’s grace, I have managed to open a bookshop, which I have named al maktaba al rifa¯ᶜ¯yyaı . It is located in one of the stores (makha¯zin) on the govern ment’s palace avenue. I have brought to it loads of Arabic, Turkish and French books, printed in Istanbul, Egypt, Beirut, India, and other countries. They include every brand and kind of scienti<sup>fi</sup>c Arabic books of interest to scholars, as well as elementary texts for schoolchildren, Arabic, Turkish and French dic tionaries, copybooks, and all other school needs. If a certain book is missing in the shop, as might sometimes happen, I undertake to bring it in as quickly as possible. I also accept books and suchlike [items] to be sold on consignment, according to the usual custom or in a manner to be agreed upon between the agent and the seller. Come and enjoy our ef<sup>fi</sup>cient and honest service and our low prices.<sup>43</sup> Rifaᶜı was realistic. There were book and journal readers in his town, pupils who needed school texts and writing gear, and businesses with of<sup>fi</sup>ce needs. There was thus room for a bookshop combined with stationery depot that would address these needs and provide its owner with a livelihood. Books, periodicals, and writing tools could be imported from other cities in the region and beyond it mostly by sea, a fairly quick, oneor two-day trip from Beirut or Istanbul at the time. Rifaᶜı knew that to survive, his business must sell as varied a line of products as possible, both to individuals and wholesale, and offer additional related services, such as retailing books and “suchlike” items (al-kutub wama mathalaha) on consignment. More ambitiously, he endeavored to be his own publisher, issuing books and selling them. Several years later – the exact date is unclear – the shop published a work by Hikmat Sharıf, a contemporary Tripoli historian, “printed at the expense” of Rifaᶜı. An advert added at the end of the twenty-four-page booklet listed <sup>fi</sup>ve more works previously published by the shop (three of them apparently rather skinny, if their modest price of three qurush apiece is any indication). The shop’s promotional notice elaborated the various goods it carried in great detail. For example, the books on sale comprised “every kind of scienti<sup>fi</sup>c, literary, and history books in different languages, books on religion, exegesis, grammar and language, stories, plays, anecdotes and tales of the most recent printing, dictionaries in Turkish, Arabic, Persian, French, English. . .” and so on and so forth. Similarly, the shop offered a rich selection of writing tools, of<sup>fi</sup>ce needs, drawing equipment, and designing implements. The note encouraged clients to buy large quantities of books, offering a discount for mass acquisition.<sup>44</sup> Al-maktaba al-rifaᶜıyya operated at least until the outbreak of World War I; it may or may not have persisted thereafter. Adverts in Beirut newspapers regularly referred book buyers to Rifaᶜı’s shop at least until mid-1914, that is, twelve years after its opening.<sup>45</sup> Such longevity would in itself be a mark of relative success, though we do not know if Rifaᶜı’s business really prospered or just barely survived. With no direct evidence on the shop’s routine functioning, we may imagine it as a small-size outlet for books and journals brought in by sea from Beirut, Istanbul, and perhaps other places, which also sold the locally published newspaper, Tarabulus al-Sham, and whatever books printed by the town’s humble presses. The impression one gets from the shop’s periodic notices and the press references to it is of a small-scale venture, whose owner had to show much creativity if he were to sustain it during the childhood days of the printed book market in a peripheral town like Tripoli. In that, Rifaᶜı seems to have typi<sup>fi</sup>ed many of his colleagues who started similar businesses then. Sensing a rising public demand but also aware of its limitations, the more successful entrepreneurs displayed much resourcefulness. They would bring in books and periodicals from other parts of the region and from Europe, equip their shops with writing paraphernalia and various other goods, promote their business in the press and on book covers, issue sales catalogs or book lists to attract the public, and offer discounts for massive purchases. They would also serve as agents for journals and newspapers, local and other, and devise other services that would bring books closer to the public, such as in-house reading corners and booklending arrangements.<sup>46</sup> None of the works which al-maktaba al-rifaᶜıyya announced as published or about to be published could be traced in available catalogs of research libraries. There is no telling if they were ever issued; conceivably, at least some of them were not.<sup>47</sup> If so, this would be one sign of the gulf between Rifaᶜı’s aspirations and his ability to carry them out. Dif<sup>fi</sup>culties of many kinds characterized the trade during that early stage of modern book retailing. Facing economic and other obstacles, most of the small businesses were short-lived, usually shorter than Rifaᶜı’s. Typical of these hardships was the phenomenon of people starting a bookshop on their own or with a partner and after a while moving on to another shop or partnership. For example, Nakhla Fawaz collaborated with Lutfallah al-Zahhar in al-maktaba al-wataniyya, in Beirut, in 1881; two years later, we <sup>fi</sup>nd Fawaz in al-maktaba al-sharqiyya in the same city, in partnership with Khalıl Fawaz (his brother/son?).<sup>48</sup> Similarly, Nakhla Qalfat, a renowned writer, opened a bookshop called al-maktaba al-suriyya in Beirut, in 1880; by 1901, he had been a partner of Salım Maydanı in al-maktaba alkulliyya there.<sup>49</sup> As is often the case in most trades, alongside the many transient shops were a few bigger and more successful ones that persisted for many years and made their impact on Arab book dissemination. Such a success sometimes suggested the unusual vision and unique business acumen of one individual; but more often, it resulted from the bookshop being a part of a bigger enterprise, usually a publishing house or a journal, on whose infrastructure it could lean. Thus Khalıl Sarkıs, our acquaintance from Chapter 2, who ran a big printing and publishing project and issued an important newspaper also had a bookshop attached to his business, almaktaba al-adabiyya, where he sold the works his <sup>fi</sup>rm published and more. So did several of the other leading Arabic papers, e.g., al-Jawa’ib, al-Muqtataf, al-Mu’ayyad, al-Zahir, and al-Hilal. The shop of this last journal illustrates the success that could stem from the backing of a prosperous journal with a gifted proprietor. Jurjı Zaydan, a self-made intellectual and owner of the literary monthly al-Hilal, had started the journal in Cairo in 1892 and soon turned it into one of the most in<sup>fl</sup>uential Arabic periodicals of its time. Its of<sup>fi</sup>ce in the Fajjala quarter, Cairo’s busy printing center at the time, at <sup>fi</sup>rst served as a sales outlet for books, including some of Zaydan’s own authorship. In 1896, he moved to add a bookshop to the business, “in response to the urging of friends and subscribers and out of a desire to contribute to the spread of knowledge.” The note announcing the opening of maktabat al-hilal projected a bold foresight: The place would be stuffed with books, journals, and newspapers from Egypt, Syria, Istanbul, Europe, and America, for customers to buy or to browse free of charge. The shop would also include a bookbinding section and a lending library.<sup>50</sup> Regular references to the maktaba in later months and years suggest that it grew into a busy enterprise. Its catalog was often reported to meet with a great demand and even run out of print, something that required repeated reprinting.<sup>51</sup> Bookshops proliferated in the region during the last third of the nineteenth century and in the early twentieth, more often akin to Rifaᶜı’s business than to Zaydan’s. No fewer than 123 such shops operated in urban centers of the Arab provinces from 1870 to 1914, two-thirds of them from 1890 onward, according to one study, whose <sup>fi</sup>ndings are less than comprehensive.<sup>52</sup> The biggest concentrations were unsurprisingly in Cairo, Beirut, and Alexandria, but they also appeared in other cities, such as Damascus, Aleppo, and Baghdad, and in many smaller towns, among them Mansura, Tanta, Suez, al-Mahalla al-Kubra, Hamah, Ladhiqiyya, Jerusalem, Jaffa, Haifa, Nablus, Tripoli, Sidon, Baalbek, Karbala, and Mecca. Other places will see their <sup>fi</sup>rst modern bookshop only after World War I. Served by better sea and land transport and advanced postal services, the new network of outlets brought books and journals to audiences in the remotest ends of the region. The expansion of vending sites selling a multiple range of goods in small places away from the main urban centers indicated a major change in the access to books. The industry was now reaching out to the consumers closer to their homes, in town quarters and markets. Bookshops were predominantly an urban phenomenon, for obvious reasons. To be sure, people in the rural areas did get access to written texts, both before and after the introduction of printing – typically to works of religious guidance and epic stories, which for the most part would be read there collectively.<sup>53</sup> But village people who could read and wished to obtain books and journals had to get them elsewhere, normally from sellers in a nearby town. In some places, however, another option began to pose itself toward the end of the nineteenth century: itinerant peddlers, who made periodic tours of villages, would bring in some printed merchandise from the city and sell or lend it there. We hear of this practice in the Egyptian countryside around the turn of the century from two witnesses who depicted the routine in some detail, Taha Husayn and Sayyid Qutb. The former – later a celebrated writer and intellectual leader – grew up in an Upper Egypt village. He recorded his memories of “booksellers (baᶜat al-kutub) who used to journey through villages and towns with an assorted stock of books (asfar)” and sell them wherever there was demand.<sup>54</sup> His contemporary, Sayyid Qutb, told of another rural part of the country in some more detail. Qutb remembered visits by a peddler who would come in annually for a few days each time, “shouldering a sack full of books . . . He would set himself in the village small marketplace, sit crossed-legged on the sack after having emptied it, and spread the books for sale, some twenty or thirty of them, in front of him in rows according to their value or subject.” He would sell these books, usually for a tri<sup>fl</sup>ing price, or lend them for local reading, for a pittance.<sup>55</sup> Both Husayn and Qutb elaborated on the kinds of books these sellers brought with them, which were of a traditional nature (tales of saints, stories from the Islamic legacy, popular epics) alongside more modern items (e.g., Sherlock Holmes). How widespread the phenomenon was in Egypt and other places is a matter for further exploration. During the period under discussion, demand for books in rural areas hardly justi<sup>fi</sup>ed more than the periodic visits of such roving vendors, who would bring in goods that <sup>fi</sup>tted the modest number of customers and their limited buying power. The countryside remained for a long time on the margins of the cultural-literary shifts prompted by the entry of printing. But if marginal, at least some parts of it were well within the circle that was gradually opening to these developments. ## Libraries and Reading Rooms Members of the society’s educated class, if af<sup>fl</sup>uent, could purchase books, subscribe to journals, and build copious collections without dif<sup>fi</sup>- culty. But to read books or journals, one did not need to buy them. One could reach them where they were available without charge, in libraries. The practice had deep roots in the Middle East. The collections of the earliest libraries, from Umayyad times onward, were open to the learned who used them for reading and copying. Libraries were usually institutional, attached to mosques and madrasas, with stocks that were gradually augmenting through bequests by private individuals. They permitted entry to whoever wished to consult or copy items from their collections, and many of them had facilities to assist readers and copiers, including writing tools and papers, as well as supportive staff. Books could be used in situ or be borrowed one or more at a time, with or without a deposit, to be read or copied at home. The overall scene emerging from recurrent references in the sources and from recent studies on the subject is of a well-organized system in many places and periods; it has even been suggested that “Muslim libraries were in every respect centuries in advance of those in the west.”<sup>56</sup> We ought to bear in mind, however, that while our knowledge about the prescribed regulations of these services may support such an impression, we know much less about the scope and nature of their actual use by the public. We may also assume that the quality of library services <sup>fl</sup>uctuated in different times and places, re<sup>fl</sup>ecting changes in general circumstances among different localities. By the onset of Arab printing, the level of public library activity in the Arab provinces was apparently low. The reading habits of the young Nasıf <sup>˙</sup>al-Yazijı (1800–1871) offer one indication of that. Yazijı grew up in an educated Lebanese home (his father was a famed physician and poet) and as a child showed signs of remarkable intellectual curiosity. His compatriot Fılıb dı Tarrazı, who recorded his biography, depicted an inquisitive young man during the <sup>fi</sup>rst quarter of the nineteenth century who was ever groping for books. However, only few books were around then, and the number of printed ones was small due to the scarcity of presses in Syria and Egypt, which turned out scholarly works only rarely. He would therefore rely on borrowing books from some monasteries and old libraries. He would read some of them once, memorizing their best parts, and hand copy some of the others. Many of them are still kept with his family.<sup>57</sup> Plausibly, this is a reliable illustration of the literary reality of the time, at least in Lebanon. A few decades later, Butrus al-Bustanı would lament that reality in gloomier terms: “Due to the stinginess of [book-collection] owners and superintendents, on one hand, and the unreliability of book borrowers, on the other, [books] remain locked behind iron doors, left at the mercy of moth and consumed by dust. What is the use of so many books if no one reads them?”<sup>58</sup> If the scene of public reading facilities was indeed disheartening, it began to change after mid-century. With increased production at home and expanded imports from abroad, the shelves of public collections started <sup>fi</sup>lling faster. Old library stocks, having comprised mostly items of a traditional, largely religious nature, changed in size and makeup. Taking in mostly printed works, they were gradually becoming more relevant to readers with modern interests. The collection of al-Azhar library, for example, reportedly reached a total of 37,000 volumes by the eve of World War I; of these, some 26,000 volumes (more than twothirds) were now printed works.<sup>59</sup> Meanwhile – and this is of greater importance to our discussion – new reading institutions were coming into being: more public libraries, libraries of literary societies, public reading rooms, and book-lending shops. New public libraries, a modern version of the old, were somewhat atypical among the mediatory mechanisms that linked books and readers. Unlike with the other channels we are examining here, serving the educated public was only a secondary priority for these libraries. Their prime objective was different: preserving the depleting treasures of handwritten works and retaining the growing lots of printed ones. Providing access to the expanding readership, though a part of their purpose once they had opened, was not a suf<sup>fi</sup>cient cause for founding more of them. These priorities shaped the role they played in the process we are exploring here. The <sup>fi</sup>rst of these new institutions and the biggest in any Arabic-speaking country was the Khedivial library (al-kutubkhana al-khidıwiyya), founded by Khedive Ismaᶜıl in Cairo in 1870 (it would later become Egypt’s National Library, dar al-kutub al-misriyya). Toward the end of that decade in Damascus, the Zahiriyya library was opened at the initiative of education inspector Tahir al-Jaza’irı, who assembled scattered literary treasures from various local collections and placed them under one roof. Al-Jaza’irı also played a role in setting up another prominent public library, the Khalidiyya in Jerusalem, around the end of the century.<sup>60</sup> These three libraries opened their doors to “anyone wishing to visit, read, write [i.e. copy], or consult” a text, free of charge.<sup>61</sup> The Khalidiyya catalog stated that the library, born out of a private collection, was reorganized as “a house of general knowledge” (dar ᶜulum ᶜumumiyya) for any individual wishing to read (man yarghab al-mutalaᶜa min ayy fard kan) on site, though not to borrow. It was to be open from dawn to dusk, and a set of written regulations, posted in the reading room, indicated the kind of working routine the owners had in mind: “Readers must not engage in excessive conversation, shouting, or argument so as not to distract those who are reading or copying.” In the same vein, “smoking of cigarettes and water-pipes inside the reading room of the library [is] strictly forbidden, regardless of who is concerned.”<sup>62</sup> The owners, then, did expect the public to visit the place. Adhering to operational norms known in traditional libraries, the new institutions were reminiscent of the old in more ways than one. But there were also major differences, in both scope and contents. These facilities availed their readers with fast-expanding stocks of printed books and journals, classical as well as modern, in Arabic and foreign languages. They encompassed thousands of volumes (tens of thousands, in the case of the Khedivial library).<sup>63</sup> If still a far cry from the mythological stocks of the classical collections with their legendary hundreds of thousands of entries, the new libraries were bigger than known collections of more recent times and, moreover, carried a promise for rapid growth. As the seven-volume catalog of the Khedivial library from 1888 to 1892 reveals,<sup>64</sup> a reader frequenting the place at that time would have access – in addition to traditional-style manuscripts and copies of the books and journals produced in Egypt since the outset of printing – also to works written or printed in various languages in Istanbul, Beirut, Tunis, and Calcutta, as well as Paris, London, Leiden, and Gottingen. He would also <sup>fi</sup>nd a range of current periodicals, local and foreign, that continued to accumulate rapidly. Over a quarter of the Khedivial library collection in 1887 were items in European idioms (most, if not all of them printed), a rate which by 1908 had increased to ca. 45 percent. In the Zahiriyya in 1896, over a quarter of all books were printed, and over half of them have been identi<sup>fi</sup>ed as dealing with “nonreligious” subjects. And in the Khalidiyya, as we have already seen, more than half of the 2,100 holdings 65 were printed items, many of them new works on modern topics. The dynamic quality of these institutions was thus all too obvious. More public libraries, usually growing out of private collections, began to open in Egypt, Syria, and the Hijaz during this period.<sup>66</sup> Though smaller and less illustrious than the ones mentioned above, they re<sup>fl</sup>ected a similar desire to collect and preserve written and printed works and put them at the public’s disposal. On the whole, however, during the period explored here, such libraries played a limited role as places of public reading. Located in a few big cities, they were conveniently reachable only by those residing in their neighborhood, not in the remoter quarters or beyond. One Cairo scholar indeed complained, in 1900, that “the only library open to the people is al-maktaba al-khidıwiyya, but it is dif<sup>fi</sup>cult for the large Cairo public to reach it.”<sup>67</sup> People living in smaller towns, let alone the rural areas, were still less fortunate in that respect. “Nowadays it is imperative that public libraries exist in every town and even every village,” Muhammad Kamil al-Buhayrı, a journalist from Tripoli, suggested when visiting the Zahiriyya in Damascus, in 1902; but his own peripheral town could boast no similar institution. “Would that our town had one like it, or even close to it,” he lamented.<sup>68</sup> Even where the new public libraries were reachable, they made no special effort to attract readers, let alone newcomers to the world of reading. As already noted, serving the public was their secondary purpose, after book preservation. Especially proud of their manuscript holdings, the image they seem to have projected in the early years was one of old-style learning institutions, associated more with scholarship and erudition than with mass modern reading. The Qur’anic phrase “fıha kutub qayyima” (“sound/valuable books inside”), inscribed above the Khalidiyya doors in 1900<sup>69</sup> and above those of many other libraries both before and after that, implied this preference: The place was <sup>fi</sup>rst and foremost a repository of precious works, and it allowed members of the public to come and browse or read, as had been customary in mosque and madrasa libraries. In that sense, the new public libraries represented a kind of a passive link in the chain of intermediary mechanisms. They permitted, but did not actively encourage, readers to come and use their collections. This view of their purpose was largely shared by the readership itself, which customarily regarded libraries as places designed for scholarly pursuit rather than for public browsing and reading. Luıs Shaykhu, the editor of an important Beirut monthly who in 1900 called for erecting a public library in that city, explained that such an institution was needed “for the intellectuals (udaba’) to turn to for their explorations, for school students [to help them in] their studies, and for newspaper and journal owners [to serve them in] their inquiries.”<sup>70</sup> The last two groups, students and journalists, were new categories of potential library users now added to the more obvious intellectuals. But Shaykhu saw no need to include the wider circle of readers that was expanding through schooling. Members of this new circle were not thought of, nor did they regard themselves, as library customers. As we shall see in a later chapter, this common view was re<sup>fl</sup>ected in the small numbers of library users in the early years. It would change slowly and only partially at a later stage. A different kind of libraries that appeared around mid-century, <sup>fi</sup>rst in Lebanon and later elsewhere, were those of literary and scienti<sup>fi</sup>c societies. These were usually exclusivist forums. The society named majmaᶜaltahdhıb (Beirut, 1846), for instance, would accept as members only “those who can read and write, age sixteen and above, who do not quarrel and do not use foul language,” as its regulations stipulated.<sup>71</sup> These societies were just as particular in making their book collections and reading rooms accessible to members only. The celebrated “Syrian Society” (Beirut, 1847) had upon its initiation a library with 756 books, mostly donated by its members, including 229 printed volumes in foreign languages. The library had a superintendent (amın) whose duties included purchasing more books and journals, cataloging them, and overseeing the use of the collection for reading and borrowing by the eligible members.<sup>72</sup> More such societies were set up in Lebanon and Egypt, and later also in other parts of the Fertile Crescent, some of which had book collections and reading facilities.<sup>73</sup> They were usually similarly exclusivist and aristocratic. Thus, the “Syrian Scienti<sup>fi</sup>c Society” (Beirut, 1868) – a resurrected forum of the defunct “Syrian Society” – launched a club with a library that was opened to those paying a “subscription” fee. Its rate was 150 qurush for Beirut residents and 50 qurush for nonresidents (who enjoyed fewer privileges), a substantial sum of money affordable only by the well-off. Such society collections offered important advantages to the social layer whose members were accustomed to consuming written enlightenment. To them, the gain of easy access to ever-increasing pools of books and journals was considerable. Two additional conduits of bringing books closer to readers appeared in the region around the same time: public reading rooms and booklending shops. In a way they represented an extension of libraries and offered services which had customarily been identi<sup>fi</sup>ed with them. Reading rooms and lending shops were set up as outlets of using books and journals for a fee. The novel thing about both was their being private ventures based on a business interest, whose owners sought to pro<sup>fi</sup>t from the new kind of public demand. As many would-be customers had more curiosity than resources, paying a small sum for reading the text instead of purchasing the product itself made much sense to them and to the businesses as well. With no antecedent in the region’s experience, they were typical nahda institutions that assumed some of the roles of traditional libraries in a new dress. The available information on them is scanty; concerning their actual functioning, it is almost nonexistent. But there are enough mentions of them in the sources, mostly notices on their opening, for us to treat them as links of some signi<sup>fi</sup>cance in the diffusion chain. Reading rooms – ghurfat (pl. ghuraf) al- qira’a, or dar (pl. dur) al-qira’a – began to appear in the region in the mid-1870s. The concept was simple: allowing reading without acquisition of a changing pool of printed texts for a modest fee. Typically they were used for reading newspapers and journals more often than books. This convenient arrangement had European (and American) precedents with deep historic roots. There, alongside the reading halls of literary-cultural clubs (Lesegesellschaften, cabinets littéraire), commercial reading rooms appeared (Leihbibliotheken, chambres de lecture), where people of wider classes could read books and journals for a monthly payment and sometimes borrow them for reading at home. Institutions of both kinds existed in Europe and North America in the eighteenth century, here and there even earlier, and proliferated in the nineteenth. Commercial reading rooms played a role in drawing substantial groups in Western societies, those left out of the more re<sup>fi</sup>ned reading clubs, into the circle of regular book and journal consumers.<sup>74</sup> The Middle Eastern version duplicated the European practice with or without having been inspired by it. Here too, starting such places was motivated by a business-driven desire to pro<sup>fi</sup>t from a growing popular demand. An 1876 initiative to open such a place by the diligent printer-publisher Khalıl Sarkıs casts light on this kind of institution. In an advert in al-Jinan, Sarkıs announced his plan to launch “a new project” (mashruᶜ) in Beirut which he called al-maktab al-surı, “Syrian of<sup>fi</sup>ce.” His motivation, he explained, derived from the belief that public reading facilities “are among the greatest means to the betterment of society,” and from his sense that Beirut was in dire need for such a place. The design was ambitious. The “of<sup>fi</sup>ce” was to consist of a meeting hall for merchants and businessmen, a bookshop, a printing press, and “a well-organized hall, where Arabic and foreign books and newspapers will be available for browsing and enjoying.” The place, to be centrally located in the city, would be open to subscribing members, but nonmembers would also be permitted to use its facilities for a fee per entry.<sup>75</sup> Sarkıs’s announcement was also publicized in subsequent issues of the journal for a while, but later sources, including his own newspaper Lisan al-Hal, made no mention of the opening or operation of the scheme. There is no evidence that he actually opened such a place. More likely, the launching of a newspaper in the following year consumed his energies and his <sup>fi</sup>nancial resources and made him give up the bold idea. Such projects, more modest than Sarkıs’s visionary plan, were started around the same time in Beirut and elsewhere. A group of intellectuals, mostly teachers and graduates of the Syrian Protestant College, opened a reading room in Beirut and stuffed it with Arabic and other periodicals, as well as “the best books that elevate and enlighten the minds.” It was reported to have become a meeting place for a “group of reading lovers of all factions.”<sup>76</sup> A similar venture, designed to enlighten youth, was started in the city by American missionaries. They rented a big shop in a central location and supplied it with no fewer than 3,400 Arabic and European books and journals. Offering tea and coffee at low prices to make reading more pleasant, they were reported to have scored a considerable success.<sup>77</sup> Reading rooms were also opened in Egypt. In Alexandria, the launching of a “public of<sup>fi</sup>ce (maktab ᶜumumı) for the reading of cultural books (kutub adabiyya) of every kind, as well as Arabic, Turkish and European newspapers” was announced in 1876.<sup>78</sup> And a bookshop owner in Suez publicized his shop as, also, a place for reading (mutalaᶜa).<sup>79</sup> Unsurprisingly, the evidence on reading rooms, modest as it is, comes from the two centers of literary activity, Lebanon and Egypt, to the exclusion of other Arab provinces. The practice would later expand to more places including, reportedly, rural areas.<sup>80</sup> Small-scale book-lending businesses began to pop up in towns of the region during the last decade of the nineteenth century, usually as sections of existing bookshops. The arrangement was simple and advantageous to all: For a small periodic fee the customer could access multiple printed treasures while the shop owner would pro<sup>fi</sup>t from lending the same items time and again. This convenient deal, too, had been popular in Western Europe and North America during the eighteenth century and a part of the nineteenth, thriving mostly on lending novels and collected stories (there, along the selling-and-lending bookshops, were also private libraries that dealt only with lending). The subsequent upgrading of public library services and the proliferation of inexpensive books and journals forced most such ventures to close toward the end of the nineteenth century, when the Middle Eastern variation of it was just beginning.<sup>81</sup> We will recall that Jurjı Zaydan, who in 1896 opened his maktabat al-hilal in Cairo and furnished it with local and international books and journals, also announced his intention to introduce book-lending arrangements. He proposed to make novels (al-riwayat) and adab books borrowable for a monthly fee of <sup>fi</sup>fteen qurush (ten for al-Hilal subscribers), one volume at a time. Clients would be permitted to “take [the books] to wherever they wished” and exchange books as frequently as they desired, “even every day.” The service was also offered to those residing out of Cairo, who could receive the books by mail provided they paid for postage.<sup>82</sup> Similar arrangements appeared in other places. We hear, for instance, of al-maktaba al-kulliyya in Beirut, which in 1901 invited “whoever wishes to subscribe for reading stories, novels and the like on a monthly basis to [come and] <sup>fi</sup>nd in [our shop] new books to gratify him.”<sup>83</sup> We may also assume that other sellers with a healthy business sense offered this kind of service in their shops without advertising it in the press. Such, for example, was shaykh Salih al-Khafash, owner of a small bookshop in Nablus, Palestine, around 1900, who had “books and story-booklets to be lent for a fee,” as one of his young customers recalled, many years later.<sup>84</sup> At a time when there was no local press in the province, his business, like all others, must have been known mostly to people in the vicinity. Shops of this kind were likely more widespread than the few of which we know, basing their businesses mostly on lending novels and storybooks, as in Europe. They would become more common in the region in the twentieth century. The impression emerging from extant evidence is that, in the overall endeavor of bringing publisher and reader closer together, libraries, reading rooms, and lending shops played a relatively small role. It also seems that the number of their users was limited in these early years, and began to grow slowly only toward the end of the period (I shall examine this last point in Chapter 6). Bookshops and journal-vending places seem to have been more numerous and widespread than libraries, reading rooms, and lending shops put together. It is impossible, however, to assess the relative roles played by these different institutions in mediating between text makers and their customers, and we must make do with the notion that all of the channels considered in this chapter contributed to this mediation to some, greater or smaller, extent. Other mediating mechanisms were no less important, and we will look at them in the chapter below.