Imagine the Egyptian Shaykh Rifaᶜa Ra<sup>fi</sup>ᶜ al-Tahtawı, who died in 1873, resurrected two or three decades later in his home city of Cairo. Tahtawı, a highly perceptive observer of human behavior who had spent years in other countries, was certainly a man of the world for his time and place. Still, had he been brought back to life in Cairo in, say, 1900, he would have been mysti<sup>fi</sup>ed by myriad sights and sounds unfamiliar and unimaginable in his own time. Among other phenomena, he would have been baf<sup>fl</sup>ed by the multiplicity of bookshops, newspaper stands, and street vendors; the city streets being densely inscribed with shop signs, commercial posters, and personal notices; the ubiquity of people reading papers in cafés and elsewhere, silently and vocally; and the sight of money bills, cartes de visite, and tickets of various uses changing hands routinely. Since Tahtawı’s passing away, written items of every form had become standard means for running public systems and for interpersonal interaction. Written messages, of course, can be useful when a signi<sup>fi</sup>cant segment of the people can make them out. And when an area that had been devoid of such signs, like Tahtawı’s Cairo, becomes replete with them in a short time, we may assume a substantial shift in the reading habits of its inhabitants. The decades around Tahtawı’s passing indeed witnessed the dawn of a major change in Middle East reading, which in time would have farreaching rami<sup>fi</sup>cations. The practice may have been on the rise among certain groups in Egypt, Syria, and Lebanon already prior to the nineteenth century (see Chapter 2), but now the change was markedly enhanced. An analogous transformation in reading habits had occurred during the eighteenth and early nineteenth century in parts of Western Europe and the United States, following a series of social and cultural developments: the accelerated spread of education, the expansion of publishing, and the burgeoning of various access channels. They entailed not only a swelling of the readership but also changes in reading patterns and in the read materials themselves. A re<sup>fl</sup>ective focusing on a limited selection of texts, often of religious-spiritual or literary nature, gave way to a lighter, more cursory browsing of writings of many types, including works of ephemeral substance that were becoming more affordable. To some historians, such wide-ranging adjustments over a few decades merited the title “revolutionary.”<sup>1</sup> Whether or not this last adjective is applicable to the changes of similar nature that occurred later on in the Ottoman provinces is a valid question, whose discussion, however, is best left for the book’s conclusion. As we shall see, within several decades, the consumption of written Arabic texts saw a sharp upturn in scale and pace, substantial diversi<sup>fi</sup>cation in contents, and profound changes in reading modes. Many in the region were leaving behind the old notion of reading being the domain of speci<sup>fi</sup>c groups – a convention that may have begun to crack already before the nineteenth century and was now openly replaced by a readiness to use written texts to many ends. More parts of society were coming to acknowledge the multiple bene<sup>fi</sup>ts of exposure to writings of the new kinds. Reading would offer them a channel for getting updated on events, exchanging views with others across the community, and negotiating with the authorities. These social segments will be the focus of our discussion below. The big shift in the attitude to writing would underlie the emergence of a reading public in the Arab provinces, small at <sup>fi</sup>rst but growing with considerable momentum after World War I. ## Exploring Reading in the Middle East If the study of book publishing and diffusion is trickier in the Middle East than it is in Europe, exploring reading – an intricate task in any society – is doubly thorny in our region, with its perennial dearth of evidence. As a human activity that is haphazardly recorded, reading is a notoriously knotty subject for historical research anywhere. Until several decades ago, the practice had not been considered to be worthy of scholarly attention. Reading had been regarded as, basically, a kind of unchanging human activity, governed by the human mind and physiology in all times and societies, a <sup>fi</sup>xed variable that does not invite any special scrutiny. But once it was claimed and established that “reading has a history”<sup>2</sup> – that it may have been practiced in different ways in different times and places and plausibly with different effects – reading began to attract interest and grew into a distinct sub<sup>fi</sup>eld of cultural history. Its accent, unsurprisingly, was on Western societies, for which we have by now a considerable corpus of research. Scholars have posed intriguing questions in this sub<sup>fi</sup>eld and have devised creative methods to address them. Among other issues, they have examined the relationship between literacy, education, and reading; the size of reading publics and their sociocultural makeup; the materials read by different social sections; routines and modes of the practice; readers’ reception of and reaction to what they had read; and, in turn, the impact of their reception on the authors. In grappling with these questions, historians have borrowed methods from sociologists, anthropologists, ethnographers, psychologists, and even neurologists, which have inspired them to examine evidence of kinds hitherto little known to historians. These have partly compensated for the paucity of more conventional evidence and helped reconstruct important parts of the reading experience in certain societies. Recalling Robert Darnton’s “First Steps toward a History of Reading,” <sup>fi</sup>rst published in 1986, which was a call for diving into these unknown waters, one cannot fail to be impressed by the historiographical and methodological progress made in this <sup>fi</sup>eld since then. Questions explored in works on Western reading are also relevant to the study of reading in other societies. In the Middle East, research in this <sup>fi</sup>eld is still in its infancy, especially with regard to reading in the age of printing. We have works on private and institutional book collecting in the region – a few of them were mentioned in previous chapters – but little about their actual reading. There are also several speci<sup>fi</sup>c studies on reading in the medieval Islamic world,<sup>4</sup> a few recent works on reading in the Ottoman period and the early Turkish republic<sup>5</sup> and another few on modern Arab societies.<sup>6</sup> All of these together are only beginning to scratch the surface. The main questions relating to reading in the Middle East in modern times are still awaiting a serious examination. Only some of the many aspects of reading may be considered here, primarily those that are essential to the broad historic process probed in this book. The present chapter examines the emergence of reading publics in the Arab Middle East after the mid-nineteenth century, their size, spatial distribution, and sociocultural makeup. It also looks, more closely, at the personal experience of people who acquired the skills for independent use of written texts and set out to use them. The next chapter will look into the related phenomenon of collective vocal reading, a mode typical of the transition phase leading to mass reading, which markedly increased the circle of those exposed to texts. As we shall see, there was no dichotomy between the two manners of activity, but rather a continuum of situations. Other questions – for example, the contents of materials read by different groups (some aspects of which are examined in Chapter 3) and the ways in which each group was in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by what its members read – must be left for another search. In studies of reading in any society, the notion of literacy is usually at the hub of the discussion. This often lends ambiguity to the search, because “literacy” itself is a murky notion, a complex and multilayer concept rather than a precise one. So is its relation to reading, as well as the relation of both of them to education. Despite the extensive scholarly endeavor devoted to discussing these matters in recent years, much remains to be explained, certainly in the context of Arabic-speaking societies. Much of the vast literature on the subject deals with aspects beyond our concern here – especially when considering literacy in the broader sense of diverse competencies, way beyond reading – and there is no need for us to address it. But since literacy in its relation to reading is central to our concern, it is important that we de<sup>fi</sup>ne the intent of both as they are used here. “Literacy” implies a wide range of situations. Its loose semantic range is re<sup>fl</sup>ected in its lexical de<sup>fi</sup>nition: The OED de<sup>fi</sup>nes a “literate” person as one “acquainted with letters or literature; educated; instructed; learned.” The semantic gamut is evidently wide. “Acquaintance with letters” indicates a variety of possible conditions, from an ability to identify letters, through reading them syllable by syllable, to composing meaningful words and sentences from them in both reading and writing. “Acquaintance with literature” and being “learned” are likewise as broad as an ocean. In addition to this elasticity, “literacy” is also a relative concept. One may be considered literate in one’s own community but less so if moving to another social or intellectual environment. As recent studies have shown, the notion is also text-dependent. A person may be able to read texts of a certain type for which he or she had been trained, such as works of religious ritual, while being unable to decipher other writings– a journalistic report, for example. Or, one may be literate enough to read a press report but not quite so to approach sophisticated works of literature or scholarship, even when written in the same language. Finally, literacy could be temporary. A person who had acquired reading skills, especially in an imperfect way, and had not used them for a long time might relapse into functional illiteracy (a phenomenon familiar mainly in rural places). Literacy is thus an umbrella notion, which more often than not requires specifying adjectives to render it meaningful in a given discussion. People may be fully literate and able to read and grasp the meaning of every text, they may be fully illiterate and completely unfamiliar with any writing, or they may be at any point along the “sliding scale” (to borrow Jonathan Berkey’s term)<sup>8</sup> between these two conditions, <sup>fi</sup>xed at one point or moving along the scale. In this study, we are interested in literacy not only as an individual capacity but also in its uses in the society at large, primarily as applied in group formats. This is a crucial point in the study of societies undergoing a transition in reading. Literacy works differently when applied in a collective mode: Groups possess mechanisms that allow them to amplify the potential of literacy held by some of their members, by making the latter share the fruits of their reading skills with others, vocally. The typical formats in which this practice takes place are sessions of collective reading, where the odd learned individual around makes the contents at hand accessible to the group by reading out the text aloud. The acquired competence of one person is thereby combined with the old routine of oral transmission to the bene<sup>fi</sup>t of all.<sup>9</sup> As in the hydraulic principle in physics, the strength of one element is multiplied to invigorate the entire system. The group’s illiterate persons remain illiterate; but the community as a whole attains the desired objective of circulating the message. As a group phenomenon, then, the weight of literacy is unlike that in which it serves the individual. The value of this communal mechanism becomes especially evident in transition situations, when a largely illiterate society in a process of becoming literate is eager to get informed and employs the enhanced tool to that end. It will be examined at some length in the next chapter. These intricacies of literacy limit the utility of relying on it in any study of reading. As a “sliding scale,” the notion does not lend itself to quantitative assessments. Moreover, given the highly common routine of group reading, the rate of individual literacy loses much of its signi<sup>fi</sup>cance. Similarly, data on educational systems, especially premodern ones, are highly problematic because the competences their graduates take with them are ever varied. Another term that requires a functional de<sup>fi</sup>nition for our purposes is “readership.” In the pages below, “readership” will be used as a two-tier notion, referring to two concentric circles of readers: an inner circle, of people who were, or became, able to read independently; and an outer one, of people without such pro<sup>fi</sup>ciency, whose access to texts was mediated by members of the former category, normally in vocal group reading. People who made up the outer circle should be regarded as a part of the consumer public, the “readership,” especially of publications carrying news and their commentary. Independent readers and listening readers were thus two constituents of the readership, the former always and the latter in speci<sup>fi</sup>c circumstances. Such a <sup>fl</sup>exible, contextdependent de<sup>fi</sup>nition best <sup>fi</sup>ts the Arab readership in the early decades of printing – although, admittedly, it leaves the question of size in<sup>fi</sup>nitely vague. ## The Emergence of Arab Readership: The “Inner Circle” In the Arab-Ottoman provinces of the early nineteenth century, people who were able to read made up a small fraction of society. Such a loose assessment is probably as speci<sup>fi</sup>c as one can credibly offer at present for that era. Any attempt to be more precise would be speculative and impossible to verify, at least until more research had been conducted and more evidence had come to light. Historians who have propounded quantitative appraisals on that score have usually pointed to a single-digit literacy rate in the Ottoman Empire around the middle of the nineteenth century.<sup>10</sup> Reading and writing were traditionally practiced mostly by of<sup>fi</sup>cials, men of religion, and a small number of intellectuals and curious people, who together formed a minor section of the society. Even if we take into account the presumed rise in book consumption before the nineteenth century suggested by historians such as Hirschler and Hanna (see Chapter 2), we may still assume that, for the vast majority of all Arabs prior to the middle of that century, reading was beyond the range of their skills, interests, and usual pursuit. The entry of printing made a difference, <sup>fi</sup>rst, in the reading habits of those already accustomed to it, the learned sector. Members of this group were the core of the publishers’ targeted market, whose business success depended on their consumption. The market’s increasing intake of printed works indeed re<sup>fl</sup>ected much interest on the part of old-time readers. This was especially visible with regard to journals, whose growing popularity and the lively exchanges among their subscribers mirrored the increasing role of reading in the routine of the educated. The advent of cultural-literary societies – the Middle Eastern variant of eighteenthcentury European “reading clubs” (see Chapter 4) – was another indication of this interest in the products of the printing press. Of greater signi<sup>fi</sup>cance was the emergence of a massive Arab readership which comprised people who had not been used to reading before, namely, the popularization of the practice. The most important drive behind this historic change was the rising public need for information. The increasing demand for intelligence was a natural reaction to the rapid changes in the region’s realities, which rendered the hitherto well-known environment less and less so. In many parts, mostly in the bigger cities and primarily those close to the Mediterranean, the physical surroundings were metamorphosing. State-initiated modernization projects, the construction of new urban neighborhoods and public buildings, the scheduled movement of trains and ships, the in<sup>fl</sup>ux of foreigners, all altered the once-familiar surroundings. Take a resident of Cairo in, say, 1875: During the previous few years, he would have witnessed new urban quarters being erected, with new architecture and street lighting in the city center and suburbs; expanding roads, railroads, and telegraph lines in and around Cairo; new public institutions such as banks, a parliament house, an opera house, theaters, and a Khedivial library popping up; a long string of strangers <sup>fl</sup>owing into the city, following the recent launching of the Suez Canal, and setting up businesses of every purpose; and fast increasing local colonies of foreigners that had multiplied eight-fold over the previous decade. All of these amounted to a makeover of the visible landscape. The dazzling pace of these changes rendered the old ways of conveying news and elucidating them inadequate. As ever in times of rapid changes, these developments evoked an urgent demand for information. Beyond basic news on daily occurrences, explanations that would make sense of the broader trends were required. This necessity could now be met by the new means that came in with the many other novelties, presses and publications, especially periodical. The thirst for news and orientation, and quenching it through newspapers and journals, would play an important role in instilling the habit of obtaining knowledge from printed texts that would also be extended to books. This, in turn, would generate a motivation for receiving training in reading, something that would quickly prove to be an asset of multiple bene<sup>fi</sup>ts. Two other factors encouraged the emergence of Arab readership. One was the increasing presence of inexpensive printed works and of diffusion channels. These developments, examined in earlier chapters, and the expansion of reading fed each other in a circle: Low-cost books and journals attracted buyers, whose continuous multiplying in turn encouraged more publishing. Printed works were popularly adopted in response to a need; but the new kinds of knowledge they imparted and the new horizons they opened generated more appeal that further boosted reading and turned it into a habit. Once again, this was particularly so with periodicals, which, in addition to news and their elucidation also featured cultural-scienti<sup>fi</sup>c essays and literary pieces that aroused curiosity and instilled new literary tastes. Sometimes, they appeared in serialized form, designed to elicit suspense and increase their lure. The option of active participation through exchanges with the editors and with each other was another attraction of the journals, which may well have increased their popularity. The other factor was the expansion of education, organized and otherwise. In the nineteenth-century Ottoman Empire, as in much of contemporary Europe, public education was becoming a state concern. Where instruction, with its mainly spiritual objectives, had traditionally been the realm of religious guides, the state now marched in for the <sup>fi</sup>rst time to assume a growing share in the responsibility for it. Both in Mehmet ᶜAlı’s Egypt (and subsequently in Ismaᶜıl’s) and, a little later, in the Ottoman capital and provinces, the government launched modern schooling projects as a part of its wider reforms strategy. By the time the state started building its new systems, missionary educational endeavor in Ottoman territories was already under way, competing with the government and offering attractive alternatives. So did private schools, founded by local religious communities and by several enterprising individuals. Together, these nonstate institutions outnumbered the government schools by a considerable margin.<sup>11</sup> State, missionary, communal, and private schools were now turning out literate graduates, at <sup>fi</sup>rst hundreds and before too long thousands of them annually throughout the region. It is impossible to tell how many of these were fully competent potential “readers,” but it is obvious that the schooling enterprises constantly and rapidly increased their numbers. A growing urge for information, its plentiful availability in print, and the spreading of education combined to produce an increasing public of readers. Obviously, only a segment of those with a thirst for news and knowledge were at <sup>fi</sup>rst trained to reach them independently. During this formative stage, the great majority had to obtain them through the mediation of the skillful few. The available <sup>fi</sup>gures regarding that smaller segment – the “inner circle” of pro<sup>fi</sup>cient readers – are inadequate for drawing a reliable quantitative picture. But some of these data are worth quoting, because they give us at least a crude notion of scale. Egypt of the mid-1870s is said to have had some 140,000 students in the different schooling institutions. The great majority of these, ca. 80 percent, were rudimentary kuttab pupils, who received limited training in reading, sometimes only a tri<sup>fl</sup>ing taste of it; the rest attended the better organized government, foreign, and local private schools and apparently did take with them functional reading tools. By 1914, the overall number had risen to around 500,000 students (ca. 70 percent of them in kuttabs).<sup>12</sup> The country’s <sup>fi</sup>rst of<sup>fi</sup>cial population census in 1897 found a total of ca. 400,000 people able to read (ca. 5.8 percent of all Egyptians), increasing to ca. 600,000 by the 1907 census and to ca. 850,000 by that of 1917.<sup>13</sup> These surveys were notoriously fraught with <sup>fl</sup>aws of many kinds, and the data they quoted on this score most likely represented a mélange of fully literate, semi-literate, and slightly literate Egyptians in terms of their reading ability. What may responsibly be said on the basis of such loose <sup>fi</sup>gures is that in the early part of the period Egypt had several thousand – probably no more than 20,000 – people with good reading capability, and by its end several hundred-thousands of them. This re<sup>fl</sup>ects the rapid emergence of a large pool of potential book and journal consumers, regardless of their small share in the overall population. As for the other Arab provinces, available assessments are similarly tenuous. One appraisal, as sound as one can expect, notes that around 1914, about a quarter of the population of Syria (including Lebanon and Palestine) was able to read, as was some 5 percent of Iraq’s, following several decades of educational activity.<sup>14</sup> Again, if these crude evaluations are anywhere near the mark, we may assume that several hundred thousands of all Fertile Crescent residents were functionally literate by the end of the period. By the eve of World War I, the overall reservoir of readers in the Ottoman Arab provinces (including Egypt), having multiplied several-fold since the onset of the nahda, comprised many hundreds of thousands of people with more or less functional reading skills. If a daring attempt at an appraisal is permitted, that pool could have reached close to a million, maybe even somewhat more, but apparently not as many as two million. This educated group, constantly increasing as it was, made up a promising market for the products of Arab print shops. As signi<sup>fi</sup>cant as the increase in the reading public’s size were changes in its spatial distribution and social makeup. For the most part, they marked a break with the past, in similarity to other places where the readership was transformed. In studying these changes, we may rely on <sup>fi</sup>ndings that, while not very helpful in assessing readership size, are valuable in reconstructing its geographical spread and social pro<sup>fi</sup>le. Such, for example, are readers’ letters to journal editors, which often contain important clues to their locations and the social standing of their senders. Such are also extant lists of subscribers to periodicals and other publications, as well as data on newspaper agents, which are useful in putting together an approximate readers’ distribution map. Looking at the scene one quickly reveals its unevenness: As one should perhaps expect in a formative phase, reading was asymmetrically distributed and limited to speci<sup>fi</sup>c sectors of society, while other parts, the great majority, entered the circle only at a later time. Throughout much of the historic shift from pervasive illiteracy to extensive literacy, the scene was lopsided in every way. Geographically, the largest concentrations of readers were in Lebanon and Egypt, with a thin spreading of more readers in the other provinces. The main centers everywhere were in urban locations; cities, more than the countryside, offered their residents material resources, access to education and to written and printed texts, and more free time. This was also truer of bigger towns than of smaller ones. Rural areas had far fewer readers, and they were especially rare in distant villages. These general contours of the scene, from the mid-nineteenth century onward, were re<sup>fl</sup>ected in newspaper-agent lists, most of whom were densely centered in Lebanese and Egyptian towns, while in other parts of the region, their presence was markedly sparser; in rural parts, it was rare.<sup>15</sup> This center/periphery pattern was also re<sup>fl</sup>ected in the distribution of readers’ letters to journals, many hundreds of which were sent annually throughout the period, whose authors were predominantly residents of Lebanese and Egyptian urban locations.<sup>16</sup> The spatial compass of subscribers to Butrus Bustanı’s Da’irat al-maᶜarif closely tallies with the same pattern, as we have noted in the previous chapter. Another factor affecting the Arab readership makeup was communal af<sup>fi</sup>liation. In general, Middle Eastern Christians enjoyed better schooling than Muslims and with better results. Arab Christians had high regard for education which emanated, among other things, from a faith in it as a vehicle to reducing their inferior minority status in society and from a religious belief that reading was related to self-salvation. Christians were also more receptive to missionary educational endeavors than their Muslim neighbors, who tended to view such foreigners with suspicion. Consequently, the Christian presence in Arab reading public was markedly weightier than their share in the population, just as they were prominent among writers and publishers. As has been shown in one study, reading became popular among Christians in Lebanon and Syria already in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, at <sup>fi</sup>rst for religious reasons and then out of curiosity.<sup>17</sup> The situation was similar in other parts of the region. In turn-of-the-century Egypt, the literacy rate among Copts was more than double the rate among Muslims, according to the 1897 census.<sup>18</sup> The Da’irat al-maᶜarif subscribers’ lists are, again, another indicator: The great majority of the names publicized by Bustanı were unmistakably Christian – Mikha’ıl, Jirjis, Niqula, and the like. (One could suspect that Christians <sup>fl</sup>ocked to join the project because it was initiated and promoted by a coreligionist. But Da’irat al-maᶜarif, far from being a communal publication, was a mine of universal knowledge which should have appealed to all intellectually curious people.) Christian names likewise dominated the lists of letter senders to journals, while Muslims were few. This Christian/Muslim gulf in literacy rates was of small signi<sup>fi</sup>cance in areas with communal homogeneity, e.g., Christian north Lebanon or the Muslim Egyptian Delta. It was of greater import in places with a mixed population, especially in big cities, where being educated meant clear socioeconomic and sometimes political advantages. Two other distinctive attributes of the emerging Arab reading publics were the entry of women and the constantly increasing presence of youths. Few women and youngsters had been readers in the past. Their joining now, beyond being a typical mark of the literary transformation (a phenomenon familiar from other places as well<sup>19</sup>), was a development that bore some of the most far-reaching social implications of the entire process. In Middle Eastern tradition, education and literacy had been characteristically a man’s domain. Girls in learned families did get training in reading, usually at home and mostly for pious purposes; we will look at some examples later on. But they were the exception to the rule, and not quite a sizeable one at that. That women had no need for such skills or for education in general was a popular conviction. If curious about written texts and eager to read them, a woman would have to face, besides the dif<sup>fi</sup>culties of obtaining the needed training, also her family’s objection and people’s frowning upon her engagement in this practice, which was typically regarded as an “ailment . . . [that] brings devious ideas” to women’s heads.<sup>20</sup> These old conventions, as well as their exceptions, were in force as the era of modern schooling was dawning. Both the authorities who built the new institutions and the parents who sent their children to be educated in them showed a preference for boys over girls as recipients of schooling. “A school for girls? What good will it do to teach the woman?” a group of young men reacted, “half amazed, half disgusted,” when told of an American missionary intention to build one in Tripoli; “You had better establish a school for young men,” they suggested.<sup>21</sup> Throughout the period examined here and long beyond it, both girls’ education and female literacy, though slowly expanding, lagged behind those of boys and men, and women’s share in the reading publics across the region remained small. As reading was becoming more popular among men and modern education for (mostly urban) girls was advancing, women in modest numbers began to join the circle. This, and a set of other developments, portended a historic shift in the overall standing of Middle Eastern women, whose course and effects are beyond our concern here. The important thing for us is that, in departure from past practice, women now came to represent a distinct hue in the society’s readership rainbow. Their voice, too, began to be heard through their participation in the printed public discourse across the region and in their own published books, starting in the late-1870s. Evidence of women reading and writing during the formative phase of the nahda is everywhere: in journals carrying their letters to the editors, in book and journal subscriber lists, in their own personal memoirs relating their experiences, in stories and novels some of them published, and in a host of periodical publications speci<sup>fi</sup>cally written by and for women, from 1892 onward. Women in educated families, typically daughters of liberal-minded Arab intellectuals, led the way in this. Butrus al-Bustanı’s daughter Alıs (Alice) and Salım Salam’s daughter ᶜAnbara, both from Beirut (a Christian and a Muslim, respectively), may be mentioned as two well-known examples of this trend. Both of them received broad education at home and in schools, and both tell us of their passion for reading (the former also published a novel, in 1891).<sup>22</sup> Women from the same sociocultural milieu opened literary salons in their homes that hosted prominent men of letters in learned gatherings – in Cairo, Alexandria, Damascus, and Aleppo. 23 Girls from other urban, not necessarily elite, families, whose parents sent them to get education in the emerging new schools, began to join the more re<sup>fi</sup>ned daughters of the aristocracy in the new pursuit, in small numbers. In her path-breaking study on the Egyptian women’s press, Beth Baron documented these developments there in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. Probing the emergence of journals by and for women as fora of printed exchanges, she portrayed women reading, writing, and calling upon members of their gender to do the same. Barred from public libraries until after World War I, Egyptian women had to make do with reading books and journals they could <sup>fi</sup>nd in their homes. Oftentimes, they had to do so clandestinely because of relatives’ unsupportive attitude. Over time, Baron showed, some of them formed a small “community of readers” around these journals, whose members corresponded with each other on matters of common concern.<sup>24</sup> Marilyn Booth, further exploring these changes in Egypt about the same time, similarly depicted a small but expanding circle of educated women accessing books and journals, writing for women’s papers, sometimes also authoring novels or other works.<sup>25</sup> In Lebanon, the other nahda hub, such activities were reported earlier, starting from the mid-nineteenth century: As a study by Fruma Zachs and Sharon Halevi has shown, upon the 1858 inauguration of Hadıqat al-Akhbar in Beirut, there were already several local women <sup>˙</sup> among its readers.<sup>26</sup> There, from the very outset of the Arabic press, the female readership was deemed substantial enough to be taken into consideration by journal owners: “If we were not sure that these novels were read by a lot (kathırat) of women, we would not place them into the many issues that concern them,” the editor of al-Jinan noted in 1873, referring to original and translated literary pieces intended for a female audience and serialized in his paper.<sup>27</sup> Their commercial value as customers notwithstanding, women remained a small minority among consumers, let alone makers, of the Arabic printed output up to World War I. There were apparently no more than a few hundred, at most a couple of thousand, of Arabic-reading women throughout the region at the beginning of the period and probably several thousand at its end.<sup>28</sup> Entering the <sup>fi</sup>eld from a rather low point – lower literacy rates, restricted learning opportunities, and an unaccommodating social environment – women proceeded more tardily in setting a presence in the reading public. Like men, their exposure to printed materials through listening was greater than through direct access. But even with this broader circle of exposure, their share in the growth of readership remained on the whole meager at that stage. Its true signi<sup>fi</sup>cance, however, was not in its size but in being a portent of a historic change in the social status of women, which would gather momentum only at a later stage. The other new color added to the fabric of readers was consumers of a younger age. In many ways, this was a weightier development in the expansion of reading publics than the entry of women. Targeting the society’s young stratum, the new schooling projects in the region caused its reading class to expand at the bottom of the age pyramid. Consequently, youth and adolescents who were trained in schools – the likes of which had not been available to their parents – and who acquired the key to a knowledge that was in high demand came to form an increasing segment of the reading public, constantly bringing down its average age. The story of the Egyptian countryside teenager who, around 1914, became the local bookseller’s “preferred client” (zabun mumtaz) with special reading privileges, in contrast to the unlearned older villagers,<sup>29</sup> is one typical illustration of these circumstances. Obviously, not all boys and girls who attended schools came out with a passion for reading, but many of them did. While still students or as graduates of the system, youngsters displayed a zeal for books, an inclination that, perhaps unsurprisingly, was not always appre-30 ciated by the older generation. The reading habits of Arab boys and girls during this period are still awaiting a systematic research. Benjamin Fortna’s instructive study, of Turkish youth entering the world of reading in late Ottoman and early Republican times,<sup>31</sup> is yet to be coupled by a similar exploration of young Arab readers. Meanwhile, what we have at hand is a set of testimonies by individual writers recalling their reading as young people, and some other contemporary references. They tell us that, beyond school texts which opened new horizons, Arab schoolchildren and graduates read stories, novels, and news reports in books and journals written for adults. We hear of youngsters (shubban) in Iraq who read and even subscribed collectively for al-Muqtataf in its early years, in the 1870s<sup>32</sup>; of a Damascus boy who, in the <sup>˙</sup>late 1880s, “started reading Arabic newspapers when [he] was 13 years old, during [his] last years in elementary school” and even subscribed to a couple of local and imported journals<sup>33</sup>; of a Beirut teenager around the same time who used to read books and journals in his room, as well as at work while helping his father in his restaurant kitchen<sup>34</sup>; and of an Egyptian youth who, as a <sup>fi</sup>rst-year high school student in the early 1900s, used to “buy old and even new [journal] issues, despite their high price, and devour them from cover to cover.”<sup>35</sup> We also hear of children reading their parents’ books and journals at home, and of a critical observer complaining about the dearth of Arabic books <sup>fi</sup>t for children, who must therefore resort to books written for adults whose “harm is greater than their gain.”<sup>36</sup> The scope and trends of these practices are as yet too uncertain for a credible appraisal. But the rapid proliferation of reading youth is beyond question. During the long interim between the outset of the process and the point, many decades later, when Arab literacy had become universal, school graduates also ful<sup>fi</sup>lled the important role of mediating the printed knowledge to their elders and other unlearned people. We shall look at some instances of that later on. This side of the process was of great social signi<sup>fi</sup>cance. The possession of such a potent tool by a hitherto subsidiary section of the community, and the palpable edge it gave young people over their unschooled seniors, would shake old social norms and intrafamily relations. Mostly Egyptian or Lebanese, predominantly urban, overwhelmingly masculine, typically Christian, and constantly declining in its average age – these were the main characteristics of the Arabic reading public on the eve of World War I. Its expansion to embrace women, youth, and people from the periphery added more shades to the scene, not yet prominent at that stage but clearly identi<sup>fi</sup>able. Members of these groups were becoming accustomed to ingesting daily news and insights from printed sources and to extending their intellectual and literary horizons by accessing them. The “inner circle” of readers referred to in the title of this section seems to imply an identi<sup>fi</sup>able segment of the public, whose members were connected by a shared pursuit. Did this segment make up a “community of readers”? The answer to this is equivocal. On one hand, there was an obvious unifying side to the practice of reading. Readers of Arabic everywhere were using the same devices to access knowledge of a similar kind that addressed issues of common interest. Many of them also participated actively in exchanges on such issues across the region through the new platform of periodicals. This was especially important during the early phase of the nahda, when the grand changes in the region were becoming visible and evoked similar dilemmas everywhere. Alongside the unifying side, there was also a comfortable equalizing facet to this discourse: Readers listened and responded to each other on equal footings, with no prescribed hierarchy among them.<sup>37</sup> This was the soil on which the local variant of the Andersonian “imagined communities” grew. On the other hand, however, members of the reading public also had their respective local, religious, sectorial, or gendered concerns, which led them to move, in addition or instead, in separate discourse circles, distinct from each other in size and focus: A Catholic Lebanese subscribing to the Jesuit al-Bashır and absorbed in its missionary call was worlds apart from a Cairo woman who only read Ruza Antun’s al-Sayyidat wa’l-Banat with its accent on women’s affairs, even though both were using the same modern device and both belonged to the same small segment, the educated part, of society. Many readers linked to local or sectorial reference groups that <sup>fi</sup>t their priorities rather than to the big “community of Arab readers” with its region-wide dilemmas. ## Entering a World of Reading As already noted, the advent of Arab printing marked a major change even for those who had long been accustomed to reading: The bulky in<sup>fl</sup>ux of writings, new contents, new styles, and new formats altered their reading habits and the role of texts in their life routine. But the truly big difference affected those who had not read in the past and were now entering the circle. To them, the main novelty was in the praxis of extracting wisdom from written texts on their own through the newly acquired tools. As can be seen from the many journalistic essays of counseling for the novice and from the latter’s numerous “how to” inquiries, adopting the habit was anything but smooth. Reading in its modern form necessitated acquaintance with some practical rules that had to be learned and applied. They were broadly discussed, mostly in the periodical press, both by seasoned readers and by those who recently joined them in this pursuit. Betraying his tenderfoot state, one Muhammad effendi Tawfıq from Bakus (Egypt) wrote to the editors of al-Muqtataf, in 1890, asking them to recommend “the most valuable book” for “someone who wishes to elevate his mind and extend his imagination.” Another reader, Muhammad effendi Ahmad ᶜArif from Giza, was concerned with a different facet of the new practice: “Is much reading during the day harmful to the body, and how many hours at most should a person read?” Niqula effendi al-Khurı from Homs likewise asked whether it was “true that extensive reading in the dark could harm one’s eyesight.” And Shafıq effendi Saᶜdallah Halaba from Cairo posed a slightly different version of the query: “If I read for a long time while lying down, I feel dizzy once I get up and start walking. This does not happen when I read sitting. What is the reason for that, and what is the best posture one should read in?”<sup>38</sup> These examples represented a widespread phenomenon. Journal editors and other writers, assuming a position of coaches for the new practitioners, addressed the queries with a distinct air of authority. The reader who asked about the “most valuable book” received a brief answer which might not have satis<sup>fi</sup>ed him: No single book can be labeled most valuable, and many of them <sup>fi</sup>t the description. But as he was asking for a shortcut to “elevate his mind,” he was offered one: encyclopedias, provided he was pro<sup>fi</sup>cient in English or French. The editors also con<sup>fi</sup>rmed that reading in the dark or in dim light could harm the eyes. And the reader who had asked about dizziness after reading in bed received this learned explanation: “Obviously, much of your blood <sup>fl</sup>ows into your head when you read lying. Then, when you stand up the blood suddenly runs down and dizziness occurs, as in brain anemia. The best posture for reading is sitting upright with the head leaning a little forward and with the book in front [of you] parallel to [your] face.”<sup>39</sup> Such counseling to the neophyte marked the dawn of a new practice for many. But writers did not necessarily wait for queries from beginners before offering them guidance. Many took the initiative and wrote instructive pieces on aspects of reading which, they knew, would be attentively received. The monthly al-Muqtataf carried some useful advice in its very <sup>fi</sup>rst volume, early on in 1876, to “those with little experience in reading, in particular craftsmen.” The editors proposed that they read deliberately and profoundly, so as to make sure they comprehended every detail, “even at the cost of great fatigue,” since “obtaining knowledge is more tiring than obtaining money.” They also extended a practical tip against forgetting the wisdom one had gotten from reading: taking written notes and retaining them, an idea many authors would later echo.<sup>40</sup> Subsequent issues of the journal carried scores of essays on the subject, under titles such as “bene<sup>fi</sup>cial reading,” “a view on reading,” “the proper way to read,” and the like. Newcomers were congratulated on having assimilated reading, which was likened (with something of a juvenile enthusiasm) to “an adventure journey, allowing a man to see the country from one end to the other while still sitting under the roof of his own home.”<sup>41</sup> Other journals followed suit. One did not have to “waste [one’s] time in sailing across oceans and traveling to the end of the earth for months in search of news and reports [that were] obtainable in one hour of reading.”<sup>42</sup> Newcomers were advised to use caution in selecting reading materials, so as not to waste their time on useless matters or expose themselves to harmful ideas, “like those who read just for entertainment and pastime.” They should choose only serious works that would uplift their minds. How were “serious works” to be identi<sup>fi</sup>ed? One author offered a method: “If you wish to know whether the book you are holding deserves to be read, listen to your heart, your mind, and your feelings after having read a part of it. If you realize that it evokes in you noble principles and lofty emotions, then this is the book you should read.”<sup>43</sup> Newspapers and journals, not just books, required some expertise in order to be properly absorbed. They should be read in their entirety, on a regular basis, with a critical approach, and without too much attention to the excessive praise they impart on people.<sup>44</sup> Other practical aspects were also discussed. Veteran readers recommended taking breaks during reading sessions, in order to ponder about the read matters; to reread the same text two, three, or even four times and thus discover new facets in it each time; and to prepare written accounts of the read items so the reader could return to them and recover the impressions they had on him.<sup>45</sup> One writer reckoned that “working people can only rarely <sup>fi</sup>nd free time for reading,” but insisted that “it should not be too dif<sup>fi</sup>cult to <sup>fi</sup>nd some extra time for that, nonetheless.” He proposed the following routine: If a person is used to getting up at six o’clock in the morning, it would do him no harm to wake up a quarter of an hour earlier and engage in reading. When wait ing for his food for ten minutes, he should use that time for reading. He who [really] wants it can <sup>fi</sup>nd a whole hour for reading every day without dif<sup>fi</sup>culty, no matter how busy he is. Days of rest should be spent partly in reading and the other part outing. And whenever traveling or moving from one place to another, a man should have a useful book in his pocket, which he should read in the appropriate time . . . However, the reader should be careful not to exhaust himself by reading or engage in it to the point of fatigue or beyond it. This is not bene<sup>fi</sup>cial but damaging.<sup>46</sup> Such basic guidance by old-timers and their exchanges with beginners convey a spirit of a new era. The space previously occupied by few was now accessed by many. Obtaining knowledge through solitary reading was quite unlike getting together with other people to receive a message. Choosing reading materials on one’s own from the ocean of printed works was equally novel, as was the need to distinguish, independently again, between truthful and <sup>fi</sup>ckle publications. Seasoned readers sensed that the tools the newcomers were bringing with them were inadequate for ef<sup>fi</sup>cient reading. Basic counsel seemed in order, and was readily offered. As ever, direct testimonies on actual reading are few. But many indirect references to the practice allow us to reconstruct a fairly meaningful picture of it. People read at home or away from it, privately and quietly or collectively and vocally. They read at home when conditions permitted, when the available space was comfortable enough and reading materials – books or journals, bought or borrowed – were at hand. This was conveniently done in the homes of the well-to-do, which had ample space, suitable lighting, and comfortable furniture, sometimes even a special reading section or a library. In the smaller and more crowded homes of others, people read as they could: by a table or on a kitchen chair, reclining or lying down (as noted in one reader’s query above), sometimes sitting on the <sup>fl</sup>oor, and at other times by the doorway outside the house. Electric lighting was still in the future at that stage, and after sunset, homes were lit with oil lamps or, in more fortunate cases, gas light, both fatiguing to the eyes and neither fully adequate for convenient reading. People also read away from their homes, mostly newer practitioners whose homes had neither reading materials nor appropriate quarters. They read in shops, in cafés, or in the street, quietly to themselves or aloud and in groups. This was a new phenomenon, a striking mark of the cultural change which will be considered separately in the next chapter. Retrospective memoirs by those who had made their <sup>fi</sup>rst steps in reading during this period commonly emphasize the lure of the new pursuit and the joy it stirred in them. This was often the case with young people or schoolchildren, the vanguard of mass reading in the region. Let us look at a few examples. Yusuf al-Hakım, a child in Ladhiqiyya in the 1880s, was exposed to the new pursuit as a school student. In his memoirs, he recalled how he became attracted to it and came to “prefer reading of useful books during school breaks” to playing with his friends or any other activity. He used to read “in my small room, which was lit by a gas lamp that cast light on the desk.”<sup>47</sup> Jurjı Zaydan, a teenager in Beirut around the same time, related how he used to read in his lamp-lit room, sitting on his bed. He was often so enamored with what he read that he went on and on for hours, sometimes through the night. He developed a passion for the world that was opened to him, so much so that he would not quit reading even when helping his father in his restaurant, standing in the kitchen among the rice and bean pots, and, “while watching them, I would open my English book and read from it.” Zaydan recalled how, at the age of <sup>fi</sup>fteen or sixteen, he was eager to possess a copy of Majmaᶜ al-bahrayn but could not afford its cost of four to <sup>fi</sup>ve francs. One day, he managed to obtain a used copy of it for about half that price, something that <sup>fi</sup>lled him with immense joy. His father, however, was less thrilled and scolded his son for having wastefully “exchanged money for paper” – a trivial incident that highlights the generational gap then with regard to the value of books and reading.<sup>48</sup> In the Egyptian countryside in the early 1900s, Taha Husayn and his brothers would spend their sum-<sup>˙ ˙</sup>mer vacation with books of all kinds, “serious and amusing, original and translated,” reading during the day and much of the night and “drawing pleasure and joy from them far more than from schoolbooks.” They would go on reading “whether the family approved of it or not” (another subtle hint to the generational gulf).<sup>49</sup> Around the same time, his younger fellow countryman Sayyid Qutb used to cut on his meager money allocation and save for buying books. He collected them, until he managed to amass a “bulky library of . . . twenty-<sup>fi</sup>ve books!” which was massive enough to “<sup>fi</sup>ll an entire tin chest.” Still a schoolchild, he became the local bookseller’s best customer, and the latter’s annual visits to his village became “the happiest days of the year” for him. The young Qutb’s obsession with reading and his book collection increased his local reputation, and village people predicted a glorious future for him.<sup>50</sup> Women who began reading during this period likewise acknowledged their having been “passionately in love with reading, taking refuge in it.”<sup>51</sup> Usually they had less freedom than men to choose their texts or even to engage in reading. But those whose testimonies came down to us reveal that they found ways to bypass restrictions and reach out to the reading materials they desired. History books, novels, poetry, the leading literary journals of the day, women’s journals, and Qasim Amın’s books on women emancipation are all mentioned in their accounts. ᶜAnbara Salam al-Kh alidı, who grew up in a Muslim family in Beirut around 1900, at <sup>fi</sup>rst had to make do with books she found at home and read them there. It was an intellectual home – ᶜAnbara’s father was a member of the Ottoman parliament and her mother had her own book collection – so there was much in the house that was worth reading. Gradually the teenaged ᶜAnbara built her own collection and was permitted to buy books of her choice during a family trip to Cairo, which, she tells us, she read avidly.<sup>52</sup> Sometime earlier, in Egypt of the 1880s, Huda Shaᶜrawı had a similar experience with books. Her home education in Minya focused on the Qur’an, the basic text for training in reading, as well as on writing and some languages. Once she had acquired reading skills she became a curious girl: I began to buy books from peddlers who came to the door even though I was strictly forbidden to do so. I could not judge the quality of the book. If it was easy to read it was good. Otherwise I tossed it in the cupboard. But the books failed to satisfy me and I grew eager to read those of my father who had loved literature and had been surrounded by poets and learned men. At opportune moments I tried various keys to unlock his bookcase which stood in our lesson room, while our two companions kept watch in the corridor. One day when I <sup>fi</sup>nally succeeded . . . curiosity made me reach for the books. I grabbed two at random the second volume of al Iqd al Farid (The Unique Necklace) and the Diwan of Abu al Nasr (collected poems). I still have them to this day.<sup>53</sup> Discovering the joys of reading by themselves, people bought, accessed, and read whatever was available, affordable, and be<sup>fi</sup>tting their tastes. We know a little more about the written works people purchased and possessed than of their actual reading of them. But we may assume that acquisition and possession were inspired by the buyers’ sense that these works, which they could now decipher, promised to open to them exciting vistas. Writings on “heavy” subjects, such as the scholarly classics in theology, philosophy, language, and suchlike serious <sup>fi</sup>elds, went mostly to scholars and students, for their explorations. More modern books, both original and translated – in literature, poetry, epics, travel, or discussions of relevant social and cultural dilemmas – circulated more widely and were repeatedly mentioned in readers’ accounts, from the tenth-century poetry of al-ᶜIqd al-Farıd, accessed by Huda Shaᶜrawı, to the popular ᶜAntara stories that reached Sayyid Qutb’s village, and from Qasim Amın to Sherlock Holmes. An important channel of entry into the world of reading for a great many people was chapbooks, both spiritual and mundane. These seemingly trivial publications are seldom mentioned in the available accounts, but we may safely assume, though not yet prove, that they were widely circulated and read, plausibly even on a bigger scale than works of the previous kinds. That may have been so because of their cheapness and due to their usually lighter style, which was intended for mass publics. The relative ease with which such booklets were produced and purchased, and the focus of many of them on issues that mattered to the public, made them popular materials which helped instill reading habits in large sectors, probably more so than other books. To the same extent, if not more, journals and newspapers with their periodic appearance and crucial relevance played a special role in habituating Arab publics to reading at a tempo unimaginable before printing. Finally, the many other printed items that became closely interwoven into practices of daily life should be mentioned among the vehicles that initiated new readers, from holiday greeting cards to wall-af<sup>fi</sup>xed handbills. Designed for speci<sup>fi</sup>c, usually utilitarian and mostly short-lived, purposes, they entailed a very different kind of reading, more hurried and practiceoriented. Such <sup>fl</sup>eeting inspecting of a text might appear to have had little to do with the re<sup>fl</sup>ective delving into works of intellectual contents or even the lighter journals and newspapers. But it is relevant to our story inasmuch as it represented one more form of training in reading, and conceivably a rather useful one at that. Where people who wished to bene<sup>fi</sup>t from the multiplying written items of either type were yet unable to access them on their own, they fell back on the age-old convenient solution of collective reading. It will be examined in the next chapter.