One noticeable change in popular reading habits which the entry of printing triggered was extending the practice on a big scale into the public domain, outside the privacy of one’s home or the quiet of the library. Reading in public places, both silently and aloud, was not new in the Middle Eastern experience. But its extensive dimensions were, as were some social routines that came with it. By the eve of World War I, people reading in public locations were becoming a common sight in many parts of the region. It was seen mostly in urban areas but gradually also in rural ones. The practice had two main forms: individual and silent, of literate people (predominantly men) reading quietly to themselves; and collective-vocal, involving both literate and illiterate people going through a text in groups. Both forms resulted from the expanding availability of printed items and the rising public inquisitiveness about their contents. But each of the two forms had its own course and logic. They will be examined here separately for their cultural signi<sup>fi</sup>cance. ## Self-Reading in Public: Café Reading The growing ubiquity of printed texts drew people to reach out for them wherever they could be found out of the home, especially where they could be accessed free of charge. Library and public reading-room shelves were <sup>fi</sup>lling with new books that allured scholars, students, and other curious people; and newspapers, obtainable in public places, attracted everybody with their pertinent and practical contents. A Khedivial Library operational report prepared in 1888, that is, nearly two decades after the library’s inauguration, indicated that during the entire previous year the library had served a total of 331 users. This means six to seven readers per week on average, a rather modest pace. This rate increased in later years, reaching a total of 2,582 in 1903 and 3,331 in 1904, by another account. The last <sup>fi</sup>gure suggests a weekly average of roughly sixty-<sup>fi</sup>ve users, a signi<sup>fi</sup>cant growth over the few of a decade and a half earlier.<sup>1</sup> Some of these visitors must have been scholars, who came to consult works in the collection as members of their ranks had done in the past. Others could be readers of a new type, students or recent graduates of the schooling systems who would be interested in more modern materials. By some testimonies that came down to us, many were visibly young people, the main category of new practitioners. Usually representing the <sup>fi</sup>rst generation in their families to be schooled, they came from homes possessing little that they could read in them, so they had to look elsewhere to satiate their curiosity. Such, we may imagine, was the “youngster (shab), no more than twenty years of age, a user or a student,” who was spotted in the Cairo Khedivial Library in 1896 “with a book in his hand, absorbed in reading” and surrounded by other young men who were similarly engaged.<sup>2</sup> We have no similar data for other public libraries in the region. If the <sup>fi</sup>gures for the Khedivial Library are indicative of the general trend in library use – it is likely, but we cannot be sure of that – we may assume that public libraries represented a marginal channel of reaching to books, but were beginning during this period to serve customers who had not been among their users before, including newcomers to the world of reading. Data concerning the activity in public reading rooms and book-lending shops are not extant. Their overall number seems to have been small at this stage, as we have seen. It stands to reason that private entrepreneurs, keen on identifying signs of public demand from which they could pro<sup>fi</sup>t, would have opened more of them had they felt that the public interest in these institutions created a promising business potential. We may perhaps carefully assume that reading rooms and book-lending places, as well as public libraries, though offering a diverse set of avenues for accessing books, served only a small circle of Arab readers. Their limited contribution is especially noticeable when compared with the more substantial occurrence of public reading in other spaces, where the main practice was the reading not of books but of periodicals. Unlike book reading in libraries, which had been a familiar phenomenon long before printing, the reading of periodicals in public places was a novelty. In the early years, the educated who subscribed to journals and newspapers received and read them in their homes, as a matter of course. But before long, these products, especially newspapers and light journals, came out of the home and began to be read in public sites that had not been the scene of such activity. Reading out became a popular habit which entailed certain advantages over the reading of such publications in one’s private quarters. Away from home, newspapers could be shared or exchanged with other readers, “rented” from the distributors, or listened to when read out loud. Out there, too, their pertinent and sometimes troubling contents could be discussed with others, something that turned their reading into a fuller experience. Public reading of journals, especially newspapers, became a routine choice all over the region. New in contents and pulse, they were also new in being commonly read in the café, in the barbershop (another routine socialization location)<sup>3</sup> and other shops, in the marketplace, and on the street. “People [are] eagerly reading newspapers in the street, the railway station, the houses, and shops,” 4 a German visitor to several Syrian towns in 1914 noted, and the scene was repeatedly reported in accounts from other parts of the region. The most widespread form of the practice was reading in cafés, the colorful quintessence of the new routine. It would be worth our while to examine it at some length. That coffee and reading go together like a horse and carriage is a modern-time commonplace that has been given much attention in research and literature. As favorite public gathering spots in many cultures, starting in the early modern period, cafés offered a classic setting for circulating and debating news and gossip, scheming political action, and, of course, spending leisure time. Seats and coffee (or tea) were the two items essential for their operation; other features, such as smoking implements, table games, music, and performers of various kinds, were common but not indispensable. Similarly, written materials were not an essential ingredient of the setting, but they were often present in coffeehouses – in their European version – ever since the advent of newspapers. In seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Western Europe, cafés and publishing ventures developed in symbiosis, often adjacent to each other and relying on the same pool of eager audience. Given that juxtaposition, coffee shops may well have played a historic social role more signi<sup>fi</sup>cant than their modest image would suggest. As Adrian Johns has observed, the conjunction of print and coffee fostered “major changes in [Europe’s] political and intellectual culture.”<sup>5</sup> With the expansion of the European news press in the late seventeenth century, and especially the daily press in the eighteenth century, cafés came to serve as standard places for newspaper reading, thus becoming the habitual sites for spreading important public intelligence. Coffee and tea were effective stimulants for reading and discussion, and coffee-shop owners made it a point to arrange a regular supply of papers as a means to lure clients. “No man,” a writer in England remarked in 1829, “or no man who can read (and how few are there of those who go to coffee-shops who cannot read), thinks of calling for his cup of coffee without at the same time asking for a newspaper.”<sup>6</sup> In the Arabic-speaking provinces and other Ottoman parts, the café (maqh<sup>an</sup> or more popularly maqha) played a similar role as a public meeting place from the early sixteenth century onward. In urban areas, especially, it was a favorite space for social mingling, predominantly if not exclusively for men. News and views were exchanged here, future political action was plotted, and patrons were having pleasurable time smoking, playing table games, listening to storytellers, and watching assorted performers.<sup>7</sup> Here too, it has been shown, literary and poetic creativity was boosted and written texts were circulated already before printing.<sup>8</sup> Following the birth of the Arabic press, centuries after the appearance of Middle Eastern cafés, coffeehouses became standard sites for reading newspapers, individually and in groups. Here, as in Europe, their owners adopted the habit of furnishing their businesses with journals so as to meet the clients’ new expectations. For the small price of a cup of coffee or tea, customers would have access to several papers in one visit or, as one observer of Egypt put it, “read the barman’s paper.”<sup>9</sup> In later years, café owners would continue to offer comparable attractions to visitors by equipping their shops with gramophones, radio, TV sets, cassette-players, and, recently, Internet. With printed materials as common paraphernalia and newspaper reading as a typical form of pastime, coffee shops epitomized the gradual metamorphosis of the public domain. Having long served as prime institutions of public activity, along with mosques, the town or village square, the marketplace, and some other locales, they now took on a new form, adapting themselves to the changing demands. “We have opened a restaurant-and-coffeehouse,” a newspaper advert in Damascus typically noted; “we have brought to it the most famous newspapers, most useful journals, and most up-to-date commercial telegrams (tilighrafat).”<sup>10</sup> Catering to what by then had become habitual customers’ expectation, the proprietor’s move mirrored the modi<sup>fi</sup>ed standards of his new business. As the public demand for newspapers grew, so did café owners’ interest in making their shop a convenient reading place. Egypt led the way, beginning around the turn of the century.<sup>11</sup> “No city has a more active café life than Cairo,” a British visitor noted in 1911. “Even in the morning the little iron tables on the pavement are thronged. Whenever you pass a café there are numbers of tarbushes to be seen both outside and inside. A few people may be playing dice or dominoes. But the mass are reading newspapers and talking politics.”<sup>12</sup> In a personal testimony on his childhood around the turn of the century, Egyptian writer Ahmad Amın related how, as a young boy, he was not exposed to newspapers because “they did not enter our [conservative] home, nor did I use to sit in a café where I could read them.” But this changed when public life in the country became more excited, around 1904. “From that time on, I began to open myself to newspapers and read them. Having moved [from Cairo] to Alexandria, I would frequent the café of ‘uncle Ahmad al-Sharbatlı,’ where I would read al- Liwa’, al-Mu’ayyad and al-<sup>˙</sup>Muqattam.”<sup>13</sup> Amın’s experience embodied the novelty of this habit. For him, to begin visiting a café and read newspapers there meant leaving behind his parents’ traditional routine, whereby newspapers “did not enter the home” – rigorously selective in its reading materials as it must have been – and adopting a new practice. Here is another recollection from around the same time by a compatriot, Egyptian historian ᶜAbd al-Rahman al-Ra<sup>fi</sup>ᶜı: In 1904, I began to visit an old town café on Ra’s al T¯n Street, near Muhı sin Ba¯sha¯ citadel [in Alexandria]. We used to go there every Friday. Its owner Ha¯jj Ahmad would serve us lemonade prepared so skillfully that it became his café’s trademark. Then he would acquaint us (yutliᶜuna¯ ᶜala¯) with some of the daily newspapers in circulation at the time, including al Liwa¯’, the paper of the leader, Mustafa¯ Ka¯mil. However, at that time I could not understand its ideas, or the ideas of the other papers . . . I was <sup>fi</sup>fteen years old then . . . In October 1904, I entered law school [in Cairo] and it was there that I began to read newspapers in a comprehending manner. The students used to get together and . . . spend their free time and evenings in a <sup>fi</sup>ne café on ᶜAbd¯nı Street, corner of Sana¯f¯rı ¯ Streetı . . . named qahwat al huq ¯uq, whose owner was Khawa¯ja Andriyya¯. We were impressed with the café’s name and chose it as a meeting place, where we would read papers of all trends and viewpoints, most importantly al Liwa¯’, al Mu’ayyad and al Ahra¯m. I thus moved from Ha¯jj Ahmad’s café in Alexandria to that of Khawa¯ja Andriyya¯ in Cairo. Both cafés played a great role in shaping my patriotic and political outlook.<sup>14</sup> Ra<sup>fi</sup>ᶜı’s description reveals an important facet of the practice. He came from a well-off family of scholars (his father was Mufti of Alexandria), a family that most likely owned a spacious home. Yet it was in a café, not at home, that he was <sup>fi</sup>rst exposed to newspapers, and in another one that his “patriotic and political outlook” was later shaped by reading them. This was a typical situation: The café had by then come to be considered as the <sup>fi</sup>ttest place for reading and discussing newspapers, regardless of one’s reading skills (or their absence) or the ability to purchase a copy. As conveyers of news and opinion that concerned all, newspapers were best read in a public place, not in the seclusion of one’s home; more suitably in groups, not on one’s own. Only in the café, in the company of other interested consumers, could they be absorbed to the full through reading and discussion. It was in coffee shops that collective reading aloud commonly rendered illiterate customers the great service of informing them and letting them partake in the debate. But they also attracted others who did have alternative options, like Ra<sup>fi</sup>ᶜı, yet chose to read their papers there. Here, the printed content was discussed by learned patrons conversing with their table partners and other readers around them. In that, newspapers were in a category unto themselves among printed publications. Only seldom do we hear about reading of more serious journals – cultural, historical, literary – in cafés, and only rarely about reading of books there (with the exception of public storytelling situations; in these, printed book copies often replaced story manuscripts or the hakawatı’s memory). Serious works that required contemplation were normally read in the quiet of one’s home or in a library, as they had been in the preprinting era. Public places hosted mainly readers of newspapers and light journals. The urban coffeehouses of the kind described by Amın and Ra<sup>fi</sup>ᶜı seem to have been visited mostly by middle class, mostly educated people. They were popular and their number was rising, but they were not the only type of Arab café. Another kind, highly widespread, included institutions of an inferior quality, small places on street corners and market sites which attracted all manners of people, among them the poor and the uneducated. They often were – as a resident of Nablus around 1900 reported – “in dark and miserable corners, their straw chairs low, their tables low and <sup>fi</sup>lthy,” and they were frequented mainly by “youth, laborers, and the indigent.”<sup>15</sup> Coffee shops of this kind were usually regarded by members of the more educated classes as debased places associated mostly with vain talk, wasteful pastime, and vulgarity.<sup>16</sup> Butrus al-Bustanı, advertising Khalıl Sarkıs’s new library and reading room in 1876, added to it a note of his own describing the place as the cultural inverse of cafés. Go visit it, he urged his readers, for “it is better than getting together in cafés for a useless killing of time.”<sup>17</sup> Two decades later, Jurjı Zaydan was more blatant when responding in his journal to a reader’s query: “Staying in cafés for many hours day after day degrades the zeal of men and prevents them from focusing on their work. It is especially harmful for the young, who are on the verge of starting their working career.”<sup>18</sup> Such coffee shops, which to the re<sup>fi</sup>ned Bustanı and Zaydan (and apparently to Ahmad Amın’s conservative parents as well) implied excessive indulgence rather than more serious pursuits, were not places of typical public reading. Yet, the practice did seem to have taken place there too on a modest scale, at least in its collective form that would be discussed below. Such was also the case with cafés of a third type, more elitist and elegant than the ones serving the middle class, which had existed in the region both before and during the nineteenth century, a small number of exclusive places designed for the region’s social elite. The extant evidence suggests that café reading of newspapers, and to some extent of journals, was practiced most commonly in institutions of the middle kind, those between the abject and the re<sup>fi</sup>ned, mostly by members of the middle classes and the newly educated. They, like Ahmad Amın, let the cafés they regularly visited, and the papers they read there mold their worldview. Commencing on a big scale in Egypt, café reading spread to other places where newspapers appeared after the fall of the Hamıdian censorship dam and became highly popular most everywhere after World War I. By then they had come to resemble the early nineteenth-century routine in London. The Arab maqha as a reading location had a parallel in the Turkish-speaking parts of the empire, beginning in the late nineteenth century (and still running in the early twenty-<sup>fi</sup>rst, under the same name): the kıraathane, literally “reading house,” a café-cum-reading room where coffee or tea and newspaper reading likewise complemented each other.<sup>19</sup> Newspaper reading in cafés was the archetypical mode of the new Arab reading experience, both when performed in silence and, still more so, when taking place as a vocal event, as we shall now see. ## Collective Reading Aloud Attaining universal literacy in the Arabic-speaking countries was a process that continued for many decades beyond the period examined here; in some places, for a century or more. Progress in education, we shall recall, was one of three factors mentioned above as responsible for the spread of reading, alongside public appetite for news and the ready availability of information in print (see previous chapter). Each of these evolved at its own pace. The public craving for news and the production of printed information rose fast; the advancement of education required more time and affected limited sections of the community in its early stage. This variance in stride spelled a gulf between people’s public thirst for knowledge and their ability to quench it independently. Such a gulf was inevitable wherever both publishing and organized education began to grow at the same time. The solutions for this provisional dif<sup>fi</sup>culty in the Middle East resembled those devised in other places and were likewise based on an intuitive principle: collective consumption. Group consumption of printed publications took on several forms. Among them were some of the mechanisms already considered above, which were based on collective acquisition and individual use, that is, buying a stock of books or journals jointly and reading them solitarily, for a fee. Libraries of scienti<sup>fi</sup>c or literary association operated on this principle, their book collections being assembled through expense sharing and then put at their members’ disposal to read and borrow. A similar mode of collective consumption was through forming up ad hoc groups to purchase a joint subscription for a periodical or for a book published by subscription, and sharing both the expenses and the use. This method had been common elsewhere and was reported in early nineteenthcentury England and Canada, among other places.<sup>20</sup> In the Arab provinces we hear of it occasionally, in Baghdad, Damascus, Sidon, and elsewhere.<sup>21</sup> Thus in al-Mahalla al-Kubra (Egypt), a group of twenty Egyptians teamed up in 1873 to purchase a twenty-franc subscription to the weekly al-Kawkab al-Sharqı, each paying one franc: They would wait the train every Friday as one would await the holiday moon. When the train arrived and mail was distributed, the literate one among them would stand [in front of] the post of<sup>fi</sup>ce, with the rest of the subscribers forming a long line behind him. One of them, at the farthest point, would then ask, shouting at the top of his voice: “Has the Kawkab arrived?”<sup>22</sup> A different form of “collective” use, with multiple readers accessing the same text without purchasing it, was the “borrowing” of newspapers from their distributors for a fraction of the paper’s price. In this practice, already mentioned above, a single copy changed many hands and eyes. Known in Europe before being adopted in the Middle East,<sup>23</sup> the routine obviously undermined the owner’s pro<sup>fi</sup>t but bene<sup>fi</sup>ted both the lending distributor and his borrowing clients. It appeared in the region very early on: Already in 1876, a Beirut newspaper complained of the “istiᶜara (borrowing/lending) of newspapers for reading them; the disgrace in such [acts] is all too obvious.” Similarly, Iraqi papers sometime later carried front-page notices denouncing the habit: “Damn he who rents a paper from the distributor!” thereby suggesting that the practice was widespread.<sup>24</sup> In this, and in the other methods noted here, sharing was in purchasing, not in reading: Joint acquisition facilitated individual reading. More popular, and far more signi<sup>fi</sup>cant as a social phenomenon, was the act of actual reading in groups. A time-honored ritual, it was carried into the age of printing as a useful way to enhance the spread of essential knowledge. To be sure, this was not a marginal conduit of access to texts. In all likelihood, during the early period we are examining here, printed information reached many more people in the region through such mediated channels than through direct reading. Vocal reading of written texts in groups had been a habit in many societies both prior to and following the introduction of printing. Here is Natalie Zemon Davis on one facet of this routine, taken from her oftquoted pioneering study of print and popular reading in sixteenth-century France: The important social institution for this [practice] was the veillée, an evening gathering within the village community held especially during the winter months from All Saints’ Day to Ash Wednesday. Here tools were mended by candlelight, thread was spun, the unmarried <sup>fl</sup>irted, people sang, and some man or woman told stories of Mélusine, that wondrous woman serpent with her violent hus band and sons; of the girl who escaped from incest to the king’s palace in a she donkey’s hide; of Renard and other adventuresome animals. Then, if one of the men were literate and owned books, he might read aloud . . . Reading aloud? We might better say “translating,” since the reader was inevi tably turning the French of his printed text into a dialect his listeners could understand. And we might well add “editing.” In urban areas, likewise, books were “shared in reading groups which, as in the countryside, brought the literate and illiterate together.”<sup>25</sup> One written copy would enlighten a family, a street-corner crowd, and sometimes a whole village or urban community. The necessary elements of the event included a piece of written or printed text, at least one learned person with a reading ability, and an eager audience accustomed to receiving contents in a mediated aural way. Reports on this routine are recorded all over Europe and North America, at least from the sixteenth century (they were certainly much older than that) until well into the nineteenth, and we also hear of the practice in China, Central Asia, Latin America, and elsewhere. The scriptures and other religious texts, folk legends and literary works, government announcements, news bulletins, and, later, newspapers were all read collectively. It was done in the intimacy of home and in the public domain – in workplaces, markets and shops, taverns, cafés, and literary salons – involving all social classes and all trades.<sup>26</sup> Although schooling increased the number of people able to read, and the entry of printing in<sup>fi</sup>nitely increased the choice of affordable texts, the public habit of group reading aloud was slow to disappear. Rather, it persisted for a long time despite the expansion of quiet private reading, as a complement to it. For one thing, the long-winded spread of popular literacy, especially before universal education, left large sectors of the society everywhere out of the private-reading scene and in need of reading mediators. For another, the prices of books and even newspapers remained beyond reach for many. And there was another important reason why the old custom was not soon abandoned, even by those who could read and buy their own copies. More than just transmitting contents and messages, group reading had some other worthy advantages. It allowed listeners to ascertain that the text and its practical signi<sup>fi</sup>cance were fully understood, something that was not always obvious in individual reading; and it facilitated the exchange of thoughts and sharing of sentiments about the read material with other members of the crowd. Those assembled to listen could be utterly illiterate, semi-literate, and even fully literate people, who would receive the text with its many shades more comfortably through the ears than through the eyes. All stood to gain from the added value of group reading, which often turned the reading into a social (on occasion political) happening. Only gradually, and seldom before the nineteenth century, did collective reading fully give way to norms of solitary reading, which became prevalent in most societies except in some speci<sup>fi</sup>c kinds of ceremonial events. Arabic-speaking societies were used to receiving messages of many kinds vocally and in groups, including those that originated in written texts. In mosques, the Imam and khatıb regularly read out the contents of holy writings, or government notices, to attentive audiences. Shaykhs in kuttabs and madrasas read to their students or to followers who came to get an ijaza (license to serve as quali<sup>fi</sup>ed transmitters of the text), using a written copy or reciting from their memory. The town or village announcer (munadı), usually a man with a thunderous voice, would read out of<sup>fi</sup>cial or other announcements to crowds that would gather around him when he called for their attention. And the storyteller (hakawatı, rawı), an old and respected social calling, would entertain his audience by reading and performing legends and tales, with or without a written copy at hand. A few literate mediators thus played a key role in the different practices. In all of these events, the literacy level of attendees was irrelevant: The added value of sharing the text communally was as important in drawing many people into the gathering as was the illiteracy of many others. Texts were often composed in a style and rhythm that would make them <sup>fi</sup>t for vocal reading: Whether epic stories or chronicles, they incorporated exclamation expressions, rhymed prose (sajᶜ), or sections in a popular spoken-idiom register, revealing their being meant for oral performance.<sup>27</sup> When printing inundated the area with its products, society, though largely uneducated and poor, was ready to receive them with a tool of proven ef<sup>fi</sup>cacy. While most community members were illiterate, the community as a unit had a “collective literacy” apparatus at hand, resting on the skills of few and sustained by centuries of operative experience. The community intuitively fell back on the accustomed oral-aural routine of transmitting messages of every kind, counting on its literate mediators to convey and elucidate the new contents – at least the most urgent parts – to those who lacked the required training. Relying on learned mediators proved an expedient solution when the hunger for knowledge surpassed the ability to reach it independently. Before looking at some instances of the practice itself, one other factor that had a signi<sup>fi</sup>cant effect on it should be noted. The written language during the formative era of Arabic printing was marked by a structural problem that weighed down on its reception. It was a two-tier problem. One part of it was diglossia, the historic gap between the written or literary language (fusha), with its colorful and multilayer inventory, and the spoken vernacular (ᶜamıyya), with its numerous regional and ethnic dialects. This gap was at times wide enough to render a written text all but incomprehensible to speakers of an Arabic dialect who had not been taught to read. The second tier of the problem comprised an additional dif<sup>fi</sup>culty that was superimposed on the <sup>fi</sup>rst following the nineteenthcentury Arab encounter with a world of foreign ideas and concepts. The contacts with new cultures and peoples exposed Arabic-speaking societies to new notions their language had not been equipped to express. Discussing the working of the British Parliament, reporting an elections campaign in the United States or describing the French Revolution required a semantic repertoire which at <sup>fi</sup>rst did not exist in Arabic. (Needless to say, the problem was two-sided: Speakers of Western languages faced similar challenges when trying to describe and discuss Middle Eastern cultural, religious, social, or political ideas.) Already during the <sup>fi</sup>rst half of the nineteenth century, the encounter initiated a process of linguistic adjustment, with many new expressions being added to the Arabic lexicon after an intricate process of verbal experimentations. These terminological trials – especially the bewildering application of terms with local associations to alien notions – rendered the written language of that time loose and sometimes ambiguous. Eventually Arabic adapted itself to the new needs, devising solutions that were often elegant and always serviceable. But during the decades after the entry of printing into the Middle East, this dual handicap of Arabic problem, especially the ongoing changes in its expressive capacity, made the reading of modern texts in that language a bigger challenge than before, or after. As in the above-quoted example from Natalie Zemon Davis, which noted that reading to a public entailed as well “translation” and “editing,” in the Middle East too there was ever a need for interpretation by rephrasing the read text to listeners unaccustomed to the modernized vocabulary. This need redoubled the popular necessity for a collective transmission, guided by one who was better quali<sup>fi</sup>ed than the others, and markedly increased its utility. The practice started in the home, where the educated, typically of the younger generation, read aloud to the others, as in Davis’s sixteenthcentury France. It was then applied outside, in public places. The society resorted to these tools for circulating those texts that were of immediate relevance, above all the news of the day. The method of enlightening large audiences through vocal reading was <sup>fi</sup>tter for discussing such matters than it was for heavy works of scholarship or complex sociocultural dilemmas; a group reading setting would be too distracting for works requiring a serious re<sup>fl</sup>ection. The collective mode was suitable for the light stuff: newspapers, opinion and satirical journals, handbills, and proclamations. It was also <sup>fi</sup>t for stories and legends designed to entertain. When texts that had been thus delivered before printing – stories from the “Thousand and One Nights” for example, or ᶜAntara eposes – appeared in print, the old practice of public reading continued unchanged. Let us look at a few examples. In 1880–1881, written proclamations denouncing Sultan ᶜAbdülhamid’s tyranny were clandestinely circulated in towns of Lebanon and Syria. Faris Nimr, reportedly one of the “youth conspirators” who were involved in that activity in Beirut, later related how he and his friends, having drafted the text of an appeal . . . would spend long nightly vigils making out innumerable copies of it in disguised handwriting. Then at an agreed hour at dead of night, the younger members would go out with pots of glue in their pockets, and stick as many placards as they found time for on the walls of the city. In the morning, a crowd will collect around each poster while someone would read it out aloud, until the police would come.<sup>28</sup> George Antonius, who quoted Nimr, saw no need to elaborate on the manner the handbills were transmitted to the public, except <sup>fl</sup>atly noting that they were mediated vocally by the odd literate man around. An explanation was not needed: This was still the default mode of spreading written information even when Antonius wrote his book, in the 1930s, let alone back in the 1880s. Such proclamations in public places were not a complete novelty in the region, nor were they a very common means of communication until around the end of the century.<sup>29</sup> When they were used, by the government or by its subjects (or opponents), those who posted them expected their contents to be publicly disseminated through the mediation of the few who could read, who were thus ful<sup>fi</sup>lling a role akin to the munadı’s. This was so with other kinds of texts designed for mass consumption. When Arabic newspapers began to appear in the region, the only way they could become means of mass communication was through such communal vocal reading. Group consumption of newspaper typi<sup>fi</sup>ed the early decades of the Arab nahda in many places and remained a habit <sup>˙</sup>that would last well into the second half of the twentieth century. Much of the evidence on the practice in the early period comes from Egypt. It was there that group reading began and continued for a few decades before spreading to other provinces. There were several reasons for that. Until 1908, newspapers were scarce in the provinces beyond Egypt and Lebanon. Copies of Egyptian and Lebanese journals that reached other places came in small numbers and usually went straight to subscribers’ homes and were read there. Lebanon itself, where papers did appear and circulate, was – along with the rest of the Fertile Crescent – under the grip of a suspicious government that was hounding the private press and spying on its readers in the marketplace and cafés. This apparently discouraged the handing of newspapers and discussing their contents in the open.<sup>30</sup> By contrast, in Egypt, with its freer atmosphere under less rigid rulers and especially under British rule (1882 onward), newspapers and journals were read unrestricted, individually and in groups. In addition, an apparent disparity between Egyptian and Lebanese sociocultural norms might have also accounted for this variance (this assumption is, admittedly, easier to suggest than to prove): For Lebanese, perhaps more than for Egyptians, learnedness was an important determinant of social status, something that would make the uneducated less prone to expose publicly their dependence on reading mediators. (In the words of my mentor, the late Professor Charles Issawi – who had an unusually keen eye for human conditions and a close familiarity with both societies – a Lebanese would be “too vain to show he cannot read by himself.”)<sup>31</sup> Be that as it may, the extant evidence suggests that Egypt was the <sup>fi</sup>rst and most fertile ground for group reading in public, a habit that would later spread to other places in the region. Egyptian and foreign observers in the late nineteenth century testi<sup>fi</sup>ed that the sight of “servants, donkey rearers, and others who cannot read gathering around one who reads while they listen” was highly common.<sup>32</sup> People were especially eager to hear the news of the day, just as they were attracted to satirical journals. “If you walked by a workshop, a low-class café or a carriage/transportation stop, you inevitably see someone surrounded by a crowd, and reading aloud from one or more of these newspapers. The listeners often laugh out-loud and uncontrollably pound the <sup>fl</sup>oor with their feet.”<sup>33</sup> Foreign visitors to the region were struck by this habit, which by then had been long forgotten in their home countries and thus represented a curiosity worth reporting. It seemed to imply that “Arabs are inordinately proud of their voices.” It often happens, an American observer noted, that “some Demosthenes is found reading to a group of myopic satellites who should buy their own copy of the paper.”<sup>34</sup> One of these accounts, by a Cairo resident around the turn of the century, described the common pattern of people gathering around “a man or a boy” who would read to them the local newspaper, or European ones in translation. One day, the observer related, he saw “a boy in a greengrocer’s shop, with an Arabic newspaper in his hands. In front of the shop a large gathering of rabble crowded around the boy while he was reading the text to them.”<sup>35</sup> The scene highlighted an important aspect of this routine: youth reading to the elders. This was common most everywhere. As we have seen, the spread of literacy through schooling, which rendered the overall readership constantly younger, also resulted in a decline in the age of mediators, while the sector that was dependent on their mediation was getting older (and in the long run dwindling). In the initial phase of this long-term process, schoolchildren and school graduates played a key role in helping their society enter the world of reading via the collective channel. In the family, younger members became the link to the written world outside. Niqula Khurı, a child in Birzeit (Palestine) in the 1890s, recalled: “I acquired <sup>fl</sup>uency in reading thanks to my father, who used to wake me up every day at dawn, take me by the hand to the church, and make me read for him the prayers, instructions, letters, and everything that needed to be taken care of.” Muhammad ᶜIzzat Darwaza, who grew up in Nablus around the same time, related how, “when spending an evening [in our place], my grandfather, his sisters, and his older cousins would ask me to read stories and books for them.” And Elizabeth Cooper, a foreign visitor to Egypt in the early 1910s, described a young girl who was sent to school in the early twentieth century and noted that she was “the only member of the family who can read the evening paper.” Thus, she related, “the father and mother and grandmother gather around her and listen with eagerness and astonishment to her marvelous tales, shaking their heads and perhaps murmuring, ‘Is it possible that this is my daughter?’” Cooper commented that, as “a few of the women of the older day can read – the daughter and the grand-daughters can read to them the news of the world.”<sup>36</sup> More testimonies of this kind reveal the prevalence of the custom, both at home and in public places. The reliance on this effective expedient for responding to the needs would continue for a long time. Many years later, in Syria of the late 1930s, when national news was a hot commodity, “newspaper hawkers (al-baᶜa al-mutajawwilun) would stop schoolchildren on their way to school and ask them to read out the paper for them.”<sup>37</sup> Adapted to the new needs, the old mechanism of sharing knowledge in groups permitted Arabic-speaking societies to distribute printed information and discuss it at the community’s remotest corners. It was a useful bypass around the hurdles of pervasive illiteracy, penury, and the dif<sup>fi</sup>- culties posed by rapid changes in the Arabic lexicon. The collective mode was at its utmost utility when applied in spreading the kind of knowledge that was of immediate relevance: news. As such, its use would be enhanced in times of dramatic events, such as wars.<sup>38</sup> It is important to note that this mediated format also had its limitations, most obviously the listeners’ dependence on the reader’s comprehension and selection. If skilled and knowledgeable, a mediator would offer a good solution to the gap between the <sup>fl</sup>ow of writings and the public inability to consume them. A perfect solution would be the complete eliminating of that gap, through schooling. If collective reading in the Middle East was an advantageous response to the <sup>fl</sup>ood of publications, to historians of printing and reading, it poses a serious dif<sup>fi</sup>culty: It complicates their ability to assess the public consumption of the texts for its extent and quality and to reconstruct the social pro<sup>fi</sup>le of the readership. Group-reading sessions, often spontaneous, hardly ever left a record of any kind. The magnifying potential of group reading and its extensive use would render futile any attempt to calculate the scope of circulation, let alone its impact. When a single copy of a newspaper or handbill – or, less often, a serious journal or book – is reached by an unspeci<sup>fi</sup>ed crowd through vocal mediation, sometimes on multiple occasions, the historian can more easily describe the phenomenon than assess its scope and effect. At best, we may responsibly postulate that the actual public exposure to a given text was many folds bigger than the number of its distributed copies (assuming we have a notion of that last <sup>fi</sup>gure) when some of them were read in groups. How many folds? Usually, there is no telling.