Many of the changes examined in this book are embodied, if we will, in one charming account: that of Sayyid Qutb, telling about his youth as a book-loving boy in the Egyptian countryside of the early twentieth century (see Chapters 4 and 6). A roving bookseller making his living by vending and lending printed works in the villages, children as a prominent category of book-consumers, a teenager building his own book collection which buys him a local repute, ᶜAntara epics in print, and Sherlock Holmes in Arabic – all of these would have been inconceivable just several decades earlier. They re<sup>fl</sup>ected the change in the attitude of Arab society to written texts following the entry of printing into the region and the inception of a far-reaching cultural transformation. During the formative period explored here, tens of thousands of Arabic books and booklets were printed in the Middle East in millions of copies, a periodical and daily press was born and prospered, multiple channels were formed to route the mounting wave of publications to near and far places, and large publics of habituated readers emerged. These processes and practices, and the men and women engaged in them, together represented the foundations of the nahda edi<sup>fi</sup>ce, known to us mostly through the written works of its luminaries. The introduction of mass printing into the Middle East, like the entry of <sup>fi</sup>rearms, railways, or postal services, proved to be irreversible. World War I, a major watershed in the region’s political history, did not mark an important turning point in that process of change or, more broadly, in the area’s cultural development. Rather, it was an interval after which the momentum resumed with double vigor, an interval conspicuous enough to serve as a convenient cutting point of our story but little more than that. Contending with initial dif<sup>fi</sup>culties and overcoming many obstacles, the process continued to expand after the war. Developments which hitherto had taken place mostly in Egypt and Lebanon spread thereafter to other parts, in similar ways and with comparable results. Egypt and Lebanon would remain regional springs of literary resources for the entire area for many decades to come. But presses, newspapers, and bookshops would also burgeon in Syria, Palestine, Iraq, Transjordan, and parts of the Arabian Peninsula, as would schooling systems and reading publics. The seeds sown during the nahda began to sprout most everywhere already before World War I, and would later yield a colorful garden. These developments were an integral part of the broad changes of the last Ottoman century, affecting and being affected by them. The advent of printing, diffusion systems, and readership rested on progress in transportation and postal services, the upgrading of urban infrastructures, and educational reforms, and were in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by economic changes and administrative adjustments, the expansion of foreign presence, and historic shifts such as the substantial Lebanese emigration to Egypt. At the same time, these developments had their profound effect on the wider changes of the time. They modi<sup>fi</sup>ed the operation of social, political, and cultural systems; altered modes of interpersonal relations; and converted people’s everyday life in endless ways. Such had been the consequences of the entry of printing in Europe earlier on, but in the Middle East, the changes were more striking, as they took less time to unfold. The rapid pace with which the region embraced tools and practices that had taken long to develop in Europe had an impact on its societies evocative of shock treatment. Its wide-ranging results are a matter for another study, or studies. Here we may only brie<sup>fl</sup>y point to some of them, by way of concluding the book. A major result of mass printing was the transformation of the public role of written texts, from a realm of small groups into a public sphere reachable by all. Spiritual and mundane knowledge, much of it enclosed in state <sup>fi</sup>les and old books, had previously been reachable primarily by political, bureaucratic, and pious leaders. Routes to some of that wisdom had existed, and sometimes been accessed by others; but on the whole, a distinction between those who employed the instruments of knowledge, and hence power, and the rest of society had typi<sup>fi</sup>ed the public system. It had been generally accepted and seldom contested. Printing opened the door to a change in this structure, by allowing not only easy popular admission to knowledge but also its large-scale reproduction and dissemination by anyone. The musical instruments used by the band on the stage became available to all members of the audience, who could employ them as they pleased. Anyone with small resources could obtain one of those tools and air his melody to others in the hall; if enterprising, one could even become a builder of such instruments and let them be heard by many, near and far. In other words, anyone could now print a proclamation or a pamphlet, skinny or substantial, in multiple copies and spread them around with a potentially robust effect. With the growing ease of issuing books, newspapers, and handbills, and with more and more people able to read them, the old structure of political and spiritual authority in Arab societies began to crack. Whether or not sultans and ᶜulama’ had once worried about the danger printing posed to their standing, such a worry would have been justi<sup>fi</sup>ed: Newspapers came to compete with the of<sup>fi</sup>cial munadı and the pulpit and in some ways even replaced them. Political and religious leaders whose authority was being challenged tried to check that trend: the state with strong-arm measures and religious guides by embracing the modern tools and applying them in counteroffensive. Both the state and the religious leadership had to resort to new methods in order to retain their longacknowledged standing in the new game; both scored merely partial success, something that had become quite evident by 1914. Printing facilitated the circulation of ideas that led to organized political action of new kinds in the region. There can be no doubting its major role in generating the processes which gave birth to the Egyptian nationalist movement around the turn of the century, for example, or to the Young Turk Revolution of 1908. The impact of printing on social relations was equally profound. With access to written knowledge becoming more vital than ever before, acquisition of the key to it became a major criterion for social status, alongside traditional criteria such as descent, wealth, or old age. The new rules modi<sup>fi</sup>ed relations within the family as well: As younger members were taught to obtain intelligence that was beyond reach to their illiterate elders, the traditional locus of authority in the family was beginning to shake. Similarly, when women began to read, lured by available books and journals at home and the bold call for emancipation by members of their gender, this began to challenge their old unprivileged place in the family and society. Finally, the introduction of many printed items of various uses, from legal notices to commercial receipts, modi<sup>fi</sup>ed people’s daily routine in many small ways and gradually made them dependent on it for practical and mental navigation in the shifting surroundings. Typical of urban more than of rural areas at <sup>fi</sup>rst, these developments would gradually affect the entire society. All of these changes were long-term processes. Most of them would become visible only at a later time, and in some areas – for instance, the reform in the standing of women – the process is still under way. But printing, publishing, and the new systems for training consumers started off these changes during the phase explored here, and their repercussions could be observed already at that early stage. Many other factors that were at play beside the entry of printing played an equal or bigger role in generating these changes. The impact of those other factors on individual and group functioning was in itself often facilitated by printing in one way or another, in the Middle East as elsewhere. Finally, we may return to the question posed in a previous chapter: Would it be suitable to designate these substantial changes as “revolutionary”? Since “revolutionary,” especially in this adjectival form, is essentially a relative term, the question is one of the historian’s semantic preferences. My sense is that the changes whose formative phase has been examined in this book were suf<sup>fi</sup>ciently profound, and their implications suf<sup>fi</sup>ciently far-reaching, to merit being labeled revolutionary. During the early stage studied here, the engine of change began rolling slowly, gathering speed and reaching a vigorous momentum in its irreversible course on the eve of World War I. It might not have seemed as a revolutionary journey then in certain parts of the region, but with the bene<sup>fi</sup>t of hindsight, we now know that it was portending one, in a big way. If we choose to apply such a tag, we must also keep in mind that the Arab printing and reading revolution, like all revolutions, did not obliterate the past but rather retained much of it. The embracing of many innovations was accompanied by a good measure of continuity in the contents and genres of written works, their form and style, the methods of their retention and diffusion, and the modes of their reading. Some of these, not all, would change over time. Bearing that in mind, and given the unfolding implications, the mass adoption of printing and reading from the late nineteenth century onward may well be counted as a truly major revolution in modern Arab cultural history – as would be the later-generation entry of media such as Internet, smartphones, and Facebook.