There is no page 168 ## 7 ## Alternative Views of Complexity The preceding chapters of this book have discussed several kinds of artificial systems. The examples we have examinedin particular, economic systems, the business firm, the human mind, sophisticated engineering designs, and social plansrange from the moderately to the exceedingly complex (not necessarily in the order in which I have just listed them). These final two chapters address the topic of complexity more generally, to see what light it casts on the structure and operation of these and other large systems that are prominent in our world today. ## Conceptions of Complexity This century has seen recurrent bursts of interest in complexity and complex systems. An early eruption, after World War I, gave birth to the term "holism," and to interest in "Gestalts" and "creative evolution." In a second major eruption, after World War II, the favorite terms were "information," "feedback,'' "cybernetics," and "general systems." In the current eruption, complexity is often associated with "chaos," "adaptive systems," "genetic algorithms," and "cellular automata." While sharing a concern with complexity, the three eruptions selected different aspects of the complex for special attention. The post-WWII interest in complexity, focusing on the claim that the whole transcends the sum of the parts, was strongly anti-reductionist in flavor. The post-WWII outburst was rather neutral on the issue of reductionism, focusing on the roles of feedback and homeostasis (self-stabilization) in maintaining complex systems. The current interest in complexity focuses mainly on mechanisms that create and sustain complexity and on analytic tools for describing and analyzing it. ## Holism and Reductionism "Holism" is a modern name for a very old idea. In the words of its author, the South African statesman and philosopher, J. C. Smuts: [Holism] regards natural objects as wholes. . . . It looks upon nature as consisting of discrete, concrete bodies and things . . . [which] are not entirely resolvable into parts; and . . . which are more then the sums of their parts, and the mechanical putting together of their parts will not produce them or account for their characters and behavior.1 Holism can be given weaker or stronger interpretations. Applied to living systems, the strong claim that "the putting together of their parts will not produce them or account for their characters and behaviors" implies a vitalism that is wholly antithetical to modern molecular biology. Applied to minds in particular, it is used to support both the claim that machines cannot think and the claim that thinking involves more than the arrangement and behavior of neurons. Applied to complex systems in general, it postulates new system properties and relations among subsystems that had no place in the system components; hence it calls for emergence, a "creative" principle. Mechanistic explanations of emergence are rejected. In a weaker interpretation, emergence simply means that the parts of a complex system have mutual relations that do not exist for the parts in isolation. Thus, there can be gravitational attractions among bodies only when two or more bodies interact with each other. We can learn something about the (relative) gravitational accelerations of binary stars, but not of isolated stars. In the same way, if we study the structures only of individual proteins, nothing presages the way in which one protein molecule, serving as an enzyme, can provide a template into which two other molecules can insert themselves and be held while they undergo a reaction linking them. The template, a real enough physical property of the enzyme, has no function until it is placed in an environment of other molecules of a certain kind. 1. J. C. Smuts, "Holism," Encyclopaedia Britannica, 14th ed., vol. 11 (1929), p. 640. Even though the template's function is "emergent;" having no meaning for the isolated enzyme molecule, the binding process, and the forces employed in it, can be given a wholly reductionist explanation in terms of the known physico-chemical properties of the molecules that participate in it. Consequently, this weak form of emergence poses no problems for even the most ardent reductionist. "Weak emergence" shows up in a variety of ways. In describing a complex system we often find it convenient to introduce new theoretical terms, like inertial mass in mechanics, or voltage in the theory of circuits, for quantities that are not directly observable but are defined by relations among the observables.2 We can often use such terms to avoid reference to details of the component subsystems, referring only to their aggregate properties. Ohm, for example, established his law of electrical resistance by constructing a circuit containing a battery that drove current through a wire, and an ammeter that measured the magnetic force induced by the current. By changing the length of the wire, he altered the current. The equation relating the length of the wire (resistance) to the force registered by the ammeter (current) contained two constants, which were independent of the length of the wire but changed if he replaced the battery by another. These constants were labeled the voltage and internal resistance of the battery, which was otherwise unanalyzed and treated as a "black box." Voltage and internal resistance are not measured directly but are theoretical terms, inferred from the measured resistance and current with the aid of Ohm's Law. Whereas the details of components can often be ignored while studying their interactions in the whole system, the short-run behavior of the individual subsystems can often be described in detail while ignoring the (slower) interactions among subsystems. In economics, we often study the interaction of closely related marketsfor example, the markets for iron ore, pig iron, sheet steel and steel productsunder the assumption that all other supply and demand relations remain constant. In the next chapter, we will discuss at length this near independence of hierarchical 2. H. A. Simon, "The Axiomatization of Physical Theories," Philosophy of Science, 37(1970), 16 26. systems from the detail of their component subsystems, as well as the short-run independence of the subsystems from the slower movements of the total system. By adopting this weak interpretation of emergence, we can adhere (and I will adhere) to reductionism in principle even though it is not easy (often not even computationally feasible) to infer rigorously the properties of the whole from knowledge of the properties of the parts. In this pragmatic way, we can build nearly independent theories for each successive level of complexity, but at the same time, build bridging theories that show how each higher level can be accounted for in terms of the elements and relations of the next level below. This is, of course, the usual conception of the sciences as building upward from elementary particles, through atoms and molecules to cells, organs and organisms. The actual history, however, has unfolded, as often as not, in the opposite directionfrom top down. We have already observed, in chapter 1, how we commonly hang our scientific theories from skyhooks. ## Cybernetics and General Systems Theory The period during and just after World War II saw the emergence of what Norbert Wiener dubbed "cybernetics": a combination of servomechanism theory (feedback control systems), information theory, and modern storedprogram computers, all of which afford bold new insights into complexity. Information theory explains organized complexity in terms of the reduction of entropy (disorder) that is achieved when systems (organisms, for example) absorb energy from external sources and convert it to pattern or structure. In information theory, energy, information, and pattern all correspond to negative entropy. Feedback control shows how a system can work toward goals and adapt to a changing environment,3 thereby removing the mystery from teleology. What is required is ability to recognize the goal, to detect differences between the current situation and the goal, and actions that can reduce such differences: precisely the capabilities embodied in a system like the General Problem Solver. Soon this insight was being applied to 3. A. Rosenblueth, N. Wiener and J. Bigelow, "Behavior, Purpose and Teleology," Philosophy of Science, 10(1943), 18 24. constructing small robots that could maneuver around a room autonomously.4 As computers became available, systems could be built at levels of complexity that had never before been contemplated; and by virtue of their capability for interpreting and executing their own internally stored programs, computers initiated the study of artificial intelligence. These developments encouraged both the study of complex systems, especially adaptive goal-oriented systems, "as wholes," and simultaneously, the reductive explanation of system properties in terms of mechanisms. Holism was brought into confrontation with reductionism in a way that had never been possible before, and that confrontation continues today in philosophical discussion of artificial systems. During these postwar years, a number of proposals were advanced for the development of "general systems theory," that, abstracting from the special properties of physical, biological, or social systems, would apply to all of them.5 We might well feel that, while the goal is laudable, systems of these diverse kinds could hardly be expected to have any nontrivial properties in common. Metaphor and analogy can be helpful or they can be misleading. All depends on whether the similarities the metaphor captures are significant or superficial. If a general systems theory is too ambitious a goal, it might still not be vain to search for common properties among broad classes of complex systems. The ideas that go by the name of cybernetics constitute, if not a theory, at least a point of view that has proved fruitful over a wide range of applications.6 It has been highly useful to look at the behavior of adaptive systems in terms of feedback and homeostasis and to apply to these concepts the theory of selective information.7 The concepts of feedback 4. W. Grey Walter, "An Imitation of Life," Scientific American, 182 (5) (1950):42. 5. See especially the yearbooks of the Society for General Systems Research. Prominent exponents of general systems theory were L. von Bertalanffy, K. Boulding, R. W. Gerard and, still active in this endeavor, J. G. Miller. 6. N. Wiener, Cybernetics (New York: Wiley, 1948). For an imaginative forerunner, see A. J. Lotka, Elements of Mathematical Biology (New York: Dover Publications, 1951), first published in 1924 as Elements of Physical Biology. 7. C. Shannon and W. Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Communication (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949); W. R. Ashby, Design for a Brain (New York: Wiley, 1952). and information provide a frame of reference for viewing a wide range of situations, just as do the ideas of evolution, of relativism, of axiomatic method, and of operationalism. The principal contribution of this second wave of inquiry into complexity Jay precisely in the more specific concepts it brought to attention rather than in the broad idea of a general systems theory. This view is illustrated in the next chapter, which focuses on the properties of those particular complex systems that are hierarchical in structure, and draws out the consequences for system behavior of the strong assumption of hierarchy (or neardecomposability, as I shall call it). ## Current Interest in Complexity The current, third, burst of interest in complexity shares many of the characteristics of the second. Much of the motivation for it is the growing need to understand and cope with some of the world's large-scale systemsthe environment, for one, the world-wide society that our species has created, for another, and organisms, for a third. But this motivation could not, by itself, tie attention to complexity for very long if novel ways of thinking about it were not also provided. Going beyond the tools and concepts that appeared in the second wave, other new ideas have emerged, together with relevant mathematics and computational algorithms. The ideas have such labels as "catastrophe," "chaos," "genetic algorithms;" and ''cellular automata." As always, the labels have some tendency to assume a life of their own. The foreboding tone of "catastrophe" and "chaos" says something about the age of anxiety in which these concepts were named. Their value as concepts, however, depends not on the rhetoric they evoke, but on their power to produce concrete answers to questions of complexity. For the particular concepts listed above, much of the verdict is not yet in. I want to comment briefly on each of them, for they are both alternatives and complements to the approach to hierarchical complexity that I will develop in the next chapter. ## Catastrophe Theory Catastrophe theory appeared on the scene around 1968,8 made an audible splash, and nearly faded from public sight within a few years. It is a solid body of mathematics dealing with the classification of nonlinear dynamic systems according to their modes of behavior. Catastrophic events occur in a special kind of system. Such a system can assume two (or more) distinct steady states (static equilibria, for example, or periodic cycles); but when the system is in one of these states, a moderate change in a system parameter may cause it to shift suddenly to the otheror into an unstable state in which variables increase without limit. The mathematician R. Thom constructed a topological classification of two-variable and three-variable systems according to the kinds of catastrophes they could or couldn't experience. It is not hard to think of natural systems that exhibit behavior of this kindstable behavior followed by a sudden shift to disequilibrium or to another, quite different, equilibrium. A commonly cited example is the threatened dog that either suddenly moves to the attackor panics and flees. More complex examples have been studied: for instance, a budworm population infesting a spruce forest. The rapidly reproducing budworms quickly reach an equilibrium of maximum density; but the slow continuing growth of the spruce forest gradually alters the limit on the budworm population until, when a critical forest density is exceeded, the population explodes.9 One can conjure up models of human revolutions embodying similar mechanisms. In the circumstances that create it, the catastrophe mechanism is effective and the metaphor evocative, but in practice, only a limited number of situations have been found where it leads to any further analysis. Most of the initial applications that struck public fancy (like the attacking/fleeing dog) were after-the-fact explanations of phenomenon that were ## 8. See R. Thom, An Outline of a General Theory of Models (Reading, MA: Benjamin, 1975). 9. For an account of the spruce/budworm model, see T. F. H. Allen and T. B. Starr, Ecology: Perspectives for Ecological Complexity (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1982), and references cited there. In the next chapter we will see that this same example can be described as a nearly decomposable system. already familiar. For this reason, catastrophe theory is much less prominent in the public eye and in the literature of complexity today than it was twenty-five years ago. ## Complexity and Chaos The theory of chaos also represents solid mathematics, which in this case has a long history reaching back to Poincaré.10 Chaotic systems are deterministic dynamic systems that, if their initial conditions are disturbed even infinitesimally, may alter their paths radically. Thus, although they are deterministic, their detailed behavior over time is unpredictable, for small perturbations cause large changes in path. Chaotic systems were sufficiently intractable to mathematical treatment that, although the subject was kept alive by a few French mathematicians working in the tradition of Poincaré, only modest progress was made with them until well beyond the middle of this century. A major source of new progress has been the ability to use computers to display and explore their chaotic behavior. Gradually, researchers in a number of sciences began to suspect that important phenomena they wished to understand were, in this technical sense, chaotic. One of the first was the meteorologist E. N. Lorenz, who started to explore in the early 1960s the possibility that weather was a chaotic phenomenonthe possibility that the butterfly in Singapore, by flapping its wings, could cause a thunderstorm in New York. Soon, fluid turbulence in general was being discussed in terms of chaos; and the possible inculpation of chaos in the complex behavior of a wide range of physical and biological systems was being studied. Solid experimental evidence that specific physical systems do, in fact, behave chaotically began to appear in the late 1970s.11 The growth in attention to chaos must be viewed against the background of our general understanding of dynamic systems. For a long time we have had a quite general theory of systems of linear differential equa- 10. H. Poincaré, Les Methodes Nouvelle de la Méchanique Céleste. (Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1892). 11. An excellent selection of the literature of chaos, both mathematical and experimental, up to the middle 1980s can be found in P. Cvitanovic \* (ed.), Universality in Chaos (Bristol: Adam Hilger, 1986). tions and their solution in closed form. With systems of nonlinear equations, matters were less satisfactory. Under particular simple boundary conditions, solutions were known for a number of important systems of nonlinear partial differential equations that capture the laws of various kinds of wave motion. But beyond these special cases, knowledge was limited to methods for analyzing local behavior qualitativelyits stability or instabilityin order to divide the space of achievable states into discrete regions. In each such region, specific kinds of behavior (e.g., movement to equilibrium, escape from unstable equilibrium, steady-state motion in limit cycles) would occur.12 This was the bread-and-butter content of the standard textbook treatments of nonlinear analysis, and beyond these qualitative generalizations, complex nonlinear systems had to be studied mainly by numerical simulation with computers. Most of the large computers and super-computers of the past half century have been kept busy simulating numerically the behavior of the systems of partial differential equations that describe the dynamics of airplanes, atomic piles, the atmosphere, and turbulent systems generally. As chaotic systems were not typically discussed in the textbooks, the then-current theory of nonlinear systems provided little help in treating such phenomena as turbulence except at an aggregate and very approximate level. Under these circumstances, new computer-generated discoveries about chaos in the late 1970s and early 1980s created enormous interest and excitement in a variety of fields where phenomena were already suspected of being chaotic, and hence could perhaps be understood better with the new theory. Numerical computations on simple nonlinear systems revealed unsuspected invariants ("universal numbers") that predicted, for broad classes of such systems, at what point they would change from orderly to chaotic behavior.13 Until high-speed computers were available to reveal them, such regularities were invisible. 12. A standard source is A. A. Andronov, E. A. Leontovich, I. I. Gordon and A. G. Maier, Qualitative Theory of Second-Order Dynamic Systems (Wiley, NY: 1973). 13. M. J. Feigenbaum, "Universal Behavior in Nonlinear Systems;" Los Alamos Science, 1 (1980):4 27. This and other "classic" papers on chaos from the 1970s and 1980s are reprinted in P. Cvitanovic \*, ed., op. cit. Deep understanding has now been achieved of many aspects of chaos, but to say that we "understand" does not imply that we can predict. Chaos led to the recognition of a new, generalized, notion of equilibriumthe so-called "strange attractor." In classical nonlinear theory a system might come to a stable equilibrium, or it might oscillate permanently in a limit cycle, like the orbit of a planet. A chaotic system, however, might also enter a region of its state space, the strange attractor, in which it would remain permanently. Within the strange attractor, motion would not cease, nor would it be predictable, but although deterministic, would appear to be random. That is, slightly different directions of entrance into the strange attractor, or slight perturbations when in it, would lead the system into quite different paths. A billiard ball aimed exactly at a 45° angle across a square "ideal" billiard table, will reflect off successive sides and, returning to the starting point, repeat its rectangular path indefinitely. But if you decrease or increase the 45° angle by an epsilon, the ball will never return to the starting point but will pursue a path that will eventually take it as close as you please to any spot on the table. The table's entire surface has become the strange attractor for the chaotic behavior and almost equal but different initial angles will produce continually diverging paths. The theory of chaos has perhaps not maintained the hectic pace of development it experienced from the early 1960s to the late 1980s, but during this period it established itself as an essential conceptual framework and mathematical tool for the study of a class of systems that have major real-world importance in a number of scientific domains. The mechanisms of chaos are more general, but also of wider application, than those of catastrophe theory. Hence, we can expect chaos to continue to play a larger role than catastrophe in the continuing study of complex systems. ## Rationality in a Catastrophic or Chaotic World What implications do catastrophe and chaos have for the systemseconomies, the human mind, and designed complex systemsthat we have been discussing in the previous six chapters? Although there have been some attempts to discover chaos in economic time series, the results thus far have been inconclusive. I am aware of no clear demonstration of chaos in the brain, but there is increasing evidence that chaos plays a role, although still a rather unclear one, in the functioning of the normal and defective heart. Designers frequently construct systems (e.g., airplanes and ships) that produce, and cope successfully with, turbulence and perhaps other kinds of chaos. On the basis of the evidence, we should suppose neither that all of the complex systems we encounter in the world are chaotic, nor that few of them are. Moreover, as the airplane example shows, the ominous term "chaotic" should not be read as "unmanageable." Turbulence is frequently present in hydraulic and aerodynamic situations and artifacts. In such situations, although the future is not predictable in any detail, it is manageable as an aggregate phenomenon. And the paths of tornadoes and hurricanes are notoriously unstable but stable enough in the short run that we can usually be warned and reach shelter before they hit us. Since Newton, astronomers have been able to compute the motion of a system of two bodies that exercise mutual gravitational attraction on each other. With three or more bodies, they never obtained more than approximations to the motion, and indeed, there is now good reason to believe that, in general, gravitational systems of three or more bodies, including the solar system, are chaotic. But we have no reason to anticipate untoward consequences from that chaosits presence simply implies that astronomers will be frustrated in their attempts to predict the exact positions of the planets in the rather long runa perplexity as frustrating as, but perhaps less damaging than, the difficulties meteorologists experience in predicting the weather. Finally, there has been substantial progress in devising feedback devices that "tame" chaos by restricting chaotic systems, moving within their strange attractors, to small neighborhoods having desired properties, so that the chaos becomes merely tolerable noise. Such devices provide an example, consonant with the discussion in earlier chapters, of the substitution of control for prediction. ## Complexity and Evolution Much current research on complex systems focuses upon the emergence of complexity, that is, system evolution. Two computational approaches to evolution that have attracted particular attention are the genetic algorithms first explored by Holland14 and computer algorithms for cellular automata that simulate the multiplication and competition of organisms, playing the so-called "game of life." ## Genetic Algorithms From an evolutionary standpoint, an organism can be represented by a list or vector of features (its genes). Evolution evaluates this vector in terms of fitness for survival. From generation to generation, the frequency distribution of features and their combinations over the members of a species change through sexual reproduction, crossover, inversion, and mutation. Natural selection causes features and combinations of features contributing to high fitness to multiply more rapidly than, and ultimately to replace, features and combinations conducive to low fitness. By programming this abstraction on a modern computer we can build a computational model of the process of evolution. The simulation, in turn, can be used to study the relative rates at which fitness will grow under different assumptions about the model, including assumptions about rates of mutation and crossover. In the next chapter, we will consider the special case of evolution in hierarchical systems, which appears to be the kind of system that predominates in the natural world. ## Cellular Automata and the Game of Life The computer is used not only to estimate the statistics of evolution but to carry out simulations, at an abstract level, of evolutionary processes. This research goes back, in fact, to the second eruption of interest in complexity, after World War II, when John von Neumann, building on some ideas of Stanislaw Ulam, defined abstractly (but did not implement) a system that was capable of reproducing itself. The idea was kept alive by Arthur Burks and others, but it was not until well into the current period of activity that Christopher Langton created a computer program that simulated a self-reproducing cellular automaton.15 Computer programs can create 14. J. H. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1975). 15. A. W. Burks (ed.), Essays on Cellular Automata (Champaign-Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1970); C. G. Langton (ed.), Artificial Life. Santa Fe Insti- (footnote continued on next page) symbolic objects of various kinds and apply rules for their replication or destruction as a function of their environments (which include other nearby objects). With appropriate selection of the system parameters, such simulations can provide vivid demonstrations of evolving self-reproducing systems. This line of exploration is still at a very early stage of development, is largely dependent on computer simulation, and lacks any large body of formal theory. It will be some time before we can assess its potential, but it has already presented us with a fundamental and exciting result: self-reproducing systems are a reality. ## Conclusion Complexity is more and more acknowledged to be a key characteristic of the world we live in and of the systems that cohabit our world. It is not new for science to attempt to understand complex systems: astronomers have been at it for millennia, and biologists, economists, psychologists, and others joined them some generations ago. What is new about the present activity is not the study of particular complex systems but the study of the phenomenon of complexity in its own right. If, as appears to be the case, complexity (like systems science) is too general a subject to have much content, then particular classes of complex systems possessing strong properties that provide a fulcrum for theorizing and generalizing can serve as the foci of attention. More and more, this appears to be just what is happening, with chaos, genetic algorithms, cellular automata, catastrophe, and hierarchical systems serving as some of the currently visible focal points. In the next chapter we will examine the last-named of these more closely. ## (footnote continued from previous page) tute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Proceedings, vol. 6 (Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley; 1989); C. G. Langton, C. Taylor, J. D. Farmer and S. Rassmussen (eds.), Artificial Life II. Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Proceedings, vol. 10 (Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1992).