We are living in unusual times. Every day we are challenged to navigate an increasingly complex and dynamic world. This is true not only for us as individuals, in our private and professional lives, but also for the organizations we create and are part of. Public organizations and companies alike are learning the hard way that the problems before us now cannot be resolved in the way we approached problems in the past. But if the old ways do not work anymore, what do we do now? How can we create progress and deal with the new challenges that the world is putting before us? As an answer to this question, this book introduces a fascinating new practice for creating original approaches to really hard problems. Frame creation is a deep and thoughtful approach for achieving radical innovation that was originally developed in the practices of expert designers. These expert designers have always been known for “solving the unsolvable,” creating new solutions where others see none, and for finding new opportunities where others see only problems. But what, then, is their secret? They have a special approach to problems, called “frame creation.” In this book, the frame creation approach is introduced, investigated, and then modeled so that it can be used by professionals in other fields, beyond the designing disciplines. The book is organized as follows: first, we will need to explore the nature of today’s problems, and understand what makes these problems so hard to solve (chapter 1). Learning from the practices of pioneering organizations (chapter 2) and more than fifty years of design research (chapter 3), the book builds up to a nine-step model of the frame creation process (chapter 4). The principles and practices behind these steps are clarified (chapter 5), and then the focus swerves to implementation of the frame creation approach, as tools and methods for frame innovators are formulated (chapters 6, 7, and 8). Rather than constituting a straight how-to manual for frame innovation, these tools and methods together could be compared to a do-it-yourself guide: a deep understanding of the principles and practices of frame creation will help the practitioner to develop his or her own approach to achieving radical innovation. This book can be read in several ways. Chapter 4 contains the core model of the frame creation approach, and the nineteen case studies illustrate its use in a lively, situated, and pragmatic manner. The broader text creates a much deeper understanding of the “why” and “how,” and explains how frame creation practice can radically extend our current approaches for creating innovation. Over the years of studying designers and experimenting with frame creation, I have become convinced that this is an immensely valuable new approach to resolving problems, and create the new thinking that is sorely needed to deal with the newly open, complex, dynamic, and networked nature of today’s world. Kees Dorst Sydney and Eindhoven, 2014