## 1 CHALLENGES ## WE ARE NOT SOLVING OUR PROBLEMS ANYMORE Look at the news this morning. If we put aside the inevitable natural disasters and the usual gossip, what stares us in the face is an endless succession of reports showing us how much trouble we have dealing with the complex issues of contemporary life. There seems to be no way out. Companies and government organizations alike are swept up in a comedy of errors, and a world of missed opportunities lies mute in the background. Sociologist Hans Boutellier has captured our current predicament well: In today’s world we have difficulty formulating grand comforting ideas. We hear a cacophony of voices and opinions, see rage and frustration, and observe a lot of ad hoc policy and tentative management. There is a lot of fumbling around without a guiding concept. … A great deal of tinkering and muddling goes on within politics, educational institutions, the business community, retailers, the self-employed. … If nobody knows the answer, then we choose what seems to be “best”: good practices, effective interventions, evidence-based policy. We formulate a politics of risk management and crisis management. … We let ourselves be guided by effectiveness and efficiency, preferably demonstrated by performance indicators, guided by supervision and control. (Boutellier 2013) This is not because we are particularly dumb or inept, but because we are collectively being tripped up by today’s problems. As I argue in this book, this difficulty is the result of the emergence of a radically new species of problem: problems that are so open, complex, dynamic, and networked that they seem impervious to solution. What all the news stories show us is that it makes no sense to keep trying to tackle these problems the way we used to. The trusted routines just don’t work anymore. These new types of problems require a radically different response. In searching for alternative ways to tackle these open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems, leading innovators in different fields have increasingly been turning to “design” for help. These individuals, companies, institutions, and governments are interested in design because expert designers deal with the new types of problems in their professional field without too much trouble. Under the flag of “design thinking,” businesses and business schools are seeking inspiration from design-based case studies (Brown 2009; Verganti 2009; Carlopio 2010; Plattner, Meinel, and Weinberg 2009). Yet recent experience has shown that it is not easy to effectively transpose these lessons from design into other domains. The application of some cool design tricks and techniques, although liberating and inspiring, doesn’t often lead to the results we really need. I will argue that this is because the interest in “design thinking” mostly focuses on the designer’s abilities in generating solutions, rather than on the key ability of expert designers to create new approaches to problem situations (“framing”). The creation of new “frames” to approach problem situations is the key and special element of designers’ problem-solving practices (Whitbeck 1998). While this framing of problems is a universal human ability (Gardner 1983, 2006), and thus cannot be claimed to be special to the design professions, it is particularly important (indeed, central) to the design professions. We will find that expert design practitioners have developed unique, sophisticated multilayered practices for creating new frames. After taking a very close look at the way these design practices work, this book will use these professional practices as the basis for developing an alternative to conventional problem-solving methods. Nineteen case studies will show how these design-based practices and strategies for frame creation can be extremely valuable for dealing with open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems in a broad range of domains. We will then explore how these practices can be introduced and implemented into organizations to achieve frame innovation. The fresh practices that will be presented in this book are based on lessons learned from studying the activities of top designers, and build on the very detailed and subtle understanding of design that has emerged from over fifty years of design research. This research is a veritable treasure trove of approaches and insights. In creating the vital link between top-end design practice and conventional problem-solving, we will wander into philosophical territory every now and then—because the issues we are seeking to resolve turn out to be quite fundamental. But in the end this book is written for practitioners, it is about practices, and it is always fundamentally practical in nature. It was written because we need to extend our repertoire of problem-solving practices to deal with the complex, networked world we have created for ourselves. We do not have a moment to lose. To begin, let’s try to understand the nature of the problematic situations we find ourselves in by looking at three case histories from widely different domains. ## CASE 1 ## The train to nowhere: ## On decision-making about public infrastructure For years, a high-speed train link was being planned in Holland, a small and densely populated European country. This link would connect major cities like Rotterdam and Amsterdam to the pan-European high-speed train network that has been built over the last thirty years. The link was seen as strategically important for economic, social, and cultural reasons. Not joining the network would leave Holland relatively isolated—geographically, the country is just north of the main population centers of the European Union. The proud and sophisticated Dutch government apparatus braced itself for a long and difficult planning process: the adverse consequences for thousands of people living and working along the proposed train route were only too easy to imagine. Who would welcome the thought of a 450-ton steel monster racing through their backyard at 300 km/hour, every ten minutes or so? The impact of noise, ruined views, vibration, and property devaluation is potentially huge. In a more hierarchical country (with a higher “power distance” [Hofstede 1997, 2001]) or in a less crowded country, the planning of a new train link might not be a problem. But in this case it was. Impact studies were made, and years were spent in elaborate community consultation procedures. Forums were created so that everyone could have his or her say, all according to best practice in democratic government. All this was done in the belief that through these discussions rationality would prevail, and a consensus could be reached. But every time one of the proposed routes took the lead, local councils and citizen groups commissioned their own studies to show that the government’s research was incomplete, or plainly wrong. While the tabled arguments were often plausible, the motivation behind them was, of course, the classic NIMBY: “Not In My Back Yard.” The confusion that ensued from this proliferation of studies was exacerbated by the fact that by this time (the mid-nineties) the Internet was coming of age and the number of stakeholders involved in these processes skyrocketed: apart from the obvious institutional stakeholders like the railway company, the main airport, or the local councils, the project was besieged by a wild variety of environmental groups, NGOs, and lobbying groups of concerned citizens expressing their views and gathering support. Interest groups started to come up with their own proposals for where to situate the train line, and launched those schemes in the press complete with “independent” studies to support their merit. In a desperate effort to reach a consensus, the government felt duty-bound to consider every new alternative. It kept commissioning extra studies to evaluate these proposals, thus dragging out the decision process even more. The local interest groups were supported by the local councils, who were getting caught between the interests of the state and the need to represent the views of their angry citizens. The councils of the towns and cities along the proposed routes sought to resolve this paradox by explaining that while they didn’t want the noise, they could live with it if they were compensated with the economic benefits of their own station on the train line (a compromise that, unfortunately, does not make sense for a high-speed train). The planning process dragged on for fifteen years, with no conclusion in sight (Priemus 2009). Meanwhile, the people living and working along the proposed routes were becoming traumatized by the constant uncertainty caused by this prolonged decision process. In the end, even the press got tired of it. Voices of those wanting to just forget the whole project were getting louder and louder: not because the train link was a bad idea, for there was general consensus that the country could ill afford not to be connected to the European network, but because no agreement could be reached on the route. After fifteen years of planning and deliberation, this process ground to a halt, collapsing under the weight of the paradoxes in the problem situation and the dilemmas presented by the different solutions. It could have remained stuck forever … but, in the end, the deadlock was broken by the election of a new government, which included parties that had pledged to forge ahead with the project. By that time, two dominant trajectories for the rail link had emerged, the first of which more or less followed a straight line from the border to its terminus in Amsterdam. This proposal, created by the government planning office, was the one the ministry had been pushing all along. The second proposal was created by an ex–civil servant and cleverly minimized the impact of the new train line by linking its trajectory to the existing freeway network at the cost of just a couple of minutes in extra travel time. In the end, the government planning office’s route was chosen, with the addition of a major tunnel to minimize the impact on a sensitive environmental area on the route. The decision was reached by some old-fashioned political power plays, and the outcome was only vaguely related to reality. The politicians were locked in groupthink, and did not realize that this compromise was both unfortunate in its impact and spectacularly expensive compared to both original plans (Priemus 2009). Although this is an example of public problem-solving at its very worst, it is by no means an exceptional story. This type of decision-making happens everywhere, all the time—just look at the news … This example had an interesting sequel: once the bulldozers were rolling through the landscape and the concrete was being poured, Parliament in its wisdom passed a motion to investigate and evaluate the decision process of the high-speed train project, as it was deemed to be clearly flawed. Resorting to political arm-twisting around such an important issue which touched the lives of so many people is highly regrettable. The parliamentary inquiry filed its report a year later, with its main recommendation being that more research should have been done on the various plans under consideration. Yet if we retrace the history of the project, we can only conclude that more research would not have helped at all. One can only surmise that this recommendation was caused by the foolhardy belief that rationality would then prevail. But that is not the issue: conventional problemsolving had reached the end of its tether, which is why the planning process had ground to a halt. The parliamentary inquiry’s recommendation for more research demonstrates their complete inability to even imagine a different kind of problem-solving practice. We will get back to this case study at the end of this book (in chapter 8), and will demonstrate that there is a viable way to approach this problem. The journey to get there starts with the realization that this problem is actually not about the train. ## CASE 2 ## The dematerialization of products: ## On navigating the postindustrial economy We live in an age in which the industrial society, based on manufacturing physical goods and selling them to consumers, is giving way to a society in which information and services are much more important. This transformation necessitates a huge shift for many organizations that have grown up and thrived in the industrial age—they are used to dealing with change in terms of advances in technology and shifts in market preference, but nothing has prepared them for the fundamental challenges that confront them now. As an example, let’s look at Bang and Olufsen, a world-renowned Danish company that produces high-end audio equipment. Only a few years ago, the future of this company looked very bright. The company had been well known for over thirty years as the producer of an iconic range of very austere, modernist audio equipment. The identity of the company was strongly associated with these high-quality “design classics” (Dickson 2006). However, to hold this enviable market position, the company could never rest on its laurels: continuous inno vation was needed to stay at the forefront of developments in audio technology, and to cleverly incorporate these cutting-edge technologies into new products that would harmonize with the company’s signature modernist aesthetic. The company mastered this extremely subtle design game successfully. But the absolute test of Bang and Olufsen’s problem-solving ability came when the profitable high end of the consumer market quite suddenly abandoned the tra ditional concept of a “sound system” as a product that is placed in a living room. These high-end consumers started buying audio systems that are built into the structure of the house itself (domotica, or “home automation”) and controlled by a remote—thus hiding the source of all that music from view. The disap pearance of the sound system as an identifiable product was, of course, a huge problem for a company that prides itself on the production of beautiful objects. As a response, Bang and Olufsen set out to develop a new way of expressing the core qualities of its material products in a nonmaterial way. It experimented with the creation of interface devices and interface scenarios that would hold the same subtle qualities as their classic products. But as they were perform ing this pioneering R&D work, another change hit the market. The ubiqui tous presence of mobile technology and the Internet paved the way for the integration of music players into computers, tablets, and smartphones. Music became something that was downloaded or bought online, shared socially, and consumed casually on mobile devices. This reframing of the meaning of music in people’s lives meant that audio quality became less of a concern to most users, aside from a small select group of connoisseurs. Bang and Olufsen found that it needed to shift its value proposition again, and found that its sophisticated skills, knowledge, and practices were exquisitely honed to a world that had changed beyond recognition (see also the Bang and Olufsen case study in Verganti 2009). We will return to this case study later; new approaches become possible once one realizes that this problem requires a complete redefinition of “quality,” away from conventional notions of (product) aesthetics. The passing of the structures and systems of the industrial age and the rise of a networked society have resulted in open, complex, dynamic, and networked challenges that can only be successfully met by organizations that are ready to become open, complex, and networked themselves. The advent of a postindustrial age has a profound effect on the way our economies and societies work—nothing really stays the same. For a manufacturing company like Bang and Olufsen, this shift has led their products to disappear into service networks. Further down the chain, the retail outlets that were the podium on which companies in the industrial economy could express the special qualities of their products are also under pressure, as the Internet is a serious competitor as a point of sale. It is as if history is repeating itself: where the increasing availability of private cars diminished the proximity value of the old neighborhood shop in favor of shopping malls and city centers, the Internet now creates a new situation in which the product monopoly of the shopping mall in turn is challenged. People still visit shops to see the products that they are interested in, but they might decide to buy later and order the items online. As we will see in case study 12 (chapter 4), the rise of the Internet requires a radical rethinking both of the value of products and of the shop as a physical outlet where they can be bought. ## CASE 3 Carrying the weight of the world: ## On the many challenges of social housing Early social housing projects in the West were part of a movement to clear the nineteenth-century slums that housed the workers of the industrial revolution. These efforts were redoubled in face of the rapidly rising population after the Second World War, peaking in the 1960s and 1970s. This was not a morally neutral endeavor: councils and social housing associations were as patronizing as they were well-meaning, setting out to change the way “those people” lived by providing a very specific infrastructure. These “estates” were utopian in a way, the carriers of high ideals—yet they were not built on a deep understanding of the everyday life of the people they were to house (after all, the idealists were planning to change that). The overwhelming focus was on speed and scale. Whole new towns were rolled out in the landscape outside of our old cities in a forbidding and anonymizing modernist architecture. They were often very cheaply built, with the new techniques of precast concrete slabs allowing quick assembly on site. Some of the high-rises are system building at its worst. After an optimistic, bright and sunny start, these estates began to get run down. The working class, which made up the vast majority of the population on these estates, was particularly vulnerable to changes in society in the 1970s and 1980s as many Western economies moved away from resource industries like mining and eventually also from manufacturing toward a service economy. This brave new postindustrial world required a completely different skillset from its workers. People who were never rich to begin with found themselves on a downward slope, without any means of reversing the steady decline (Bourdieu et al. 1999). At the same time, the boom in property prices caused city life to become increasingly expensive. The housing estates were often the cheapest places to live within this new ecosystem, and consequently they attracted an influx of people who, through nature or nurture, could not connect to the new economy—bringing mental issues, poverty, drugs, and crime into these areas. Bourdieu’s chilling description of the plight of people in a region in the south of France where new management practices and a general economic shift led to decreasing employment in a once-thriving industrial area makes for extremely depressing reading. Social suffering becomes entrenched as it is passed on from generation to generation. Immigrant workers (legal and illegal) coming into these areas often raised a new generation growing up in poverty, with a general frustration at the lack of opportunities easily leading to lethargy and a harsh, cynical street culture. In many estates crime surges, creating an even grimmer situation (Hanley 2007). The incredibly complex network of factors conspiring together to create these problematic situations makes them almost impervious to change. The buildings themselves become very visible symbols of failure, as “slums in the sky.” The stigma that became associated with them reduces the life opportunities of their inhabitants even further. Ill-conceived public spaces create a soulless atmosphere, and the relative isolation of many estates (poor transport, poor shops, and most importantly poor schools) contribute to a downward pull on the inhabitants. Young families who can move away do so, and the people who remain are basically stuck. Polite society tends to look away from these issues, and (literally) does not want to go there. The question of what to do now rests with the social housing providers, often local councils or social housing authorities. Most of these housing authorities were originally set up as organizations to efficiently roll out large housing projects. To give them credit, many of them now support their communities of tenants with very committed networks of social workers. But their conventional problem-solving strategies still concentrate on the “bricks and mortar,” and when the social problems become overwhelming, they seek physical solutions (pulling down the buildings, and starting all over). This tendency is reinforced by the media, which invariably portrays these neighborhoods as drab, gray, and menacing. But we will see later in this chapter (and in case study 15) that this requires new thinking. There are other ways to address these dauntingly complex problem situations, if we start from the realization that this problem is not about the buildings. ## THE CHALLENGES Now we need to spend a couple of moments on understanding these challenges better. First we will look at the nature of the kind of problem we are up against, and ask the question, “What do we actually mean when we talk about ‘open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems’?” (see figure 1.1). Then we will look into what makes these problems hard to solve, identifying the counterforces in organizations that keep them from addressing these problems effectively: the five syndromes of conventional organizations. So what do we mean when we say that these contemporary problems have an “open, complex, dynamic, and networked” nature? Point by point: An open problem is one where the system border is not clear, or where it is permeable. It is important to realize that normally when we start out solving a problem we draw a mental circle, nominating things to think about and what to leave out. Anything beyond the circle we call “context,” and that will not play a part in our thinking about the problem. Yet in some cases now, we find problem situations in which it is very unclear where this circle should be drawn, where we really cannot say what can be safely excluded and ignored. Any rash assumptions that some factor or stakeholder can be excluded may come back to haunt you later on in the problem-solving process. Problem and context seem to merge. ## “COMPLEX” A complex problem is one that consists of many elements, with numerous connections between them. These connections may themselves be interdependent, creating a system where one small local decision can lead to lots of repercussions and chain effects in other seemingly unrelated areas. These interrelationships make it very hard to split up the overall problem situation into smaller chunks that could be dealt with more easily (as one does in conventional problem-solving): one can never be sure that in doing so you are not severing key relations. If key relations are accidentally severed, they will need to be reestablished later in the problem-solving process, when they will present themselves as flaws in the solution or, indeed, as fresh problems. Furthermore, the very number of elements and relationships also makes it well-nigh impossible to abstract from a complex problem (which would be the alternative strategy to cutting up the problem). The tangle of elements and connections means that these problems basically have to be approached as a whole, in all their complexity. But how can you do so? We will see that this is an area where expert designers have some interesting strategies. ## “DYNAMIC” A dynamic problem situation changes over time, with the addition of new elements and the shifting of connections (e.g., through the shifting of priorities). These can be slow changes, driven by ponderous processes like cultural change, or lightning-quick movements driven by technological development, for instance. Some of these dynamic changes we can predict by realizing that irresolvable issues tend to generate an oscillation, the type of dynamism that is a swinging movement—especially when the feedback mechanism is slow. For example, we often see this in the management of large organizations, which tend to be forever in flux between centralization and decentralization. Both of these modalities have their pros and cons, and management tends to keep compensating for these by “reorganizing.” The pendulum between centralized and decentralized management swings back and forth. One could plan for that. The wildly dynamic problem situations, of which we will encounter several in this book, are much more problematic. But as we will learn from expert designers, one can prepare for these challenges, too. OPEN NO BOUNDARIES MANY ELEMENTS AND RELATIONSHIPS # NETWORKED ACROSS ORGANIZATIONS ## Figure 1.1 The nature of contemporary problems. ## “NETWORKED” The networked nature of today’s problem situations means that they potentially influence each other constantly—as we saw in the first case study, where the rise of the Internet confounded the government’s efforts to reach consensus on the route of the railway line. What other people are doing in seemingly unrelated fields might cause an effect that severely influences your problem field and options for action. Examples abound—and we will see another example of an unexpected stakeholder influencing the issues around social housing later in this chapter. ## “OPEN, COMPLEX, DYNAMIC, AND NETWORKED” All together, these four properties of the new problem situations severely challenge the assumptions behind our conventional ways of solving problems. We will see in chapter 7 that any one of these is already enough to pull the rug out from under most conventional problem-solving strategies, and the case studies above have shown that they can be really disconcerting in combination. These open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems just do not gel well with the assumptions behind our conventional problem-solving methods, because most of our conventional strategies were conceived to work in a reasonably isolated, static, and hierarchically ordered “miniworld.” When problems appeared, we could isolate them in a separate problem arena, decompose the problem into relative simple subproblems and analyze these, create subsolutions, and then build those subsolutions together into an overall solution that satisfied all concerned. If this strategy of divide-and-solve failed, we could use the alternative strategy of exercising authority to “simplify” the problem area by overruling some parties, and force a solution that satisfied the most powerful player. But neither of these strategies works for today’s problems. We are living in a state of hyperconnectivity. Each of us has become newly connected to innumerable other people. By networking our society, we have inadvertently networked our problems, too—we have made them more open, complex, and dynamic! The enclosed miniworlds of our societies, economies, and cultures have been replaced by a tangle of relationships within complex and overlapping networks, where problems cannot be simplified by being split up (the network of relationships is too strong) and power doesn’t rest in one place anymore (so overrule-and-conquer is out of the question). Moreover, problems are so intimately related to each other (and there are so many interdependencies) that they become impossible to isolate (Stacey, Griffin, and Shaw 2006; Lawson 2001). Solving problems nowadays is like trying to undo the Gordian knot in Greek mythology: whatever string you try to pull to unravel the knot, you end up in more of a jumble. From the three case histories above, we can also learn that these peculiar open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems cannot be pinned down very easily—if at all. They are more like “problem situations” in which the issues keep shifting around, and any premature attempt to draft a problem definition can lead to suboptimal or even counterproductive solutions. Yet in conventional problem-solving, the “definition of the problem” is always the first step, and it is the solid ground on which the problem-solving practices of organizations are built. Often, organizations that do not realize the open, complex, dynamic, and networked nature of the world around them get tricked into using their established routines because the problem, as they define it for themselves, mostly looks the same as earlier problems. And indeed, the core problems themselves may not have changed much over time (after all, we have planned train lines for over 150 years; we should know how to do this)—but the problem boundaries are harder to draw, and there is a much more complex and dynamic context around the problems we are facing today. That context ultimately defines what practices will work, and which will fail. Even organizations that fully realize the fluid nature of the world around them often feel they cannot move forward without first defining the problem. But by defining the problem, they inadvertently freeze the context too, and more often than not this is a grave mistake that will come back to haunt them as they try to implement their new solution. One of the core lessons that we will draw from the expert designers’ practices that will be introduced in the next chapters is that new approaches can be developed to deal with open, complex, dynamic, and networked problem situations without prematurely fixing the problem formulation. But before we start prescribing a “cure” that will help organizations deal with problem-solving in a different way, we first need to explore what lies behind their current conventional problem-solving practices. And we need to ask ourselves what makes these practices so resistant to change, even in the face of overwhelming evidence that they do not deliver the expected results anymore. To put it in terms of medical diagnostics, we need to get beyond the symptoms of these problem-solving breakdowns, and examine the syndromes that are at the root of it all. The examples described above illustrate a variety of degrees and kinds of “stuckness” that organizations (whether public-sector organizations or commercial companies) experience these days. Let’s explore the underlying syndromes that all have in common (see figure 1.2). ## “THE LONE WARRIOR” First of all, we can observe that in all these cases the problem-solving situation was set in such a way that one major party rightly or wrongly felt that they “owned” the problem and needed to drive the problem-solving process, and they honestly believed this approach to be in everyone’s best interest. In cases like these, one party seeks total control over the problem-solving process, and usually positions itself outside the problem-solving arena (everything else needs to change, but never them). While that may be a good and efficient way to work in conventional problem situations, we can see that in situations like the high-speed train problem, where other stakeholders seek to influence the solution, conflicts arise immediately. There has been no process to create a basis of trust and understanding between the lead organization and these # LONE WARRIORFREEZE THE WORLDSELF-MADE BOXRATIONAL HIGH GROUNDIDENTIFICATION Figure 1.2 The five syndromes of conventional organizations. interested parties to enable a genuine, effective collaboration to occur. And it is very hard for organizations to understand their own role in creating the disconnect, let alone to change their singular approach into a more collaborative one once the project is under way. Once the process has started off on the wrong foot, it is very hard to change. In the commercial world, projects that have started without an open engagement with the people they are setting out to create value for are very hard to redirect (Harkema 2012). In public-sector consultation processes, parties often dig in after an initial skirmish, and at that point the whole process shifts from dealing with the problem to discussions that focus only on “position bargaining.” In all the open, complex, dynamic, and networked problem situations above, the problem-solving situation can move forward only through collaboration. The pattern that emerges is that the lead party who had heroically shouldered too much of the problem-solving responsibility is just one step away from deep frustration. This party will see the involvement of others as “interference,” and feel misunderstood and unappreciated in their implacable motivation. These are strong sentiments that easily turn into anger, and often cause them to stop listening to others altogether. ## “FREEZE THE WORLD” Conventional problem-solving processes tend to be curiously static. Apparently, conventional problem-solving requires us to stop the world, isolate the problem, and come up with a one-off solution. But in an environment that is very dynamic and open, this approach just isn’t realistic: the influence of time and connectedness means that the borders around the problem situation are very permeable, and that the rules of the game keep changing over time. The presence of such a “freeze the world” practice is indicated by telltale signs like endless amounts of preliminary research and interminable working group discussions before a project is allowed to start. The problem solver tries to carefully understand the problem situation before deciding on an elegant and convincing solution. This approach is curiously nonexperimental, and underlying it is the apparent need to attain complete closure before the solution is put into action. When the problem solvers realize they have failed to contain the problem-solving situation and are swept along in a dynamic process, or “thrown” into situations (Winograd and Flores 1986, quoting Heidegger) that are not of their making, they feel they are losing control. Forced to improvise when they are unwilling or ill-equipped to do so, they might just stop in their tracks. This is called the “freeze the world” syndrome. ## “THE SELF-MADE BOX” All organizations will initially try to approach a new problem in ways that have worked in the past. This reaction is completely understandable—it is prudent to avoid the investment and hassle that always accompanies change unless it is really necessary. Even organizations that pride themselves on being innovators in their field aim to be just ahead of the others, and avoid unwarranted innovation. But in these case studies, we have seen that there is a great reluctance to change tack even when these trusted practices are clearly not delivering the desired results. The organizations seem to be trapped by their habits. In a worst-case scenario, the organization might be holding on to its conventional practices for dear life, often not even knowing why. This grasping is accompanied by a degree of defeatism or melancholia, a nostalgia for the times when the world was still understandable, a golden age that is now long gone. This pattern of behavior, effectively the locking down of a problem situation, leads to a deeply engrained inability of organizations to step beyond the boundaries of their earlier ways of thinking. Creativity consultants then provide workshops to help people “think outside the box”—which may help a little, but organizations often do not realize what a real change in their own practice will mean, and do not realize that the boxes they are trying to escape from are completely self-made. Later in this book we will see how design practitioners manage to escape creating these thought traps for themselves. The “self-made box” is an important syndrome because in a truly bound situation, even very mild and reasonable people can be strangely persistent, relentlessly pushing a certain problem-solving approach for lack of alternatives. They are blocking new thinking and reinforcing the patterns of the “self-made box.” ## “TAKING THE RATIONAL HIGH GROUND” Deep down, all organizations that display clear signs of these first three syndromes are convinced that their way of dealing with the problem situation is completely rational, and that they couldn’t have done anything else. This belief in their own rationality, and the deeply rooted conviction that there is only one rational position, can make organizations strangely inflexible in their problem-solving approach. This inflexibility persists even to the point of inducing a curious repetitiveness, where we see an organization using the same disastrous approach over and over again. The same government that planned the highspeed train link also constructed a major freight line running right through the country a couple of years later. That project displayed exactly the same dysfunctional pattern as the one before (de Vries and Bordewijk 2009). The strong pattern that emerges here goes beyond clinging to cherished assumptions or preconceptions: at its core is the conviction that the organization’s problem-solving actions are completely rational and deeply self-evident. This is reminiscent of the way generals in the First World War kept ordering waves of attacks on the enemy trenches—only to have their troops mowed down time and again. Even when this sometimes happened several times a day, they persisted because they just had no other strategy to break the stalemate. Thus there is a strange correlation between the unquestioning belief in a certain type of rationality and the utter madness of continuing to apply it in situations where it clearly doesn’t work. Symptomatic behavior that accompanies this syndrome can be the repetitious use of sentences that start with “Of course … ,” exemplifying the inability to discuss other viewpoints. Such appeals to rationality and causation come with a second claim, and that is to the moral high ground of “reasonableness.” This can easily result in the adoption of a nonnegotiable position in the problem-solving process and in stubborn perseverance. Attachment to the rational high ground is accompanied by an acute fear of what might lie beyond the confines of this rationality, which is often referred to in terms of anarchy and chaos. Many organizations hold on to the “rational high ground” for dear life, to avoid slipping into the quicksand where “trial and error” may be the only way forward. ## “SHAPE YOUR IDENTITY AROUND ESTABLISHED PRACTICES” Well-worn problem-solving paths become deeply entrenched in the minds of people, and indeed in the structure and procedures of an organization. They easily become a major part of what people feel is the organization’s core, its identity and “culture.” This culture is embodied in the organization’s goals, structures, processes, espoused values, practices, and the accepted definition of “quality” within the organization. If the organization operates in a stable environment and has the time to hone its procedures to perfection, and its culture is seen to be very successful, the emotional bond of people with what they see as the unchangeable DNA of the organization can become very strong. Persistence in holding on to an organization’s practices can be seen most clearly and explicitly in what is called organizational autopoiesis, the subtle ways in which new staff members are initiated into “how we do things here” by the resident staff. Initiation starts as soon as the new person arrives (which incidentally can be frustrating to the management if they had tried to bring fresh ideas and new practices into the organization by hiring this person). This pathological identification with current practice has been described as an organization’s culture becoming “self-sealing” (Argyris 2000), and it is the absolute death knell to any innovation. A self-sealed culture makes it extremely difficult for the staff to even think of new practices, no matter how strongly and obviously they are needed to meet changes in the external environment. ## MOVING FORWARD As Boutellier remarks (2013), complexity without direction paralyzes. The feeling of powerlessness that permeates the case studies can be traced back to these five underlying syndromes, which will each be further explored throughout the book. But before we go on, it is important to realize that the proponents of the nineteen case studies in this book are actually all very good organizations, which have operated successfully in their respective domains for many years. The people in these organizations are highly educated, highly skilled, well-meaning, experienced, motivated, clever, and proactive. The fact that such impressive organizations find themselves staring at these new types of problems in a dumbfounded manner is what sparked the writing of this book. And we have to realize that shifting these old ways of problem-solving is not going to be easy. The five syndromes that prevent us from addressing these open, complex, dynamic, and networked problem situations in novel ways are literally as old as humanity. This is why they are so recognizable—they are deeply rooted in us, and in our professional cultures. In fact, these patterns of thought can be chased all the way back to the big books of humanity. “Lone warriors” already populated the Bible, the Koran, and the Bhagavad-Gita. Even though the lone warrior pattern with all its heroism and dysfunctional romanticism was brilliantly mocked by Cervantes in his Don Quixote, the long line of archetypal lone warriors has continued, extending unabated to today’s children’s books and Hollywood blockbusters. Likewise, the idea that a “frozen world” is necessary to solve any problem is another assumption that permeates our stories, films, and literature—think about crime stories, for instance. The Sherlock Holmeses always discover the perpetrator from a select group of suspects that is isolated in a house, on a train, in a specific family constellation, or (nowadays) in a spaceship. The “self-made box” of received wisdom and conventional practices is often considered the very core of the culture of our societies, and eagerly reinforced by popular media. The “rational high ground” that is often implied in this claim to authority sparks another archetype: the clever outsider who runs circles around accepted behavior. These jester-like figures are consistent across time and cultures: examples range from Loki in Celtic mythology to the Tengu in Japan, and the stand-up comedian of today. But this carnival of ritualized dissent implicitly recognizes the importance of the consensus and the powers that be (Le Roy Ladurie 1979). The dark logic behind the state apparatus in Orwell’s 1984 offers us a dystopic view of what the enforcement of a limited, twisted rationality can lead to. But that book becomes really chilling when the reader realizes that the logic is completely sealed within the “identity” of the society, and everybody in it. There is no escape possible from this closed totalitarian culture, and all deeds of resistance will ultimately be doomed. The self-sealing mechanism is very serious, indeed … Thus, there is no question that the syndromes we are dealing with here are deeply engrained, because they serve important purposes in creating stability and continuity. They cannot be “solved” or eliminated—but we will see later in this book that they can be overcome when that is needed. Frame creation is an opportunity to approach the problems we face in novel ways, and avoid repeating the dysfunctional problem-solving practices of the past. As a first example, in the next case study the complex and deeply engrained problems of a social housing situation are approached in an original and very effective manner, bypassing all conventional problem-solving strategies. ## CASE 4 ## Stories to connect people: ## On reframing housing issues An early project that pioneered a completely different approach to the bricksand-mortar thinking that dominates the cultural DNA of social housing authorities took place in the late 1990s in Amsterdam. It was sparked by the pressing issues of a neighborhood that had seen a substantial influx of immigrants from Turkey and Morocco. These new communities introduced a different culture to the old area, now vibrant with “Eastern” shops and newly built mosques. In their midst still lived an aging Dutch population (Dutch families with children tended to move away from this area, to the suburbs) who were feeling more and more lost within their familiar surroundings. They perceived the neighborhood as going downhill, a feeling of unsafety that was exacerbated when some public spaces were vandalized. Everybody kept more or less to themselves, and it was clear that the influx of new people did not contribute to an inclusive social network. While there were no immediate problems, the social structure was felt to be close to collapse (De Gruijter, van Waesberge, and Boutellier 2010). From interviews, researchers learned that many of the recent (and not-so-recent) arrivals saw their existence in this cold, wet country as temporary—they intended to return to Turkey or Morocco when they were old. This actually didn’t happen at all; the first-generation immigrants stayed with their kids who had grown up in the new country. However, while these children (the second generation) grew up within the Dutch culture, the first-generation immigrants did not mentally adopt Holland as their new home, inadvertently creating enclaves where they could feel comfortable among themselves, but not connecting with broader Dutch society. This larger social drama was played out on a local scale in this particular part of the city. Later, the Amsterdam Historic Museum coordinated a project to collect stories about this neighborhood by interviewing the older Dutch population, to give a sense of depth to the place (what could be called “a deep map” [Heat-Moon 1999]). A website was created in which these anecdotes were displayed (http://www.geheugenvanoost.nl), and was advertised locally. In the end, people from the Turkish and Moroccan communities also got involved, relating their own experiences of arriving and living in the area. When they started recounting stories about their life in the places they had come from, the project staff realized that they did not come from “Turkey” or “Morocco,” but that each community was rooted in just a few specific villages in rural areas of those countries. The older Dutch population could relate to these stories of rural life—they were not that different from their own family histories one or two generations back, when their own ancestors moved to the city from the Dutch countryside. The network of stories expressed many more common values than anyone could have imagined, and created avenues for further contact and understanding. This made a real difference in defusing tensions and improving the capacity of the neighborhood to deal with any problems that might arise— including vandalism and loitering teenagers. Years later, this particular website is still active, with stories now spanning the whole city. Several features of this modest project deserve to be highlighted. First of all, the issues were approached on a human level and directly impacted the everyday life of the area. Second, the approach was proactive: the problems addressed in this project were not defined in terms of unsafety and the need to tackle small-scale crimes, nor did they focus solely on troublemakers. Third, by concentrating on common human values and intense interaction with the people, existing community groups could be connected, strengthened, and harnessed for a common good. From this project, we can learn that in this kind of open, complex, dynamic, and networked problem situation there probably are no direct, quick fixes, and that it is crucial to understand the underlying structures of the specific situation. By exploring these underlying structures, we will start to see solutions emerge. A problem situation like social housing will have been approached in all its complexity, without any assumptions, generalizations, or convenient simplifications by stakeholders. Engagement in these issues involves quite a bit of courage and determination: as was mentioned in case study 3, networked problem situations can often be so incredibly complicated that people just give up on them and turn away. Yet we will see that the very complexity, openness, and networked nature of modern problems also hold the key to progress in these situations: in the Amsterdam example, who would have expected a historic museum to be a partner in directly effecting such a deep social change? Later in this book, case studies will illustrate that the plight of retail in a postindustrial society and even the train conundrum can be tackled fruitfully through the creation of new frames. The inability of conventional problem-solving to deal with the new open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems is reaching a crisis point. And these types of problems will not go away. On the contrary, we will have more of these problem situations to deal with in the future—they naturally arise today because we live in a nexus between technological revolutions and momentous social and cultural changes. We have an unprecedented need to extend our problem-solving repertoire so that it can address these issues. In the next chapter we will encounter some of the deliberate strategies that outstanding designers have developed for navigating this terrain—and then we will explore how these strategies can be harnessed by contemporary organizations.