# APPENDIX 1: AN EXPERT DESIGNER AT WORK My colleague Henri Christiaans and I studied individual designers working on a design task. The subjects were asked to think aloud so that their thought patterns could be captured and analyzed (this particular study was reported on in Dorst and Dijkhuis 1995; Dorst 1997). This particular series of protocol studies was performed with twelve experienced designers; the design challenge was to develop a new trash system for the passenger carriages of a new Dutch train. All the information needed to design a solution (e.g., background of the project, stakeholders involved, dimensions of the train, user research on the existing trains, etc.) was provided on information cards that the designers could request. The designers had 2.5 hours to tackle this design challenge. In this appendix we enter this protocol after an hour, during which the expert designer has been going through the information and discussing his own experiences with trash on the train and some comparable situations (trash collection in aircraft). Then suddenly, the designer jumps to an idea that might structure the problem situation for him. (time: 60 min.) Just had a flash … Would it be good to make separate bins? … Because we have several different types of litter … We’ve got the dry litter … I would say paper bins … Because lots of newspapers and magazines are left in trains … I can imagine that you make a bin in which you can put newspapers and magazines, that kind of stuff … That bin should be made in such a way that you can’t put coffee cups and other stuff in there … That’s a problem … Because people are bored … That happens in trains … They tend to start trying things that weren’t supposed to happen … (time: 61 min.) But it would be a nice … Well, there’s a number of things crossing my mind now … First, there’s the railways … The railways provide a mode of transport that is environmentally friendly … That is still being used as an argument in favor … And it would be a nice marketing ploy to expand that idea into litter collection … With litter, I mean … That the litter collection in trains could help that identity … The environmentally friendly railways … Then there would be in trains, where a lot of paper is thrown away, because that is the main kind of litter … We could design the bins in such a way that we create a compartment where the newspapers can be put in … (time: 62 min.) So we … I don’t know how it will find its way in the rest of the litter processing … But it would be nice if we could keep this paper separate from the rest of the litter … Because that means that we have a bin that will not pose a number of problems in maintenance … If I look at the current bin … Then there is stench … And it’s too small … It being too small is mainly because … because it is full of newspapers and that kind of stuff … It would be possible … Because the newspapers are 40 percent if I remember … Yes, 40 percent of the total litter is newspapers … Almost half … It would be so good to remove that beforehand … It is dry litter … It doesn’t cause any visible dirt in the bins … (time: 63 min.) It isn’t wet, or any of that … It would be nice if we could make a simple compartment on the bin where people can just stick in their newspaper … You don’t use the bin as much … You need less volume in the bin … What was the mean filling … 70 to 85 percent … Of which 40 percent [is] newspapers … That is an option anyhow … To make such a newspaper bin … And it has another advantage … You see that newspapers and magazines are read by several passengers … So if you don’t put him in the same container with the coffee cups and the cans … That the newspapers will remain clean … And can be used again … (time: 64 min.) Now they stay on the table in the morning … To leave them for the use of the next passenger … I think the newspapers and magazines are also most of the stray litter … I can’t really tell from this information card … I think I heard that somewhere … See if I can find it in the interview with Van Dalen … Then it will probably … Yes, the newspapers also block the emptying help … They are a nuisance … Lots of stray litter on the luggage racks … (time: 65 min.) What is on the luggage racks, … As far as I know in trains, … But now I’m only using my own experience … There are newspapers and magazines on the racks … I would like to start with the division between newspapers and other litter … I’ll put down that 40 percent of the litter is newspapers … That means that the other bin can be smaller in size … However wonderful … That is an important thing … I think it … (time: 66 min.) It is now at a height that is felt to be uncomfortable by everyone … So we have to see whether we can find a better position … Positioning … For filling up and emptying, so to speak … I think we have to try to get the bin as much against the wall as is possible. The trains are, as some people said … Though not many … Well, still, 8 percent … That bump their knees on the bins … That’s a nuisance … If we can avoid that, we should … So it would be nice to get the bin flatter against the wall … And Mr. Van Dalen also said … I think this has to do with his remark that he likes the integration of the bin in the wall so much … (time: 67 min.) You try to gain as much space as you can in the passenger compartment … So let’s say … Has to stick out as little as possible … Let’s see … Yes, and then there’s stench … And the filthy lid … That filthy lid is brought up by almost 30 percent … Yes, 28 … We have to find something for that … Important … Then we have more problems … That it is too small, of course … (time: 68 min.) This is also in my litter separation … With the newspapers, etc. That includes the size … Total size … Then we have summarized in four points now … The cleaners that would have to bend over so much … Dark in the trains … Too fast in flipping over … That is the flipping over of the bins … Sometimes … (time: 69 min.) The liquids in the bin splashes … Turn over … splashing of the liquids … Yes, I’m putting it all together now … Then you’ve got the newspapers … OK … I think that the separate collection of paper is all that’s feasible … Because other separations will be too complicated … Do you know whether the railways are interested in the separation of litter in paper and other litter? … (time: 70 min.) That has not been discussed … Yea … But if I bring up the subject, can I then get an answer from the railways? … In this way? … EXPERIMENTER: You can raise the subject tomorrow … Right … And then we’re presenting the concepts … That means we’ll have to work now … I will look back to the current bin … Because I want to see how far that sticks into the compartment … The exact measures … (time: 71 min.) I don’t think … I’m making a drawing of the bin … And I’m putting in the measures … The total size of the product as it is … Because I have some views here … And I’m making a 3D sketch … This is the height … Section … And the lid … Interestingly, the separate bin is a solution that emerges as a possibly integrative frame idea from an intense analysis of the project brief and all the other information. These kinds of ideas have been called a “primary generator” in design, and they are to be taken as an initial frame that can lead to design ideas rather than as a core for a design concept. Taking this as a starting point, the designer retraces the value that can be achieved by this frame, and links it to the wishes of other stakeholders in the broader field—checking whether they would object, seeking to bolster the case for why this is a good solution direction, and seeking to enrich the frame with added value that might be achieved. This is an intense process of invention and reflection. The designer is carefully exploring an interpretation of the problem and a core solution idea together, in a close coevolution of the two. The paradox that gave rise to this quest was hidden in the brief: Because the railway company wants to encourage use of the bins, the bins should be in easy reach for passenger comfort. Because the railway company wants to encourage use of the bins, the bins should be quite big. The paradox then becomes: Because the bins are in easy reach for the passenger and quite big, they limit passenger comfort. This is a classic problem for product designers: the product needs to be there and handy when in use, and not there when not in use (think of foldaway beds, inflatable mattresses, etc.). This need for the bin to “disappear” led other designers to come up with inventive placings of the bin, bins made of flexible material (to expand as they are filled), or the replacement of the bin by a chute (thus separating the functionalities of access and storage). This particular designer effectively chose to open the questioning by addressing the idea of what constitutes “rubbish,” and explores putting newspapers separately. The themes he identifies that make this initial idea of separate bins valuable are the sense of being environmentally friendly (as a passenger, and as part of the image of the railway company) and that of generosity—leaving newspapers for the use of other passengers is a positive thing to do in a public space. The dominant frame in this episode is the separation of the newspapers from the other rubbish. This leads to the generation of a clear design brief: create a bin that is compact but has two separate compartments, one of which is designed in such a way that people will put only newspapers in it. In the evaluation of his initial design, he realizes that there is a second paradox in this problem situation: Because the bins are in easy reach for the passenger, they are distributed throughout the cabin. Because the bins are distributed throughout the cabin, they are hard to empty and clean. This is where the needs of the passengers and the cleaners are at loggerheads (separate collection from multiple points makes life worse for the cleaners). In the end, this problem leads the designer to create a single, large newspaper rack at the end of the carriage, where passengers can leave their newspapers as they get off the train. This particular solution was graded highest of all twelve expert designs by a panel of independent judges. What will have struck the reader is that the designer seems to go more or less upside down and back to front through the design process. The process doesn’t start with a problem definition, and the designer doesn’t seem to have a structured way toward reaching a solution. And it also seems much messier than the clean, linear nine-step model of frame creation that was introduced in chapter 4. But if we take the initial idea as what it is—a frame idea that works as a “primary generator” guiding a possible interpretation of the problem situation—and we follow the twists and turns of the designer closely, it reads as a very coherent story. From this analysis, we find that expert designers tend to go through the steps of the frame creation process, but implicitly and fluidly. The elements of frame creation are there. In developing the frame creation method, we have straightened out these steps and brought them into a possibly logical order. But that is for modeling purposes—in reality, the steps will be executed in close interaction with one another, as the frame creators have to balance creative steps with analysis and reflection all the time. (This study later led to the Delft Protocols Workshop [Cross, Christiaans, and Dorst 1996].)