# APPENDIX 2: IS DESIGN “SEARCHING” The first paradigm through which researchers have studied and begun to understand design was introduced by Herbert Simon in the early 1970s (Simon 1973). In this paradigm, design is viewed as a rational search process: the design problem defines the “problem space” that has to be surveyed in search of a “satisficing” design solution. Seeing design as a rational problemsolving process entails adopting a positivistic view of science, taking natural sciences as the model for a science of design. The rational problem-solving approach to design is a combination of practice-based phase models of the design process and a model of the designer as an information processor from the field of cognitive psychology. The glue that holds these together is the theory of “human problem-solving.” The central paradigm in this field is that problem-solving can be described as “a search for a solution through a vast maze of possibilities [within the problem space]. … Successful problem solving involves searching the maze selectively and reducing it to manageable proportions” (Simon 1969, 54). These search processes have been studied through protocol analysis of subjects solving chess and cryptarithmetic problems. They can be displayed and analyzed in “problem behavior graphs” (Newell and Simon 1972). Simon’s key contribution to design methodology was to state that the productive design thought could be captured in the same positivistic framework. Problem solvers are seen as “goal-seeking information processing systems,” operating in an objective and knowable reality. Simon explicitly states that his theory does not take into account the processes and results of human perception; it assumes that “human beings, viewed as behaving systems, are quite simple. The apparent complexity of our behavior over time is largely a reflection of the complexity of the environment in which we find ourselves.” In studying an “adaptive system” (like man), we can often predict behavior from knowledge of the system’s goals and its outer environment, with only minimal assumptions about the “inner environment” (Simon 1969, 53). In a later paper, Simon (1973) addressed some of the difficulties that might arise in applying the rational problem-solving approach to design by defining design problems as “ill-structured problems.” Ill-structured problems should be tackled in an “immediate problem space”—a part of the total problem space which is deemed too large, ill-structured, and ill-defined to be described. The immediate problem space is addressed and put together by an (unspecified) “noticing and evoking mechanism.” The goal of a design process is to arrive at a solution that is “good enough”: “we satisfice by looking for alternatives in such a way that we can generally find an acceptable one after only moderate search” (Simon 1973). In The Sciences of the Artificial (1969), Simon maintains that design problems are hierarchically organized, and the way to design a complex structure is to discover viable ways of decomposing it into subproblems, solving these, and combining them to arrive at a new overall solution. In problemsolving theory, a “good” (most efficient) reasoning process is defined as the one that involves the shortest search path through the problem space. A radically different paradigm was proposed fifteen years later by Donald Schön (1983), who describes design as an activity involving “reflective practice.” This pragmatist, constructionist theory is specifically made to address some of the shortcomings Schön perceived in the rational problem-solving approach to professional practice. Schön believes that the design component of the professions is underestimated, and that the nature of human design activities is misunderstood. Schön stresses the uniqueness of every problem situation, and identifies the core skill of designers as their ability to determine how every single problem should be approached. Schön calls this the essence, or “the artistry,” of design practice, and finds it unacceptable that it cannot be described in the rational problem-solving framework. To Schön, one of the basic problems for designers is to determine how to approach each single unique task through “a kind of knowing [that] is inherent in intelligent action” (Schön 1983, 50). Although he recognizes that this implicit “knowing-in-action” is difficult to describe and convey to students, he argues that what can be taught and considered is the explicit reflection that guides the development of one’s knowing-in-action habits. This he calls “reflection-in-action.” In a “reflective conversation with the situation,” designers work by naming the relevant factors in the situation, framing a problem, making moves toward a solution, and evaluating those moves. The frames are based on an underlying background theory that corresponds with the designer’s view of design problems and his or her personal goals. Schön contrasts this theory with the positivistic rational problem-solving approach, remarking that “although Simon proposes to fill the gap between natural sciences and design practice with a science of design, his science can be applied only to well-formed problems already extracted from situations of practice” (47). The description of design as a reflective conversation concentrates on the structuring role of the designer, setting the task and outlining possible solutions all in one framing action. The strength of this framing action determines the amount of structure in the task The central concept of framing was taken into the realm of organizations by Chris Argyris, who stressed the learning cycles (“single loop” and “double loop”) in which framing takes a crucial role (Argyris 1992). These ideas have progressed in the work of Senge and others, emphasizing the importance of the “learning organization” (Senge 2006). Many people immediately recognize these theories as a description of an important aspect of the organizational lifeworld. But they have also been criticized as lacking the kind of structure that one needs to run an organization—the kind of structure that rational problem-solving seems to provide. The rational problem-solving methods start out with goal definition and build an extensive apparatus of planning and control methods to achieve this preconceived goal in the most efficient manner. This allows for structured working processes that can be controlled unequivocally and measured objectively. The two paradigms established by Simon and Schön are representations of two fundamentally different ways of looking at the world—positivism and constructionism—and as such they are on opposite sides of a deep schism that runs through science and philosophy. They both have a role in understanding design practices (Dorst 1997).