Argyris, C. 1992. On Organizational Learning. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. Argyris, C. 2000. Flawed Advice and the Management Trap. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Bourdieu, P., et al. 1999. The Weight of the World: Social Suffering in Contemporary Society. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. Boutellier, H. 2013. The Improvising Society: Social Order in a World without Boundaries. The Hague: Eleven. Bower, J. D., E. Crabtree, and W. Keogh. 1996. Rhetorics and Realities in New Product Development. In Hidden versus Open Rules in Product Development, ed. J. Thölke, G. Loosschilder, and F. Smulders. Delft: TU Delft Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering. Brown, T. 2009. Change by Design. New York: HarperCollins. Bucciarelli, L.L. 1994. Designing Engineers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Carlopio, J. 2010. Strategy by Design. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Cross, N. 2004. Expertise in Design: An Overview. Design Studies 25 (5):427–441. Cross, N. 2007. Designerly Ways of Knowing. Basel: Birkhäuser. Coles, A. 2012. The Transdisciplinary Studio. Berlin: Sternberg Press. Cross, N. 1990. The Nature and Nurture of the Design Ability. Design Studies 11 (3):127–140. Cross, N. 1996. Method in Their Madness: Published Inaugural Lecture as Professor of Design Methodology. Delft: Delft University Press. Cross, N., H. Christiaans, and K. Dorst, eds. 1996. Analysing Design Activity. Chichester, UK: Wiley. Deming, W. Edwards. 1993. The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Dickson, T. 2006. Dansk Design. Millers Point, Australia: Murdoch Books. Van Dijk, J. 1999. The Network Society. London: Sage. Dorst, K. 1997. Describing Design: A Comparison of Paradigms. Published PhD thesis, TU Delft, The Netherlands. Dorst, K. 2002a. Hester van Eeghen: The Bag Is the Person (Hester van Eeghen—De tas is de mens). Items (May/June):64–71. Dorst, K. 2002b. Orgacom: Art as a Reflection of Company Culture (Orgacom. Kunst als spiegel van bedrijfscultuur). Items (January):42–47. Dorst, K. 2006. Design Problems and Design Paradoxes. Design Issues 22 (3):4–17. Dorst, K. 2008. Design Research: A Revolution-Waiting-to-Happen. Design Studies 29 (1):4–11. Dorst, K. 2011. The Core of “Design Thinking” and Its Application. Design Studies 32 (6):521–532. Dorst, K. 2013a. Academic Design. Eindhoven: Eindhoven University of Technology. Dorst, K. 2013b. Shaping the Design Research Revolution. Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED13), Seoul, Korea. Dorst, K., and N. Cross. 2001. Creativity in the Design Process: Co-evolution of Problem-Solution. Design Studies 22 (5):425–437. Dorst, K., and J. Dijkhuis. 1995. Comparing Paradigms for Describing Design Activity. Design Studies 16 (2):261–274. Dorst, K., and D. Tomkin. 2011. Themes as Bridges between Problem and Solution. In Diversity and Unity, proceedings of IASDR2011, ed. N. Roozenburg, L.-L. Chen, and P. J. Stappers. Delft: Delft University of Technology. Dreyfus, H. L. 1992. What Computers Still Can’t Do. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Dreyfus, H. L. 2002. Intelligence without Representation: Merleau-Ponty’s Critique of Mental Representation. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 1:367–383. Van Eeghen, H., and J. Gannij. 2009. Bag and Shoe Design: Hester van Eeghen. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers. Ford, D. 2007. The Search for Meaning. Berkeley: University of California Press. Foucault, M. 2002 [1969]. The Archaeology of Knowledge. London: Routledge. Fukasawa, N. 2007. Naoto Fukasawa. New York: Phaidon. Gamman, L. 2012. Gone Shopping: The Story of Shirley Pitts, Queen of Thieves. London: Bloomsbury Reader. Gamman, L., A. Thorpe, E. Liparova, and M. Malpass. 2012. Hey Babe, Take a Walk on the Dark Side: Or, Why Role-Playing Is a Suitable Tool to Design against Crime and Aid Designers to Think Thief. Design and Culture 4 (2):171–193. Gardner, H. 1983. Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences. London: Heinemann. Gardner, H. 2006. Changing Minds. Boston: Harvard Business School Press. Graves, R. 1991. The Case for Xanthippe. In The Oxford Book of Essays, ed. J. Gross, 472–479. London: Oxford University Press. Grenfell, M., ed. 2012. Bourdieu: Key Concepts. Stocksfield, UK: Acumen. de Gruijter, M., E. Smits van Waesberge, and H. Boutellier. 2010. Een vreemde in eigen land (A stranger in your own country). Amsterdam: Askant. Hanley, L. 2007. Estates: An Intimate History. London: Granta. Hargardon, A., and R. I. Sutton. 2000. Building an Innovation Factory. Harvard Business Review (May–June): 157–166. Harkema, C. 2012. Revealing Unawareness in Usability-Related Decision Making. Published PhD thesis, TU Eindhoven, The Netherlands. Hart, S. 1996. New Product Success: Measurement, Methodology, Models, and Myths. In Hidden versus Open Rules in Product Development, ed. J. Thölke, G. Loosschilder, and F. Smulders. Delft: TU Delft Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering. Hatchuel, A. 2002. Towards Design Theory and Expandable Rationality: The Unfinished Program of Herbert Simon. Journal of Management and Governance 5 (3):260–273. Heat-Moon, W. L. 1999. PrairyErth: A Deep Map. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Heidegger, M. 1962. Being and Time. New York: Harper and Row. Hekkert, P., and M. B. van Dijk. 2011. Vision in Design: A Guidebook for Innovators. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers. Heskett, J. 1985. Industrial Design. London: Thames and Hudson. Hirshberg, J. 1998. The Creative Priority. New York: Harper Business. Hofstadter, D. 1979. Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. London: Penguin. Hofstede, G. 1997. Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind. New York: McGraw-Hill. Hofstede, G. 2001. Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions, and Organizations across Nations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Houkes, W. N., P. E. Vermaas, K. Dorst, and M. J. de Vries. 2002. Design and Use as Plans: An Action-Theoretical Account. Design Studies 23 (3):303–320. IDEO. 2003. Method Cards: 51 Ways to Inspire Design. Palo Alto, CA: IDEO. Jacobsen, M. H., ed. 2009. Encountering the Everyday: An Introduction to the Sociologies of the Unnoticed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Krishnamurti, J. 1995. The Book of Life. New York: Harper One. Kroes, P., M. Franssen, and L. Bucciarelli. 2009. Rationality in Design. In Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Science, ed. A. W. M. Meijers. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Kuhn, T. S. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Kumar, V. 2012. 101 Design Methods: A Structured Approach for Driving Innovation in Your Organization. Chichester, UK: Wiley. Lakoff, G. 1987. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal about the Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Lakoff, G., and M. Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Lakoff, G., and M. Johnson. 1999. Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western Thought. New York: Basic Books. Latour, B. 1987. Science in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Laurel, B., ed. 2003. Design Research: Methods and Perspectives. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Lawson, B. 1994. Design in Mind. Oxford, UK: Butterworth-Heinemann. Lawson, B., and K. Dorst. 2009. Design Expertise. Oxford, UK: Architectural Press. Lawson, H. 2001. Closure: A Story of Everything. London: Routledge. Leadbeater, C. 2001. Living on Thin Air: The New Economy with a New Blueprint for the Twenty-first Century. London: Penguin. Lefebvre, H. 2008. Critique of Everyday Life. Vol. 2. New York: Verso. Le Roy Ladurie, E. 1979. Carnival in Romans. New York: George Braziller. van der Lugt, R. 2001. Sketching in Design Idea Generation Meetings. Published PhD thesis, TU Delft, The Netherlands. Maher, M. L., J. Poon, and S. Boulanger. 1996. Formalising Design Exploration as Co-evolution: A Combined Gene Approach. In Advances in Formal Design Methods for CAD, ed. J. S. Gero and F. Sudweeks. London: Chapman and Hall. van Manen, M. 1990. Researching Lived Experience. Ontario, Canada: Althouse Press. Martin, R. 2009. The Design of Business. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press. Morgan, G. 1986. Images of Organization. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Mulder, B. 1997. Unpublished Lecture Notes on Cultural Codes. Utrecht, The Netherlands: Lectures for the Parapsychology Institute. Musashi, M. 1974. A Book of Five Rings. Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press. Newell, A., and H. A. Simon. 1972. Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Norman, D. 2010. Why Design Education Must Change. Core77, November 26, http://www.core77.com/blog/columns/why\_design\_education\_must\_change\_17993.asp. Pappers, D., J. Kolkman, P. Suyling, and J. Engel, eds. 1999. YD+I—Young Designers and Industry 99, Minds over Matter—31 Designers Work with 9 Companies. Amsterdam: Sandberg Institute and the Netherlands Design Institute. Paton, B., and K. Dorst. 2011. Briefing and Reframing: A Situated Practice. Design Studies 32 (6):573–587. Plattner, H., C. Meinel, and U. Weinberg. 2009. Design Thinking—Innovation lernen— Ideenwelten öffnen. Munich: Mi-Wirtschaftsbuch, Finanzbuch Verlag GmbH. Priemus, H. 2009. Besluitvorming over megaprojecten (Decision making in megaprojects). In Rijdende treinen en gepasseerde stations, ed. J. de Vries and P. Bordewijk. Amsterdam: Van Gennep. Roozenburg, N. F. M., and J. Eekels. 1995. Product Design: Fundamentals and Methods. Chichester, UK: Wiley. Sarasvathy, S. 2008. Effectuation: Elements of Entrepreneurial Expertise. Cheltenham, UK: Elgar. Schön, D. A. 1983. The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action. London: Temple Smith. Schön, D. A. 1987. Educating the Reflective Practitioner. San Francisco: Wiley. Senge, P. M. 2006. The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization. New York: Random House. Simon, H. A. 1969. The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 2nd ed. 1982. Simon, H. A. 1973. The Structure of Ill-Structured Problems. Artificial Intelligence 4: 181–201. Rpt. in Developments in Design Methodology, ed. N. G. Cross. Chichester, UK: Wiley, 1984. Smulders, F. E. H. M. 2006. Get Synchronized: Bridging the Gap between Design and Volume Production. Published PhD thesis, TU Delft, The Netherlands. Stacey, R., D. Griffin, and P. Shaw, eds. 2000. Complexity and Management: Fad or Radical Challenge to Systems Thinking? London: Routledge. Stacey, R., D. Griffin, and P. Shaw, eds. 2006. Complexity and the Experience of Managing in Public Sector Organizations. New York: Routledge. Steyaert, C. 2007. Entrepreneuring as a Conceptual Attractor? A Review of Process Theories in Twenty Years of Entrepreneurship Studies. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 19 (November). Suchman, L. A. 1987. Plans and Situated Actions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Sutton, R. I., and A. Hargardon. 1996. Brainstorming Groups in Context: Effectiveness in a Product Design Firm. Administrative Science Quarterly 41:685–718. Sutton, R. I., and T. A. Kelley. 1997. Creativity Doesn’t Require Isolation: Why Product Designers Bring Visitors “Backstage.” California Management Review 40 (1):75–91. Suyling, P., D. Krabbendam, and K. Dorst, eds. 2005. More Than Eight Design Ideas for the Integrated Living of Mentally Handicapped People in Society. The Hague: Ministry of Health, Wellbeing, and Sports. Tanizaki, J. 1977. In Praise of Shadows. New Haven, CT: Leete’s Island Books. Thorpe, A., and L. Gamman. 2011. Design with Society: Why Socially Responsive Design Is Good Enough. CoDesign 7 (3–4):217–230. Tzonis, A. 1992. Huts, Ships, and Bottle Racks: Design by Analogy for Architects and/ or Machines. In Research in Design Thinking, ed. N. Cross, K. Dorst, and N. Roozenburg. Delft: Delft University Press. Ueda, M. 1982. The Master Haiku Poet Matsuo Bashō. Tokyo: Kodansha International. Valkenburg, R. 2000. The Reflective Practice in Product Design Teams. Published PhD thesis, TU Delft, The Netherlands. Valkenburg, R., and K. Dorst. 1998. The Reflective Practice of Design Teams. Design Studies 19 (3):249–271. Verganti, R. 2009. Design-Driven Innovation. Boston: Harvard Business School Press. de Vries, J., and P. Bordewijk. 2009. Rijdende treinen en gepasseerde stations [The train has left the station]. Amsterdam: Van Gennep. van de Wetering, J. W. 1999. The Empty Mirror: Experiences in a Japanese Zen Monastery. New York: Thomas Dunne Books. Whitbeck, C. 1998. Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Winograd, T., and F. Flores. 1986. Understanding Computers and Cognition. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing. Wittgenstein, L. 1963. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. Zeldin, T. 1994. An Intimate History of Humanity. New York: HarperCollins. Van Zomeren, K. 2000. Ruim duizend dagen werk. Amsterdam: De Arbeiderspers.