# Primitivism in Russian Futurist Book Design 1910-14 In the introduction to his book “Primitivism" in 20th Century Art, William Rubin notes the relative paucity of scholarly works devoted to “primitivism—the interest of modern artists in tribal art and culture, as revealed in their thought and work." While considerable attention has been paid to primitivism in early-twentieth-century French and German art in the time since Rubin's 1984 publication, Western awareness of a parallel trend in Russia remains relatively limited to scholars and specialists. Yet, the primary characteristics that Russian artists' recognized and revered in primitive art forms played as profound a role in shaping the path of modern art and literature in Russia as they did in the artistic expressions of Western Europe. "Primitive" and "primitivism," as they are used in this text, are defined as art or an art style that reveals a primacy and purity of expression. There is little or no regard for laws dictated or imposed by nature, science, academic instruction, or convention. In no sense are these terms meant to be derogatory or pejorative, however. Indeed, so-called primitive artists bore with pride the names that their critics called them—barbarians or savages—and they were not offended by accusations that they were "uncivilized." The primitivist movement in Russia (1909–14) bridged the period between Symbolism (1904–08) and the styles that most distinguish the early Russian avantgarde—Cubo-Futurism, Alogism, and Rayism (1912–14), and Suprematism (1915–20). Embracing primitivism and Neo-primitivism (the latter was so named by its proponents in 1913), Russian artists such as Mikhail Larionov, Natalia Goncharova, Kazimir Malevich, and Olga Rozanova espoused the fundamental aesthetic principles and theories, set the priorities, and developed the courage to abandon naturalism in art in favor of free creation, pure expression, and, ultimately, abstraction. The present work focuses on the illustrated book as the ideal framework in which to examine primitivism in Russia. Through this medium, artists and writers of the emerging avant-garde achieved one of the most original responses to, and modern adaptations of, primitivism, and realized the primary goals and aesthetic credos set forth in their statements and group manifestos. These artists drew on a wide range of primitive art forms from their own country: Old Russian illuminated manuscripts, miniatures, wood carvings, icons, and hand-painted religious woodcuts; antiquities and works dating from pre-Christianized Russia (particularly those of the Scythians and other Asiatic peoples); folk art, such as lubki (popular prints, usually hand-colored), blockbooks, toys, shop signs, distaffs, and embroidery; and the work of "modern" primitives (children, selftaught artists, commercial sign painters, and the nomadic tribes of Siberia and Central Asia). The book form allowed Russian artists to explore new materials and techniques. Images could be reduced to their essentials, and elements of color could be embraced in their primacy. Collaborations between artists and poets increased the expressive potential of Jared Ash