# OTTOMAN MANUFACTURING IN THE AGE OF THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION DONALD QUATAERT Binghamton University Published by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1RP 40 West 2oth Street, New York, NY 1001 1–4211, USA 1o Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia © Cambridge University Press 1993 First published 1993 Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridge A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Library of Congress cataloguing in publication data applied for ISBN o 521 42017 2 hardback To Jean Helen Quataert, with love and respect List of illustrations page xi List of tables xii Acknowledgements xiii List of abbreviations XV Note on weights, measures and currencies xvii Introduction I Opening remarks State policy The historiography of Ottoman manufacturing Ottoman manufacturing in comparative perspective 15 Part I: Manufacturing for the domestic market 21 General introduction 23 Raw cotton, dyestuffs and yarn production 27 Raw cotton 27 Dyestuffs 29 Handspinning 31 Ottoman spinning mills 40 2 Trends in cloth production in the Ottoman lands from Salonica to Aleppo 49 The European provinces, İstanbul, West- and West-Central Anatolia 49 East-Central and East Anatolia 61 Aleppo and northern Syria 71 3 Patterns of cloth production in the Ottoman lands from Salonica to Aleppo 80 Introduction 80 ## Contents The workforce 80 Organization of home and workshop production 84 Organization of production in privately owned mechanized weaving factories 90 The fall of international markets 92 Domestic markets 95 Struggles for the internal market against foreign competitors 96 Domestic competition for domestic markets 99 Part II: Manufacturing for the international market 105 4 Silk cloth and raw silk production Introduction 107 The silk cloth industry 109 The silk reeling industry 116 Carpet making 134 Introduction: patterns and trends in production 134 Changing rug designs 142 Dyestuffs 144 Wool yarn 148 Diffusion of rug making 150 Working conditions, the workforce and the division of labor 154 Conclusion 161 The decline of decline 161 Beyond the decline paradigm 167 Notes 178 Bibliography 207 Index 219 ## Plates between pages 104 and 105 I. Cocoon sorters, Syria (Reproduced by courtesy of the Library of Congress) 2. Carpet makers, Western Anatolia (Reproduced by courtesy of the Library of Congress) 3. Bursa silk mill interior, 198os 4. Silkworkers, Servet-i-fünun no. 101, 4 Şubat 1308 (Reproduced courtesy of Beatrice Saint-Laurent) 5. Bond certificate for Nouvelle Filature de Salonique ## Maps 1. Cotton and wool yarnmaking in the nineteenth century 28 2. Trends in clothmaking in the nineteenth century 50 3. Patterns of clothmaking in the nineteenth century 81 4. Silk cloth and raw silk production, c. 18o0–1914 108 5. Carpet making, c. 1820–1914 135 ## Tables I.I Handspun cotton yarn production, c. 19oo page 40 2.I Textile shipments from the town of Bitlis, 1896–1905 64 2.2 Shipment of various cloths from Harput province, 1884–1910 66 2.3 Textile shops in the town of Diyarbakır in 1857 and 1864 67 2.4 Production and shipment of cloth at Diyarbakır, 1857 and 1863 67 2.5 Production of textiles in Diyarbakır province, 1884-1903 69 2.6 Textile production in Diyarbakır region, 1863–1903 70 2.7 Types of cloth woven at Aleppo, 1830–1900 73 2.8 Looms in Aleppo and adjacent areas, 18o0–1914 76 2.9 Textile exports from Alexandretta, 1880–1911 79 4.I Bursa-area silk cloth production, 1840–1912 III 4.2 Consumption of raw silk in Bursa weaving, 1840–1908 115 4.3 Bursa-area raw silk production, 1810–1908 122 4.4 Reeling mills in the Bursa and Lebanon regions, 1840–1913 123 4.5 Global raw silk production, 1871-1913 125 4.6 Annual average prices of Bursa and Syrian raw silk, 1850–1911 126 4.7 Workers and wages in the reeling mills, 1839–1913 131 5.1 Rug exports from İzmir and the Ottoman Empire, 1857–1913 136 5.2 Role of Uşak in the Anatolian rug industry, 1873–1910 137 5.3 Uşak carpet prices, wages, working conditions and Anatolian wool production, 1834-1914 138 5.4 Carpet production at Uşak, 1873-1910 139 5.5 Carpet production at Gördes and Kula, 1885–1906 140 5.6 Sivas rug production, early twentieth century 140 5.7 Profile of the Anatolian rug industry, c. 1906 141 This book has been in preparation since 1983 and I have many friends and colleagues to whom I am indebted for their numerous kindnesses and generosities. The staffs of many archives and libraries made the work far more pleasant than it might have been. These include the Library of Congress and National Archives in Washington, D.C., and the Public Record Office in London, as well as at the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris. At various times, the personnel at the libraries of the University of Houston, the University of Chicago, and of Binghamton University were very kind to me. I also am grateful for the efficient help given by the staff in the Zentrales Staatsarchiv in Potsdam of the former German Democratic Republic, who overlooked Cold War policies to render guidance. As always, my work at the Başbakanlık Arşivi, İstanbul, was indispensable to my research and I recall with pleasure the many friends I have made there. Jim Jones gave me needed support and encouragement at a very early stage. Rifaat Abou El-Haj always has been a valued critic, from whom I continue to profit. At varying points in the research, the following have offered constructive advice: Çağlar Keyder, Şevket Pamuk, Faruk Tabak, as well as the participants in the Binghamton University 199o conference on Ottoman Manufacturing, especially Jonathan Prude and Albert Feuerwerker. Both the Ottoman history reading group in the Fernand Braudel Center (and its director, Immanuel Wallerstein) and the History Department faculty at Binghamton have given me much valuable criticism. Among the latter, I single out Mel Dubofsky and the late Charles Freedeman. Mehmet Genç always has shared research findings and ideas. Andreas Tietze remains an inspiration. For the carpet chapter, I owe particular thanks to Carol Bier, Victor Binns, the late Louise Davison, Brian Hufner and Annette Ittig. For the silk chapter, my special thanks to Beatrice Saint-Laurent. The three anonymous readers at Cambridge University Press offered exceptionally careful and thoughtful comments. I count myself fortunate for the time they spent. For various kinds of help in preparing the manuscript, my thanks to Bennie Ables, University of Houston, and to Lisa Fegley-Schmidt and Yavuz Karakışla, ## Acknowledgements Binghamton. Nergis Canefe Günlük helped prepare the maps. Faruk Tabak proof-read the final text and prepared the index. Invaluable financial support was offered at the beginning by the University of Houston and by the Institute of Turkish Studies, then by the National Endowment for the Humanities – its Senior Fellowship was essential for the completion of this project. At the end, a Binghamton University Research Award gave me a needed semester away from teaching. The arrival of my daughter Laurie's twins, as the manuscript neared completion, reminded me that life goes on, even after books are written. For the years with my son Eliot, who continuously gave me perspective on the importance of this scholarly undertaking, I owe very much. <table><tr><td>AA A&amp;P AE</td><td>Germany: Auswärtiges Amt Great Britain: Parliamentary Papers, Accounts and Papers France: Archives du Ministère des affairs étrangères, Quai</td></tr><tr><td>AS</td><td>d’Orsay, Paris Great Britain: Annual Series</td></tr><tr><td>Aus</td><td>Austria</td></tr><tr><td>BBA</td><td>Turkey: Başbakanlık Arşivi, İstanbul</td></tr><tr><td>BCF</td><td>France: Bulletin consulaire français. Recueil des rapports commerciaux adressés au Ministère des affaires étrangères par les</td></tr><tr><td>BEO</td><td>agents diplomatiques et consulaires de France à l’étranger. Bab-1 Âli Evrak Odası</td></tr><tr><td>Bel BTTD</td><td>Belediye Belgelerle Türk Tarih Dergisi</td></tr><tr><td>Buhi</td><td>Germany: Deutsches Reich. Handel und Industrie. Berichte über Handel und Industrie</td></tr><tr><td>CC</td><td>Correspondance commerciale</td></tr><tr><td>Cev</td><td>Cevdet Tasnifi</td></tr><tr><td>CR</td><td>Consular Reports of the United States</td></tr><tr><td>Dah</td><td>Dahiliye</td></tr><tr><td>FO</td><td>Great Britain: Foreign Office</td></tr><tr><td>Fr</td><td>France</td></tr><tr><td>GB</td><td>Great Britain</td></tr><tr><td>Ger</td><td>Germany</td></tr><tr><td>HH</td><td>Hatt-ı Hümayûn</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>HHst A</td><td>Austria: Haus-Hof und Staatsarchiv, Vienna, Politisches Archiv (PA)</td></tr><tr><td>è</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>İradeler</td></tr><tr><td>IJMES</td><td>International Fournal of Middle East Studies</td></tr><tr><td>IJTS</td><td>International Fournal of Turkish Studies</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Kepeci</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Kamil Kepeci Tasnifi</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>k und k</td><td>Austria: Berichte der k. u. k. Österr.- Ung. Konsularämter über das Fahr</td></tr><tr><td>Mal</td><td>Maliye</td></tr><tr><td>MM</td><td>Meclis-i Mahsûs</td></tr><tr><td>MV</td><td>Meclis-i Vâlâ</td></tr><tr><td>PA</td><td>see HHstA above</td></tr><tr><td>RCC</td><td>Rapports commerciaux des agents diplomatiques et consulaires de France</td></tr><tr><td>RCL</td><td>La Revue commerciale du Levant, bulletin mensuel de la chambre de commerce française de Constantinople, 1896–1912</td></tr><tr><td>ŞD</td><td>Şura-yı Devlet</td></tr><tr><td>UPA</td><td>University Publications of America</td></tr><tr><td>US</td><td>United States</td></tr><tr><td>VS</td><td>Vilayet Salnamesi</td></tr><tr><td>ZStA</td><td>Germany: formerly Democratic Republic, Zentrales Staatsarchiv, Potsdam, Auswärtiges Amt</td></tr></table>