# General introduction ## Cloth production Ottoman textile manufacturing retained a strong vitality during the nineteenth century despite falling prices, changing technologies and fashions, and severe foreign competition. The remarkable decline in yarn and cloth prices in Europe, at first in Britain, derived from a number of factors. These included the introduction of the machine-spun yarns and synthetic and artificial dyestuffs (chapter 1) and, later, machine-made cloth as well (chapters 2 and 3). In addition, the fall in prices owed much to the vast expansion in the supply of very cheap raw materials from the United States to Britain.¹ In the Ottoman world, these distant innovations prompted shifts from one textile to another, usually cotton at the expense of other materials. Thus, cotton largely replaced silk and mohair as the fabric of choice for the Ottoman upper classes. Among workers and peasants, the use of home-spun cotton yarn declined as did that of wool cloth, animal skins, and mohair cloth. The adoption of Western fashions in clothing accompanied and stimulated these shifts from one to another textile. And so, Ottoman imports of cotton yarn and cloth grew enormously over the century, to levels that are very impressive on an absolute scale. Over the nineteenth century, imports of cotton yarn increased between 25 and 50 times, depending on whether a base year during or after the Napoleonic Wars is adopted (chapter 1). Cotton cloth imports have been estimated at 4,1oo tons a year during the 184os; by 1909, they had risen over tenfold, to more than 49,000 tons.² Early in the century, Britain drove its Indian competitors from Ottoman marketplaces, where they had sold for centuries.³ Thereafter, British producers always dominated the overall textile import market. But, i.e., the Swiss, Germans, French and Austrians offered greater and lesser competition over the century in certain cloths and segments of the market; these states, as well as India and Italy, competed to fill Ottoman cotton yarn needs.⁴ Ottoman manufacturers survived because the story of Ottoman yarn and cloth is more complicated than the preceding, familiar, account suggests. Cotton yarn imports did soar but homespinning remained important and, at the end of the period, still provided a full one-quarter of all Ottoman cotton yarn needs (chapter 1). The rise of cotton cloth to the first rank did occur but some other textiles hung on. The use of mohair cloth seems to have vanished almost entirely but that of linen did not and in fact rose over time. Similarly, use of silk and silk-cotton cloth persisted for much of the century and then significantly increased, on a per capita basis, towards its end. Wool cloth, for its part, retained considerable popularity, as demonstrated by the continuing vitality among Balkan weavers of the stuffs. Also, the wearing of “traditional’ clothing – here only meaning non-Western styles – by both men and women, of all communities, remained very common. This is true despite ongoing westernization and our assumption that it meant disappearance of existing modes of behavior (and dress). Western-styles at first found favor among the urban-based elites and only gradually, in a process continuing until the present, spread into provincial towns and the rural countryside. European manufacturèrs in fact recognized and responded to the continuing appeal of local fashion, devoting quite considerable energies to learning and copying local patterns. Much of the imported cloth was not at all of the modern and Western design, but rather were European imitations of Middle Eastern patterns and styles. Ottoman styles also continued because some wore them as a form of protest, seeing the economic danger to Ottoman manufacturers posed by Western-style clothing.⁵ Ottoman textile manufacturers employed several survival strategies. A major theme of their story is the relentless drive to reduce prices. Hence, they employed rural and household labor and also more intensely exploited workshop labor. Producers frequently purchased machine-made yarn (at first European and later Ottoman and Indian as well) to obtain the price, quality and regularity advantages that such yarns offered. At the same time, for various textiles that required a particular texture or other characteristics, producers continued to use homespun. Many manufacturers used varying mixes of machine and hand-spun yarn for the warp or the weft, in order to produce desired qualities in a particular fabric. Also, they employed huge quantities of factory-made dyes and, over the century, became increasingly sophisticated in their handling of these new and inexpensive dyestuffs. Especially during the later part of the period, they readily used these to dye on the spot rather than import colored yarn. And, in a few locations, local manufacturers began producing their own synthetic and artificial dyestuffs. Through these mechanisms, they not only dropped prices but also obtained the precise colors demanded by their consumers. Many Ottoman weavers focused on making the non-Western clothing still beloved by so many of their customers. Here, the producers both encouraged the maintenance of unique local fashions and created new ones as well. It turns out that some patterns were hardly traditional, in the sense of longstanding, at all. Ottoman merchants had invented them, trying to keep their European competitors offbalance by rapidly changing fashions and creating patterns difficult to replicate in a factory.⁶ It was not only that producers found refuge in weaving and dyeing particular cloths in the small quantities that were not worthy of European manufacturers or that they underbid them for the bottom of the market.7 This often did occur. Many Ottoman producers survived because of the tiny niche in the market they filled; this especially was true of wool cloths and those made of silk and silk-cotton. Some wove the coarsest textiles at extremely low prices, an effort that is a critical part of the story of Ottoman cloth production. But these alone are not adequate explanations. Ottoman manufacturers sometimes outcompeted the Europeans for products sold in quantities that were extremely large indeed, winning because they better understood their customers’ wants. Also, the Ottoman product often was slightly more expensive and won favor because of durability and/or style. ## 1 Raw cotton, dyestuffs and yarn production ## Raw cotton For centuries, Ottoman cotton yarn and cloth producers had benefitted from abundant supplies of the raw materials, both raw cotton and dyestuffs. Important centers of cotton cultivation historically had included southern Arabia, the Mesopotamian steppe, north Palestine, north Syria and the Adana region, the Aegean littoral, as well as the Thessalian plain and the Zekhua and Serez regions of Macedonia. From the time of the Crusades, many of these areas had supplied both regional and European textile makers. Levantine cotton seeds were transplanted in the soils of colonial Virginia, Delaware and Louisiana and helped give rise to these global centers of cotton production. But still, cotton production in the Levant during the late eighteenth century exceeded, by a factor of nearly thirty, that in the American colonies. Ottoman raw cotton exports then were considerable and there were plentiful supplies of raw cotton remaining for local manufacturers. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the city of Salonica exported $2 2 , 5 0 0$ bales of raw cotton while supplying another $\mathtt { I 5 } \mathtt { O O O }$ bales to local manufacturers. During the 183os, the Adana region produced c. 1,9oo bales of raw cotton for domestic hand spinners.¹ Somewhat later, in the 185os, Asia Minor altogether produced $c , 5 0 , 0 0 0$ bales of cotton, and about one-quarter of it was spun locally. By contrast, the Palestine port of Jaffa then exported only c. 5oo bales. Macedonia, for its part, produced 9,7oo bales, half of it for export; Thessaly, on the other hand, consumed virtually all of the 3,5oo bales of cotton grown locally. In $\mathbf { I 8 7 9 } \colon$ Anatolia exported some $^ { 8 5 }$ percent of its production, then estimated at ${ } ^ { 2 7 , 0 0 0 }$ bales.² In the early 189os, aggregate Ottoman cotton production totalled $6 0 , 0 0 0$ bales but, by 1904, the provinces of Adana, Syria and West Anatolia alone yielded some $_ { 8 0 , 0 0 0 }$ bales. Stimulated by booming international textile production that caused severe raw material shortages, raw cotton output increased sharply in some regions during the early twentieth century.³ Between 1906 and $\mathbf { I 9 I 4 } ,$ for example, production on the Adana plain rose 25o percent, from ${ 5 0 , 0 0 0 }$ to ${ } ^ { 2 5 0 , 0 0 0 }$ bales, and had risen four-fold since the late 188os. But at İzmir, by contrast, production held stable after 1888 and, in $\mathbf { I 9 I 4 } ,$ totalled c. 29,ooo bales. In the Syrian regions, cotton cultivation was neglected in the nineteenth century: in 1913, output at Aleppo was only c. 10,000 bales while that of Palestine was about one-half that level.4 Egyptian raw cotton output, on the other hand, completely overshadowed that of the Ottoman lands during the nineteenth century. Raw cotton exports there averaged over 100,o0o bales during the 185os and, with violent fluctuations in between, reached a phenomenal 1.7 million bales on the eve of World War I.⁵ <table><tr><td>•Üsküp Niausta• Salonica Karafería</td><td>•Serez</td><td>•Edirne Istanbul Gallipoli •İznik</td><td>Ereğli Merzifon• Amasya •Tokat</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ambelakia</td><td>Bursa Kütahya• Manisa •Gördes</td><td>• Ürgüp • Kayserí</td><td>Zile• •Yozgat Sivas •Arapkir Harput Elazığ•</td><td>Trabzon •Erzurum</td><td>一</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Antalya</td><td>Konya• •Bor Karaman Tarsus Mersin Anamur</td><td>Malatyå • Niğde •Maraş • Aintab Adana</td><td>uş •Hani Bitlis Diyarbakır</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>汇</td><td></td><td>• Aleppo</td><td>心 •Mosul</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Se a</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mediterranean</td><td></td><td></td><td>Beirut</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Damascus</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>• Baghdad</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>•Cairo</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></table> Mot y n u n u ## Dyestuffs Textile producers historically also had access to richly abundant supplies of most of the dyestuffs they required. The most important of these was madder root, the source of the famed “Turkey-red" color so valued by European and Ottoman consumers. The madder dyestuff itself came from many regions, such as the mountains south of Konya that shipped to İzmir, to Europe through the Taurus mountains and met the needs of local dyers as well. Aleppo in the earlier nineteenth century received large quantities of madder root from Ereğli, two days the other side of the Taurus range. The region around Gördes in western Anatolia, c. 18oo–40, supplied the İzmir dyeworks and foreign markets with some 8,ooo bales of the root, ideally 3–6 years old when extracted.6 Other notable dyestuffs of the late eighteenth century included yellow berries. England once had relied on the European provinces of the Ottoman Empire for this material but switched over to fustic wood from the Caribbean. The Kayseri region, however, continued to supply important quantities of the berries for local yarn and cloth producers and for export to Holland and the Germanies. The development of artificial and synthetic dyes during the 185os and 186os, first in England and then Germany, had enormous consequences for Ottoman textile producers. The first breakthrough had been in the 182os and, by the 185os, it had become possible to produce alizarin, possessing some 36 times the color strength of madder, in the laboratory. Factory production of this widely used and highly prized color soon followed. It was molecularly identical to the natural substance and had the advantage of being obtainable in unlimited quantities from the factory. Other new colors thereafter steadily emerged out of European laboratories. In addition, there were the new coal-tar, aniline, dyes. These came into existence in the 185os and were photo-sensitive substitutes for, but not the chemical equivalents of, natural dyestuffs. The anilines, if used properly, were color-fast and very cheap artificial coloring materials. Synthetic dyes cost somewhat more. Use of the new dyes was not without problems (see chapters 2-3 and 5). Illiterate peasants could not read the directions; and mordants were left out, sometimes deliberately to save money. Merchants did not always provide proper instruction in use of the anilines or synthetics, resulting in poor color fastness and other problems. But there were many advantages. Synthetic dyes freed Middle East textile producers from the oftenlaborious task of gathering and preparing natural dyestuffs, or paying others for the work, and it liberated them from the vagaries of nature. The new dyes enabled them to color their yarns and cloths with very inexpensive materials that, compared to the natural substances, were simple to apply. Since, by the third quarter of the century, Ottoman consumers largely had switched over to imported yarn, these new dyes had a particular importance. Ottoman textile producers using imported yarn benefitted from European technology that provided a steadily cheaper basic material that was superior in strength and regularity to home-spun yarn. By importing undyed yarn and using these easily handled dyes, thev could cut costs since imported undyed yarn cost from one-fifth to one-third less than dyed yarn of the same size. Part of the savings could be retained by dyeing the yarn locally with the new materials. Use of the aniline dyestuffs avoided the duty on red yarn, that was higher than duties on the imported undyed yarn and dyestuffs together. Textile makers now could bypass professional dyehouses, at some risk to quality and fastness, but with considerable savings. Locally dyeing the yarn transferred the labor input from Europe to the Middle East, where it was cheaper, hence commercial textile producers could enhance their marketplace position. The product was acknowledged as imperfect but served the lower end of the market.? The impact on natural dyestuff production and usage was impressive although the evidence is mainly indirect. Madder, yellow berries and other dyestuffs disappeared from the world market as well as many regional ones. Madder production in Asia Minor had totalled as much as $8 0 , 0 0 0$ bales in the early 186os. For decades, the export of madder root annually had averaged c. 1o,ooo bales, worth c. 12.0 million piasters. But by the mid-188os, shipments to foreign markets had fallen to c. o.4 million piasters/year. İzmir had exported $5 , 0 0 0$ tons of madder roots in 1830 and $7 , 0 0 0$ tons in $\mathbf { I } 8 5 6 ,$ when it was the second most important export. Between 1905 and 191 1, by contrast, madder root exports averaged only 94 tons.8 Indigo imports from India suffered first from aniline competition in some areas and later when the synthetic equivalent was formulated.9 Saffron, once a favored and extensively cultivated dyestuff, was grown only as a spice by World War I. Yellow berry production also suffered. The competition of aniline colors lowered the price of yellow berries some 9o percent in just a few years. At the end of the century, cultivators hardly bothered to harvest the berries and began cutting down the bushes in some regions.1º The hilltops of the Ankara districts once were covered with yellow berry shrubs but reportedly became barren as demand faded. In the later nineteenth century, European travellers were to report that yellow berries grew wild on the hilltops of the Kayseri region, affording a source of income with scarcely any labor. This, however, had not always been the case. Before the development of synthetic dyes and the collapse in the price of natural dyestuffs, great plantations of yellow berries had been cultivated carefully and were well-cared for since this notably enhanced output.11 Regional use of imported dyed yarn varied considerably, depending on the manufacturing speciality of the area (see chapters 2-3). Several important textile production centers continued to dye locally, while some others imported their colored yarn needs. In Mardin district (sancak) during the early twentieth century, for example, local dyers annually colored 94 percent of the yarn imported while at Maraş, some 43 percent of all yarn imported already was dyed, of the better qualities.12 At Trabzon, c. 19oo, producers dyed substantial quantities of cotton yarn with cochineal, indigo, campeche and alizarin. But for better quality and specialized goods and for colors the local dyers could not provide, they imported colored yarns.13 The important textile center of Tokat, at the end of the century, imported only red yarns from Switzerland and Germany. Otherwise, local dyers colored the imported plain yarn, imparting a fastness considered more durable than the European.14 Until late in the nineteenth century, residents of the land behind İzmir still used “a large quantity of vegetable dyes."15 Imports of colored yarn into the port city were reduced when factories for yarn dyeing opened in the early twentieth century, one each for dyeing cotton yarn and wool carpet yarn.16 One of the factories employed some 25-5o workers and produced in all colors; by 1912, it had “shut out [imported] colored yarns to a large extent."17 At several locations including Diyarbakır, dyeing with natural indigo, that had to be imported, remained significant. At Aleppo, the indigo dyers, who worked with Manchester yarn, were singled out for their prosperity at the end of the nineteenth century.18 By then, there were only indigo dyers in the city, working in about 1oo shops. With the development of synthetic indigo just a few years later, the blue dyers in Aleppo continued to thrive, using the new discovery as well as the natural indigo.19 Some textile producers alternatively abandoned and then resumed local dyeing in their efforts to find the most marketable combination of product and price. In the 188os, for example, Aleppo producers started buying large quantities of aniline and alizarin dyes to undercut their Aintab competitors by dyeing locally. But, after losing customers, they resumed colored yarn imports within two decades. By contrast, the Aintab producers imported a recently developed and cheap synthetic dye for its lower-end textiles, while importing dyed yarns for their higher qualities (see chapters 2–3 for details).20 ## Handspinning ## Introduction Ottoman cotton yarn producers labored in a context of (nearly) steadily falling yarn prices. Whatever their identity – Ottoman, British, Italian or Indian – suppliers of yarn to the Ottoman market continuously were challenged by competitors who offered approximately comparable goods at a lower price. During the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, Indian and Ottoman yarn lost out to British goods. Thereafter, for most of the century, England nearly totally dominated the import of unbleached yarns while, for a time, Belgium supplied most of the balance. In the 187os, unbleached English yarns formed 9o percent of all yarns imported into İzmir. England then also provided all the red-dyed thread imported to that city. Subsequently, Britain lost its virtual monopoly in red-dyed yarns as Germany, Switzerland and Austria-Hungary emerged as important suppliers. Elberfeld in Germany became particularly important.21 In unbleached yarns, Britain encountered stiff competition near the end of the century, when Italy suffered from overproduction of yarn and sought new markets in the Middle East. Thanks to lower labor and transport costs, the Italians drove Belgium totally out of Anatolia, winning real successes in the coarser numbers of unbleached yarn, selling them for 5-1o percent less.22 At Bursa, Italian mills won the lion's share of the market in low price, coarse yarns, sharing sales with producers from Salonica and Germany. Italian thread also sold well at Edirne, but at Harput it captured only 10 percent of the total market in the first years of the new century.23 Despite these advances, Britain remained the primary supplier of imported yarns and, in 19o1, the Ottomans were Britain's third most important customer in both yarn and in piece goods. The United Kingdom then supplied over half the total yarn imports, sending over 8 million kg. of thread while Italy provided some 5 millions.24 At the turn of the century, c. 1902, resurgent Indian spinners entered the Ottoman market, undersold the British and struggled with the Italians. Totally unknown before 19oo, Indian yarn quickly occupied an important place in the Ottoman market, supplying some one million kg. of yarn by 1904.25 Its price advantage was fractional, not even 2 percent less than British yarn of the same number. But, thanks to this differential and dumping, Indian yarns quickly dominated the İzmir market in the lower numbers, while England continued to prevail in the finer grades. Bombay spinners, selling at a loss, began making inroads into the Iraqi markets c. 19o8; by then, Aleppo weavers already had shifted away from the Manchester yarns to inferior but cheaper Indian grey twists and Italian mercerized yarn. As World War I approached, India accounted for as much as one-fifth of all Ottoman yarn imports.26 Toward the end of the century, a number of mechanized Ottoman spinning mills emerged. Utilizing technology more readily available than in the past, and employing very cheap female and child labor, these factories captured about one-quarter of the total Ottoman market (see below). By the period's end, Ottoman suppliers of machine-made cotton yarn were competing, often successfully, with British, Belgian, Italian and Indian producers. Amidst the pricecutting wars of the machine producers of yarn, hand spinning both by wheel and by hand persisted remarkably in many districts. ## Ottoman handspinning before Manchester In the waning decades of the eighteenth century, Ottoman cotton-yarn makers dominated the domestic marketplace; Indian yarns were ranked second while European, mainly Dutch, suppliers ranked a poor third.27 Local weavers generally obtained their yarn supplies from this combination of Ottoman, Indian and Dutch yarn producers, although there were many regional variations. The silk weavers of İstanbul, for example, used Indian, as well as Dutch and local, cotton yarn. They bought the yarns from Muslim and non-Muslim Ottoman merchants who imported all numbers of Indian yarn, separated those that were too fine for local use and forwarded them to Europe. Many customers, such as these weavers, turned to cheap, good quality English yarn that, as early as the 179os, had become one of the largest Ottoman imports.28 The Syrian textile industry, for its part, placed considerable reliance on the Indian yarns, more so than in most other parts of the empire. At the turn of the eighteenth-nineteenth centuries, Ottoman spinners produced important quantities of cotton yarn in very many areas, for personal use and for sale to domestic and foreign buyers and to the state. In addition to the towns of northern Anatolia, these included the central districts (sancaks) of Hamit, Bozok, Kayseri, Yozgat and Niğde. In the European provinces, the Gallipoli peninsula at the Dardanelles, the Ambelakia region, and the area of Salonica particularly were active,29 while, in the Syrian provinces, Aleppo excelled.30 The yarn was produced through a variety of organizational forms that differed in the many cities, towns and villages of its origin. Free labor spun the yarn in thousands of village homes, often for family use or casual sale in nearby markets. But merchants also organized substantial putting-out systems, involving large numbers of village and town spinners. The Kayseri merchants operated a very widespread network, buying cotton from Adana (some 7o percent of its total output) and distributing it to spinners throughout central and northern Anatolia. In some cities, guild labor may have provided the yarn although this seems unlikely since non-guild female labor accounts for most of the hand-spun yarn used by commercial and subsistence weavers alike. Labor of various kinds made yarn in government workshops. In the Eyüp quarter of İstanbul, for example, about 6o non-Muslims spun in a state-run factory, rewarded by exemption from the poll tax (cizye) (and perhaps cash payments as well).31 To overcome the chronic problem of finding sufficient numbers of workers in an economy characterized by its scarcity of labor, the Ottoman state resorted to a number of other mechanisms. State factories (riştehane-i amire) regularly employed several hundreds of orphaned children to spin yarn for the Ottoman fleet. The children were “suitably paid"and worked in the factories for short, specified periods of time, on a rotational basis. Initially, Armenian Orthodox children from around Erzurum, Van and Sivas were employed but when their numbers proved inadequate, some 10o Greek and 10o Catholic orphans were summoned from the Ankara-Ürgüp-Niğde regions of central Anatolia. In the 185os, this yarn factory used persons convicted of misdemeanor offenses, who worked off their sentences and then were released. Other spinners worked under government orders, e.g. those on the Gallipoli peninsula who received piece work wages to supply yarn to the tentmakers' guild in İstanbul.32 At the end of the eighteenth century, Ottoman yarn producers not only prevailed in the internal market, but also shipped substantial quantities of yarn abroad. Exports of cotton thread totalled some 2.5 million kg., mainly from the regions around Serez, Salonica and Thessaly. North Anatolian yarn spinners exported massive quantities to the Crimea while İzmir, for its part, exported one million kg. of yarn, in approximately equal shares of red and white, to Marseilles alone. Towards the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the İzmir hinterland was exporting some 250,ooo kg. of hand-spun yarn. Arriving at the port in hairsacks of c. 67 kg., each sack contained 4-5 different numbers of yarn. The yarn arrived in the grey state and was dyed red in the city, for export to Russia. Formerly, great quantities of the "Turkey red" yarn had flowed to France and the German lands, but ceased in the face of protectionist measures that were enacted in those areas.33 Ottoman yarn exports had rested on well-guarded techniques of red yarn dyeing, secrets so valuable that English manufacturers allegedly had offered five thousand pounds sterling for the formula. The secret technique involved boiling the cotton in olive oil and then in a mild alkali, before immersing it in the madder dye.34 The so-called “Edirne red" had predominated but gave way in the late eighteenth century to the products of İzmir, “some towns in the interior of Asia Minor" and, most of all perhaps, to Ambelakia. The brilliant yarnmanufacturing center at Ambelakia, to the south of Salonica, provided perhaps one-quarter of late-eighteenth-century Ottoman yarn exports. Thanks to booming European demand for its famed red yarn, the population of the town had trebled between 1783 and 1798. Every arm, even those of the children, is employed in the [twenty-four] factories; whilst the men dye the cotton, women prepare and spin it.35 They exported the yarn to Vienna, Leipzig, Bayreuth and other cities in south Germany and had offices in Salonica, İzmir and İstanbul.36 But the European industrial vibrancy that boosted the Ambelakia and Anatolian yarn industries also caused their destruction, and that of Ottoman spinning in general. As early as 1765, the French government obtained and publicized the secret red formula.37 Thus, means were found within a short time, in our French manufactories, to give spun cotton a red colour full as beautiful and as durable as that which is given to it in Turkey.38 Beginning in c. 179o, English machine-made yarn started substantially to underprice the Ottoman and Indian products, thanks to steam-power and increasingly exploitative labor employment practices. The price of English yarn fell by two-thirds between 1792 and 1812 and its production increased at least 250 percent. Ottoman yarn exports abroad ceased forever by the mid-nineteenth century. As a result, production centers that had focused on the foreign trade, notably Ambelakia, were abandoned by the organizing merchants and fell into near ruin. The spinning families emigrated in large numbers to expanding industrial centers, such as Serez.39 The Ottoman import of machine-made yarns from abroad increased by leaps and bounds. By 181o, the annual volume of yarn imports equalled some 250 tons.40 During the next decade, these annually averaged 45o tons and then shifted, nearly incredibly, to some 2,65o tons in the 184os. Thus, in a mere three decades, according to one calculation, Ottoman use of foreign yarns had risen ten-fold.41 Important changes continued until c. 1870, when nineteenth-century Ottoman yarn production probably reached its nadir. During the great mid-Victorian boom years of the 184os-7os, yarn imports reportedly tripled again, to an annual average of 7,750 tons and then rose to 12,55o in the final years before World War I.42 The growth of European yarn production caused huge dislocations in Ottoman yarn spinning and, more generally, the Ottoman textile sector. Inflationary spirals driven by Western demand forced up the cost of raw materials, increases that European makers could better absorb since their labor input costs were dropping. These raw material price increases badly hurt many Ottoman guilds. For the products they provided, the guild received fees that were fixed and could be adjusted only with official consent, a procedure that, if prolonged, could be damaging in times of rising raw material prices. Because of increased raw cotton prices, in one period of less than three years during the mid-184os, the government granted a full 33 percent increase in the price that it paid for thread used in tents.43 During the 183os, the price of copper, starch and indigo that the Muslim dyers guild (Islam boyacı esnafi) of İstanbul used to color tenting cloth rose exceptionally. After absorbing these rising prices for seven years, they obtained a 25 percent fee increase from the state. Within a year, the guild won another increase, of 2o percent, only to return again, four years later, to petition for yet another raise. This time, they received increases of c. 17 and 4o percent for dyeing several different kinds of cloth. Invariably, there was some time delay between the increase in raw material prices and state approval of the fee hikes, during which the workers had to absorb the rising costs.44 In the early 184os, the European market had become so attractive that some imported logwood dyestuffs virtually were unobtainable within the Ottoman economy and various guilds scrambled to control the limited supplies of other dyestuffs available.45 The diminished supplies of dyestuffs in turn adversely affected the producers of mordants to make fast the colors. For example, some 4oo households processed alum at a centralized workshop in the Kütahya district, receiving piece wages according to the quantity of each grade produced. They also received military service and tax exemptions, until these were eliminated in the legislation of 1845-46. Alum production, however, stagnated because of the lack of demand and workers'wages remained unchanged between the 183os and 186os.46 The critical shortage of dyeing materials prompted a series of private and government efforts to expand existing supplies. In 1845, several Ottoman Jews obtained tax privileges to grow and process indigo in western Anatolia (İznik).47 At the same time, the government launched a major search to locate, identify and exploit mineral sources of dyestuffs. Samples were taken at locations in northwest Anatolia and the Üsküp and Niş regions of the European provinces that could provide green, yellow, white and red dyes, and plans were formulated to hire local workers for wages.48 A decade later, the state 'initiated plans to import indigo from Egypt for cultivation in the Baghdad region, with the intent of replacing existing Indian supplies.49 ## Ottoman handspinning in the era of European industrial hegemony The combination of competition from foreign yarn producers whose prices steadily fell and the rising cost and scarcity of raw materials was devastating. During the first decades of the nineteenth century, profits in Ottoman yarn making plummeted by as much as one-half.50 Ottoman handspinning was abandoned, rapidly and permanently, in some areas. At places such as Ambelakia, the Ottoman export trade in yarn evaporated immediately and the decaying town became a symbol for the decline of Ottoman industry in general. Northern Anatolia, at the end of the eighteenth century, began losing its yarn markets in the Crimea to English producers. Indian and Dutch yarns similarly disappeared very quickly from Ottoman markets. But the replacement of British for Ottoman yarn was not a uniform process; rather it occurred with considerable variations in timing and extent. More surprisingly, perhaps, the manual spinning of Ottoman yarn persisted at levels, often extremely difficult to assess and measure, that were significant nonetheless. Geography played some role but was a far less important factor than has been assumed. The presence of putting-out networks as well as poverty played greater roles in delaying acceptance of the foreign yarn. The merchants of İzmir, for example, still were exporting some 14.9 million piasters of cotton yarn to England and Trieste in 1843, suggesting the enduring vitality of that particular network.51 Rural households, generally, were slower to accept the imports than town or city textile manufacturers. The availability of alternative manufacturing and/or agricultural opportunities certainly promoted the shift from locally to foreign-made yarn. Similarly important were economic cycles affecting agricultural and manufactured goods. In some areas, the process of adopting British yarn was completed or welladvanced by the mid-183os, for example, at the textile-producing centers of Tokat and Yozgat as well as Arapkir, where yarn imports gave birth to a new weaving industry (see chapter 3).52 Residents of the Bursa region were among the first to switch, nearly totally, to British yarn.53 Here, as in many regions, customers appreciate its advantages, and the waste of time spared in spinning cotton of native growth, for making stout articles of common wear ...54 But there were other, more specific reasons for the early changeover, explanations linked to the booming foreign demand for raw silk. Bursa cotton spinners, caught in a cycle of declining profits, had a ready alternative in the world of silk spinning, one long familiar to area residents. At this critical transition time, moreover, silk spinning was not the ill-paying activity that characterizes it generally, but a lucrative occupation, one offering high wages to attract badly-needed workers (see chapter 4). The manufacturing empire of the Kayseri merchants fought a bitter but losing rearguard action against European yarn imports. In the mid-183os, they still were shipping Adana cotton to north Anatolian towns, such as Vezir Köprü, where large quantities of yarn were made. Some of the yarn was used locally and the balance sent to nearby Merzifon and Bafra. Amasya weavers at this time used local yarns exclusively, to make coarse dyed and printed cottons. Similarly, workers at Zile received large quantities of Adana cotton from the merchants at Kayseri, spinning it and then weaving coarse calicoes for export to the Crimea. A half decade later, the Amasya industry annually still used 1oo,ooo kg. of Adana cotton to spin yarn for tent canvas and sails and for coarse calico.5⁵ In the mid-184os, Kayseri merchants continued to buy a substantial amount, some 3,ooo bales, of Adana cotton for distribution to hand spinners. But by the middle of the next decade, the marketing networks of the city and its importance as a center for organizing manufacturing had withered away.5⁶ Similarly, the famed Diyarbakır cloth industry, oriented to production for sale, had switched over to British yarn by the mid-183os.57 The use of Ottoman homespun elsewhere, however, continued. In some areas, its use persisted for a few decades more than in locales where British yarn immediately had been adopted. In yet other regions, hand spinning was present until the end of the Ottoman Empire. At Malatya, in the mid-183os, homespun provided enough yarn to supply some 8oo looms commercially weaving cloth.58 Domestic spinners in the Diyarbakır area continued to work at home for decades after, as the following demonstrates. All the Koordish women during the winter employ themselves in spinning the native twist of which the above cloth [bez] is made. The poverty of the mass of the country people is however so great that they can rarely afford to buy the cotton of which the twist is made, so that numbers of women endeavour to find employment in gathering and picking cotton, for the sake of a small portion which is given to them. Thus a woman being possessed of, for instance, six pounds of cotton, turns it into twist as soon as she can, and brings it into town, where she exchanges it for nine pounds of raw cotton; this she converts again into twist, and exchanges again, in the same proportion, against raw cotton; until by these means she becomes possessed of a certain quantity of twist, which the husband converts into cloth, using for his family what is necessary, and selling the rest.59 Northeast of Diyarbakır, at Hani, some 3oo Muslim and 150 Armenian families in 1839 spun cotton yarn imported from Harput and Erzurum and then wove it into cloth for sale in nearby villages as well as in Diyarbakır and Muş.60 In the region of Bitlis at this time, Persian cotton (from Shirvan, Harzan and Khvoy), was spun in very large quantities, enough to make several hundred thousand pieces of heavy calicoes. At Bor, southwest of Niğde and just across the Taurus Mountains from the Çukurova plain that produced the cotton, spinners were using Adana cotton into the mid-184os.61 At this time, north Syrian spinners used local cotton to produce yarn of ordinary quality to make coarse clothes, underwear, shirts, mattress coverings, and stockings. Weavers there, however, also employed British yarn for the better kinds of goods and Aleppo annually was importing c. 230,000 kg. of British yarn, Nr. 10–30 and 40–60.62 Much of the surviving spinning industry rested in the hands of rural women, who spun for their own needs and sold the surplus, for example, women of the Aleppo area. Many used only their own homespun to weave cloth. The practice described in detail for the area around Niğde during the later nineteenth century probably prevailed in most Ottoman regions. In the district of Niğde, most homes held both a spinning wheel (cıkrık) and a loom."Young girls, each of them planning on motherhood," bought cotton, spun it on the wheel and wove cloth on the loom, either for their trousseaus, for members of the family or for sale. But, as the use of the factory yarn, so-called water yarn, increased, the spinning wheels gradually disappeared.63 Around Kayseri, although the region is not mentioned as a major source of yarn, cotton (and wool) spinning remained an everyday part of women's skills until World War I.64 Although many wove for family use, commercial weavers also used hand-spun yarn, in combination with factory yarns, to produce cloths of a certain desired strength, fineness and price. Women spinning at home in Sivas province during the early 189os used “the modest kind of spinning wheels," and annually utilized 10,0oo bales of cotton from the provinces of Adana and Harput to produce yarn for a coarse cloth used in men's trousers.65 A steady decline in the price of imported yarn was continuing to erode demand for raw cotton from Harput at the turn of the century. By 1907, one account suggests, local yarn only occasionally was being used for the warp while Adana factory yarn more usually was employed.66 At Aleppo, cotton spinners numbered 6,ooo persons in the late 185os, employed in 400 shops. In the first decade of the twentieth century, weavers in the city still used regionally spun yarn for warp thread in many of the coarser textiles. Women working at home for “supplemental" income provided the yarn, earning 0.4-0.8 piasters a day. Annual yarn output totalled an estimated 100,000 kg.67 Bitlis spinners annually produced $6 5 0 , 0 0 0$ lb. of cotton yarn for local weaving during the 186os. In the 187os, Erzurum weavers regularly used a mix of local and English yarns to produce the lower-grade towels.68 Yarn spinning in the districts surrounding Diyarbakır, as seen, retained great vitality among the Kurdish tribal population who depended on the income it produced. In the early twentieth century, the district (sancak) of Diyarbakır still produced over 16,ooo top of red yarn, shipping two-thirds of it to Ottoman customers. Spinners in Mardin district (sancak), in the mid-188os, made c. 7,70o kg. of red yarn and $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ kg. of white yarn, using three-quarters of each type locally and sending the balance to other Ottoman buyers.69 Two decades later, in c. 1907, Mardin district yarn output had more than doubled and spinners provided local weavers with more than twice as much yarn, an estimated 45,ooo kg. Local weavers used the hand-spun for the warp in the coarse natural colored textiles and in the striped alaca cloths as well.70 At Harput, impressive quantities of locally spun yarn were used c. 1905, often in combination with the machine-made. Employing cotton gins that replaced the old hand gins in the late nineteenth century, villagers then hand-carded the cotton and spun it on small wheels for use on home looms. These spinners utilized over 7oo,ooo kg. of local raw cotton. Unlike weavers in Sivas province and at Aleppo who used hand-spun for the warp, Harput weavers employed it for the weft (and for candle wicks).7¹ During the mid-189os, hand spinners in villages around Mosul annually produced c. $6 6 5 , 0 0 0$ kg. of yarn for sale to weavers in the town. Women “and men" even in the villages spun the yarn “when they are not employed in other profitable occupations."72 At Maraş, home-spun prevailed until the 185os, when Manchester yarn, found to be cheaper and better, reportedly “almost entirely"superseded the local product. But, c. 19o6, local hand spinners still were producing some 46,00o kg. for sale to local weavers.73 Spinning yarn does not constitute a profession properly speaking; it is done in all the poor homes - that is, among nearly all families - the occupation of women who' are at the spinning wheel during their spare time moments ...74 For the work, they daily earned c. o.5o piasters; the most active might gain up to o.75 piasters, about the same as the women who spun for the Aleppo industry. The yarn was very coarse and irregular, suitable for weaving but not sewing and sold for 1o percent less than approximately equivalent size factory thread from Adana.75 Table 1.1. Handspun cotton yarn production (available data), c. 1900
<table><tr><td>place</td><td>date original qty.</td><td>in tons</td></tr><tr><td>Diyarbakır district (sancak)</td><td>1900 $1 6 , 0 0 0 \ t o p \ ( \mathrm { r e d \ y a r n } )$ </td><td>n.</td></tr><tr><td>Sivas province</td><td>1890s $_ { \mathrm { I } \odot , \odot \odot \odot \mathrm { b a l e s } }$ </td><td>2,000</td></tr><tr><td>Aleppo city</td><td>1900 $1 0 0 , 0 0 0 ~ \mathrm { k g } .$ </td><td>100</td></tr><tr><td>Mardin district</td><td>1907 $4 5 , 0 0 0 ~ \mathrm { k g } .$ </td><td>45</td></tr><tr><td>Harput district</td><td>1900 $7 0 0 , 0 0 0 \mathrm { k g } .$ </td><td>700</td></tr><tr><td>Maraş district</td><td>1900 $4 6 , 0 0 0 \mathrm { k g } .$ </td><td>46</td></tr><tr><td>İzmir region</td><td>1901 $4 , 0 0 0 \ \mathsf { b a l e s }$ </td><td>800</td></tr><tr><td>Mosul area</td><td>1896 $5 0 , 0 0 0$ batman</td><td>666</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> $\mathrm { T O T A I }$ </td><td>(IN TONS) 4,357</td></tr></table> Sources: see references in text. Pamuk $( \mathbb { r } 9 8 7 ) , \mathbb { p } . \ \mathbb { r } 1 5 .$ calculates annual·average Ottoman cotton yarn imports at c. 11,000 tons in 1894–96. He mistakenly calculates Ottoman handspun yarn production at only 1,50o tons. The picture of Ottoman handspinning thus is quite different from that suggested by the standard accounts of deindustrialization. The handmaking of cotton yarn hardly had disappeared. Rather, it remained an important source for Ottoman textile producers and accounted for a considerable proportion of all cotton yarn being used in the empire, at least 25 percent in c. 190o (see table 1.1). At this time, the known quantity of handspun cotton yarn production exceeded 4,00o tons. The actual total surely is much higher since the statistics presented are hardly a systematic compilation but those randomly encountered in the sources. ## Ottoman spinning mills ## Introduction Hand spinning survived in part because some of its makers could not afford to purchase yarn at any price, as in the example of the Kurdish female spinners around Diyarbakır in the 185os. Also, many families did not give monetary value to the time spent spinning, counting as net savings the sums not spent to purchase yarn. But, as seen, much of the spinning activity that did survive was aimed at the marketplace, for sale to regional and distant consumers. The spinners continued working because their yarn undersold the European product. It was not yarn of comparable quality, but yarn of the coarsest kind, that nonetheless had a wide variety of uses. Since the price of imported yarn and textile goods fell steadily over the century, so too did the prices of hand-spun yarn and the wages received by the surviving spinners. In the final quarter of the century, Ottoman hand spinners encountered new competitors, while continuing their battle with Manchester and the other foreign producers. Mechanized Ottoman yarn factories emerged, carving out a market by undercutting the European products. Although these new mills spun yarn in a wide range of numbers, they focused on the lower numbers, precisely the coarser yarns that had become the hand producer's last stronghold. By the turn of the century, in an atmosphere of increasingly intense international competition and falling yarn prices, matters had become very grim for these Ottoman hand spinners. Events at Maraş in 1904 illustrate the competition between European and Ottoman mechanized spinners and between them and the hand spinners. In that city, Nr. 2o Adana undyed yarn sold for some 7 percent less than the equivalent Nr. 2o English yarn. But the cheapest yarn at Maraş was hand spun, selling for 10 percent less than the lowest-priced yarn, Nr. 4, produced at Adana. And, this home-spun was one-half the price of the lowest-numbered European yarn (Nr. 16) available in Maraş. When the mechanized spinning mills of Italy and India entered the fray, prices for the coarser yarns fell still further.76 Mechanized factories to spin cotton yarn were few and far between in the Ottoman lands. Except for those established to fill government needs, Ottoman mills were founded at the end of the nineteenth century and later. In 1904, they provided some 13 percent of all mechanically spun yarn used within the empire and, within a decade, had increased their share to about one-quarter of the total.77 The founding of cotton yarn factories occurred at two distinctively different periods. The first group emerged during the 187os and 188os during the Great Depression. Since European loans for additional Ottoman imports were more difficult to obtain, local production of consumer goods became more important. Also, the depression pushed down raw material prices, an advantage for most Ottoman mills that were located very close to raw cotton supplies. And, third, depressed agricultural prices meant decreased earnings for cultivators, the major market for Ottoman textile producers. Hence, the need for cheaper goods. The second cluster of factory foundings came in quite different circumstances, after 1896, when agricultural commodity prices were rising. This upward trend favored local capital accumulation and triggered the expansion of internal markets for cloth, in turn prompting demand for yarn, both foreign and domestic. Further, the rise of Ottoman yarn manufacturing was part of the global diffusion of mechanized production. In Europe, two trends had been favoring Ottoman yarn factory formation during the post-187o era. First, the wages of European workers had risen, thanks to their comparatively successful mobilization and, overall, standards of living improved in many West European countries. Thus, production costs relatively became higher and the prices of some goods rose to levels that permitted competition, for the first time since the rise of British yarn-making hegemony. Also, the mature European industrial economies were de-emphasizing the export of textiles and light consumer goods and focusing on the shipment of capital equipment. The export of machinery had emerged as an important part of British business, in contrast to earlier decades, when the British government routinely had prohibited the export of textile machinery.78 Hence the growth of Ottoman, as well as Indian and Italian yarn manufacturing in the later nineteenth century. By the end of the 189os, owing to the facilities enjoyed by these [Ottoman] factories, to the cheapness of labour, and to the privilege they enjoy of importing raw materials duty free, it is found that foreign cottons cannot compete with them in the coarser numbers (3s to 14s) of unbleached yarns.79 There were a few mills at widely scattered locations. The earliest privately owned yarn factory probably was at Harput, that worked as early as 1864. It used European machinery to make cotton thread (as well as silk cloth and cotton fabrics) and the yarn was well regarded. Although equipment difficulties restrained production, cotton spinning continued until the end of the period.80 Much later, in 1899, the state awarded a concession to open a yarn factory, steam or water-powered, in the province of Sivas or Ankara.81 There was a successful mill at Elaziğ, established in c. 19o3 and one at Gallipoli, founded sometime before 1913. A Muslim founded the first mill at Manisa before 1910 and a British subject established another there in 1911. Beyond the fact of their existence, we have no information on these mills at present.82 The vast majority of Ottoman yarn factories were located in just a few areas, notably İzmir, Adana, Salonica and, to a lesser extent, İstanbul. ## Mechanized spinning ## Istanbul An English-French family, Eastfarre, that had resided at İzmir since the eighteenth century, founded the yarn spinning mill at Yedikule in the capital. Family members won the concession for a spinning mill in 1886 and opened it about two years later.83 The mill enjoyed early successes thanks to cheap labor and the erasure of internal tariffs. In 1890, the factory spun c. 1.I million kg. (240,00o packets) of yarn and, by 1897, successfully competed with England in the low numbers. Its 9,ooo spindles made yarn in the 3-8 number range while sometimes shifting to 2-14 yarns, to meet the demands of its Ottoman customers. It found significant export markets in Bulgaria, Egypt, India and even the United States.84 For a time, it supplied much of the yarn for a state textile factory (basmahane).85 In May 19oo, however, the mill operated only two days a week but, in 1901, production boomed, to a record 2.2 million kg. (5o0,000 packets worth some 7 million piasters).86 ## Izmir A French family at İzmir founded a steam-powered spinning mill, Cousinery et fils, in 1892 and its production immediately cut into foreign yarn imports. In 1901, annually using as much as one million kg. of local cotton on its 8,00o spindles, the mill sold coarse yarns, Nrs. 8–14, in İzmir, the hinterland and the archipelago. By then, it was offering serious competition to the Italian yarns in Nrs. 8-10. Its yarn exports totalled 307,000 kg. in 1900, while, several years later, daily production equalled 3,00o kg. per day.87 A Belgian stock company bought the firm in 1903 and, later in the decade, exported part of its output to Bulgaria under a special low tariff. Producing the coarse numbers, 4-16, the mill spun about 10 percent of all yarn used locally.88 In 1912, when it was joined by a second mill at İzmir, its output had risen 20–40 percent over the past decade. As World War I began, the two mills together operated 28,00o active spindles.89 ## The Adana region Despite severe labor shortages, the Adana region rose to occupy the second rank among mechanized Ottoman yarn producers. By World War I, it possessed an impressive industrial complex, with over 40,ooo active spindles, located in the heart of the greatest cotton-producing region in the Middle East outside of Egypt.90 Nomadic tribes from the mountains supplied most of the labor for the cotton harvest, that increased 2.5 times in the early twentieth century. Each week, employers obtained the laborers in the markets of Tarsus and Adana, negotiating with the headman chosen by each gang. The cotton was ginned, but some hand removal of the seeds was required in addition. In 1907, workers typically received meals and 1.2-4.0 piasters per six-day week.91 The total number of gins rose from 550 to 1,o0o during the first decade of the century, concentrated in at least 22 ginning factories. Adana alone contained 6oo gins, Tarsus another 3oo while only a handful were located in small villages.92 A few of the gins worked for wage hire but most belonged to the various spinning mills. The Mavrumati family, owners of a 6o-gin operation, founded the first spinning mill as early as 1878. Located at Tarsus, it was water-powered and produced Nr. 4–18 yarns on 2,700 spindles. In the early 189os, it annually spun about one million kg. of yarn. By 19oo, the Tripani brothers had founded'a second steam-powered mill, at Adana. Together, the two mills daily produced c. 8,1oo kg. of yarn. Regional yarn exports by sea from Mersin then averaged c. 3.5 million piasters while caravans carried an approximately equal amount into the Anatolian interior.93 The two mills prospered and, in 19o2, were unable to fill the orders being received, reportedly using an extraordinary 10,ooo bales of local cotton. But the cotton shortages in Europe during 19o3 doubled the prices of local cotton and sent it to the West. Mill operators cut back operations, reducing the regular workforce by half.94 By 1907, markets again had been restored. There now were three spinning mills. Cosma Simyonoğlu owned the most recent one, also at Adana, that contained 3,50o spindles.95 The three mills now held 16,ooo spindles, with an annual productive capacity of c. 1.6 million kg. of yarn. Rasim Dokur, a Muslim Turk from Egypt, founded the last spinning mill at Tarsus in 1911; three years later, it contained some 10,800 spindles.96 Cotton textile production in the Adana area expanded substantially in the years immediately prior to World War I. Two, or perhaps three, of the spinning mills integrated vertically, acquiring important weaving capabilities, while expanding their spinning capacities as well.97 One mill at Adana expanded to $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ spindles, producing c. 4,000 kg. $( 8 0 0 - \mathtt { I } , 0 0 0$ bundles) of Nrs. 10–12 yarn per 12-hour day. In 1914, the spinning and weaving mills in Tarsus and Adana contained an aggregate $4 2 , 0 0 0$ spindles, that used $\scriptstyle \mathbf { I O } , 0 0 0$ bales of local cotton.98 Yarns up to Nr. 2o could be made, but the focus was on Nrs. $\mathtt { \mathtt { O } - I 4 }$ In good years, the four mills together consumed $4 0$ percent of the local cotton crop and daily produced some $^ { 7 2 , 0 0 0 }$ kg. of yarn.99 This represented a nine-fold increase over the output of the two regional mills back in 19oo. But they competed with difficulty even in their own backyard since hand looms in the area used both “native and foreign yarns, especially Italian yarns" to make napkins and sheets.1∞0 Italian competition prevented the mills from expanding further, even though they did profit from the Tripolitanian war and the temporary break in commerce with Italy.101 Adana yarns were sold “all over Turkey,"a commercial network encompassing coastal and interior regions as disparate as Silifke, Anamur and Antalya as well as Konya, Karaman and Maraş. The mills also supplied a small quantity of yarn to Aleppo weavers who used it for the weft. They annually furnished the Mardin district with some $2 2 , 5 0 0$ kg. of yarn, only 5 percent of its total needs,102 but supplied 4o percent of the urban market in the Harput area. Sivas weavers of manusa cloth sometimes used local hand-spun but had come to rely primarily on Adana yarns.103 As early as 1898, Adana mills controlled 10 percent of the Diyarbakır market while, at Konya, in the next decade, Tarsus supplied onequarter of its Nr. 6–24 yarns.104 ## Salonica and the Macedonian interior Macedonia held the densest concentration of spinning mills, a network lost to the Ottoman economy just before World War I. The oldest mill, at Niausta, dated back to the mid-187os while five others were established after 19oo. Two of the smaller mills annually spun $3 6 4 , 0 0 0$ kg. of yarn. The two mills in the city of Salonica emerged between 1878 and 1885 and, at the latter date, annually produced ${ 5 4 0 , 0 0 0 }$ kg. of yarn. Managed by Englishmen, the two mills earned 25 percent per year in the 188os, helped by government duty exemptions on intra-empire shipments.105 In c. 1906, the Macedonian yarn mills contained $4 2 , 9 0 0$ spindles and annually produced 2.9 million kg. of yarn. By 1909, the number of spindles had risen to $_ { 6 0 , 0 0 0 }$ and, four years later, some $7 0 , 0 0 0$ spindles (28,000 more than in the Adana area c. 1914) were working in ten mills, located at Salonica, Niausta, Karaferia and Wodena. Not counting the Salonica mills, the·Macedonian factories consumed 2-3 million kg. of raw cotton. Most mills obtained cotton from local cotton gins; for example, there were some 10o in the district (sancak) of Serez. These gin operators provided cultivators with cash advances, obtained the cotton at harvest, and negotiated directly with mill owners. Although cotton cultivation in Macedonia had increased because of the mills, it was not enough to meet the rising demand. And so, the mills bought some cotton from İzmir, Adana and even Aleppo. In 1904, for example, Syria shipped $9 0 0 , 0 0 0$ kg. of raw cotton to the Salonica and Niausta mills. A general lack of investment capital meant that each of the mills was owned jointly. Ottoman Jews owned two mills, both in Salonica, while Ottoman Greeks owned the remaining eight spinning factories. The mills supplied one quarter of local yarn requirements and shipped to other markets as well. Villagers near the two smaller Niausta mills, for example, bought the yarn, made into 4.5 kg. bundles, for home weaving.106 In common with other Ottoman mills, the Macedonian factories produced mainly coarser yarns, Nrs. $4 ^ { - 1 2 } s$ although some of the newer mills produced Nrs. 16–24 and even up to 32. By 19oo, the Salonica mills were competing against Italian (and English) yarn in the lower, 4-1o, numbers. The two Salonica mills shipped one-third of their production to Macedonia and Albania and exported the rest to Bulgaria, Serbia, Anatolia and the archipelago.107 When Bulgaria declared its independence from the Ottoman Empire in 19o8, the Salonica mills lost an important market; thereafter, most sales were in Macedonia and Albania. Already in the mid-188os, the Salonica mills supplied İzmir with important quantities of yarn, for the "shirtings used by both sexes in the interior of Anatolia."108 They also supplied Bursa with cotton thread, perhaps one-fifth of its total consumption, in the lower price qualities.109 Commercial weavers at Edirne generally used thread from Salonica, that sold for one-third less than the British equivalent while Edirne cultivators used thread made in Salonica as well as in İstanbul and İzmir.110 The mills at Salonica, well-placed at the waterside with good rail links to the hinterland, initially enjoyed a number of advantages over rival mills in the Macedonian interior. But, by 19oo, the Salonica mills found it difficult to survive and one of them shut down for seven years.111 There were several problems, beginning with crop failures in the 188os that had interrupted cotton supplies in the nearby Vardar river valley. In the early twentieth century, the Salonica mills suffered from the booming demand for tobacco as many cotton growers switched to tobacco, thus undermining the proximity advantage to the cotton fields. Also, the Salonica mills had higher production costs, land values and overheads than their inland competitors. These mills used coal to run steam engines while the competing mills at Karaferia, Niausta and Wodena instead employed water power. This might condemn the factories to seasonal closing as the water sources froze in winter or dried up in summer; but their operational costs were lower. Also, mill operators at Niausta and Karaferia further reduced overhead costs by milling flour as a sideline enterprise. The Wodena mill, largest of the Macedonian mills with its $_ { 1 6 , 0 0 0 }$ spindles, attempted vertical integration, by producing cotton cloth. In the early twentieth century, six of the mills outside Salonica combined into two syndicates, controlling some $4 1 , 5 0 0$ spindles. This was part of an overall pattern as Ottoman yarn manufacturers sought to form cartels in response to global cotton shortages. In 19oo, the larger mills at İstanbul, İzmir, Salonica and Tarsus had tried but failed to effect such a consolidation.12 The six mills attempted to control access to Macedonian cotton, reduce production costs, and further rationalize marketing procedures. And they adopted a division of labor, agreeing that a particular factory would produce only a certain yarn number. Generally, however, there were few other wage-earning jobs near the mills of interior Macedonia and so the operators could rely on cultivators who were available seasonally. During the summer harvest, the numbers of workers did fall sharply. But, since they had few other opportunities to earn cash wages, their labor remained cheap and available for the yarn factories of the Macedonian interior. The full potential of these few mechanized yarn factories in the Ottoman Empire remained unrealized, in part because of foreign competitors, including the new producers such as India and Italy. Also, the development of Ottoman yarn manufacturing was disrupted by the diversion of raw cotton supplies at the beginning of the twentieth century, when world-wide shortages caused European buyers bid up raw cotton prices.113 Local mills, therefore, had to cut back production just as their operations were gaining real momentum. Contemporaries liked to blame the mills’ relative lack of success on the workers, specifically, on labor turnover. Since the young girls who formed the bulk of the labor force did not remain long on the job, it was said, much time and capital was lost in training new hands. Because they lacked skilled labor, the argument continued, Ottoman mills were unable to make the finer numbers.114 Hence, Ottoman industrial development was retarded. But, this logic seems flawed. European and American mills also relied on young girls and certainly were familiar with the turnover problem, and these competed successfully. In fact, the Ottoman focus on coarse yarns derived from the nature of local raw cotton on which they depended, that was suitable for only these lower number yarns. The Ottoman experiences with privately owned factories in some respects parallels that of Egypt during the later nineteenth century. In both instances, the textile and other industries remained very small in scale. In Egypt, at the very end of the period, only 4 percent of industrial enterprises employed more than nine workers while another 8 percent had between five and nine workers. Also, mechanized textile factories similarly came very late in Egypt. In the Egyptian case, the dismantling of Mohammed Ali's industrialization efforts early in the century had been followed by decades of hiatus. Private textile factories appeared only in 1899, even later than many Ottoman enterprises. Moreover, the two big privately owned textile mills in Egypt proved particularly unprofitable, generating little profit and no dividends: one went bankrupt and the other only staggered along.115 Some Ottoman textile mills also went under and many did poorly. But others turned decent-enough profits and paid dividends to their shareholders. During the first decade of the twentieth century, for example, one textile mill in İstanbul often paid 2 or 4 percent dividends while another in Salonica averaged 4-5 percent.116 ## The workforce of the spinning mills In the Salonica regions, and probably elsewhere, many members of the owners’ families worked in the mills, in managerial and, sometimes, production jobs. Everywhere, young girls and women formed the vast majority of the work force although there is little specific information about their numbers and the conditions of labor. Approximately 3oo women and children were working in the İstanbul spinning factory, c. 1902, each daily earning between 2.5 and 10 piasters.117 In the Adana area, the Mavrumati mill in the early 189os employed c. 300 workers, also usually women and children.118 At one of the combined spinning and weaving mills at Adana in c. 1907, the spinning section employed 550 persons, who averaged 5 piasters silver per day of 12 hours. The headman earned 15–20 piasters. Overall, weekly wages in the spinning department totalled 20,o0o piasters. Female and child labor also was common at the cotton gins scattered throughout the area. Labor was particularly scarce in this southeastern region and the mill owners were in the process of building houses to attract Armenian workers from Hacın, Zeytun and Aintab. This particular mill ultimately planned to employ 1,500 persons, who would work on 22,o00 spindles and 40o looms.119 There is more detailed information, but still very incomplete, about the Macedonian mill workers. Just after its founding in the 187os, the first mill in Niausta employed 250 young women and 50 males, all Jews.120 Females, mostly girls as young as six years of age, were three-quarters of all Macedonian spinning mill workers who, c. 19o6, numbered some 1,57o persons. Among the mills of the Macedonian interior, that is, away from Salonica, the workers usually were Greeks, except at Wodena, where most were Bulgarians. During the 189os, Macedonian mill workers daily labored 15 hours in summer and 1o hours in winter, with a 35-minute break for dinner and none for breakfast. At Salonica, in 1885, the two mills together employed 8oo workers, while in the early 189os, they employed 16o men and boys and 48o girls, 12–18 years of age. All were Jews, reflecting Jewish demographic preponderance in the city. The wages of men were two and three times those that the boys received and girls’ starting wages were 5o percent lower than the boys’. ## Manufacturing for the domestic market The Jewish girls are very skilful; they work til they marry, which at Salonica takes place from the age of 15 and upwards, or as soon as they raise by their savings a small dowry . .. besides the necessary clothing.121 Tobacco processing (and the diversity of the Salonica economy) competed for workers in the Salonica yarn mills, draining away the reservoir of cheap female labor. As the tobacco industry expanded rapidly and offered high wages and as the general business climate in Salonica improved, wages in the city rose to a level that prevented the Salonica mills from meeting the prices of their inland competitors. By 1913, Salonica mill workers were earning up to three times the wages of their sisters inland. In the Macedonian interior, labor generally remained abundant and available for mill work, especially at Karaferia and Niausta. In these more rural regions, mill workers more often also were cultivators and hence less dependent on wage work. Thus, the dependence of the Macedonian mills on seasonally available water power fit well with the character of the local work force. At Wodena, silk raising drew away workers from the two large cotton spinning mills. In the summer season, the labor-intensive demands of silk raising reduced the work force available for cotton spinning by more than 50 percent. And so, like the Adana entrepreneurs, Wodena mill operators attracted the workforce from more distant areas - this time Karaferia and Niausta – by offering housing and other incentives. Thus, they built barracks while one factory operator opened a kitchen offering cheap, hot meals.122 ## 2 Trends in cloth production in the Ottoman lands from Salonica to Aleppo The following chapter adopts a geographical approach in narrating the story of nineteenth-century Ottoman cloth making. The focus usually is upon cotton textiles, but there is discussion of wool, linen and cotton-silk textiles as well. It first focuses on those Balkan areas that remained Ottoman throughout the nineteenth century and then moves eastward from region to region, to İstanbul, west, west-central and then the Black Sea region and its hinterland. The final section studies east-central, east and southeast Anatolia and the region of north Syria, dominated by the great production center of Aleppo. The result is not entirely satisfactory. The rapid change in locations can be bewildering. Overall, there is not enough information on the industry of any single area while, at the same time, there is too much stress on the later period and not enough on the early years of the nineteenth century. These lacunae reflect the Ottoman and European sources, primary and secondary, consulted for the present study. But this chapter is an overview of Ottoman textile production that has been unavailable until now. By outlining the activities of producers in these various locations and showing the many different kinds of enterprises, it forever destroys the clichés about moribund Ottoman industry. And it points the way to the monographic research that many industries clearly deserve but whose very existence had not been considered before – e.g., those of Arapkir and Gürün or Buldan and Kadıköy or Diyarbakır and Aintab. The European provinces, İstanbul, West- and West-Central Anatolia ## The European provinces Coarse-wool cloth production easily dominated the textile industry of this region although other textiles also were woven. Thanks to this regional speciality, most local producers avoided confrontations in cotton cloth making, the competitive industry par excellence of the age. In the Edirne region, wool cloth manufacture of the coarse aba and the finer şayak maintained a high volume of production, especially for shipment to distant markets, throughout the century. In villages of the districts (sancaks) of Gömülcine and Dedeağaç, c. 1902, cottage industry workers produced about 250,o0o meters of the coarse and fine wool cloth (aba and sayak), for the lower end of the local market and for shipment to Anatolia. In addition, the Edirne area produced important quantities of wool cloth for the Ottoman military, that also bought from other producers in the European provinces.¹ <table><tr><td>Niausta</td><td>Salonica Gömülcine Dedeağaç W S</td><td>• Bursa Manisa Buldan •Alaşebir</td><td>•Ankara S Gürün Kayseri•</td><td>Trabzon Amasya • •Tokat</td><td>Rize</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>店</td><td colspan="2">’İzmir Aydin Denizli</td><td></td><td>• Niğde • Maraş •Urfa Adana Åintab</td><td>Harput Bitlis • Ergani • •Sürt Diyarbakır • Mardin</td><td colspan="2">8 •Erzurum</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">S.</td><td colspan="2">证</td><td>• Mosul • Aleppo</td><td></td><td>3</td><td></td></tr></table> Mane en vy In Ottoman Bulgaria, wool cloth production thrived until the end of Ottoman domination (also see chapter 3).² On the north slope of the Balkan Mountains, at Gabrovo, some 1,00o looms annually produced 10,00o pieces of cloth, selling mainly to the army but also to local and Anatolian peasants.3 In 1867, the Plovdiv region produced and consumed some 4.o million piasters worth of the coarse cloth; about ten years later, shipments to Anatolia reportedly were twice that amount.4 In Salonica province, despite the grave losses represented by the collapse of international sales and the destruction of the Janissary Corps, commercial textile production retained considerable importance during the subsequent decades. After maintaining comparatively stable levels, cloth production began to increase substantially in the late 188os. As the boom began, the province, by one count, held some 7,47o full-time artisans who commercially wove on 4,5oo looms. (These figures do not include those weaving for home use or part-time workers.) Some of the vitality derived from the adoption of imported yarn as a replacement for homespun; in the 184os, cheap British yarn brought a new textile activity as local residents began to wear cotton stockings. In the 188os, cotton cloth producers shifted over to yarn from Ottoman factories, supplemented by smaller amounts of handspun. By the 189os, Drama and Demir Hisar had emerged as commercially important centers of stocking production, some 300,000 pairs/year.⁵ The weaving of coarse wool cloth remained important around Salonica and in the Macedonian countryside but there is little direct evidence in the form of statistics concerning numbers of weavers, looms or output levels. Coarse-wool cloth production, often based on cottage industry, probably increased in the Salonica area during the century. Local weavers, c. 18oo, had used c. 295,ooo kg. of raw wool to make the coarse wool cloth while, in the mid-189os, they consumed some 35o,ooo kg.⁶ At this later date, the three leading coarsewool cloth centers were the regions of Nevrokop, Niausta and Mayada, that altogether contained some 2,125 looms.7 During the late 183os and early 1840s, the town of Mayada annually had marketed some 3oo,ooo pieces of the cloth and, for decades after, remained a major center. In the Crimean War, for example, it furnished cloth for the Ottoman and British troops and ranked first among cloth producers in the European provinces.8 Following the slight increase between c. 18oo and 189o that was noted above, wool cloth production in the Salonica region rose sharply. The export of raw wool from Salonica decreased between 188o and 1895 because of“the extension of native industries for the manufacture of coarse cloth for the army" and “the growing local consumption caused by the expansion of native industries."9 Salonica now was importing significant quantities of raw wool (in one case 12o,ooo kg. from the Edirne area for army cloth production) to supply this growing industry.1º At this point, mechanized looms located in a number of factories helped to push local cloth output still higher (chapter 3). Thus, textile output in these European provinces began increasing sharply during the 188os, in the middle of the price depression and well before the general price rises of the post-1896 era. The continued survival of coarse-wool cloth manufacturers in the European provinces derived from their production of a textile at the very bottom of the market, a rough cloth that was very cheap in price and had a vast clientele. Competition with European wool cloth producers was not as severe as in cotton textiles because there had not been as many innovations' driving down prices. Natural advantage played a larger role in the Ottoman wool cloth industry and survival was somewhat easier. In addition, the weavers benefitted significantly from a captive market - sales to the Ottoman military – a factor that should not be underestimated. The gendarmerie and regular military forces stationed in the province remained the most important consumers of this cloth. The cloth also was worn by vast numbers of Ottoman peasants all over the empire. Despite competition from Austrian, German and British manufacturers, the European provinces (as well as formerly Ottoman Bulgaria and Serbia) maintained significant sales in a very broad market area that reached into most corners of the empire outside of Iraq and the Arabian peninsula.11 ## Istanbul ## Guild manufacturing İstanbul is the attractive trap from which Ottoman economic history must escape.12 The trap lies in the combination of documentation availability concerning its economic activities and patterns of production and the unique place of İstanbul in the economic life of the empire. The sheer quantity of İstanbulrelated documents is mind-numbing and beyond the ability of any generation of scholars to exhaust. Because of this ready availability, scholars have tended to focus on İstanbul and use its history, usually implicitly, to illustrate the economic activities and patterns of production for the Ottoman Empire as a whole. In many respects, however, İstanbul is not the norm but its opposite. Because it was the capital, it had become a huge city and had very special requirements that make its economic history unique. In regards to manufacturing, the guilds in the capital were more important and more regulated than elsewhere because they directly supplied the needs of the imperial bureaucracy and military, both for day-to-day and wartime use. Throughout the Ottoman centuries, these requirements played a key role in the economic life of the empire. The city remained the greatest urban center of the eastern Mediterranean until the end of the empire. Its estimated one million inhabitants, including the central bureaucracy and imperial court, drew on the resources of the entire empire for their food, clothing and shelter needs. To meet these demands, the state had erected a formidable, complex and changing provisioning system that funnelled products as dissimilar as wheat and shoe leather to residents of the capital. For example, grain from Egypt, Rumania, Bulgaria, the Marmara and the north Anatolian shores poured in, by camelback, wagon, ship and, late in the century, by railroad, to make the city's bread. In the capital itself, a rich and variegated artisanal and commercial infra-structure processed, re-worked and/or distributed the goods. İstanbul, with some exceptions, was not a major manufacturing center, in the sense of supplying quantities of finished goods to the rest of the empire. But the incredible size of the population assured that it was the seat of important industrial activities keyed to furnishing local needs. These economic workings and the provisioning and supply mechanisms are relatively well-known for the pre-18oo period.13 How these activities and mechanisms changed during the nineteenth century, however, is not understood clearly. There certainly is super-abundant archival evidence concerning staterun industrial activities in the capital. More nineteenth-century documentation presently is available on the various imperial factories in İstanbul - e.g., the Tophane or the Tersane complexes that respectively made guns and ships - than on whole Ottoman towns that were important manufacturing centers, for example Tokat or Diyarbakır.14 İstanbul possessed more mechanized factories than anywhere else in the empire (see factory section). Nonetheless, small-scale manufacturing predominated in the city although we know still less about such production than about the factories. Ongoing research by twentieth-century anthropologists is demonstrating that whole quarters of the modern city are teeming with small-scale manufactories that still account for a considerable output. These surely were present 1oo years ago but the records of their activities need to be located and explored.15 This book is about manufacturing in an empire and not just its capital; it does not pretend to exhaustively exploit the sources relating to manufacturing in nineteenth-century İstanbul. This would entail another, probably several books. Instead, it focuses on two issues that seem to encapsulate textile production in the city, themes directly tied to the momentous changes occurring as free trade encroached on autarchy. Thus, we first examine several Istanbul guilds and their fates during the liberalization of the Tanzimat reforms and then the phenomenon of expanding industrial sectors with very cheap, highly exploited labor that seems characteristic of the subsequent era. The Tanzimat changes assaulting monopolies inaugurated an intense struggle among textile-making guilds in various quarters of the city. Some guilds wished to maintain monopolies while others welcomed the chance to break them. The quarrel shows up clearly in a series of petitions from cloth printers in the Üsküdar workshop (basmahane) and from those in the Yeni Kapı and Ahmediyye quarters on the other (European) side of the city. These and other groups, in c. 1813, had worked out an uneasy agreement that permitted each to monopolize the production of a certain textile. The cloth printers in an area of Üsküdar had possessed monopoly rights to make a certain cloth (hassa yemeni) with cochineal.16 The Tanzimat regulations, however, snapped this arrangement and a quarrel erupted with cloth printers on the European side of the city, in the Yeni Kapı and Fazil Pasha neighborhoods. The Yeni Kapi group, that represented some 1oo masters, journeymen and apprentices – both Muslim and non-Muslim – petitioned the government and received permission to make the special cloth that had been the monopoly of the Usküdar printers. It also retained the right to continue making a coarse, logwood-dyed cloth (yemeni). Working outside the new gate (Yeni Kapi), the group then established a great factory (bir fabrika-i cesime) and began making the cloth with cochineal.17 The aggrieved guild members in Üsküdar admitted that the new factory did not violate Tanzimat principles (of free commerce), but warned that it would ruin them. In repeated petitions, they asked the government to restore their monopoly (that they implicitly admitted no longer had legal force). Just as persistently, the Yeni Kapı group defended itself by appealing to the Tanzimat decree and other imperial orders, that now prohibited monopolies, and to the recent imperial permission that allowed them to make the special cloth.18 After much hesitation and indecision, the government resolved the issue by coming down against exclusivity and permitting both the Üsküdar and the Yeni Kapı groups to dye in colors that the other once had held as monopoly right.19 In this struggle, the state withdrew its protection for monopolies, thus destroying a guild's privileged status and exposing it to unaccustomed open competition.20 Within scarcely a decade of these quarrels, monopolies in cloth printing at İstanbul vanished altogether. The rival guild printing factories in the Üsküdar, Yeni Kapı and Ahmediyye quarters shared a common fate as the total number of guildsmen employed in all of them reportedly fell by 95 percent, from 130 to only 6 persons. The latter two guilds consolidated into a single group, but in the early 185os, the guild factories in both European and Asian İstanbul reportedly closed down. The guilds had declined precipitously as new centers of production arose in the Tanzimat era. But, if these guilds were vanishing, the cloth printing industry in the capital flourished: at least 8-1o new printing factories began operations during the 184os.21 The news of the printing guilds’ deaths, however, was greatly exaggerated. In the 188os, the guilds of the printing houses at Üsküdar and of the consolidated Yeni Kapı and Ahmediyye printing factories still existed. When the state reviewed its industrial tax rates in 1887, it listed the former and new taxes for 287 İstanbul guilds. The survey is important here because it noted the continued presence of the two groups of cloth printers who had been in such desperate straits a few decades earlier. The enumeration, however, is not very helpful for understanding the actual condition of the two groups, beyond the fact of their legal existence. The masters, journeymen and apprentices of the two guilds paid taxes that placed them in the upper one-third of the 287 guilds listed. The new taxes that the journeymen and apprentices of both guilds paid rose in about the same proportions as in the other guilds while those of the guild masters fell somewhat, an unusual pattern in this enumeration. These changing tax burdens, however, probably say nothing about guild prosperity or poverty but speak of government needs for more revenue.22 If the government threw the cloth printers into the free market, it simultaneously defended the monopolies of other guilds engaged in textile making. In c. 1841, a group of Muslim and non-Muslim workers challenged the monopoly rights of the fez dyeing guild and requested permission to open competing retail shops. The affronted guildsmen pointed to prior certification (in the form of gediks from the evkaf-ı hûmayun) that, they claimed, bestowed monopoly rights. The would-be competitors, it turns out, originally were fez repairers who had worked in the fez-making factory (feshane), had become redundant through mechanization, and lost their jobs. A high official council (the Meclis-i Vâlâ), maintained the rights of the fez dyers and forbade the former fez repairers to compete with them.23 Two decades later, the fez dyers’ guild reappeared before the council, complaining of improper competition from other guilds. The certificates (35 gediks) in their possession, they asserted, had become a bad investment because of illegal dyeing and thus largely had gone unrented and unused. As earlier, the government, in 1862, upheld the fez dyers’right to the monopoly.24 In sum, the state supported particular guilds’ privileges while withdrawing them from others. In the examples given here, it upheld monopolies for the fez dyers. But it denied the validity of such restrictions among cloth printers. ## Non-guild manufacturing İstanbul participated in the general revival of Ottoman manufacturing that took place during the final quarter of the nineteenth century. As elsewhere, the willingness of workers to accept very low wages played an important role. In İstanbul, this willingness was especially keen because, during the later nineteenth century, Muslim refugees from the Balkans poured into the city in vast numbers, to stay permanently or on their way to new homes in the Anatolian and Arab provinces. These urban migrants thus offered a large and cheap labor pool. This new labor force combined with excellent transportation and communication linkages and a large merchant community to make İstanbul particularly suitable for the emerging low-wage industries of the late nineteenth century. Home industries and sweatshops played a vital role in the manufacturing life of the city. Commercial lacemaking, for example, caught on among many Ottoman women and girls working at home. Some labored full-time, for example, the 2oo voung Jewish girls at nearby Silivri, but others made lace in their spare hours. İstanbul merchants supplied imported thread and picked up the finished product for export to France, Germany and other European locations. This became an important industry, providing the equivalent of over 7,ooo full-time jobs by c. 19oo.25 Similarly, large numbers of Turkish women in Bosphorus villages near İstanbul worked at home, decorating veils and headcloths for sale in Anatolia and Persia (see chapter 3).26 The rising availability of the sewing machine played an important role in the emergence and expansion of several sweatshop industries, including the manufacture of umbrellas, ready-made clothing and shoes. Invented in the 184os, sewing machines did not appear in significant numbers on the Ottoman scene until the end of the century when the Singer Sewing Machine Company began its Middle East operations.27 This American company sold pedal-driven machines to full-time manufacturers for one-half the price of the English, German and French machines. And, it offered a still cheaper hand-driven machine aimed at the home market. Using the system that had won it worldwide markets, the company introduced installment buying and depots with repair facilities and a ready supply of spare parts.28 In the early twentieth century, thousands annually were imported into the empire; in 1907, for example, total sales exceeded 1 I,00o sewing machines.29 The once-considerable trade in imported umbrellas came to a nearly complete halt at the end of the nineteenth century when the capital emerged as a major production center. The necessary fabric and metal were imported from Germany, England and Italy. Men, but also large numbers of children and women, assembled the components in workshops. The children received 10–25 piasters per work week of unspecified length and the women obtained 25-30 piasters. After assembly, the umbrellas were shipped to buyers not only in İstanbul, but also Salonica, Anatolia, İzmir and Beirut, as well as Bulgaria and Cairo. In c. 1902, the industry started reducing its dependence on foreign materials when a workshop in the Stambul area of the capital began manufacturing umbrella handles, cutting the sales of Viennese handles. By the early twentieth century, umbrella production in the capital totalled some 75,ooo-100,000 dozen pieces, valued at c. 13 million piasters.30 A ready-made garment industry similarly thrived on the combination of imported materials and cheap local labor. Large textile houses in the city directed the industry, importing foreign cloth for cutting and sewing. Circa 1900, sales of local ready-made clothing totalled 31 million piasters, more than the value of the imported product.31 Final products included men's clothing as well as women's dresses and linens. The industry produced two lines of clothing and used sewing machines for all operations except the fastening of buttons. The first line of goods competed directly with Austrian producers, the major source of imports. Using fabric as good or nearly equal in quality, the İstanbul manufacturers made a final product for a much cheaper price. They also produced bottom-of-the-line clothing using inferior German or Austrian cloth, employing labor of incredible cheapness." Tailors employed their wives and children and several other young workers, all working for piece-work wages. In 1909, the cost of the labor input in a sewn pair of trousers was 5–6 percent of the retail selling price, an extraordinarily low figure. The final products cost one-half or less than the imported product and were sold in Austrian-owned stores in the capital.32 New credit procedures boosted sales. The department stores offered credit and installment purchases to the employees of local companies. The employees who bought the clothing on time agreed to have their company bookkeeper withhold regular payments from the paycheck. Further, the employees agreed to be collectively responsible for the debts of all fellow workers who entered into such arrangements.33 ## Izmir province Unlike the wool cloth manufacturers in the Balkan regions, most textile makers in Anatolia overall made a variety of cotton cloths, thus working in the most competitive sector of the nineteenth-century international economy. The deep involvement of İzmir province in commercial agriculture often caused labor scarcities and the high wages in agriculture drew off workers from other sectors, checking textile production.³4 And yet, the province held rich and varied traditions of textile production, both for domestic consumption and for sale in local and distant marketplaces. It is not generally known that apart from the very important carpet industry a considerable domestic industry in textiles is carried on in this province, i.e., yarns for carpets, bath towels, shawls, socks, underclothing, bed covers, material for men's suits, &c., chiefly used by the lower classes.35 The textile industry in the İzmir region was on the rise in c. 19oo, doubtlessly helped by the positive price trends of the post-1896 era. A resurgence in local dveing reduced colored yarn imports while introduction of the Singer sewing machine helped to overcome labor scarcities.36 At this time, annual sales of these machines at İzmir averaged some 5,000-7,000 units.37 Provincial weavers, c. 190o, altogether used some 30,00o bales of undyed and dyed imported yarn and perhaps 4,o0o bales from domestic spinners. Production of the cloth alaca, beloved by the population and used as vests, undergarments and bathing stuffs, alone equalled about 1.5 million pieces, valued at 9.5 million piasters, or c. three-quarters of total textile output in the province. Fabric for clothing and furniture (manusa), as well as materials for the bath and sofa covers (peştemal) were among the other most common locally manufactured goods. These textiles sold well because of their strength and long-wearing qualities, and the fast colors that were lively and harmonious. Regional weavers also made pure silks, mixed silk with gold and silver thread, cotton-silk and linen-silks.38 The Alaçatı and Yeninahiye regions together annually produced some 10,ooo meters of silk products called Ödemiş handkerchiefs (mendil). The town of Ödemiş, for its part, made cloth of pure silk as well as silk mixed with gold thread for carşafs; the same cloth also was used for bed coverings. Three villages in the district (kaza) of Bozdoğan wove sacks, bags, horseblankets and saddlebags while others nearby variously made lining (boğası) the alaca fabric and cotton trouser cloth (pantalonluk) that women in the interior also wore.39 The Denizli district (sancak) was the most vibrant cloth production center in western Anatolia during the later nineteenth century. The town of Denizli contained 19o looms that annually produced 69,oo0 pieces, more than half of it the alaca fabric.4o The fame of the region rested on the output of two large nearby villages, Kadıköy and Buldan. In Kadıköy, where output was rising sharply at the turn of the century, 15,ooo villagers used British yarn and German dyes.41 Some 784 looms wove 321,ooo pieces of various textiles (üstlük, bez, kuşak and alaca) c. 19oo while, several years later, output of just the alaca cloth reached 3oo,ooo pieces. Buldan, in common with Kadıköy, possessed a good water supply and was famed for its cotton-silk cloth, used chiefly for bed covers and table cloths. The townspeople wove 40,ooo pieces of the alaca cloth and a similar number of cushion and mattress covers. Buldan weavers also produced over one-half million handkerchiefs and a large number of cotton curtains. In common with Kadıköy, output at Buldan was growing very rapidly at the end of the century, and the number of looms doubled in just a decade, to 1,5oo.42 In addition to the two towns, other places in Denizli district made silk cloth, embroidered with gold thread, for furniture and clothing decoration.43 There also was a certain concentration of production at Alaşehir, a town of 22,0o0 mid-way between Manisa and Denizli/Buldan.44 The Manisa region probably ranked second in importance to the Kadıköy and Buldan industry. Manisa weavers, who spent most of their time in agriculture, used cotton yarn from England and Greece and, to a lesser extent, from the brand-new spinning mill at İzmir. During the mid-189os, the Manisa region annually produced c. 2.6 million piasters worth of textiles. This included 150,000 pieces of alaca cloth that alone accounted for one-half the output, 6o,o0o pieces of shirting, 50,000 hand towels, 40,000 sofa and mattress covers and 1,000 pairs of socks and c. 20o,o0o piasters worth of a woollen undergarment (gömleklik). The great port city of İzmir not only imported substantial amounts of foreign yarn and cloth for redistribution in the·Anatolian interior but also reworked considerable quantities of these imports. By 190o, according to one count, İzmir manufacturers were dyeing and printing 1.5 million pieces of imported plain cloth for women's head covering. Another estimate states that İzmir dyehouses c. 1900 annually dyed $_ { 1 0 0 , 0 0 0 }$ pieces of cloth that then were cut up, each yielding 2o yemeni or kalemkâr headgear for a total of two million pieces. In addition, they dyed $5 0 , 0 0 0$ bolts of çember cloth, a headcovering of very soft cotton. Each of these yielded 2o pieces for a total of one million pieces. The dyehouses were very active during the later nineteenth century in the production of various kinds of printed headgear for women and, to a much lesser extent, coloring furniture fabrics. In addition, the city held one of the more important clusters of mechanized factories for both yarn and cloth making (chapter 3).45 ## Bursa The city of Bursa bustled as an important manufacturer of cotton cloth during the nineteenth century. Throughout the period, however, the cotton weaving industry scarcely is mentioned, overshadowed by (and sometimes part of) the famed silk industry. From the 183os until World War I, the city consistently ranked among the leading Ottoman import centers of British cotton yarn. In $\mathbf { I } 8 4 0 ,$ for example, Bursa imported some 100,000 kg. of yarn while, in 1905, the volume equalled some 245,o0o kg.4 During the early twentieth century, about one-third of the yarn received was shipped out of the city as cloth while the balance was woven for local use. (By comparison, local consumption accounted for a full 8o percent of imports in the town of Baghdad.) Many weavers made the famed Bursa towel, of cotton and silk, and much imported yarn was used in combination with silk.47 Bursa weavers had been among the first to adopt British cotton yarn and, during the 184os, its sharply increasing sale had helped locally woven cottons to displace silk cloth in the every day apparel of many Ottomans (see chapter 1).48 During the latter 185os, however, British cotton weaves were replacing local cloth,49 a trend traceable to the boom in steam silk reeling (see chapter 4). This burst of factory formation placed a strain on the local labor market and temporarily gave high wages to the young girls who reeled in the new factories. Hence cotton cloth weaving declined, apparently to a new low. By 1862, only 6o looms were active in both cloth and towel weaving while 26 others made “long" dresses. Production of towels had fallen from ${ } ^ { 2 0 , 0 0 0 }$ to $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ pieces as the work force gravitated towards the higher-paying new jobs. But, when the American Civil War pushed up English textile prices some 5o percent, local cotton weavers, in $\mathbf { I } 8 6 3 .$ tripled production of towels and bath wrappers.5º At about this time, some 60–10o looms actively were weaving towels.51 By the beginning of the new century, when prices finally were rising again, the number of looms weaving towels had increased quite impressively, to some 6oo.52 At this time, Bursa weavers regularly were providing the İstanbul market with better qualities of mixed – cotton and silk – çarşafs and sofa covers in addition to bath towels. In 1905, this aggregate production equalled some 8,70o kg. in weight, worth 1.5 million piasters. The number of active town looms, according to one count in 19o6, had increased to 8oo (exclusive of silk weaving), making bathhouse as well as home towels and bath materials, in addition to çarçafs and sofa covers.53 But another estimate states that, beside the 6oo looms making towels, there were another 86o looms in town commercially producing textiles other than silk. Three-quarters of these wove linen cloth while the balance mostly made various kinds of coarse cloth and shirting (kanunlu bez and bürümcük and helal bez); 6o looms wove aprons and shawls (futa and kefiye). In addition, c. 1912, 700 hand looms wove silk cloth in the town (see chapter 4).54 ## Konya The town of Bor stands out as the only textile center of any importance in this poor and thinly populated agricultural region. During the 184os, it contained 2,ooo houses, c. 85 percent Muslim. Artisans were engaged chiefly in the spinning, weaving and dyeing of a coarse white cotton cloth as well as a colored striped cloth (alaca). They spun Adana raw cotton and benefitted from abundant local supplies of madder and yellow berries. Other dyestuffs, such as indigo and cochineal, arrived from Kayseri and Konya. At the time, Bor manufacturers supplied local markets and also sent large quantities of cloth to Kayseri, and to Gümüşhane and other areas on the Black Sea coast. These activities at Bor bustled for the remainder of the period. Production of the white cloth, now made from British yarn, continued into the twentieth century. By the early 189os, the town had doubled its 184os' size. Alaca weaving now occupied 2,25o looms in the town.55 Weavers in the city of Konya, 1907, supplied local residents with about onefifth of their textile needs (recall that Bursa and Baghdad weavers supplied over two-thirds of local consumption). Worth about one million piasters and made from British and Tarsus factory yarn, locally made textiles included men and women's underwear, women's trousers and sheets and towels. Merchants bought the rest outside, alaca and yazma cloth woven in Aintab, Damascus and Isparta, and in other locations.56 ## Ankara During the nineteenth century, the mohair yarn and cloth industry of the region collapsed (see chapter 3) but other weaving activities persisted. The district of Yozgat further endured the Russian conquest of its markets across the Black Sea but, in 1907, still had some 6oo looms, weaving ordinary cotton cloths for local use. Weavers in the Kayseri district at this time worked on 1,50o looms, mainly producing a coarse natural-colored cotton cloth, using Adana-made yarn for the woof. To a lesser extent, they produced colorful alaca cloth, with imported European yarn. In the prospering conditions at the turn of the century, the city of Kayseri contained a growing muslin printing industry of some importance, employing 50o workers and using 2.7 million piasters worth of English cloth.57 ## East-Central and East Anatolia ## Amasya In the 183os, Amasya was famed for its coarse dyed and printed calicoes and for canvas used in tents and sails, spinning and weaving large quantities of Adana cotton for the purpose.58 At the same time, artisans at nearby Vezir Köprü also spun the Adana cotton brought by Kayseri merchants and wove it, usually into striped cloths, a local speciality.59 Both industries suffered badly from the loss of their northern markets but seem to have hung on. During the final decades of the century, cotton weavers at Amasya and some nearby towns routinely were out-competing British producers for the local market. Between 19oo and 1907, Amasya cotton textile production annually averaged 2.4 million piasters.60 In Sivas province overall, of which Amasya was a part, manufacturers annually were using a total of 1o,ooo bales of Adana and Harput cotton and somewhat more British yarn (see chapter 1). In 1907, some 13,6oo looms in the province were producing the manusa cotton fabric, one-third more than the total number of all looms just a decade before.61 ## Tokat The town of Tokat in northern Anatolia, long famed for its dyeworks, entered the 183os often using British rather than locally made cloth. In addition to printing British muslins, local manufacturers also found it advantageous to use British varns to make muslin and calico.62 At Karahisar, with a far smaller textile industry, by contrast, weavers still were using “country yarn" to weave a few calicoes. During the 185os, Tokat produced a high quality, quite expensive fabric (peştemal) made of silk mixed with linen yarn.63 Perhaps an experiment seeking to find a new market, this endeavor seems to have disappeared while that of weaving and printing cotton cloth persisted. Called the “Manchester of Asia Minor" by one European, the town relied on good quality water and cheap labor.64 It specialized in making a headware of light cotton material (yemeni).“At Tokat there is a considerable trade in stamping patterns in colour on white Manchester cotton." Large pieces of the cloth first were printed with black patterns and then dyed with the desired basic color. Artisans then hand stamped patterns in three to six colors. The printers annually imported, c. 1907, 4.3 million piasters worth of cloth from Manchester, sent to Tokat by their brothers or associates, without the more costly intervention of outside middlemen.65 In addition, some 6oo looms wove manusa cloth, yearly worth some 2.7 million piasters. Except for red fast yarns from Germany and Switzerland, they used mainly British yarn and dyed it on the spot.66 ## Gürün Unusually for Anatolia, wool cloth dominated the textile industry at Gürün. The textile industry at this town, located roughly midway between Sivas and Malatya, was thriving during the early part of the nineteenth century. This prosperity, in large measure, was thanks to nomadic Kurds and Turkmen who wintered near Ankara, returned to Syria in the spring and spent much time in the pastures around the town. During the 183os, some 1,8oo families, in approximately equal numbers of Muslims and Christians, lived in Gürün; since the agricultural base was poor, they had come to rely on these tribal migrations. Gürün merchants furnished the tribes with supplies, including the textiles of Damascus and Aleppo and the linens of Rize, received payment in wool, and then distributed much of it for spinning and weaving. In the 183os, Gürün merchants also annually were importing some 3,ooo pieces of British calico, dyeing it blue and then re-shipping the entire lot.67 Thus, Gürün then was important both for its wool cloth weaving and its cotton cloth dyeing. A half century later, Gürün's wool weavers continued to thrive. Some 500 looms in the town and the villages of the district (kaza) wove shawls, trousers and jackets from wool (as well as some light silk fabrics). Some of the wool yarn still was home-spun, from local sources, but most now came from Britain, preferred for its strength.68 Besides fine shawls and men's clothing, Gürün produced coarse wool (aba) cloth for the army as well as the finer şayak cloth.69 Buoyed up by the rising prices of the early twentieth century, Gürün's market grew noticeably. Diyarbakır consumers began buying Gürün goods for the first time in 1907, followed by the entry of Egyptian purchasers in 191o.70 At this time there seems to have been a shift from weaving pure wool textiles to also making a cotton and wool cloth. Production of both textiles was climbing sharply.71 In 1907, the total number of looms in the town reached ${ \scriptstyle 2 , 0 0 0 , }$ perhaps four times as many as during the previous decade.72 Just a few years later, in 1911, there were 3,500 looms, using wool and cotton yarns from Manchester. Weavers now made a wider variety of textiles including cloth, covers, curtains, and cushions in either pure wool or a wool and cotton mix. The town had emerged as the leading textile center in Sivas province: annual cloth production totalled some 13.2 million piasters, triple the average levels of the preceding decade.73 ## Trabzon In c. 186o, the city and its hinterland contained a mixed textile-making sector that included the manufacture of silk veils, linen and cotton shirting, sheets and towels, cotton and wool braids and socks, woolen aprons for women, and“a common rugging." Local artisans then were printing European muslins for head dresses. White calicoes similarly were imported and dyed blue, very popular as the chief clothing of the town's “lower classes." Many of these weaving, dyeing and printing industries fought with foreign and Ottoman producers to serve the local market (see chapter 3). At the turn of the century, the production of silk cloth enjoyed a certain revival that absorbed some of the workers who were losing their jobs weaving the peştemal fabrics. The best and most favored silk weave was the local copy of the Persian silk çarçaf; this garment (keşan) had become very fashionable, thanks to a 50 percent drop in its sale price during the prior half decade. A full one-half of local women reportedly wore a silk çarşaf of one style or another, depending on their religious affiliations. These particular tastes gave local weavers protection from outside competition as well as securing them a strong regional market, reaching from Samsun to the Russian border on the coast and south to Erzurum in the interior. Imported factory-made çarçafs, by contrast, generally were of cotton and scarcely in demand. For less-expensive çarşafs from cotton, the weavers dyed their own yarns, in red and other colors as well, particularly in indigo. They also dyed yarn and wove colored silk cloth for clothing, mainly for Muslims, and for bedcovers and upholstery. Production of these last items were extremely restricted, perhaps 12,ooo piasters per year, because of competition from other Ottoman producers.74 ## Rize The town of Rize on the eastern Black Sea coast is situated on stony soil, in mountainous terrain that rises 2,ooo meters in fewer than twenty kilometers. In the nineteenth century, it was not really an urban center but rather hundreds of houses dispersed among gardens that offered a verdant, picturesque appearance.75 Agriculture was marginal, affording subsistence only and the inhabitants had developed a variety of textile manufacturing activities, notably linen cloth production.76 This Rize cloth (bez) was beloved throughout the empire for its “remarkable" lightness, a real advantage in the heat.77 Over the century, Rize linen production increased impressively in volume but perhaps not in value. Annual production averaged 75,ooo pieces, of all qualities, during the mid-183os. By the 189os, the volume of output had doubled and then rose again (by c. 8 percent) during the next decade. Production of the finest grades in the early twentieth century totalled some 12,5oo pieces, each selling for 40–100 piasters while output of the second quality equalled 150,000 pieces, costing 11-12 piasters.78 Despite the uniqueness of their linen product, Rize weavers (in common with other Ottoman textile producers) competed by lowering prices. Between c. 1896 and 1910, the unit price of the best quality Rize linen dropped nearly two-thirds,79 during a period when prices generally were increasing. Rize weavers therefore suffered considerable losses in real income during the final Ottoman decade. ## Bitlis The town of Bitlis remained a comparatively important textile producer throughout the period. In 1839, it was celebrated for its bright red and coarse cotton cloth. Local artisans obtained some plain cloth from Van weavers but wove most of it themselves with raw cotton from adjacent regions to its south and west and from Khvoy in Persia. The Persian city of Shirvan at that time provided the madder root while, several decades later, the Bitlis industry relied on Siirt and Diyarbakır for these supplies. In the late 183os, Bitlis annually shipped several hundred thousand pieces of the cloth to “distant parts of the country."During the 186os, it sold 2,094 bales of its red-dyed cloth at Erzurum in a good year but only one-half that amount in a bad year.80 Bitlis was still a significant commercial textile producer in the twentieth century. In 19o1, the town sent 1.5 million yards each of the red and of white canvas cloths; these were worth nearly 2.o million piasters and formed up to 50 percent of the value of all goods sent from Bitlis province.81 But in years of political instability and crop shortfalls, such as 1908 and 1909, textile shipments could fall by one-third.82 ## Van Textile production in the town of Van similarly showed considerable continuity over the century. Local weavers not only made a coarse calico from Persian cotton but also, unusually, they wove a raingear made from goathair.83 A half-century later, in the 188os, some 2oo houses in the town annually wove 50,000–6o,000 pieces of cotton cloth for sale at Başkale, Ercis and locally. The mohair aba cloth still was being made commercially, in another 67 houses in the town. In addition, seven so-called factories at Van and another 6o at nearby Çatak produced a fine-textured mohair cloth (sal) used for men's tunics and women's dresses.84 Table 2.1. Textile shipments from the town of Bitlis, 1896–1905 (in piasters).
<table><tr><td>year</td><td>red cotton cloth</td><td>natural-colored</td></tr><tr><td>1896</td><td>108,000</td><td>n/a</td></tr><tr><td>1901</td><td>982,800</td><td>982,800</td></tr><tr><td>1903</td><td>756,000</td><td>756,000</td></tr><tr><td>1905</td><td>216,000</td><td>356,000</td></tr></table> Source: Buhi 9, 8/20/1907, 703. Converted from marks at 5.4 ptrs./mark. ## The Harput region The industry at Arapkir is perhaps the clearest example of an Ottoman handweaving industry born of the European Industrial Revolution. Producers in the town adopted British yarn during the early 183os; for the rest of the nineteenth century, Arapkir remained the most important production center, probably, in Harput province (see chapter 3). The looms at Malatya in the 183os produced large quantities of “striped nankeens, cotton cloths, picture and plain silks," mainly for sale in Erzurum (2oo bales in volume) and to Russia. Imports of British textiles then were very limited: in the towns of Harput and Malatya, British yarn formed the weft and local silk the warp of the silk cloth while artisans dyed and stamped the plain imported shirtings with local patterns.85 When local manufacturing again is visible, in the mid-188os, the production of cotton cloth, prints, handkerchiefs and of coarse woollens in the Harput region had increased considerably.8⁶ The introduction of cotton gins during the late 188os improved efficiency and quality, certainly helping to promote this upwards trend.87 As prices fell in the depression, imports of some textiles were reduced sharply; those of Swiss handkerchiefs, for example, declined by fourfifths. Manufacturers in Harput province, during the late 189os, annually shipped an average of c. 150,ooo pieces of silk and cotton cloths. This production continued to rise during the 189os. In addition to using 2,50o bales of imported cotton yarn, more than twice the levels of the previous decade, the weavers also consumed three-quarters of the local cotton harvest. Production levels during the 189os were perhaps more than ten times greater than during the 183os.88 In part, the increase derived from the emergence of a new industry, the manufacture of red prints using Austrian-made alizarin, just around the time of the Armenian massacres. This was a shift away from the earlier emphasis on silk-cotton cloth and focused on the lower end of the market (see table 2.2). At the end of the century, the quantity of total cloth shipments outside of Harput province apparently was greater than at any point during the past 15 years (table 2.2). But, their value was at a new low, reflecting the declining importance of the more expensive silk-cotton cloths and their replacement by the cheaper cotton textiles. In 1898, Harput province shipped record amounts, Table 2.2. Shipment of various cloths from Harput province, $I \ 8 8 4 - I 9 I O$
<table><tr><td rowspan="5"></td><td colspan="2">qty. (pcs) value</td><td colspan="2">bales used</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(piasters)</td><td>of imported yarn</td><td>types of cloth</td></tr><tr><td> $_ { 1 2 5 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td> $\mathtt { r } , 6 5 \circ , \infty \circ$ </td><td></td><td>silk-cotton</td></tr><tr><td>1884 1885 125,000</td><td> $\mathtt { r } , 6 5 \circ , \infty \circ$ </td><td> $\scriptstyle \mathtt { I } , 0 8 2$ </td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>1886</td><td>172,000 $2 , 3 1 0 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>1,786</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1887</td><td></td><td> $^ { 2 , 6 4 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1888</td><td></td><td> $^ { 2 , 4 7 5 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1889</td><td></td><td> $\yen 9230,456$ </td><td>n</td></tr><tr><td>1890</td><td></td><td> $\mathtt { I } , 6 5 0 , \infty \mathtt { O } \mathtt { O }$ </td><td>&quot;</td></tr><tr><td>1891</td><td></td><td> $\mathtt { I } , 7 0 5 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>n</td></tr><tr><td>1898</td><td> $_ { 1 3 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td> $_ { 9 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td>manusa</td></tr><tr><td>1898</td><td>90,000</td><td> $4 5 0 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>red cloth and print</td></tr><tr><td>1906</td><td></td><td> $7 0 4 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>manusa</td></tr><tr><td>1907</td><td></td><td></td><td>I</td></tr><tr><td>1909</td><td></td><td> $_ { 1 3 6 , \infty 0 }$ </td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>1910</td><td></td><td> $\mathrm { { ^ { * } a } b o o m { y e a r } ^ { 3 3 } }$ </td><td></td></tr></table> Source: FO 195, various reports, often by Boyajian, for Harput province, 1886–1911. Converted from pounds sterling at 11o ptrs./£S except for 1898, which originally was given in Ottoman pounds, converted at 1oo ptrs. $/ \mathcal { E } \mathbf { T }$ 22o,ooo pieces, of manusa cotton cloth and red prints (to Erzurum, Trabzon, Sivas, Bitlis and Diyarbakır) but their value was less than the smaller quantities of silk-cotton textiles sent during the previous decade (table 2.2). In the early twentieth century, Harput province held some 5,ooo looms for manusa weaving including 1,200 at Arapkir (see below), $\scriptstyle \mathbf { I } , 0 0 0$ at Malatya and its environs, and 30o at Eğin.89 Shipments to neighboring provinces fluctuated very sharply during these years, sometimes dropping to zero and in other years booming (table 2.2).90 During these last years, silk and cotton-silk production seems to have resumed greater importance, in part thanks to rising prices. In this more positive atmosphere, several factories were established in the region, at Harput and Mezre (see chapter 3). Thus, atypically (but in common with the introduction of jacquard looms at Diyarbakır, see below), mechanization played a role in the revitalization of weaving. ## Diyarbakır Despite the loss of its international markets during the eighteenth century (see chapter 3), the Diyarbakır region continued as one of the most important Ottoman textile production centers. Diyarbakır weavers, by the mid-183os, were focused on the domestic Ottoman market and had accepted some Britishmade cotton yarn. There was another change as well. The industry once had relied on external sources for all of its raw silk needs, both for the pure silk and silk-cotton cloths. But, about a decade after local workers had accepted British yarn, they began raising silkworms locally. On the average, during the early 186os, the town workshops annually consumed 15,o0o kg. of silk and 34o bales of British cotton yarn.91 When they worked with British yarn, Diyarbakır-area weavers named it the devil’s cloth (şeytan bezi). But homespun yarn remained a vital part of the industry and when it was used, the end product simply was called cloth (bez). Often the yarn was obtained through the system, described earlier, of picking cotton and exchanging the spun yarn for more raw cotton for subsequent spinning (see chapter 1). In the 185os, this picking-spinningexchanging-spinning method provided enough yarn to weave some 1oo,ooo pieces of coarse cotton cloth (bez) for shipment outside the province. This alone accounted for one-third of total Diyarbakır textile shipments. By contrast, rural weavers then used British yarn to produce about 5,ooo pieces of seytan bezi, only c. 5 percent of the cloth sent from the area. Diyarbakır urban and rural producers also wove important quantities of handkerchiefs (mendil) and çarşafs.92 Table 2.3. Textile shops in the town of Diyarbakır in 1857 and $\pi 8 6 4$
<table><tr><td>calico handkerchief printers</td><td>1857</td><td>1864</td></tr><tr><td>red thread makers</td><td>14</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>7</td><td>４６</td></tr><tr><td>red thread sellers</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>loom makers</td><td>9</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>silk and cotton goods</td><td>150</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>cloth and linen sellers</td><td></td><td>180</td></tr><tr><td>felt makers</td><td>I4</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>linen drapers</td><td>4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>silk fringe makers</td><td>34</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>silk winders</td><td>10</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>pattern setters for silk goods</td><td></td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>tailors</td><td></td><td>50</td></tr><tr><td>hair cloth and thread makers</td><td>9</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>horsecloth makers</td><td>27</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>dyers</td><td>8</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>retail cotton dealers cotton sellers and cleaners</td><td>55</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>sellers of fancy silk, chintzes and cloth</td><td></td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>weavers</td><td></td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>311</td><td>320</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>652</td><td>678</td></tr></table> Source: FO 195/459, Holmes at Diarbekir, 3/31/1857; FO 195/799, Taylor at Diarbekir, 3/31/1864. Table 2.4. Production and shipment of cloth at Diyarbakır in 1857 and 1863
<table><tr><td>1857 production</td><td>1863 export</td></tr><tr><td>15,000 pcs cotton-silk (kutni)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15,000 pcs cotton-silk brocade (çitari) 25,000 pcs cotton-silk, 50/50 (gazliye)</td><td>40,800 yds.</td></tr><tr><td>40,000 yards silk (canfez)</td><td>15,300 pcs.</td></tr></table> Sources: various FO reports, including those in table 2.3. At “Redhwan," they made a high-quality linen for sale in Bitlis while in the towns of “Deh’ and Eruh, Christians monopolized the manufacture of șal cloth on 6oo looms. They produced a high quality product of unique and varied patterns that was so preferred by local Kurdish buyers that the English product had vanished from the local market. In the Mardin district, there were important manufacturing activities in several locations. Workers at Cebel Tur and Mardin specialized in making woollen cloth (aba) and their annual production during the 186os was devoted in equal measure for local uše and shipment to the northern part of the province, to be worn in winter or rainy weather.93 Not later than the beginning of the 187os, the Diyarbakır region was experiencing a“great manufacturing revival." This upward trend in part derived from shifts in the international economy, namely, the price depression of 1873-96 that sharply reduced Ottoman cultivators’ purchasing power and placed many imported goods outside their reach. The revival at Diyarbakır, however, had begun at least several years before the start of the depression and was said to be underway in November 1872. It seems closely connected to a sharp rise in the use of imported materials, practices that continued cost-cutting techniques begun decades earlier at Diyarbakır, notably the adoption of British yarn and inauguration of silk raising. To minimize costs, artisans imported “plain and red cotton and wollen yarns, [and] plain shirtings" and then wove or stamped the cloths with local labor.94 The precise magnitude, pattern and nature of the upward trend after 1872 is uncertain. The narrative sources present a dramatic picture of positive change but the competitive struggle must have been grim as prices of foodstuffs, raw materials and manufactured goods fell. During the mid-188os, the sale price of Diyarbakır and Mardin manusa cloth overnight fell by one-half as producers sought to maintain their sales outside the province (shipping some 2o,o0o pieces of the cloth to Erzurum). At this time, the volume of Diyarbakır sales of cotton-silk specialities reportedly doubled. The revival faltered temporarily when drought and crop failures in the late 188os afflicted the industry's Anatolian customers. During this crisis, Diyarbakır shipments of the cheaper cotton cloths actually increased but “that of [more expensive] silk stuffs fell off considerably," throwing many town artisans out of work. When the crop failures ended, production of the mixed cotton-silk cloth quickly bounced back. Thereafter, until 1914, overall textile output in the town and the region seems to have climbed steadily, for customers in Bitlis, Van, Harput, Erzurum, and Baghdad as well as in the local area. The narrative testimony to “revival" and strong growth indicate that within the town of Diyarbakır itself, the volume of textile manufacturing reached levels that were higher in c. 19o8 than at any point during the previous one-half century. At Mardin, a new manufacturing activity – cotton weaving – emerged to supplement the woollen cloak (aba) industry.95 In the region overall, the use of British yarn quadrupled or quintupled between the 186os and late 188os and, by the mid-189os, had doubled again. Diyarbakır weavers in 1895 employed more than eight times (34o vs. 3,ooo bales) as much British yarn as they had in the 186os!96 Table 2.5. Production of textiles in Diyarbakır province, 1884–1903
<table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Diyarbakır district</td><td colspan="2">Mardin district</td><td colspan="2">Ergani district</td></tr><tr><td>çitari#</td><td> $\tau 8 8 4$ $_ { 1 6 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td>1903 17,500</td><td> $\pmb { I } 8 \pmb { \{ 8 4 } $ </td><td>1903</td><td> $\pmb { I } 8 \pmb { \mathrm { 8 4 } }$ </td><td>1903</td></tr><tr><td>kutni#</td><td> $3 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>3,200</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>gazliye# white bez#</td><td> $^ { 2 4 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td>25,000</td><td> ${ } ^ { 2 0 , 0 0 0 }$ $_ { 1 6 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td> $^ { 2 0 , 0 0 0 }$ $_ { 1 6 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td> $^ { 2 6 , \infty 0 0 }$ </td><td> $2 8 , 2 0 0$ </td></tr><tr><td>red $b e z \#$ </td><td></td><td></td><td> $8 , 0 0 0$ </td><td> $8 , 0 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>red yarn</td><td> ${ \mathrm { I } } 5 { \mathrm { , } } 0 0 0 { \# }$ </td><td> $1 6 , \infty 0 \#$ </td><td> ${ \bf 6 , 0 0 0 ^ { \star } }$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>white yarn*</td><td></td><td></td><td> $8 , \infty \infty$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>manusa#</td><td> $3 0 , 0 0 0$ </td><td> $3 2 , 4 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>yerli basma#</td><td> $^ { 2 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td> $2 1 , 5 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>çarşaf</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ipleği#</td><td> $3 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>3,400</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>mendil@</td><td></td><td>2,000</td><td> $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td> $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>şal aba@</td><td> $4 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>4,700</td><td> $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td> $\scriptstyle \mathbf { 1 } \mathbf { I } , 0 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>yün aba</td><td></td><td></td><td>5,000</td><td> $5 , 0 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>çorap pr.</td><td> $3 0 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>35,000</td><td></td><td>16,000</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>külah@</td><td> $\scriptstyle \mathbf { I } \mathbf { I } , 0 0 0$ </td><td>11,000</td><td></td><td> $5 , 0 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td> $_ { 2 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>canfez</td><td> $3 0 , 0 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>@ = each; * = kiyye/weight</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Units of measure: $\# = t o p / \mathrm { p i e c e } ;$ </td><td></td></tr></table> Sources: Diyarbakır vs 1302/1884-5, pp.98–100, 131, 153; Diyarbakır vs 1321/1903, pp. $\tt { I 9 4 - 6 , }$ 204, 212. In addition to the production of various cloths, the town and region of Diyarbakır at the end of the nineteenth century possessed a thriving export business in raw silk and cocoons. These were activities particularly reliant on very cheap labor (see chapter $^ { 4 ) }$ . At the end of the period, raw silk and cocoon shipments from Diyarbakır exceeded, by 25 percent, those of mixed cloth.97 By this measure, the cheap and comparatively unskilled jobs in the silk industry had become more important to the Diyarbakır economy than the skilled tasks involved in making the famed cotton-silk cloths. Reduced wages and low material costs played an indispensable role in the industrial life of this community. The few statistical tables on textile production have been assembled for comparison of trends between the 186os and the twentieth century (see table 2.6). This comparison does not bear out the argument of growth, that contemporary witnesses attest was taking place; but, rather, it gives the impression of stagnating production levels. The assembled data argue that aggregate textile production around Diyarbakır was stable, at c. 2oo,ooo pieces, between the 186os and 1903. Decreases in output of one kind of textile were offset by increases in other varieties.98 Table 2.6. Textile production in Diyarbakır region, 1863–1903
<table><tr><td>1863</td><td>1884</td><td>1903</td></tr><tr><td>çitari</td><td> $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ $_ { 1 6 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td>17,500</td></tr><tr><td>kutni</td><td> ${ \bf 2 1 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td> $_ { 3 , 0 0 0 }$ 3,200</td></tr><tr><td>gazliye</td><td> $4 , 0 0 0$ $_ { 4 4 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td>45,000</td></tr><tr><td>canfez</td><td> $\mathrm { I } 5 , 0 0 0 \ \mathrm { y d s }$ $3 0 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>2,000</td></tr><tr><td>bez</td><td> $\scriptstyle 1 0 7 , 0 0 0$ $5 0 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>52,200</td></tr><tr><td>manusa</td><td>no mention $3 0 , 0 0 0$ </td><td>32,400</td></tr><tr><td>yerli</td><td>II</td><td> $^ { 2 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>basma</td><td></td><td>21,500 3,000 3,400</td></tr><tr><td>çarşaf abá</td><td>3,500</td><td>20,700</td></tr><tr><td>“el medeen’</td><td> $_ { 1 5 , 0 0 0 }$ 5,000</td><td> $_ { 1 9 , 0 0 0 }$ no mention</td></tr><tr><td>siçekli</td><td>800</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>mendil</td><td> $5 , 0 0 0$ $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td>12,000</td></tr><tr><td>misc.</td><td> ${ } ^ { 2 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>TOTAL</td><td> ${ 2 0 6 , 3 0 0 }$ 225,000</td><td>209,900</td></tr></table> Sources: derived from tables 2.4, 2.5; units of measure and sources as cited therein. Comparing the data delineates several trends in Diyarbakır production. There was an important shift in the relative market shares held by local and more distant buyers. The local market annually accounted for less than one-fifth of all textiles produced in the Diyarbakır region in $\mathtt { I 8 6 4 }$ and 1889 but one-half of all textiles sold in 1884 and 1903.99 Generally, local buyers were more important for the cotton cloth industry and those at a distance played a greater role in the sale of the other textiles. Production of more costly textiles seems to have been decreasing in favor of cheaper materials, at least until the opening of the twentieth century. Hence, the tables show the decline in the production of pure silk canfez cloth and the stagnation of mixed cotton-silk fabrics while the output of simple cotton textiles clearly was on the rise, for example, the emergence of a new cotton cloth industry at Mardin. This pattern, however, shifted in the final years before World War I. Entrepreneurs moved to take advantage of rising prices and introduced jacquard looms into the silk cloth industry at Diyarbakır. These looms allowed good quality production of cloth on a small scale, thus enabling local weavers to compete more effectively. Thereafter, the production of silk and mixed cotton-silk cloths increased, surely at lower unit costs than before. ## Mosul Mosul textile production remained very active and (see chapter 1), homespun played a major role even at the end of the period.100 By the 189os, however, coarse cloth weaving, once the local speciality, had fallen sharply in importance, accounting for only one-quarter of the $7 8 5$ looms counted in the town. Aniline dyes came late, in the 189os, but then were widely adopted. Natural indigo, imported from India, remained important but major changes occurred in the structure of the local dyeing industry. As elsewhere, the dyers’monopoly was broken by around the mid-century.101 Indigo dyeing then spread out from the three dyehouses that had controlled the craft to dyers who also worked in other colors. During the early twentieth century, the textile industry at Mosul supplied local markets as well as buyers in Bitlis, Siirt, Trabzon and Persia. Overall export and production trends at Mosul are difficult to determine. The industry clearly was vibrant and busy at the end of the period. The number of looms in the town equalled perhaps $\scriptstyle \mathbf { I } , 0 0 0 ,$ by 1910, when a roughly equal number were working in the villages of the province. The quantity of indigo imports and the value of yarn imports rose very sharply during the early twentieth century. Those of indigo increased by $7 0$ percent while the value of yarn imports and their share of all textile imports fully doubled. Thus, it seems likely that Mosul participated in the increases that occurred in many Ottoman manufacturing areas during the latter part of the period. ## Aleppo and northern Syria ## Introduction In the world that existed before the Great Powers partitioned the Middle East, Aleppo and the line of cities to its immediate north formed an inter-dependent economic region located in northern Syria. With the final collapse of the Ottoman universe, however, Aleppo became part of the modern Syrian state while the other cities and towns - Urfa, Maraş, Kilis and Aintab - were incorporated into the Turkish nation state. In this work, they are discussed together, as the economic unit they once were. Stripped of its international markets by c. 18oo (see chapter 3), Aleppo remained one of the most important centers of Ottoman textile production, vying with Damascus for first place among regional textile producers. The adoption of British yarn was credited with reviving a decaying industry (see below) but local spinning remained common enough. In the 184os, large numbers of children and women spun while, during the late 185os, some 400 shops with 6,ooo urban workers similarly were employed. Hand spinning hardly had died out.102 During the first half of the century, Aleppo textiles were traded especially actively in north Anatolian towns such as Samsun, Bafra, Merzifon, Amasya and Sivas and at the great annual fairs at Zile and Yapraklı.103 In c. 186o, during the peak of the destruction brought by European competition, the "lower classes" in Urfa, Diyarbakır, Mosul, Baghdad and their hinterlands bought important quantities of indigo-dyed coarse cotton cloths from Aleppo. Aleppo merchants also exported a small quantity to Persia. Silver-embroidered Aleppo silk cloth covered the Kaaba in the Holy City of Mecca. In the 186os, the manufacturing center of Gürün obtained undyed cotton cloth from Aleppo while customers in Egypt, the Iraqi provinces, İstanbul and İzmir bought a variety of its textiles.104 Buyers “eagerly attended" the Yaprakli fair in 187ı in order to buy Aleppo cottons while, in the following year, Egypt alone bought about one-quarter of the city's total production.105 Because of their cheapness and strength, substantial quantities of Aleppo (and Damascus) cottons and colored half-silks were sold at İzmir, c. 4.5 million piasters’ worth during the early 187os.106 Salonica and Macedonia first are mentioned as markets for the higher-quality textiles during the early twentieth century, when generally rising prices were bringing prosperity to many manufacturers. Thus, the industry was expanding its market nexus at the end of the period.107 The city then possessed an impressive range of outlets for its textile production, including the Sudan as well as the Persian frontier provinces. ## The changing textile mix Already in the 183os, the richer fabrics were "not manufactured to nearly the extent that they once were, but the cheaper stuffs are decidedly increasing in consumption ..."108 At the bottom end of the market were muslin cloths; next were the silk-cotton cloths costing four times more and at the top were the luxury cloths, for women, selling for fifteen times the price of a simple cotton fabric. A full one-half of all active looms during the 183os wove cotton cloth; about 40 percent worked up the famed mixed cotton and silk cloths and fewer than ten percent manufactured the luxury cloths of silk and gold and silver thread.109 These relative proportions remained approximately the same into the mid-185os, when a detailed enumeration of these looms and their products was offered.110 During the early 186os, cotton cloth formed one-half of total textile production but its share of operating looms was only 33 percent. This slump, however, surely was a function of the U.S. Civil War and global shortages of cotton. Various kinds of silk and cotton goods, notably kutni, alaca and gazel on silk/harir, totalled 46 percent of output and used 56 percent of the looms. Silk and cotton goods then cost about six times more than plain cotton textiles; thus the differential was greater than in the late 183os (see table 2.7). Table 2.7. Types of cloth woven at Aleppo, 1830–1900 (in percent of total active looms and value of production)
<table><tr><td rowspan="2">type of cloth</td><td colspan="2">1830s looms prod.</td><td colspan="2">1860s looms</td><td colspan="2">1871 looms prod.</td><td colspan="2">1900 1907 prod.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>prod.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>looms</td></tr><tr><td>cotton cotton-silk</td><td>50</td><td>43</td><td>34 56</td><td>50 46</td><td>8o</td><td>66</td><td>75</td><td>82</td></tr><tr><td>silk</td><td>43 8</td><td>53 4</td><td>10</td><td>4</td><td></td><td></td><td>24 I-2</td><td>17 2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1860</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Price (index) cotton</td><td></td><td>1830s</td><td></td><td>100</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>cotton-silk</td><td></td><td>100</td><td></td><td>600</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>400</td><td></td><td>4,600</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>silk</td><td></td><td>1,500</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table> Sources: Bowring (1840), p. 84; FO 195/741, 6/5/1862 for 1861; A&P 1872, 57, 3575, Skene for Alepp0, 12/31/1871; Buhi III, 10, 1/22/1902, Aleppo; Buhi, 9, 8/20/1907. Prices: in each time period, the cotton cloth price is the basis of comparison among the various cloths and is assigned an index number of 1oo. The prices in the two time periods are not to be compared. Pure silk products continued to account for c. 1o percent of the looms in operation and some of the pure silks (for example, canfez) cost over forty times plain cotton cloths. In 1871, 8o percent of all looms working in the city made winter and summer cloth, presumably all cotton, for the “lower orders" of the people.111 At about this time, in 1875, the industry consumed some 82,ooo kg. of raw silk, three-quarters of it from Europe, India and Iran and the balance from a variety of Ottoman locations, including Mt. Lebanon and Tripoli.112 In the early twentieth century, cottons accounted for some threequarters of total textile output. Mixed silks accounted for most of the balance and pure silks scarcely were present.113 Another early twentieth-century estimate states that two-thirds of all Aleppo looms wove cotton and the remaining made wool, silk and mixed fabrics.114 Thus, these statistics show a sharp rise in the relative importance of cotton cloth weaving over the period (if we ignore the artificial low in the early 186os), from about one-half to two-thirds and more of all looms in the city. Pure silk cloth production sharply declined while the relative importance of cotton-silk fabrics also fell, but less drastically. Some of the city's favorite textiles, moreover, had changed composition over the course of the century. In the 185os through the 187os, the cloth called alaca had been a mixed silk and cotton fabric: it contained a“little"cotton in the mid-185os and was still one-half silk in the 187os.115 The shift to a completely cotton fabric began in response to the import of all-cotton alaca cloth, that first reached Syria in the late 186os or early 187os.116 During the early twentieth century, Aleppo weavers made the cotton alaca cloth using British yarn for the weft and Adana or Indian yarn for the warp.117 ## Factors influencing Aleppo textile production As seen earlier, changes in tariffs and taxes played an important role in the evolution of the Aleppo textile industry and merchants of the city had been particularly active in seeking to overturn government policies that they felt were detrimental to the health of local industry. Abolition of several duties, including that on the water transport of goods within the empire, certainly had a positive impact on textile production. We also have seen the effects wrought by the falling prices of the $\mathtt { I 8 7 3 - I 8 9 6 }$ depression and the subsequently positive price trends that continued until World War I. A wide variety of other more specific factors, ranging from rebellious pashas against the Ottoman state to Confederate generals fighting the authority of Washington, also affected the Aleppo industry. During the $\mathbf { I } 8 2 0 \mathbf { S } .$ Egyptian factories and Mohammed Ali's monopoly system hurt Aleppo weavers by drawing away raw materials and closing access to a major market. In $\mathtt { I 8 5 0 } _ { \mathtt { \lambda } }$ a taxpayers’ revolt in the city resulted in 5oo pillaged houses and 40o destroyed manufactories. Some 450 silk and cotton weavers, using British cotton yarn, were thrown out of work.118 But Aleppo weavers could benefit when disorders occurred elsewhere. When the riots of 186o destroyed silk-weaving factories at Deir el Kammar and Damascus, the number of active Aleppo looms immediately rose from $4 , 0 0 0$ to $6 , \scriptstyle 0 0 0$ in order to supply Egyptian buyers.119 As the American Civil War began, raw cotton prices skyrocketed and first affected British textile prices, temporarily creating a price advantage for Middle Eastern fabrics. Seeing the opportunity, Aleppo manufacturers jumped in and seized the British T-cloth market in Diyarbakır and Baghdad. By the end of 186ı, however, local raw cotton prices also had risen enormously and they abandoned the effort. The great if emphemeral prosperity that the Civil War brought to the Egyptian peasants substantially increased their purchases of Aleppo textiles.120 Bumper crop conditions around Aleppo could boost agricultural production in ways that were disadvantageous to weavers. In $\mathbf { I } 8 6 7 ,$ local food prices fell with a good harvest and no means of export. The low price of food in turn depressed the price of local manufacturing labor, making Aleppo textiles more competitive but, at the same time, reducing the local cultivators’ purchasing power. At the beginning of the year, a mere 8oo looms reportedly were operating. The very low number of active looms and the reported drop in wages also may be attributable to the post-Civil War slump in Egypt, when the price of cotton collapsed. But the lowered wages at Aleppo and the end of the cotton bust meant that some $3 , 0 0 0$ looms were “rapidly weaving" for the Egyptian market by $\mathbf { I } 8 6 7 .$ 121 The Egyptian market continued to boom until $\mathbf { I } 8 7 2 ,$ consuming one-quarter of total Aleppo textile production. At least $\scriptstyle \mathbf { I } , 0 0 0$ more families were “supported by weaving than in $\mathbf { I } 8 7 \mathbf { I } . \mathbf { \Omega } ^ { \mathbf { 7 9 1 2 2 } }$ This seems to have been a particularly active period; $^ { 8 , \bullet }$ 000 and sometimes as many as $\scriptstyle \mathbf { I } \mathbf { I } , 0 0 0$ looms reportedly were “at work." The bubble of activity then burst in 1873–74, when the last killing famine of the century struck Anatolia, a major market of Aleppo. Drought combined with harsh winters destroyed crops and livestock and brought exceptional devastation. Sales collapsed; for example, Trabzon buyers abandoned Aleppo textiles for British yarn that they then wove themselves. Aleppo weavers put away their looms and took on other jobs; “most of that class are emigrating to other provinces where they can find work."123 Despite the government's 1874 abolition of most internal tariffs (see above), the crisis continued. Without work in 1876, weavers either had found new jobs “or have emigrated to Egypt."124 The number of active looms reached a new low, of 7oo. Political upheavals in the Sudan – the wars of the Mahdi and later of the Khalifa - damaged sales beginning in the mid-188os. Several years later, crop failures and drought again struck in Anatolia as well as in the Aleppo region itself. In 1887, Trabzon, for example, reduced its imports of manusa, gezi and ghontin’’ cloth from Aleppo in favor of cheaper goods from Russia.125 Wages in textile making correspondingly fell; cotton weavers continued to work, but “for 12 hours a day for a pittance ..." By later 1889, however, exports to Anatolia were seen as particularly active, a trend that carried into the following years. Cocoon exports dropped as local weavers needed increased quantities of the raw material.126 Textile shipments halted only briefly with the Armenian massacres of 1894- 95.127 But there were other economic consequences. Armenian weavers at Aintab and Maraş emigrated to Europe, whether permanently or not is unknown.128 Many other Armenian weavers and merchants migrated to Egypt and set up their looms to serve the local market.129 During the new century, the loss of artisans mounted with additional migrations to Egypt, there weaving alaca cloth to meet Egyptian and Sudanese demand.13o Production in the other urban centers of northern Syria outside the city and environs of Aleppo was increasing substantially, partially because of these migrations and, perhaps, rising wages at Aleppo (see below). Other factors affecting textile production included a local crop failure in 1898 that triggered a bread riot at Aleppo¹31 and a bad harvest in Aydin province, “one of the chief markets," during the next year.132 The Young Turk Revolution and the 19o9 conscription law that rendered Ottoman non-Muslims eligible for military service affected the industry in several, quite different, ways. During the first year of the new law, 10,ooo young men, of Armenian and Syrian Christian origins, reportedly left from Aleppo alone, mostly bound for the United States.133 Their departure may have hurt output but the resulting reduction of the labor pool could have raised weavers’ wages. The conscription law gave new life to an already impressive wave of Syro-Lebanese migration, in motion since the 186os. These immigrant workers had an additional economic importance, besides remittances and investments by returnees. Homesick and with high wages, they provided new markets for Aleppo textiles. Living in Great Table 2.8. Looms in Aleppo and adjacent areas, 1800–1914
<table><tr><td> $\scriptstyle { \mathrm { I } } 8 2 0 5 ^ { \star }$ </td><td>25,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 2 9 ^ { \star }$ </td><td> $6 , 0 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 3 8 ^ { \star }$ </td><td> $_ { 4 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I 8 3 8 2 }$ </td><td>2,800</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\boldsymbol { \mathbf { I } } 8 4 5 ^ { \star }$ </td><td> $\mathbf { I } , \mathbf { \boldsymbol { 5 0 0 } }$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I 8 4 6 b }$ </td><td>800</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I 8 4 8 ^ { \star } }$ </td><td>5,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 5 0 ^ { \star }$ </td><td> $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $1 8 5 2 0$ </td><td>10,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 5 5 ^ { \star }$ </td><td>5,560</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 5 6 ^ { \star }$ </td><td>10,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 5 6 ^ { \star }$ </td><td> $5 , 5 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 5 8 ^ { \star }$ </td><td> $\scriptstyle \mathbf { I } , 4 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 5 9 ^ { \star }$ </td><td> $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 5 9 \mathbf { d }$ </td><td> $_ { 4 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 5 0 \mathbf { S } ^ { \star }$ </td><td> $3 , 5 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1860e</td><td> $6 , \scriptstyle 0 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1861f*</td><td>10,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 6 2 \mathbf { g }$ </td><td> $3 , 6 5 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 6 2 ^ { \star }$ </td><td> $_ { 4 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1868h</td><td>800</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1868i</td><td>3,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I 8 7 I } \mathbf { i } ^ { \star }$ </td><td>5,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 7 2 ^ { \star }$ </td><td>6,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1872k</td><td> $6 , 4 0 0$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>early 1870s</td><td> $_ { 8 , 0 0 0 }$ </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\boldsymbol { \mathbf { I } } 8 7 4 ^ { \star }$ </td><td>5,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1875m</td><td>4,900</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 7 5 ^ { \star }$ 1876</td><td>2,400</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 7 9 ^ { \star }$ </td><td>700</td><td>Aintab Urfa</td><td>Maraş Kilis</td><td>Total North Syria</td></tr><tr><td>1889</td><td>3,000</td><td>2,000</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 9 \mathbf { I } ^ { \star }$ </td><td>3,610</td><td>2,500</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1893</td><td>5,884</td><td>2,000</td><td>(per a 1902 source)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1896</td><td>3,610</td><td>2,500 (per a 1902 source)</td><td></td><td>3-3,500</td></tr><tr><td> $\mathbf { I } 8 9 7 ^ { \star }$ </td><td>3,000</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1899</td><td>2,915</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1900</td><td></td><td>900</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1901</td><td>2,915</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1901-2</td><td></td><td>2,900</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1902</td><td></td><td>2,500</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1904</td><td>4,200</td><td>5,500</td><td>1,500</td><td>+80o more</td></tr><tr><td>1906</td><td></td><td>14,000</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1907</td><td>9,000 in city</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1907</td><td>5,735</td><td>3,726 1,150</td><td>2,090 115</td><td>12,816</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1907</td><td></td><td>12,000</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table> Sources: \* from Issawi (1988), table on p. 374. a − FO 195/741, Alepp0, 6/5/1862; b – BBA Cev Ikt 1024, 11 X 1262/October 1846; c – FO 195/741, Aleppo, 6/5/1862, certainly Skene; d – FO 195/700, Skene, Aleppo, 12/31/1860; e - FO 195/700, Skene, Alepp0, 12/312/1860; f – A&P 1872, LVII, 3565, Skene, Aleppo, 12/31/ 1871; g – FO 195/741, Aleppo, 6/5/1862, certainly Skene; h – FO 195/802, Skene, Aleppo, 4/2/1868; i − ibid.; j − A&P 1872, LVII, 3565, Skene, Aleppo, 12/31/1871; k – A&P 1873, 64, Škene, North Syria for 1872; 1 – A&P 1876, 75, 3925, Skene, Aleppo, 12/31/1875; m – BBA I MM 2276, 28 III 1292 /May 1875. After 1875, see various A&P reports from Aleppo. Britain and the United States, the migrants avidly bought Aleppo embroideries, silk embroidering on Manchester cloth, used for wall and table coverings and other purposes.134 ## The fictitious decline of Aleppo textile production In the introduction of this book, beliefs in Islamic civilizational and industrial decline were said to have blinded us to the realities present. Aleppo is an excellent case in point since it incessantly has been cited in Ottoman historiographical literature as a major example of Ottoman industrial decline. Its decline, however, truly was in the eyes of the beholders rather than real. Consider the data given in table $_ { 2 . 8 , }$ stating the number of looms in Aleppo and the Aleppo region. In particular, note the varying number of looms during the period from the 1820s through 1871. The ${ } ^ { 2 5 , 0 0 0 }$ and $\scriptstyle { \mathtt { I O } } , { \mathtt { O O O } }$ loom figures stand out in the table as anomalies. In every example but one, the figures derive from a later source reporting on the production levels of a preceding period. In each case, the observer has established the decline of Aleppo industry in his own day by comparing its output with production levels in the past. The $\tt I 8 5 0$ and 1852 figures thus are respectively from an 1862 book and an 1862 consular report; the 1861 figure, for its part, is from an $\boldsymbol { \mathtt { I } } 8 7 \boldsymbol { \mathtt { I } }$ report. The 1862 consul proved the manufacturing decline in the city by comparing the $3 , 6 5 0$ looms of his own day with the $\scriptstyle \mathbf { I } 0 , 0 0 0$ looms that he said were present just ten years earlier. But the consular official in $\mathbf { I } 8 7 \mathbf { I }$ used the 186os for the mythic past. He proved the sharp decline of the Aleppo industry by comparing the $5 , 0 0 0$ looms then operating, in $\mathbf { I } 8 7 \mathbf { I }$ , with the $_ { 1 0 , 0 0 0 }$ looms that he said had been present ten years before!135 Rather than declining, the nineteenth-century Aleppo textile industry encountered constantly changing conditions. As seen, wars, political instability, international crises or crop failures affecting peasant customers might depress output and cause many weavers to put away their looms, waiting for better times. A return to normal conditions, or bumper crops stimulating cultivator demands for textiles, or the misfortunes of competitors, brought Aleppo weavers back to the looms. Thus, the statistics in table 2.8 do not show decline; but they do reflect widely fluctuating market opportunities. In most years, between $3 , 0 0 0$ and $^ { 6 , }$ ooo looms actively wove but the number often fell below ${ 3 , 0 0 0 , }$ sometimes to 1,500 and less. On several occasions, lows of 80o and 700 were met, due to particularly unfavorable combinations of events. The number of active looms generally continued to fluctuate within the $3 , 0 0 0 - 6 , 0 0 0$ range until World War ${ \mathrm { I } } ,$ although there are indications of real production increases at Aleppo after 1907. More certainl $. \mathbf { y } ,$ the number of active looms in Northern Syria generally increased very dramatically in just a few years during the early twentieth century. Other statistics besides the number of active looms argue strongly against the notion of decline in the Aleppo textile industry. The output of gold and silver thread, important in the luxury silk textiles, indicate the health of that particular branch of textile making. In 1838, Aleppo held 15 manufactories making the gold and silver thread; these employed 6o workers while, in 19o2, the workers numbered 7o persons. Thus, apparently, the making of gold and silver thread did not decline during the period as a whole even though luxury cloth lost in relative significance in Aleppo textile production.136 Also, the number of dyehouses in Aleppo remained steady and probably increased over the nineteenth century. In c. 1838, there were perhaps 10o dyeshops (and printshops) in the city, employing 1,500 workers. In 1868, the city contained 89 dyehouses while, in 1899, there were 129 of them operating, together with 27 printing factories.137 In 19o1, approximately 1oo dyehouses worked in indigo alone; about 10 percent of these dyemasters worked with two helpers and the rest·worked alone or with children. By 1907, the number of dyehouses had increased substantially, to 120, using both synthetic and natural indigo.138 Contemporary foreign observers fundamentally misunderstood the meaning of these increases in indigo dyeing and the quickness with which Aleppo dyers adopted the new synthetic; and they refused to acknowledge the dyers’ actions as rational efforts to remain competitive. Instead, they insisted that the prosperity of indigo dyeing proved the progressive impoverishment of the region; they saw increasing output in the craft only as an effort to serve the poorer classes that were becoming ever larger.139 Trends in the use of domestic and imported cotton yarn and in the production of cloth reflect similar patterns of resiliency and then growth. Between the mid-185os and early 187os, the levels of thread usage, both foreign and domestic, and cotton cloth production were at least stable, at c. 9oo,ooo kg. and two million pieces respectively.140 In 190o, Aleppo imported 7.I million kg. of cotton yarn while in 1905, yarn imports were given at 3.5 million kg.141 Even the lower figure shows very substantial growth in Aleppo's cotton yarn usage since the 185os-187os. By the early twentieth century, the total volume of all yarns used, Ottoman and imported, had increased at least four times at Aleppo. There is another, less direct, suggestion of rising prosperity in the industry during the early twentieth century. In 1903 and 1904, weavers and dyers in Aleppo successfully struck. They won very impressive wage increases, some 2o percent, while the wages of embroiderers doubled. Wage increases of this magnitude do not occur in moribund or stagnating industries: they show that profits or market conditions were sufficiently attractive so that merchants were willing to pay higher wages to maintain production.142 Textile exports from Aleppo bear out and support the argument for stable and then increased textile production during the period c. 183os-1914 (see table 2.9). Textiles from Aleppo and other North Syrian centers exited at the port of Alexandretta for shipment to İstanbul, İzmir and the European provinces and, c. 19oo, these seaborne exports represented about one-half of total textile output. Generally, their value remained approximately steady from the early 188os through c. 19oo. (More specifically, the value of the sea-exports fell in the late 188os, regained the lost ground and then rose fractionally in the 189os.) Thereafter, and until the Young Turk Revolution, textile exports via Alexandretta jumped more than 50 percent in value. Similarly, the volume of these exports rose 17 percent during the 189os and increased by another 38 percent during the twentieth-century years before the Revolution. The instability of the post-revolutionary period then took its toll and exports slipped, but only back to the levels of the later 189os. Table 2.9. Textile exports from Alexandretta, 1880–1911
<table><tr><td>1880</td><td>quantity (tons) value (pounds sterling)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> ${ } _ { 2 1 8 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1881</td><td> $1 5 9 , 0 0 0$ </td></tr><tr><td>1882</td><td> $_ { 1 2 9 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1883</td><td> $9 2 , 0 0 0$ </td></tr><tr><td>1884</td><td> $9 2 , 0 0 0$ </td></tr><tr><td>1886</td><td> $_ { 1 3 3 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1887</td><td> $_ \mathrm { ~ I ~ I ~ 3 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1888</td><td> $_ { 1 0 4 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1889 235</td><td> $9 9 , 0 0 0$ </td></tr><tr><td>1890 363</td><td> $_ \mathrm { ~ I ~ I ~ 3 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1891 326</td><td> $_ { 1 3 2 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1892 365</td><td> ${ \tt I } 3 8 { , } 0 0 0$ </td></tr><tr><td>1893 353</td><td> $_ { 1 3 5 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1894 378</td><td> $1 4 5 , 0 0 0$ </td></tr><tr><td>1895 297</td><td> $\mathtt { I I 3 , O O O }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1896 353</td><td> $_ { 1 3 4 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1897 503</td><td> $^ { 1 7 8 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1898 504</td><td> $_ { 1 9 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1899 438</td><td> $_ { 1 6 5 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1900</td><td> $_ { 1 7 6 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1901 525</td><td> $_ { 1 9 7 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1902 541</td><td> $^ { 2 0 2 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1903 587</td><td> $^ { 2 5 6 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1904 596</td><td> $^ { 2 6 2 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1905 562</td><td> $_ { 2 4 7 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1906 589</td><td> $^ { 2 5 8 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1907 649</td><td> $2 8 5 , 0 0 0$ </td></tr><tr><td>1908</td><td> $_ { 1 4 7 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>319</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1909 390</td><td> $_ { 1 7 0 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1910 427</td><td> $_ { 1 9 4 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr><tr><td>1911 360</td><td> $_ { 1 6 3 , 0 0 0 }$ </td></tr></table> Sources: 1880–89, 1900 – Firro Kais, “Alep, une ville traditionnele face à l’impact de l’Europe, $\Im { 8 } 3 0 \mathrm { - r } 9 ^ { \intercal } 4 , ^ { 3 3 }$ Cahiers de la Méditerranée, Áctes du Colloque (Décembre 1987–Juin 1988), p. 143, based on FO reports, British consular reports, 1889–99, 1901–1 1.