All rights reserved © The Architectural Press, London, 1960 Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 67-16449 Printed in Great Britain # Contents ## BOOKS THAT MATTER Published in the United States of America in 1960 by Praeger Publishers Inc. 111 Fourth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10003 Second edition, 1967 Second printing, 1970 ## 9 Introduction SECTION I: PREDISPOSING CAUSES: ACADEMIC AND RATIONALIST WRITERS, 1900-1914 14 The Academic tradition and the concept of elementary composition 23 Choisy: Rationalism and technique 35 The Academic succession: Garnier and Perret 44 England: Lethaby and Scott 68 Germany: Industry and the Werkbund 79 The Factory aesthetic 88 Adolf Loos and the problem of ornament SECTION 2: ITALY: FUTURIST MANIFESTOS AND PROJECTS, 1909-1914 99 Futurism: the Foundation Manifesto 106 Futurism: theory and development 127 Sant'Elia and Futurist architecture SECTION 3: HOLLAND: THE LEGACY OF BERLAGE: DE STIJL, 1917-1925 139 Holland: Berlage and attitudes to Wright 148 De Stijl: the Dutch phase 163 Expressionism: Amsterdam and Berlin 185 De Stijl: the international phase SECTION 4: PARIS: THE WORLD OF ART AND LE CORBUSIER 202 Architecture and the Cubist tradition 214 Progressive building in Paris: 1918-1928 220 Vers une Architecture 247 Le Corbusier: town planning and aesthetics SECTION 5: GERMANY: BERLIN, THE BAUHAUS, THE VICTORY OF THE NEW STYLE 265 The Berlin School 276 The Bauhaus 305 Germany: the encyclopaedics 320 Conclusion: Functionalism and technology 331 Index ## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Acknowledgement is made to the following for the use of illustrations. The numbers refer to the figure numbers. Arphot 86-88, 96; Photo Chevojon, Paris 13; Mario Chiattone 50, 51; Doeser Fotos, Holland 56, 77; E. M. van Ojen 123; Buckminster Fuller 13, 137; Gemeente Musea van Amsterdam 54, 65, 67, 69; Lucien Hervé 131, 132; Lucia Moholy-Nagy 121, 122; Museo Civico, Como 42-49; Museum of Modern Art, New York 79; Mart Stam 71; Stedlijk Museum, Amsterdam 58, 59. ## Illustrations 49 Tony Garnier. Project for a national bank 5o Sirot. Project for a national bank 50 Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer. Plan of the Fagus Factory, Alfeld 51 Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer. Plan of the Werkbund Pavilion, Cologne 51 Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer. Plan of the Bauhaus buildings, Dessau 52 Auguste Choisy. Three drawings from Histoire de l'Architecture 53 Tony Garnier. La Cité Industrielle; refrigerator tower 53 Paul Gaudet. House in the Boulevard Murat 54 Auguste Perret. Apartment block and garage in Paris 55 Auguste Perret. Théâtre des Champs Elysées 56 Auguste Perret. Church of Notre Dame, Le Raincy 56, 57 Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer. Fagus Factory, Alfeld 57 Bruno Taut. Steel industry pavilion, Leipzig; glass pavilion, Cologne 58 Max Berg. Jahrhunderthalle, Breslau 59 Hans Poelzig. Water tower, Posen; Chemical factory, Luban 59 Albert Marx. Boiler house, Bad Nauheim 60 Heinrich Stoffregen. Anker linoleum factory, Delmenhorst 60 Peter Behrens. AEG heavy erection hall, Berlin; turbine erection hall, Berlin 61 Peter Behrens. Gasworks, Frankfurt-am-Main 61 Walter Gropius. Farm workers' housing, Jankow 62 Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer. Werkbund Pavilion, Cologne 63 Frank Lloyd Wright. Hotel, Mason City 64 Adolf Loos. Steiner House, Vienna; Tzara House, Paris 113 Medardo Rosso. Impressione d'Omnibus 113 Georges Braque. Le Portugais 114 Pablo Picasso. Portrait of D. H. Kahnweiler 114 Marcel Duchamp. The Coffee Mill 114 Umberto Boccioni. La Strada entra nella casa 115 Umberto Boccioni. Three drawings 116 Antonio Sant'Elia, Stazione Aeroplani; central station, Città Nuova 117 Antonio Sant'Elia. Projects for hangar and generating station 118 Antonio Sant'Elia, Casa a Gradinate; projects for a lighthouse and generating 119 Antonio Sant'Elia. La Città Nuova 12o Mario Chiattone. Projects for blocks of flats 169 Hendrikus Peter Berlage. Main hall of the Beurs, Amsterdam 169 Frank Lloyd Wright. Office of Larkin Company, Buffalo 170 Theo van Doesburg and Wilmos Huszar. Opening page of de Stijl 170 Theo van Doesburg. Black and white composition 171 Rob van t'Hoff. Villa at Huis ter Heide 171 Jan Wils. Restaurant, de Dubbele Sleutel 172 J. J. P. Oud. Projects for Strandboulevard housing 172 Michel de Klerk. Post office on the Zaanstraat, Amsterdam 172 Theo van de Vijdeveld. Volkstheater project 173 Eibink and Snellebrand. Project for a villa 173 Eric Mendelsohn. The Einstein tower, Potsdam 174 Eric Mendelsohn. Drawings for four projects 175 Aldo Fiozzi. Valeurs Abstraits