175 Vladimir Malevitsch. Fundamental Suprematist elements 175 Gerrit Thomas Rietveld. Chair 176 Giaccomo Matté-Trucco. Rooftop test track, Fiat Factory, Turin; Werner Graeff, project for a motor cycle 176 Mart Stam. Project for office block in Konigsberg 177 El Lissitsky and Mart Stam. 'Wolkenbügel' project 177 Wesnin Brothers. Project for Leningrad Pravda offices 177 Ladowski Psychotechnical Laboratory. Study for airport 178 Cor van Eesteren with Theo van Doesburg. Reconstruction of Unter den Linden, Berlin 179 Frederick Kiesler. Cité dans l'Espace 179 Gerrit Thomas Rietveld. Schröder House, Utrecht 180 Marcel Breuer. Project for theatre at Kharkov 180 Mart Starn. Chairs 229 Raymond Duchamp-Villon. La Villa Cubiste 229 Charles Edouard Jeanneret (Le Corbusier). Peinture 230 Charles Edouard Jeanneret (Le Corbusier). Still life 230 Mass-produced French glass and china 231 Henri Sauvage. Flats in Rue des Amiraux, Paris 231 K. Melnikov. Russian Pavilion, Exposition des Arts Décoratifs, Paris 232 Andre Lurçat. Studio house in Rue de Belvedere, Paris 232 Studio flat and saddler's shop in Paris 233 Le Corbusier. Project for Maison Citrohan 234 Charles Edouard Jeanneret (Le Corbusier). Villa in Switzerland 235 Opening from Le Corbusier's Vers une Architecture 236 Le Corbusier. Pavillon de l'Esprit Nouveau 237 Le Corbusier. Project for Une Ville Contemporaine 237 Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, Ozenfant house, Paris 238 Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret. Villa Cook, Boulogne-sur-Seine, Paris, and Palais du Peuple 239 Le Corbusier. Diagrams of roofs, house structures and windows 240 Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret. Les Terrasses, Garches 289 Bruno Taut, City centre from Die Stadtkrone 289 Lyonel Feininger. Woodcut from first Bauhaus proclamation 289 Eric Mendelsohn. Hat factory, Luckenwald 290 Mies van der Rohe. Friedrichstrasse station competition, Berlin 291 Gropius and Meyer. Skyscraper project, Chicago Tribune competition 291 Mies van der Rohe. Project for concrete office block 292 Mies van der Rohe. Project for brick villa 292 Mies van der Rohe. Wolf House, Guben; Monument to Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, Berlin; Lange House, Krefeld 293 Bruno Taut. 'Gehag'housing, Berlin-Britz 293 Mies van der Rohe. Housing and landscaping at the Weissenhof-Siedlung 294 Mies van der Rohe. Flats at Weissenhof-Siedlung, Stuttgart 294 Bauhaus 'Vorkurs' 295 Paul Klee. Ideal Menage Lily and Zimmerperspektive 296 Gropius and Meyer. Bauhaus buildings, Dessau 297 Brinckmann and van der Vlugt. van Nelle factory 297 Serafimov and Kravets. State Light Industry Centre, Kharkov 298 Graybar building, New York 299 Airshaft of a ship, from Moholy-Nagy Von Material zu Architektur 299 Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. Enamel 300 Page opening from Moholy-Nagy Von Material zu Architektur 301 Mies van der Rohe. Pavilion of the Deutscher Werkbund 302 Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, Les Heures Claires, Poissy-sur-Seine 303 Richard Buckminster Fuller. 'Dymaxion' house project 304 BaeCSrmiears; # Introduction—the machine age THIs Book wAs conceived and written in the late years of the Nineteenfifties, an epoch that has variously been called the Jet Age, the Detergent Decade, the Second Industrial Revolution. Almost any label that identifies anything worth identifying in the period will draw attention to some aspect of the transformation of science and technology, for these transformations have powerfully affected human life, and opened up new paths of choice in the ordering of our collective destiny. Our accession to almost unlimited supplies of energy is balanced against the possibility of making our planet uninhabitable, but this again is balanced, as we stand at the threshold of space, by the growing possibility of quitting our island earth and letting down roots elsewhere. Again, our explorations into the nature of information have made it possible, on the one hand, to set electronics to work to take the drudgery out of routine thought, and on the other hand to tailor human thinking to suit the needs of some narrow-minded powerélite. These, of course, are the grand prospects that affect economics, morality and sociology, in the same remote and statistical way as did the perfection of cavalry, the growth of feudal organisations, the rise of money economy. But, unlike those developments of the past, which left the objects of daily life, the hierarchy of the family and the structure of sociable intercourse almost untouched, the technical revolutions of our own time strike us with infinitely greater force because the small things of life have been visibly and audibly revolutionised as well. Even a man who does not possess an electric razor is likely-in the Westernised world at least—to dispense some previously inconceivable product, such as an aerosol shaving cream, from an equally unprecedented pressurised container, and accept with equanimity the fact that he can afford to throw away, regularly, cutting-edges that previous generations would have nursed for years. Even a housewife who does not possess a washing machine dispenses synthetic detergent from synthetic plastic packs on to synthetic fabrics whose quality and performance makes the jealously-guarded secrets of silk seem trivial. A teen-ager, curled up with a transistorised, printed-circuit radio, or boudoir gramophone, may hear a music that literally did not exist before it was committed to tape, reproduced at a level of quality that riches could not have bought a decade or so ago. The average automobile of today, running on such roads as have been especially contrived for it, provides transport more sumptuous in vehicles more gorgeous than palanquin-borne emperors knew how to desire. Many technologies have contributed to this domestic revolution, but most of them make their point of impact on us in the form of small machines —shavers, clippers and hair-dryers; radio, telephone, gramophone, tape recorder and television; mixers, grinders, automatic cookers, washing machines, refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, polishers. ... A housewife alone, often disposes of more horse-power today than an industrial worker did at the beginning of the century. This is the sense in which we live in a Machine Age. We have lived in an Industrial Age for nearly a century and a half now, and may well be entering a Second Industrial Age with the current revolution in control mechanisms. But we have already entered the Second Machine Age, the age of domestic electronics and synthetic chemistry, and can look back on the First, the age of power from the mains and the reduction of machines to human scale, as a period of the past. Although the earliest stirrings of that First Machine Age must have appeared with the availability of coal-gas for lighting and heating, the mechanism of light and heat remained a flame, as it had been from the Stone Age onwards. Mains electricity made a decisive alteration here, one of the most decisive in the history of domestic technology. In addition, it brought small, woman-controlled machinery into the home, notably the vacuum cleaner. Electrical techniques brought the telephone as well, and for the first time domestic and sociable communication did not depend on the sending of written or remembered messages. The portable typewriter put a machine under the hands of poets, the first gramophones made music a domestic service rather than a social ceremony. All these machines are still with us in the Second Machine Age, supplemented and improved by more recent technological advances, but there is a more than quantitative difference between the two ages. In the Second, highly developed mass production methods have distributed electronic devices and synthetic chemicals broadcast over a large part of societytelevision, the symbolic machine of the Second Machine Age, has become a means of mass-communication dispensing popular entertainment. In the First, however, only cinema was available to a broad public, whose home life was otherwise barely touched and it was in upper middle-class homes that the First Machine Age made its greatest impact, the homes that could afford these new, convenient and expensive aids to gracious living, the homes that tend to breed architects, painters, poets, journalists, the creators of the myths and symbols by which a culture recognises itself. Thus, it was into the hands of an élite, rather than the masses, that the symbolic machine of that First Machine Age was delivered, the automobile. It was more than a symbol of power, it was also, for most of that élite, a heady taste of a new kind of power.¹ One of the uncommented curiosities of the early part of the Industrial Age is that, in spite of its massive dependence on mechanical power, few of its élite, if any, had any personal experience of controlling that power. They could buy the use of it with money, and ride in its great ships and famous expresses, but they did not dirty their hands with the controls. That was left to a separate, working-class élite of ships' engineers, engine-drivers and so forth, who retired into the middle-classes when their service was complete. But, with the coming of purchasable motor-cars, it became possible, and fashionable, for the opinion-forming classes to own and personally control units of motive power of up to sixty, or even a hundred horse-power. Although they brought over into this new situation certain horse-andgroom social usages, the psychological effect was a revolution that struck deep. Many of them were clearly aware that the men who made and serviced their cars were of an utterly different breed and mind to those who had bred and cared for their horses. Over and above this, the jump in speed from a spanking twenty-five miles an hour to the roaring sixties, with the magic century an ever approaching goal for the really rich and determined, brought in changes of experience that were qualitative, not merely quantitative-the dynamics of a fast-moving car are different in kind to the dynamics of even a race-horse. The Man Multiplied by the Motor, to use Marinetti's phrase, was a different kind of man to the horse-and-buggy men who had ruled the world since the time of Alexander the Great. Under these changed circumstances, that barrier of incomprehension that had stood between thinking men and their mechanised environment all through the nineteenth century, in the mind of Marx as much as in the mind of Morris, began to crumble. Men whose means of moving ideas from place to place had been revolutionised at their writing desks by the type- 1 John Davidson, Scots chemist and journalist, who died in 19o9, expressed the élite aspect of motoring more explicitly than any other writer of the time, and contrasted it with the mass experience of railway travel in a late poem entitled The Testament of Sir Simon Simplex concerning Automobilism, of which the following lines are typical: Class, mass and mob for fifty years and more Had all to travel in the jangling roar Of railways, the nomadic caravan That stifled individual mind in man, Till automobilism arose at last! And things that socialism supposed extinct, Degree, nobility and noble strife, A form, a style, a privacy in life Will re-appear; and, crowning nature's plan The individual and the gentleman In England reassume his lawful place.... Goodhart-Rendel, H: English Architecture since the Regency, London, 1953. writer and the telephone, could no longer treat the world of technology with hostility or indifference, and if there is a test that divides the men from the boys in say, 1912, it is their attitude to Ruskin. Men whose view of the aims of art and the function of design were as diverse as could be, nevertheless united in their hatred of ce déplorable Ruskin. The human chain of Pioneers of the Modern Movement that extends back from Gropius to William Morris, and beyond him to Ruskin, Pugin and William Blake, does not extend forward from Gropius. The precious vessel of handicraft aesthetics that had been passed from hand to hand, was dropped and broken, and no one has bothered to pick up the pieces. When Gropius, in the Bauhaus Proclamation of 1919, talked of handicrafts he was, effectively, talking to himself. His re-establishment as one of the leaders of Modern design after about 1923 was as the head of a school devoted to Machine Age architecture and the design of machine products, employing a Machine Age aesthetic that had been worked out by other men in other places. Naturally that Machine Age aesthetic was not an entirely new creation —the men who wrought it came to the First Machine Age bowed down with two-thousand years' culture on their backs, but the very minimum of the new mental equipment needed to handle their new environment. At one extreme, the Futurists proposed to dump their cultural load, and rush forward equipped only with a new sensibility; at the other extreme, men like Perret and Garnier in France felt that the new should be, in Paul Valéry's phrase, subject to the old, or at least the outlines of the old. Between Futurist dynamism and this Academic caution the theory and design of the architecture of the First Machine Age were evolved. Whether those theories, and that architecture were what we, looking back from the Second Machine Age, would regard as proper, or even adequate, to their situation, is a question which will be held over until the last chapter, after the events and theories of the period have been described. Nevertheless, while we yet lack a body of theory proper to our own Machine Age, we are still free-wheeling along with the ideas and aesthetics left over from the first. The reader may therefore, at any turn, find among these relics of a past as economically, socially, and technologically dead as the city-states of Greece, ideas that he is using every day of his life. Should he do so, may he ask himself two things; firstly, are any of his ideas as up-to-date as he thinks them to be, this is the Second Machine Age not the First; and secondly, how out-moded in truth are the ideas he dismisses as mere fashions of the Jazz Decades, for one Machine Age is more like another Machine Age than any other epoch the world has ever known. The cultural revolution that took place around 1912 has been superseded, but it has not been reversed. ## Section one This printing differs from earlier versions in the addition to the bibliographies of a few substantial works of scholarship that have come to my notice since the original text was completed. So far, their content does not seem to require any major revisions of the text, but the reader is enjoined to refer to any books listed in the bibliographies with dates later than 1957—most of them should be available in specialised architectural libraries—in order to bring himself up to date. Footnotes are given only for quotations from publications of subsidiary importance, and the main works are listed in a bibliography at the beginning of the section in which they are discussed. PREDISPOSING CAUSES: ACADEMIC AND RATIONALIST WRITERS, 1900-1914 Guadet, J: Éléments et Théories de l'Architecture, Paris, 1902. Blanc, C: Grammaire des Arts de Dessin, Paris, 1867. Ferran, A: Philosophie de la Composition Architecturale, Paris, 1955. Choisy, A: Histoire de l'Architecture, Paris, 1899. Morancé and Badovici: L'Euvre de Tony Garnier, Paris, 1938. Garnier, T: Une Cité Industrielle, Paris, 1918. Jamot, B: Auguste Perret et l'Architecture du Beton Armé, Brussels, 1927. Collins, P: Concrete—The Vision of a New Architecture, London, 1959. Lethaby, W. R: Form in Civilization, London, 1922. Architecture, London, 1911. Scott, G: The Architecture of Humanism, London, 1914. Lindner and Steinmetz: Die Ingenieurbauten und ihre Entwicklung, Leipzig, Muthesius, H: Stilarchitektur und Baukunst, Berlin, 1902. Pevsner, N: Pioneers of the Modern Movement, London, (ist edn.) 1936 (for a brief account of the Deutscher Werkbund). Loos, A: Trotzdem, Innsbruck, 1930 (for Ornament und Verbrechen, Architektur and excerpts from Andere Periodicals Die Form, VII, 1932 (for a fuller account of the beginnings of the Deutscher Werkbund, by Peter Bruckmann). Fahrbuch des Deutschen Werkbundes, 1912 and 1913 (for Muthesius's Wo stehen wir, Grosz's Probleme der Ornamente, essays by Muthesius, Gropius and others on factory design, etc.). ## 1: The academic tradition and the concept of elementary composition WHILE A sERIEs OF revolutionary gestures around 1910, largely connected with the Cubist and Futurist movements, were the main point of departure for the development of Modern architecture, there were also a number of particular predisposing causes that helped to guide the mainstream of development into the channels through which it flowed in the Twenties. These predisposing causes were all of nineteenth-century origin, and may be loosely grouped under three heads: firstly, the sense of an architect's responsibility to the society in which he finds himself, an idea of largely English extraction, from Pugin, Ruskin, and Morris, which was summed up in an organisation founded in 19o7, the Deutscher Werkbund: secondly, the Rationalist, or structural approach to architecture, again of English extraction, from Willis, but elaborated in France by Viollet-le-Duc, and codified in Auguste Choisy's magisterial Histoire at the very end of the century, though the parallel tradition in Germany has no major exponent after Gottfried Semper; and, thirdly, the tradition of academic instruction, world wide in distribution, but owing most of its energy and authority to the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris, from which there emerged, just after the turn of the century, Julien Guadet's compendious summary of his course of professorial lectures-though again no equivalent work appeared in Germany at that time. The attitude of those who were to become the masters of Modern architecture to these traditions from the past was apt to be equivocal. The Werkbund and its members were the object of suspicion in some quarters, though most of the younger architects accepted the moral imperatives bound up in it. The Rationalist attitude was held in high regard, yet effectively repudiated by most of them, and the academic tradition was generally vilified, yet many of the ideas it embodied were taken over by them. The last circumstance makes the evaluation of Guadet's contribution to modern theory difficult to assess. 'Those who rejected the academic discipline did so because they felt it to be hostile to their conception of architecture, which they held to be functional, scientific and divorced from stylistic considerations. Yet, on the evidence of his five volumes of Éléments et Théories de l'Architecture, Guadet—the very embodiment of the academy -was as functional, scientific and un-stylistic as they. Conversely, they in their turn, while repudiating the 'false standards of the academies', accepted many academic ideas without knowing where they had come from. Thus Gropius in 1923, having criticised the academies for not nurturing aesthetic science, goes on in the succeeding paragraphs to make use of a number of aesthetic concepts that resemble those of French academic origin.1 This state of affairs was, to some extent, the product of specialisation and compartmentation inside the academies themselves, and also of certain silences that were observed in academic teaching on subjects held to be too obvious or too sacred for discussion. On the first count, one must note that many of the academic ideas accepted by architects came not from the architectural side of Beaux-Arts instruction, but from the painterly. The Grammaire des Arts de Dessin, written by Charles Blanc, the librarian of the École des Beaux-Arts, and published in 1867, had become part of the racial sub-conscious, so to speak, of many tribes of creative artists in the Western world and its ideas can be paralleled (e.g. in Germany) even where they had no direct influence. Its emphasis on technical methods of expression (brushwork, colour, composition, etc.) as against subject-matter, in painting—128 pages of the former, only 19 of the latter-helped to pave the way for the rise of Abstract art. It may well have helped to pave the way for Guadet as well: Blanc's insistence on the ordonnance of a painting as its prime means of expression, was echoed over and over again by Guadet's insistence on the importance of composition in architecture. Again, Blanc's relative lack of interest in subject-matter, is matched in Guadet by a complete absence of interest in style. This is one of the conspicuous silences in the Éléments et Théories; the other concerns axial planning. Guadet's attitude to both subjects, both so crucial to academic teaching, seems to be a product of his own intimate and lifelong entanglement with that teaching system. He became Professor in 1886, after fiftytwo years of blameless academic respectability, suitably adorned with numerous firsts, medals and the Prix de Rome. His own master had been Henri Labrouste, the 'rogue' academician of the middle of the century, and through him Guadet was a link in an unbroken academic chain that went right back to the early days of the nineteenth century, and to the heyday of neo-Classical architecture in France. So truly did the tradition run through him, that his own insistence on composition, the assembly of a building from its component volumes, is only an echo of J. N. L. Durand saying, in 1821² Any complete building whatever is not, and cannot be, anything but the result of the assembly and putting together (composition) of a greater or number of parts. But the specific mode of putting the parts together is something that Guadet barely discusses—it occupies one chapter out of eight in the second book of the first of the five volumes of Éléments et Théories, is not very informative and is completely swamped by the mass of practical information contained in the other four volumes. The fact was, simply, that the symmetrical disposition of the parts of a building about one or more axes was so unquestionably the master-discipline of academic architecture that there was no need for him to discuss it, any more than he would need to discuss the clothing of the building's forms in one or another of a number of recognised 'catalogued styles' (as Lethaby was to call them). The details of those styles could be had from a good crib-book, such as Normand's Parallèle, the axial discipline would be part of the air a student breathed, and Guadet's business as Professor was to handle the information that could not be acquired from these two sources. It was not until the idea of axial composition had ceased to be unquestionable, that any justification or explanation of it appeared in print-Albert Ferran's Philosophie de la Composition Architecturale, published as late as 1955, but cast entirely in the frame of mind of the first decade of the century, when Ferran was among Guadet's last pupils, and largely illustrated with Rome Prize projects of that epoch. The resultant state is a curious one: here was the man who was the master of Auguste Perret and Tony Garnier, the twin progenitors of the Modern Movement in France, whose book formed the mental climate in which perhaps half the architects of the twentieth century grew up, and provides valuable clues to the atmosphere in which the other, German, half matured, and yet contained neither of the main themes—axial planning and historical styling—of the mental discipline that produced it. The direct influence of the book has, in fact, always been slight. Bulky, sumptuous, expensive and largely unreadable, its place has been the shelves of reference libraries, rather than in the students' lodgings. But it has been much consulted for information, if rarely read for instruction. Guadet himself saw his position thus I do not aspire to role of a guide for the whole journey; to those who leave after me I indicate the luggage wanted on the voyage and the bulk of its five thick volumes is taken up with luggage wanted on the voyage, by a student at the École—instruments and techniques of draughtsmanship, systems of proportion, walls and their openings; porticoes, bays and orders; roofs, vaults, ceilings and stairs: type plans and schedules of accommodation for all conceivable sorts of public and semi-public buildings, down to such matters as the provision of toilet facilities for infant schools. In sum, five volumes of pre-digested wisdom on functional matters, all second-hand, much of it out of date, all of it vital to success wherever the Beaux-Arts system flourished—hence its continuing influence deep into the century, and hence, too, the various attempts to write 'a new Guadet', culminating in Talbot Hamlin's Forms and Functions of Twentieth-Century Architecture. Nevertheless, between the lines of this mass of information, and in annexed texts, such as the introduction, and the reprint of his inaugural lecture of 1894, a certain amount of Guadet's theory emerges, and some of it deserves comment, either for its intrinsic interest or for the echoes of it that can be heard later in the century. For a start, his attitude to the past is not altogether what one might expect from an academician. It is from the masters and monuments of former periods that he prefers to draw his examples, but he recognises the emergence of new building types and functions in the lifetime of his own contemporaries, and concedes that ## Là, il faudra bien que je fasse des emprunts aux vivants. This may be only prudent, but one notes elsewhere a tendency to be scornful of pure archaeology in the choice of style. In Munich they imagine utilitarian Parthenons; in London, in response to the entirely modern needs of clubs, you meet such old friends as the Palazzo Farnese, the Procuratie .. . down to the very mouldings for greater servility of imitation. Against this, he sets the example of the innovators of the generation of his master, Labrouste. Fortunately, certain proud artists-our masters-saw, and made us see, that freedom is not simply the right to change one's uniform, and our art has gradually freed itself from such archaeology. Not everything was a success, but all efforts in this direction bore fruit, and today we know and proclaim that our art has a right to liberty, that only liberty guarantees its life and fecundity; in a word, its health. ... If I insist on these considerations it is not, indeed, to wipe the slate clean of all that went before; on the contrary our art, like our language, like our whole civilisation, is-and must be-the rich inheritor of an estate that has accumulated over the centuries. But I hate artistic proscriptions, like all proscriptions, and artistic exclusiveness like all exclusiveness, and I aim to make you understand the sense, broad and severe, in which I understand that word 'Classic' that I set at the head of these studies. Leaving aside the libertarian sentiment of the last sentence for the moment, we see here an abstract and ambivalent attitude to history—to be understood, not imitated, its lessons embodied less in the actual monuments of former time than in the principles that can be abstracted from them. This last idea will be seen to be of peculiar importance in evaluating Guadet's understanding of ce mot de classique. ## This attitude to history was regarded by Guadet as 'scientific' The architect today is, or should be, a most manifold man: a man of science in all matters touching construction and its applications, a man of science also in his profound knowledge of the whole heritage of architecture and this clearly implies a different meaning of the word science to that which was current even among the generation of his own pupils. He means science in the generalised sense in which Leonardo de Vinci understood science, as erudition plus logical method (Paul Valéry's Introduction à la Méthode de Leonardo da Vinci came out only five years before Guadet's book was published, and it is probably no coincidence that Leonardo is Ferran's most quoted authority) not as most twentieth-century writers understand it, as a mental discipline based on experimental research. If anything, Guadet was hostile to exact physical studies as a basis of design He must be shown what can be built; later he will see by what means he can secure its construction, that is, the realisation of a thing he must already have yet he certainly regarded his own teaching methods as scientific, and at one point draws an energetic parallel between the ateliers of the École and the laboratories of a scientific institute. The confusion that he introduced here was widespread in later years, though the blame is not always to be laid upon his influence. Much of the academic aesthetics of Blanc and his followers, which was scientific in the older and more generalised sense, acquired the prestige accruing to science in the newer and more specialised sense, in spite of the inconclusive result of Charles Henry's attempts in the Nineties to render them scientific in the experimental sense as well.³ The statement of Ozenfant and Jeanneret that ## l'art et la science dépendent du nombre suggests that they too, while claiming for their theories the prestige of the advanced science of the twentieth-century, are still thinking of science in terms of its condition before it became 'the experimental philosophy'. This confusion over the meaning of 'scientific' has been paralleled by an equal confusion between the two possible meanings of 'objective', and the aesthetics of Abstract art, largely derived from Charles Blanc, which are capable of being rendered objective in the sense of logically impeccable, have been regarded as also objective in the sense of substantiated by experiment, which they have not been so far. The connection with Abstract art needs to be made at this point, because Guadet has occasionally been represented as favouring an Abstract architecture. Colin Rowe, for instance, has proposed that he 'envisaged an architecture of pure form',s but the illustrations in Éléments et Théories, the work done at the Ecole under his professorship, and the few buildings to emerge from his office do not substantiate this idea. It would be truer to say that he facilitated the emergence of an architecture of pure form in much the same way that Blanc facilitated the emergence of Abstract art. Blanc pays little attention to subject-matter, Guadet even less to stylistic details, but this does not imply that either envisaged doing without them. Guadet regards style as something outside the competence of his course, open to the choice and temperament of the individual designer and the examples in his book are drawn from all styles and periods; he is a sort of negative eclectic, and—as was pointed out above—his attitude is libertarian, he hated proscriptions and exclusivism. The key point in his avoidance of the stylistic problem is the large et sévère sense in which he understands the word classique. It is something like the 'unhistorical Classicism' later proposed by Oud,\* or the diagrammatic Classicism of Labrouste and, even more, the masters like Ledoux and Durand in whose work the roots of the Beaux-Arts tradition were struck. It is like the sense of Greek intended by Alois Hirt, also in the early years of the nineteenth century when he said ## Whoever constructs correctly, builds even as the Greeks —that is, rational and straightforward, a sense that comes back many times in Le Corbusier's comparisons of machinery with Greek architec- Thus, on at least three topics current in the Twenties, the meaning of history, the status of science, and the status of the Classical tradition, we find Guadet anticipating widely held opinions, though it would be risky to propose any influence or historical connection. On one topic, however, and that of the greatest importance, an historical connection can certainly be proposed: his conception of the actual process of designing buildings. If his views on style were too negative to reach the printed page, his views on symmetrical composition were too positive to do so. It was under his professorship that the Beaux-Arts training became almost completely focused on the elaboration of multi-axially symmetrical plan patterns of abstract, but unfunctional elegance. Elevational design became so secondary that Ferran, for instance, feels no need to illustrate anything but the plans and leaves the reader to infer the elevations from the columniation, etc. shown on them; and where Ferran expresses a preference between one plan and another—preferences which seem always to follow those of the Rome Prize jury—t s always for schemes that are symmetrical about more But this hammering of axiality is not found in Éléments et Théories indeed, Guadet mocks absolute axial symmetry as 'du non-sens'; what he does emphasise is the manner of fitting the parts of the building into the axial plan This course has for object the study of the composition of buildings in their elements and their totality, from the double viewpoint of adapting them to defined programmes and to material necessities and he expands this viewpoint on more than one occasion To compose is to raake use of what is known (ce qu'on sait). Composition has materials, just as construction has, and these materials are, precisely, the Elements of Architecture ## and again Nothing, to be sure, is more engaging than composition, nothing more seductive. It is the true realm of the artist with no limits or frontiers but the impossible. What is it, to compose? It is to put together, weld, unite, the parts of a whole. These parts, in their turn, are the Elements of Composition, and just as you will realise your conceptions with walls, openings, vaults, roofs-all elements of architecture—you will establish your composition with rooms, vestibules, exits and staircases. These are the Elements of Composition. These elements are ce qu'on sait, the utilitarian information that makes up the contents of the last three volumes of Éléments et Théories; composition is the manner of putting them together, and the two concepts make up a design philosophy that was common to Academics and Moderns alike. The approach is particulate; small structural and functional members (elements of architecture) are assembled to make functional volumes, and these (elements of composition) are assembled to make whole buildings. To do this is to compose in the literal and derivational sense of the word, to put together. But it is not the only way of designing buildings, or the only way of creating great architecture. To take an example that will be discussed in a later chapter, Mies van der Rohe's flats at Weissenhof were designed by subdividing a bulk volume to create functional spaces out of it. Although there have been a number of later buildings conceived in this mode, by Mies himself, by office-block designers like Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, and by engineers like Buckminster Fuller, examples of this approach were rare in the period covered by the present study, and it may be taken as a general characteristic of the progressive architecture of the early twentieth century that it was conceived in terms of a separate and defined volume for each separate and defined function, and composed in such a way that this separation and definition was made plain. In view of the dependence of Guadet's theory of elementary composition on neo-Classical writers like Durand, it should come as no surprise to find that this clear separation of the parts of buildings has been identified as a characteristic of neo-Classical architecture in general—by Kaufmann, who also drew attention to its reappearance in twentieth-century architecture\* —and even of its earliest phase-by Wittkower, who drew attention to the distinction of the parts in Lord Burlington's designs." The theory seems to have survived throughout the nineteenth century, the practice was somewhat submerged except where unstylistic aesthetic practices, such as those of the Picturesque flourished, and the re-emergence of this piece-by-piece mode of design may well have been due to the impact of the picturesque 'English Free Architecture' on an established neo-Classical tradition, as in Germany, where it cannot be due to the impact of Guadet direct. Thus, while it comes as little surprise to find Le Corbusier, a pupil of Perret, persistently using elementary composition, and even paying direct tribute to Guadet by captioning an alternative version of his League of Nations design:10 Here.. . an alternative proposal, employing the same elements of composition. the presence of Gropius among the architects of this persuasion must be due, presumably and in part, to the impact of Muthesius's enthusiasm for English free planning on the Schinkelschuler tradition of neo-Classicism. Yet it is worth noting that while two of Gropius's most famous and most original designs, the Fagus factory of 1911-13 and the Bauhaus at Dessau, of 1925-6, both compose their elements in a free manner, the equally famous Werkbund Pavilion at the Cologne exhibition of 1914 composes its disparately conceived elements according to purely Beaux-Arts rules of symmetrical composition, complete even with secondary and tertiary axes, such as were discussed later, and quite independently in Ferran's book However, mention of the Bauhaus raises the question of another theory of elementary composition, which may have influenced Gropius in its design. This was propagated by the Elementarist Movement, and took the form of supposing pictures, sculptures, etc. to be composed of certain fundamental geometrical elements." This movement drew its inspiration from Dutch and Russian Abstract art, and thus owes something to the theories of Charles Blanc. It chimed in well with ideas that came from the architectural side of academic thought and were current at the time, but its