tendency was to focus attention on what Guadet would have called elements of architecture, not of composition; that is, on structural components, and it is in this sense that the word 'element' has passed into the common vocabulary of the mainstream of development. # 2: Choisy: rationalism and technique IF GUADET's MAIN thesis is almost lost beneath a flood of miscellaneous information, Choisy's, to which information is everywhere subservient, is always in view, even if it continually opens side issues or casts light on other matters. His book¹ is history, but it is history with a single theme—Form as the logical consequence of Technique—that makes the art of architecture always and everywhere the same With every people, the art will undergo the same choices, obey the same laws; prehistoric art seems to contain all the others in embryo. For Guadet, composition was the perennial theme, for Choisy it was construction. The difference is one of background and work, not of generation, for they were men of almost the same age, Guadet, born 1834 died in 1908, Choisy, just seven years younger, died in 19og. There was a difference of temperament also; Guadet was, apparently, very much the Grand Professeur, and in his later years almost as diffuse in personality as in his writings, but Though short in stature, M. Choisy, was a man of very fine presence, with something military about his personalitya and photographs taken of him at the time he received the RIBA Gold Medal, 19o4, show a rather hard-faced, business-like man in the sort of square-rigged jacket affected by sea captains and constructional engineers. An engineer by training, he took a down-to-earth, practical-minded view of architecture which remained for him, as for Henri Labrouste, L'Art de Bátir. For him, the essence of good architecture, was always construction, the business of the good architect was always this: to make a correct appraisal of the problem before him, after which the form of the building would follow logically from the technical means at his disposal Style does not change according to the caprice of more or less arbitrary fashion, its variations are nothing but those of processes . . . and the logic of methods implies the chronology of styles. in which, of course he was not alone, Semperian Rationalists having taken a similar view in Germany, and Gothicising Rationalists in England as well. Thomas Graham Jackson, for instance, saw the matter in a less absolute light, but in very similar terms.a To clamour with some people for a new style as if it could be had for the asking, to parade your Art Nouveau .. . is to ignore the whole teaching of histo Not so did the great styles of the past come into being. .. . It was in the suggestions of construction that the architect of the great artistic ages found his truest inspiration. But, in terms of influence, Choisy had certain advantages over other Rationalist theorists—historical, technical and literary advantages. The historical advantage lay in his book appearing, in 1899, just as Art Nouveau was about to go into its decline. T. G. Jackson's objections came when it was already past its peak, but those who read Choisy early would see his view of the origins of style being proven before their eyes over the next decade. Art Nouveau, widely regarded by then as a caprice de mode was visibly proving deciduous, a distaste for the arbitrary among the younger generation was hardening into an admiration for the logical, and Choisy's obituary on late Gothic must have sounded to them like a rappel à l'ordre applicable to their own situation. Complexity had reached its peak, a return to simple forms was the only way to rejuvenate the art. Choisy's technical advantages lay in the appearance of his book and its illustrations. The Histoire de l'Architecture is packed into two substantial, but not bulky volumes; it is not too big to take home. The text is set out in shortish paragraphs, each of which makes—normally—only one particular point, so that reference is easily made, and on almost every page there is at least one of his remarkable illustrations. Nothing could so well reinforce the idea of the continuity of architectural practice than the complete homogeneity of style of these 1,7oo illustrations, all drawn by his own hand according to an almost invariable formula. The deviations from that formula are not numerous-an occasional perspective, pure elevation or plan-but, more important, they are not memorable. The formula is: isometric in its setting out, it presents plan, section and elevation in a single image, detailing is suppressed and one is left with an elegant and immediately comprehensible diagram. There is no attempt at artistic effect in them, they are the careful and learnedly drawn representations of fact. So convincing were they at the time that even the obituarist of The Builder, who is elsewhere critical of Choisy's methods, failed to observe that they are pure abstractions, and don't deal with such facts as what the building looks like to an observer inside it or in front of it. Nevertheless, it was almost certainly this quality of abstraction, of a logical construct rather than the accidents of appearance, the elegant pattern of black and white on the page, that endeared these illustrations to the generation born in the Eighteen-eighties, the generation which, outside architecture though never out of touch with it, also perfected Abstract art. Le Corbusier, at least, took these illustrations for his own, and used many of them in L'Esprit Nouveau, through which agency they gained a fresh and wider circulation. His literary advantage lies in the style of writing that goes with the short paragraphs that have been discussed already. His overall argument is often too diffuse to be read consecutively, but individual paragraphs, crisp and aphoristic in manner, stick in the mind by virtue of their balanced concision and eminent reasonableness. Thus, of Doric pediments he says The pitch of the gable is that of the roof, which is governed by this double condition, that the rain should run off, and the tiles should not. a tidy and reasonable explanation, even if it lacks any documentary or factual evidence to support it, and rendered convincing by its very reasonableness. As the obituarist in The Builder observed . . . if he was too prone to treat as proved that which he had only succeeded in representing as probable, many of his probabilities as to ancient construction impress themselves on the reader, in his brilliant demonstrations, as at all events more likely to be the true solution than any others that could be offered. These pithy propositions, which so often appeared to his readers to have tidied up some problem, explained some mystery in a definitive manner, are without doubt, largely responsible for the durability of his reputation. Memorable and quotable, they gave a clear and logical orientation to minds seeking guidance on detail points, as well as guiding principles, and in some cases even furnished the phraseology and form of words for later discussions. At times this too takes on a tinge of seeming-prophecy, and one wonders if Le Corbusier's willingness to be included among the founders of the review L'Esprit Nouveau may not have been conditioned by a mental echo of We have perceived as a sign of the new spirit (l'esprit nouveau) the search for truth, the independence, of a rejuvenated art that breaks with conventional Choisy was, in fact, discussing the new spirit of emergent Gothic architecture, but nothing could better describe the aims (if not the performance) of L'Esprit Nouveau during the five and a half years of its existence than this association of a search for truth with a rejuvenated art that broke with conventional types of architecture. Underlying the memorability of his writing—or perhaps partly caused by it—was Choisy's success in imposing his mental processes on his readers. When they were stuck with some problem, they went back to his favoured method of correct appraisal from which the answer logically derives. ## La question posée, la solution était indiquée. They tended, more often than not, to phrase the question in his terms, and thus—almost inevitably-were practically incapable of coming out with any answers but his. He put in circulation a whole coinage of questions and answers that remained current until devalued, much later, not by the experience of his followers, but by a different kind of architectural history, that of scholars like Worringer and Sedlmayr, or—in France itself— Focillon. That devaluation did not even begin to affect the theoretical approach of architects themselves until well after the period covered by the present study, and Choisy's coinage, embodying major architectural values as well as the small change of discussion, needs to be examined in some detail. Bearing in mind the basic concept of architectural form as the logical consequence of technique, it should be noted that for Choisy technique, méthode, procédé and outillage, are aspects of society as a whole, the complete range of mechanisms and relationships that are put in motion in the erection of a building. Buildings classify themselves as witnesses fixing the way of life and the moral condition of humanity, age by age. This applies, equally, in his eyes to smaller units within the larger social frame. On Gothic cathedral planning he notes that these civic churches had to serve a dual purpose .. . to serve both for meetings of the people and for sacred ritual. Hence their mixed character as buildings at once municipal and religious. Sometimes the civic influence prevailed, sometimes the ecclesiastical, and their alternations explain and sum up the history of successive types of plan and even smaller units within the church had their traceable influence in his eyes, for on conventual planning he observes ... from one group to another the character differs according to the very spirit of the Rule. 'According to the very spirit of the Rule' is a very vague and generalised sort of causation, but there are times when Choisy seems to envisage nothing more definite than a kind of abstract necessity as a determining factor. L'arc-boutant (the flying buttress) . . . ne fut point inventé, il s'imposa. and he backs this up later with It is in the nature of Gothic, as with all discoveries, that we can rarely manage to name the true inventor without dispute; the seeds incubate in obscurity, and suddenly we witness various hatchings that imply only the logic of facts. Such a position, of constructional fatalism, is probably inevitable in one who adopts a strictly determinist view of architectural history, and it brings out the difference between a Rationalist like Choisy, under the older historiographic dispensation, and a merely reasonable man, under a different historical discipline, who would tend to suppose that an inability to name names derives from an absence of the necessary documentation. At all events, it is an approach that depreciates personal effort, and tended to leave his followers standing about waiting for a new structural principle like the flying buttress, to impose itself. However, such an attitude was understandably welcome in a period of revulsion against Art Nouveau and its supposed excesses of personal wilfulness. However, since Choisy was not specifically arguing against Art Nouveau, but speaking in more general terms, the drift of his remarks sometimes appears to favour some aspects of Art Nouveau practice. Thus the concept of the all-round designer receives implied support when he speaks admiringly of Renaissance architects who ... possessed an universality of talent; all matters touching form were their domain .. . the superiority of the Renaissance lies in not having arts independent of one another, but a single art in which all expressions of the beautiful were fused. Ideas like these helped to prepare French architects, who did not have the backing of Germany's kind of Arts and Crafts Movement, for post-War forays into the neighbouring arts of painting and product design, circulated the concept of a single overriding art of design embracing all others, and began to give currency to the word form as part of the terminology of design theory—a word closely associated with later developments in the field of industrial design. In that context, form is generally regarded as having laws of its own; laws of harmony, proportion and so forth. But on these laws Choisy is ambiguous. He notes the use of systematic proportion, for instance, wherever he finds evidence of it, but rarely accords it great importance The Egyptians did not accept that the effect of a monument resides entirely in the abstract harmony of its lines and although he records the use of tracés regulateurs in the Middle Ages and Renaissance, to advance him as a justification for their use, as Le Corbusier seems to wish to do on occasion, is to misrepresent him. In fact, his best-known remarks on geometrical tracés appear in a gloss on Serlio that seems to be intended only as an ironic comment on regulating lines as an intellectual exercise We take from Serlio . . . the proportional setting out of a door in a panel of width m', n'.. . (construction C). In reality, construction C, results in giving the door a width equal to one third of m'n' and a height equal to twice the width, but the graphical method that leads to this result is interesting in itself and contains a whole method. but one does not feel that Choisy really considers this method worth the trouble, if the same result could have been attained by simple measure- However, as a Rationalist, he naturally inclined toward the orderly and the logical, and some sort of system in dimensioning and proportion receives his implied approval from his use of faintly derogatory language ce vague sentiment de l'harmonie qu'on nomme le goût to describe the alternative; personal taste. In any case it seems likely that what interests him is not the pure harmony of proportions, but the use of dimensional modules implying a sense of scale, deriving from the multiplication of a standard structural component. Modular proportions: we have observed that they result, as an inevitable consequence, from the use of brick Classical art had only an abstract harmony based on proportion alone; but, as Lassus observed, it is to the Middle Ages that the art of emphasising the dimensions belongs, and the principle of scale. This principle of scale seems to subsist, in Choisy's view of the Middle Ages, in two things. Firstly, dimensioning by the size of a man, rather than increasing door-heights, etc. as the building became larger Man does not change dimensions according to the importance of the monument. and secondly, as a consequence of Romanesque and Gothic stone-laying methods, course by course, which, he claims, led to the necessity of making all vertical dimensions into multiples of the course-heights, so that capitals and friezes, door-jambs and column shafts, all answered to the same module. Arguable as this last observation may be, the importance of the idea of building to a human scale, advanced in this influential context, is not to be overlooked. The Gothic masons who practised this technique were the heroes of his second volume, the heroes of the first had been the builders of the Doric temples. In the words of de Dartien's Compte Rendu and he continues to justify Choisy in this distribution of emphasis. And it is just that it be so, for these two architectures, so absolutely different in spirit, stand in the front rank of all the styles by the high value of the qualities they hold in common—clarity of methods, sincerity of expression, spontaneity, delicacy and intensity of artistic feeling. Choisy's views on these two preferred styles are of the greatest interest, and were of great seminal power, but before passing on to them there is an oddity of his History (an oddity that he shared with other Rationalists) that affects his view of the place of Doric in Greek technical culture, and is best dealt with first. This oddity, which was a certain fascination with the use of the forms and methods of one material in connection with another, has an interest of its own, in any case, as will be seen later. Such a procedure ought, presumably, to be anathema to a Rationalist, but Choisy seems to have no overriding objections to it. Inevitably, almost, he compares Doric to wooden structure, as generations of neo-Classicists had done, but in a way that seems to invert the normal implications of this comparison. Doric for him owes nothing to carpentry, which he believes to be a borrowing from shipbuilding technique, and .. . the difference from our system of carpentry is radical; Greek woodwork . . . is a piling up pure and simple, a veritable masonry of wood. The Doric order was to be the application of this mode of building to stone. so that, if anything, pre-Doric was a wooden architecture imitating the, as yet, undiscovered modes of stone construction. However, Choisy finds the Classic type of reversal in Indian architecture. The stone is put to work in the manner of wood, with all the jointing techniques that suit wood . . . a carpentry of stone. This was for the past, of course, but for the materials of his own time, notably iron, Choisy believed that appropriate forms and methods had already been evolved. At the Halles de Paris we can see realised a whole body of forms that arise naturally from the material employed. But not all Rationalists were quite so sure as this, and Thomas Graham Jackson in his Royal Academy lectures of 1go6, after demanding that iron should not be used after the manner of brick and stone, nevertheless continues It has often struck me that the half-timber work of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries contains many suggestions for this new way of construction. In the This Compte Rendu adopts throughout an extremely eulogistic tone, and appeared immediately upon the publication of the Histoire. It has the air of being either a piece of 'inspired' puffing (which a work by Choisy could hardly have needed by that date) or of interested flattery. It may yet, however, be read with profit as an 'official' Rationalist evaluation of the master's work. first place it is a trabeated style in the literal sense of the word, a style of posts and beams.... And iron construction is very like carpentry. It too is a system of trabeation, of posts and beams, ties and braces; it has the tensile strength and rigidity of timber to a superior degree, and hangs together by its joints, cleats and bolts, much as carpentry by its tenons and mortices. This transposition of forms and methods must appear a muddle to later readers, but the greatest muddle—a very productive and influential muddle-was Auguste Perret's transposition of wood-framing techniques on to reinforced construction, a procedure which he, apparently, held to be warranted by Choisy. Right or wrong, however, this act of transposition served an important purpose in bringing a new material within the accepted body of formal procedures in building design, and by endowing it with a rectangular aesthetic of posts and lintels, made it accessible to integration with the rectangular aesthetics of Abstract art that appeared after 1918, and thus, in a very real sense, determined the appearance of the new architecture. But Perret's structural methods owe a further debt than this to Choisy, and to his views on Gothic structure in particular. Gothic, as has been said above, was one of Choisy's two preferred styles, because it constitutes in his eyes, the culmination of logical method in structure. Comes the Gothic period .. . the new structure is the triumph of logic in art; the building becomes an organised being whose every part constitutes a living member, its form governed not by traditional models, but by its function, and only its function. This is Choisy's view of Gothic, but, as so often happens with him, it sounds in retrospect like a directive to his successors. Logic, analysis, function, economy, performance Everywhere, in the detailing of the forms, we have recognised the spirit of analysis that governs the economy of the whole work .. . in effect, a construction where stone works to the limit of its resistance. and the consequence of this was, as in later Modern-Movement theory, that the appearance of the building was supposed to some extent to be fixed thereby By the very fact that the stone works to its maximum effort, the absolute size is in no way arbitrary; and the eye, most sure of mathematical instruments, at once establishes the scale, which calculations may figure out in due course. This paragraph brings forward a number of important ideas that were to enjoy further currency. The idea of an unavoidable mathematical relationship of the parts of a building, on an absolute, not a relative scale, which clearly ties in with the idea of modular dimensioning discussed above, and the idea of the eye as an accurate judge of measurement, an idea that played a vital part in the so-called objective aesthetics of post-War Abstract art. Reason in Architecture, p. 167. See chapter 3. Choisy's whole view of Gothic structure is clearly coloured by his early readings in Willis and Viollet-le-Duc, and it was a view of Gothic that one of his own supposed followers, Pol Abraham, was to call seriously in question by demonstrating the considerable redundancies and large margins of safety of all those Gothic structures that have managed to survive.' Abraham also did much to discredit Viollet-le-Duc's theory that Gothic vaulting was a light panelled structure carried on a framework of ribs, an idea that was also used by Choisy, and extended by him to wall-structures of the period as well. The Gothic vault is nothing but a ridged vault where the panels are independent and supported by the rib-work . . . and the wall is nothing but an infill. Frame and fill, the posts that bear the load, and the screen panels that do not—these concepts seem to have been current wherever the Willis/le-Duc view of Gothic had encountered nineteenth-century iron construction —for what was dubiously true of the Sainte Chapelle, was abundantly so for the Galérie des Machines, where the arches were grounded on rollers, and the glass infill of the roof was carried by a system of riblets that span the spaces between the main trusses—a contemporary reworking in iron and glass of Viollet-le-Duc's vision of Gothic as a form of elastic, selfcompensating structure. But most important from our point of view is the fact that Auguste Perret took over from Choisy the idea of a load-bearing frame with lightweight infilling, and from there forward, the concept of the separation of support and cladding became one of the most discussed, if least practised ideas of the Modern Movement. The mood of Gothic, as Choisy saw it, was progressive, forward looking and enabled its practitioners to tackle .. the most daunting problems with the zest of that spirit of progress and reform that animated society as a whole. and again the use of the historic present (anime) must have struck his younger readers as a call to themselves. It would also be a call to model themselves on the Greeks for Ancient Greece and our Middle Ages meet in this faith in progress. The Greece he has in mind is the Greece of the Periclean Empire, Doric not Hellenistic, and in writing of Doric architecture he is at his very best -better even than on Gothic, on which he has, in fact, one slight reservation; the buttresses cannot be seen from within the main vessel of the ## building and this causes him inquietude ## ... at first sight one does not understand its stability but he has no such qualms about Doric. But in his discussion of this other preferred style of his, he brings into juxtaposition two ideas very rarely found together in works of theory-pure form and picturesque composition—though of course they had existed together in neo-Classical practice, in Nash and Schinkel particularly. The way in which he arrives at this position is as interesting as the juxtaposition was to be productive. Doric, for him, is a reformist style, a revolution against the applied decoration of previous ages .. the Mycenacan age only thought of decoration as an applied and outward show but this was not good enough for Choisy's Greeks They would need a more masculine accent," a firmer expression; they placed their ideal in an architecture that scorned the easy seductions of ornament, an architecture that aimed, above all, at a severe beauty of line ... new types, more abstract and more simple and it was the revival of these qualities that Choisy found admirable in Renaissance architecture. What architecture had just regained was the sense of classic beauty in its highest and most abstract purity. But this style, praiseworthy for its abstract purity of undecorated form (triglyph and metope were not decoration to him) is set firmly by Choisy in the context of picturesque grouping. And picturesque is to be understood in its strict sense, not the eroded picture-postcard sense. It is to be understood from a succession of pictures (tableaux) seen by the visitor approaching the Parthenon, and as a deliberate, not an accidental, mode of procedure. He compares the plans of the Acropolis before and after the fire had razed most of its buildings and comments that though the earlier plan was the result of an accumulation of accidents . .. the other is methodically conceived according to an overall view and adapted to a site that had been cleared by the fire, and in this new Acropolis the apparent asymmetries are only a means of giving a picturesque aspect to the most cunningly balanced group of architecture there ever was. This is putting a very high value on picturesque composition, and makes a striking contrast to Beaux-Arts practice with its routines of major and minor axes. He identifies the components of the picturesque method with complete accuracy: the respect for site. The Greeks never visualised a building without the site that framed it and the other buildings that surrounded it... siting it as nature would have done profiting by given factors Architecture bent itself to these subjections, and turned them to account balancing of masses Each architectural motif, on its own, is symmetrical, but every group is treated like a landscape where the masses alone balance out as seen by the eye of a walking viewer at ground level The method of balancing will emerge from a study of the successive pictures that the Acropolis of the fifth century presented to the visitor. And not only is the picturesque good enough for the Greeks, it is also nature's way. So proceeds Nature .. . symmetry reigns in each part, but the whole is subject only to those laws of equilibriurn for which the word 'balance' is at once the physical expression and the mental image. To Choisy as a practical man, this ad hoc and natural mode of composition would obviously appeal, but nevertheless the association of Greek Doric, an ultimate term in architectural discipline and regularity, with asymmetrical composition remains a remarkable achievement in the context of French late nineteenth-century design. T'he message did not go by default, and though the asymmetries of post-War building were to have a more complicated aesthetic basis than this, Choisy's illustrations turn up, and his arguments too, in support of Le Corbusier's anti-axial views on planning. All the same it may be doubted if Choisy realised that he was putting a mine under accepted planning methods for a younger generation to explode. His last words on Greece are conventional. Greek art... seems to be a disinterested cult offered to the idea of harmony and abstract beauty. Choisy, indeed, has his soft passages, when he falls short of his best form. His logical and teleological view of architectural development makes little allowance for such random factors as the exercise of the human will, with the result that his attitude to the Renaissance is muddled and self-contradictory, largely because he failed to take into account the full range of social determinants. Similarly his study of the nineteenth century is unsatisfactory because he failed to take into account the full range of technical determinants. He seems not to have observed that, at the time that the book was writing, both equipment and materials were in revolution, and that-by his own standards even--architecture ought to be in revolution as well. But he stops with Labrouste's Bibliothéque Nationale observing that it was a début that contained plus que des promesses, and remains silent about the last third of the century. In the meantime outillage was being revolutionised by electricity and the internal combustion engine, construction by steel and reinforced concrete. Yet he could say of Gothic building tackle We recognise there our present engines, near enough, the crane, the capstan, all our machinery, which itself is nothing but the machinery of antiquity. However great his contributions to the mental equipment of the Modern Movement, his failure to appreciate the emergence of its mechanical equipment meant that he could contribute nothing final to it. But something like final contributions were to come from his own direct successors, Auguste Perret and Tony Garnier. ## 3: The academic succession: Garnier and Perret ouTsIDE THE contribution of engineers like Freyssinet, France gave to the developing practice of a new architecture before 1914, only the work of two members of the academic succession to Guadet: both Auguste Perret (1874-1954) and Tony Garnier (1869-1948) had been his pupils and imbibed both the progressive and the negative aspects of his teaching. Both also owe something to Choisy, but the debt is slighter in the case of Garnier, whose career was academically respectable, much greater in the case of Perret, who did not stay the course. But whatever the debt to Choisy, the prime one in their mode of designing buildings—composing, that is—is to Guadet, whose course they heard, whose influence they underwent in the Nineties, when he was in his prime as a professor. Garnier bore off the Rome Prize in 1899 (two years after Perret had left) with a design that is still cited (by Ferran)1 as a model of composition and, indeed, represents the Beaux-Arts ideal at its most abstract and most elegant. It is a design for the central office of a State Banking House, with its main work-spaces distributed peripherally around an enormous covered court in the centre of which, but occupying barely a tenth of its area, is the main banking room. The scale is grandiose, the space given to monumental circulation, entrance facilities, etc. is utterly disproportionate—yet this scheme was preferred by the Prize jury to others with far more efficient circulations, far greater functional sense, One can understand how a generation rendered suspicious of the arbitrary by Choisy's teaching would be in revolt against such design principles as these, and against the juries that enforced them. But to suppose that Garnier made his design with his tongue in his cheek, as was apparently supposed by students in Paris after 1918,² jealous of his reputation as a father of Modern architecture, seems not to be borne out by the evidence. Had he done so, it is unlikely that so astute an academic critic as Ferran would be taken in by his design fifty years later, and the evidence rather points to the probability that he turned to his Cité Industrielle project in revulsion against ideas he had previously held with some sincerity. To occupy one's time with such a scheme while a pensionnaire at the Villa Medici was an unprecedented and, indeed, revolutionary course of action, but there is evidence that he also occupied some part of his time with more conventional academic exercises.ª However, he seems to have been in an unacademic and troubled frame of mind while he was there, for one of his few recorded statements on architecture, written in i9oo, reads Since all architecture rests on false principles, the architecture of antiquity was an error. TRUTH ALONE IS BEAUTIFUL. In architecture truth is product of the calculations made to satisfy known needs with There is an echo here of Guadet's 'Composer, c’est faire l’emploi de ce qu’on sait', but the use of calculs sounds more like Choisy, whose book was new in men's minds, though the sentiment goes far beyond anything in it. But this seems to signal fairly accurately the frame of mind in which an architect might turn from the unreality of a Rome Prize programme, to the verité of an industrial town. That verité, however, was by no means utterly removed from Beaux-Arts connotations. Unlike Sant'Elia's Città Nuova fragments of 1913-14,º Garnier's project is not concerned with the problems of any actual town or city.º La Cité Industrielle stands upon an imaginary site-an ideal site, in fact, for a more-than-convenient flat-topped ridge lifts the residential area clear above the industrial zone. 'The zones, too, though they are of the sort generally envisaged by early twentieth-century town-planning thought, are treated almost as Guadetesque elements. Residence, industry, transportation, sport and health are allotted separate and compact areas of land, all industry in one unit, all residential in another, with—as between industry and residence-quite inadequate communications, the single axial road that runs the length of the residential ridge bottle-necking all traffic to and from the industrial zone into a single artery without relief roads. But the academic survivals go deeper than this. The residential zone, though irregular in outline, has its streets laid out on a regular rectangular grid with axe d'équilibre and axe secondaire, with its salles d'assemblées at its intersection, in the centre. The houses, though freely sited—more or less —are squared up to the road grid. The pattern, indeed, is like Camillo Sitte with the serpentinings taken out. In smaller detail the house plans though asymmetrical, in some cases—seem derived from those precepts upon la salle et ses dépendances that Guadet derived from Blondel, while individual public and institutional places seem drawn directly from Guadet's ideas, notably the salle des collections of his art school. In elevational treatment the various buildings tend to follow Guadetesque precedent when they are largely fenestrated and, indeed, establish already a number of norms to which Garnier returned in his later work. But it should be emphasised that it is not the Guadet of the Cours de Théorie, nor the Guadet of the Hôtel des Postes that he follows here, but the Guadet revealed in his son's small house in the Boulevard Murat, which will be discussed later. The small houses of the Cité Industrielle, however, are even simpler than this, solidly-walled with plain rendered surfaces, flat roofs and no cornices. It is in these smaller buildings that Garnier is most truly a forerunner of later developments in architecture, and Morancé and Badovici, when they published their book on Garnier in 1931, drew special attention by means of footnotes to the table of plates, to such features as toît-terrasse jardin, and suppression totale de la corniche. It was in this that he was a forerunner of detail developments in architectural form, but as a forerunner of developments in architectural thought he must be remembered and valued simply for having considered an industrial town (indeed, any town) as a subject worthy of the architect's drawing board. By this gesture he extended architecture's terms of reference, and he brought the art closer to the reality—la verité-of an industrialised epoch. However, the impact of this gesture was somewhat softened, as far as his own contemporaries were concerned, by the fact that-though substantially completed by 19o4—it had to wait until the end of the War for publication, and it was upon the men of a generation younger that it made its greatest effect. This was a generation that had been prepared for ideas about industrial cities by the Futurists, and had, by then, some completed works by Garnier to look at. Although Garnier's unconventional attitude to architecture would not recommend him to the regularly constituted elements of the French administrative hierarchy that handed out big commissions, it did bring him the attention of one of France's most enlightened politicians of the time, Edouard Herriot, then Mayor of Lyons, Garnier's native town. Les Grands Travaux de la Ville de Lyon, put in hand under Herriot's leadership, occupied Garnier for fourteen years, from 19o6 to 192o. The work is partly a realisation and extension of ideas that already existed in the Cité Industrielle, such as the stadium, and the great hospital centre at Grange Blanche; and partly a making good of the most conspicuous deficiency of the Cité. In spite of the name, this project had been weak on the industrial side. Out of one hundred and sixty-five pages and several large sheets of plans in the 1918 edition of La Cité Industrielle, only five pages are given to industry alone. And of these, two are borrowings from his actual work on industrial construction at Lyons. For a large part of his work for Herriot was in laying out marketing and abbatoir facilities on the very largest scale. This work included a large hall with its roof carried on lattice trusses in the manner of Contamin's Galerie des Machines, and a remarkable group of auxiliary buildings housing power-plants, cold-storage, etc. in which he combines his Classicist learnings (cornices and a form of Doric columnfluting on the chimneys) with the satisfaction of industrial requirements to produce an architecture which can stand comparison on the one hand with early nineteenth-century industrial buildings, and with the projects of contemporaries like Behrens, Poelzig or Sant'Elia on the other. A similar interaction between Classicist leanings and technical necessities underlies the work of Auguste Perret, but similarities between him and Garnier go little further than this. As has been said above, he left the École des Beaux-Arts in 1895 before completing his course, but after showing considerable aptitude for his studies, in order to join his father's contracting business. He had been designing independently from about 189o, the year he entered the École, so that he had possessed, almost from the start, that combination of the architect and the practical man of affairs that makes him comparable with Peter Behrens in status, as well as influence on the rising generation-for it seems clear that these two transitional Classicists were among the most influential figures in the formation of the generation that produced, rather than pioneered, Modern architecture. With Perret, that influence depends chiefly on three complete buildings and the frame of another, all but one of them completed before 1914, and on a brief period as teacher and elder statesman in the Nineteen-twenties. An examination of these buildings will show that his achievement was to have imposed on reinforced concrete structure an eclectic aestheticderived from Guadet as much as Choisy-that his contemporaries, and the following generation too, believed to be the natural form of reinforcedconcrete construction. In fact, he left concrete structure no more advanced than he found it and some, more recent, criticism has even suggested that he retarded its development. On the other hand he left concrete an aesthetically acceptable material (in the eyes of the younger generation at least) which is what it certainly was not before him, in spite of the efforts of Hennebique. And this acceptability was achieved by finding concrete a place within the possibilities of time-honoured structural and architectural concepts, not by extending those concepts to include the possibilities of concrete construction. The three pre-1914 buildings depend, as Perret himself admitted, on a Choisyesque transposition of reinforced concrete into the forms and usages of wooden construction—a rectangular trabeated grid of posts and beams. This procedure which makes little use of the monolithic qualities, and less of the plastic ones, of the material, the assertions of Perret's followers notwithstanding, appears to have a complicated derivation. Perret himself is reported as claiming its descent from the half-timbering of northern France (much as Thomas Graham Jackson wished to have iron construction based upon English half-timbering) but there is more to the matter than this. The house in the Boulevard Murat, executed by Perret for Paul Guadet in 1912, has a short-span grid of beams and posts clearly exposed on its street-front, the voids being filled in with glazing, and stone spandrels—the uppermost run of spandrels, directly under the projecting cornice, being treated somewhat as a Doric frieze-the whole design has the quality of a rationalised, geometricised pilastered elevation, somewhat on the model of a Chicago school office building, but perfectly conceivable as a direct derivation from the elder Guadet's approach to 'les elements de l'architecture'. If, on the other hand, Perret derived this type of structure from woodwork practice independently of Guadet, he had here again good visible precedent in Paris. The piecemeal replacement of timber beams by concrete ones can be seen at a vernacular level in the long factory sheds of the Rue des Cordeliers area. Bay-widths and beam depths are often identical for wood and concrete, even in the case of complete concrete structures, some of which even retain the corner brackets used in wooden work, and theoretically unnecessary in concrete. The dates of these structures are difficult to determine, but details of door-furniture, etc. suggest that some of the complete concrete sheds, even, may go back to the Eighteennineties. Certainly, Perret's early use of concrete is no more adventurous than is to be found in the Rue des Cordeliers, and in his first important concrete manifesto-building, 25bis Rue Franklin, only one beam—the fascia at first floor level—spans a distance that would be quite inconceivable in wood. Nevertheless, this is a most original building, if only for the way it avoids the inhuman results of the light-well requirements of the Paris townplanning code. The solution devised by Perret—that of putting the requisite courtyard area on the front of the building, instead of behind it—has already in 19o3, the Gordian quality of some of Le Corbusier's ways of avoiding difficulties, and results in a floor-plan arranged in a hollow U facing the street—something completely unprecedented in Paris at the time. But this has nothing to do with reinforced concrete; even the cantilevers that bring the arms of the U forward over the street are of such a form that they could probably have been achieved in wood or corbelled brickwork. What is equally important is the way in which Perret uses his façade to express both his material and his Choisyesque attitude to structure. The main supporting members, both horizontally and vertically, are exhibited on the face of the wall, but without putting any concrete on show, since the beams are tile-faced. At the top of the building the areas between the frame members are unfilled, thus creating open loggie, but on any typical floor, these spaces are filled with fenestration, or with pot-tiles faced with brownish ceramic mosaic, making a raised pattern of giant daisies—a pattern which effectively emphasises the unstructural nature of these panels of fill. But there is no attempt to separate the load-bearing and sheltering functions of the wall, the fill is effectively co-planar with the face of the structural grid, and, internally, though the plan is free (but no freer than some of the fragments of Blondel's planning to which Guadet referred) wall surfaces tend to run simply from one structural upright to the next, and there are no free-standing columns. The importance of this building lies, indeed, more in the originality of its plan, the use of concrete, and its bold display of framing as an exterior effect, than in its structural aspects. His next important pre-War building, the Garage Ponthieu of 19o5, marks a recession from this advanced position towards one which is more nearly Guadetesque though the structural concrete is now exposed. This building has been discussed as if it were a simple, unassuming structure whose forms were the simple outcome of purpose and materials 'barren of all refinements . . . exhibiting all the clumsiness of a new architecture in the making' and 'the reinforced-concrete skeleton is given full opportunity to determine the character of the façade'.' The latter statement is questionable, the former false. Rebuttal comes from Perret himself, claiming the Garage Ponthieu to be the première tentative (au monde) de béton armé esthétique,8 and it seems clear that the aesthetic he had in mind was that of the Beaux-Arts. The façade is composed as a rhythmic travée of pseudo-pilasters disposed 3: 5: 3, the rhythm being counted off by the windows that occupy what would (in a Chicago school building) be termed an 'attic frieze', and the vertical composition is closed by a projecting cornice. The elements of the façade are, indeed, those of the later house in the Boulevard Murat, and though they lack the particular decorative devices used by Paul Guadet, the square edged modenature employed throughout is far from unrefined, while the great rose-window over the doors and the stained glass of the doors themselves, not to mention the bronze window-surrounds at ground floor level seem to suggest aesthetic pretension rather strongly. As to the general form of this façade, and its relationship to the material employed, it is to be observed that only one span on the façade is as long as the beams inside, and that is the one that crosses the top of the rosewindow, the equivalent beam beneath it being supported, visually, at its outer quarter-spans by two colonettes, as it were in antis. The effect of these columns is to muddle, not reinforce the expression of the garage's interior economy on the outside, the central gangway between the parking bays being the same width as the major central span, not of the door opening. It cannot truthfully be said that this exterior elevation has been determined either by the material employed, or the function of the building, but rather, one senses a compromise between the positions of Choisy and Guadet, that is between the expression of the technique of the period (including automobiles and reinforced concrete) and the Beaux-Arts concept of 'design first, structure afterwards'. In his next major design task of the pre-War period, Perret found himself driven explicitly into the latter position, serving initially on the design staff of the Théátre des Champs Élysées as structural consultant to Henry van de Velde. This was an unhappy collaboration that ended in quarrels, public polemics and considerable bad blood,\* but whoever, in fact designed the exterior and detailed the interior, the main structure is undoubtedly Perret's own, and stands as a witness to his mode of thought at the time of its design (1912) and is one of his most prized works in the eyes of his followers. Since this structure was entirely hidden, there was no need for him—as in the Garage Ponthieu—to put an aesthetic face on it while concealing his more daring employment of the material for the interior, the whole frame is consistent in feeling, and incorporates curved and bracketed members that could not be accommodated in his trabeated exteriors. It is imbued throughout with the feeling of a wooden framing built of standard timber sections; thus, none of the vertical members is diminished toward the top but becomes increasingly redundant in section and farther away from the Choisyesque ideal of materials working to their limits. Bracketed corners under constant-section beams are used instead of arches to take up heavy distributed loads, and although there are undoubted good reasons concerned with simplification of shuttering for these practices, the general appearance of the frame is of a complicated piece of joiner's work, with beams threaded through upright stiles, and glued fillets in some of the corners. The monolithic qualities of the frame are used only to attain those torsional resistances that derive, in joinery, from dove-tailed or mortised joints. However, viewed out of context—the only way it can be viewed as a visual image—this frame is an exciting artefact in its own right, and one that differently clad might have looked very like the framed architecture of the Twenties. There can be no doubt that it must have appeared to be very close to their own hearts' desires to the succeeding generation— the generation that flocked to admire his church at le Raincy. Notre Dame du Raincy is a confusing monument, but of considerable importance. Almost all its visible surfaces were concrete faced—the facing being no less than the carefully shuttered surface of the structure—and its completion in 1922 confirmed Perret's standing as the master of reinforced concrete in the eyes of a generation that was convinced that new materials would revolutionise architecture. But their acceptance of the church aesthetically must have been considerably eased by the fact that there was little new here structurally. In its widths of span it lags well behind what had already been achieved by Freyssinet, though the very tall slim columns -almost thirty-five feet high but barely fourteen inches thick—represent a bold stroke for the period. However, the general form of the construction is well covered by Choisyesque precedents that had had, by then, more than two decades of acceptance. At first sight the form is Gothic, even though it lacks the pointed arches of Anatole de Baudot's earlier concrete church,1º for it has a nave slightly higher than its aisles, from which it is separated by a row of tall 'aspiring' columns and its vast windows are filled by a tracery-that is literally a remplissage—of precast geometrical units. But this Sainte Chapelle du béton armé avoids Choisy's difficulties with Gothic's external buttressing that was invisible from within by adopting a general procedure that lies close to his analysis of the Basilica of Maxentius, and similar structures. There are no external organes de butée, and the lateral thrusts of the nave vault are absorbed-visually at least-in the structure of the aisles, whose vaults lie at right angles to the main axis, as do the side vaults of the Basilica of Maxentius, while the thrusts of the aisle vaults are visibly taken up by an upstand edge-beam interposed between them and the main vault.1º Such a procedure had Choisy's approval The eye takes in at one glance the vault that covers the building and the buttressing that supports it. Nothing that is not self-explained, the clarity of Greek art itself and in the eyes of his followers Notre Dame du Raincy would have the double prestige of being Gothic and Greek at the same time. The younger of those followers were being directed to Perret and to his works at this time both by his direct successors like Le Corbusier, and by independent Rationalists like Adolf Loos. He was in the process of being elevated to the rank of a patron of the new architecture, the formal canonisation coming in 1923, when a body of dissatisfied students from the École des Beaux-Arts persuaded him to set up as their maître d'atélier1athe actual atélier being established in one wing of an interesting building of his, the Palais de Bois, a temporary wooden structure whose spans, in timber, were slightly greater than those of the Garage Ponthieu, though admittedly less heavily loaded. In the same year he was invited to contribute a preface to the first volume of Morancé's periodical L'Architecture Vivante, which was one of the most important recording organs of the Modern Movement. 'This page liminaire took the form (and the layout) of a Classical inscription, though the phraseology was hardly lapidary LIVING ARCHITECTURE IS THAT WHICH FAITHFULLY EXPRESSES ITS TIME WE SHALL SEEK IT IN ALL DOMAINS OF CONSTRUCTION WE SHALL CHOOSE WORKS THAT STRICTLY SUBORDINATED TO THEIR USE AND REALISED BY THE JUDICIOUS USE OF MATERIAL ATTAIN BEAUTY BY THE DISPOSITION AND HARMONIOUS PROPORTIONS OF THE NECESSARY ELEMENTS OF WHICH THEY ARE COMPOSED MCMXXIII AUGUSTE PERRET and contained nothing, beyond the offer to go to 'all domains of construction', that Choisy and Guadet might not have approved. Perret's later development towards full Classicism, lies beyond the scope of the present study psychologically, since it had no appreciable influence on the development of the Modern Movement, while his work on the rationalisation and standardisation of building elements lies beyond its scope in time, not taking notable form until 193o in his Garde-Meuble Nationale. His importance in the present context is as a teacher and example to the next generation, and as the man who, more than any other, made reinforced concrete acceptable as a visible building material in the eyes of those who practised architecture as an art, and did so by endowing it with an easily recognised, and easily digested, rectangular aesthetic.