# 5: Germany: industry and the Werkbund THE YEAR 19o7 must appear, in retrospect, a decisive one for German (and, by that token, international) architecture. If no new themes are introduced into architectural thought, attitudes toward certain contemporary problems were as resolutely taken up as they were, a little later, by the Futurists, and -what is more-were shortly translated into practice. That is to say, discussion and exposition among architects and those connected with design were primarily devoted to evolving programmes and organisations for immediate action, and not to the formulation of bodies of encyclopaedic theory in the manner of Choisy or Guadet. There was indeed a parallel current of pure intellectual speculation about the aesthetics of architecture, descending from Lipps and producing one of its classics in Worringer's Abstraktion und Einfühlung of 19o8, but there seems to have been no important mingling of the two streams of thought—the men of action tapped the Lippsian stream at source, not at Worringer. The heart-theme of the practical body of thought was the problem of mechanism-or rather, the relationship of architecture, as an art of design, to mechanical production at all its phases, from the factory work-hall to the advertising of the finished product. This relationship was scrutinised most closely at two critical points: the aesthetics of engineering construction, and the aesthetics of product design. To take the first point first, leaders of German architectural thought, like the Italian Futurists, deplored the application of art-work to engineering structures, but whereas the Futurists intended to conjure an aesthetic out of machinery and engineering, the Germans hoped to conjure some aesthetics into them. Already, therefore, in 1g07, the Verband Deutscher Architekten- und Ingenieurvereine was challenging expert opinion on this point: How shall we force up the importance of aesthetic considerations in engineering construction to a higher level than at present. Phrased thus, as a sort of collision between two separate entities, aesthetics and engineering, the problem tended to indicate two equally separate answers, as Lindner and Steinmetz go on to record We soon arrived at the conclusion that any solution for our new situation involved the discovery of a new, appropriate and heartfelt mode of expression. The architecture of the styles having broken down, everybody changed their aim and began to shoot in different directions. Some preached Pure Functional Art (Reine Zweckkunst) while others saw the ideal in untramelled artistic creation 'each according to his own powers' finding new forms for new problems. This latter paragraph identifies, perhaps unwittingly, a basic division in the work of the years immediately after 1go7. Lindner and Steinmetz associate 'new forms for new problems' with 'untramelled artistic creation' and not with 'Pure Functional Art' and it is to be noted that those most closely associated with the pure service of function—Behrens, Muthesius, Mies van der Rohe and Gropius (with one notable exception)were not formally inventive, while the Individualists, later termed Expressionists, of that generation in Germany—Poelzig, Berg, Marx, Stoffregen—were among the most fertile creative minds in their profession at that time, and the most vigorous continuers of the spirit of the English Free architecture. It should be emphasised here that this division of practical method does not imply, at that time, any notable division of theoretical approach—that did not appear until after 1922, when Zweckkunst finally acquired a formal language of its own—nor any difference of organisational loyalty. All these architects were connected with the Werkbund, and the two whom it is most customary to contrast; Hans Poelzig and Peter Behrens, both enjoyed the support of Hermann Muthesius, the Werkbund's founder. But, in any case, it was events connected with the Werkbund and with Peter Behrens that made 19o7 a decisive year, rather than the beginnings of a stylistic division among the progressive German architects. For it was in 1907 that Behrens joined AEG (Allgemeine Electricitätsgesellschaft) and Muthesius founded the Deutscher Werkbund. The two events are related, if not connected, and are the two faces of the same coin—a rapprochement between creative designers and productive industry, in which industry was a more willing participant than the designers. The foundation of the Werkbund took place in the teeth of some fairly spirited opposition from the 'establishment' of the German Arts and Crafts Movement, and Muthesius's success is a tribute to his diplomacy, as well as his determination and his influential supporters. He was held in suspicion for a variety of reasons. As a Prussian civil servant who regarded himself as an instrument in the furtherance of German economic policy, he naturally stood for order and discipline, and not for the Bohemian individualism and aestheticism of the loosely organised German Kunstgewerbe craftsmen and designers. Furthermore, he seems to have been regarded as the importer of a foreign style to be imposed on German Arts and Crafts. This arose naturally from his having been in England from 1896 to 1903 as a supplementary trade attaché to the German Embassy, with a brief to study and report back on the high prestige of English architecture and design. His reports covered not only domestic and church architecture, but teaching methods as well—even amateur work done in evening classes. His masterpiece as rapporteur was undoubtedly Das Englische Haus, which covered, in three volumes of which the last appeared in 19o5, every aspect of the English free style from Stokesey Castle to Sanitary Ware. The impact of this book can be seen as early as Peter Behrens's Obenauer House of 19o6, and persisted until it was overtaken by the Wasmuth publications of the work of Frank Lloyd Wright. Thus these attempts to weld industry and the unattached artists and designers into a single, effective organisation that could make a useful contribution to the national economy were regarded in some quarters as an attack on German art. The polemical situation came to a head in the early part of 19o7. Muthesius opened with a speech at the new Commercial College in Berlin (of which he was then head) in the course of which he complained of the superficiality of the 'so-called style' then in use in German Kunstgewerbe, but his complaint has an economic basis. As Peter Bruckmann (a progressive industrialist who employed designers like Lauwericks) reports He prophesied a sharp economic recession if the motifs used in the shaping of their products continued to be thoughtlessly and shamelessly borrowed from the form-treasury of the previous century What Muthesius put forth publicly in this lecture was vigorously rebutted both by the Crafts and Industry, and the Verband für die wirtschaftlichen Interessen des Kunstgewerbes in Berlin battled fiercely against him, putting on the orderpaper for their meeting of June 19o7 an item headed 'Der Fall Muthesius'. Bruckmann himself took part in this meeting as an interested party. Not that he was in any personal way connected with Muthesius, but I felt in Düsseldorf that a change was imminent, and that there should be representatives from Industry for Muthesius and his ideas... . On the Muthesius case, the Chairman made play with the complaints of Industry and the Crafts, calling him their traducer and enemy of German art.. . Dohrn, Lux, and myself confronted the whole assembly, which we left in complete uproar. This Congress took place in June, yet as early as the sixth of October the Deutscher Werkbund was founded. How was it possible to achieve this object so quickly? Bruckmann's question must be rhetorical, rather than naive, since he must have known as well as anybody, as a representative from progressive industry, why things had moved so quickly between June and October. Major German industrial enterprises were becoming interested in quality products and better design, as witness the appointment in the same month of October of Peter Behrens as design consultant for everything that AEG built, manufactured or printed. Nor were AEG alone in this; wherever German industries had set up selling organisations they soon turned to designers-as in the case of the Stahlwerksverband and their employment of Bruno Taut—for their publicity material if nothing else. From the other side, the more responsible section of the German Kunstgewerbe movement, the Deutsche Werkstätten, had already in 1go6 begun to develop furniture for mass production, and was associated with the Werkbund from its inception. Bruno Paul,º the designer of this furniture was appointed in 1907 as head of the Berlin Gewerbeschule—an appointment in which Muthesius must have been as much interested as that of Behrens to AEG, though there seems to be no record of his having directly influenced either appointment. In any case, the whole tendency to a union of crafts and industry was given urgency by the economic situation and national interest. Muthesius had issued his warning in 19o7, but Karl Schmidt, the director of the Deutsche Werkstätten at Hellerau, had warned before him, in 19o3, that German industrial products were so inferior that Within a year we might be hard put to buy sufficient raw material from abroad to keep running, and the social problem would then become sharper and sharper until it (scil. design) was no longer just a cultural problem. and it was this same economic situation that gave force to Muthesius's insistence that the problem was not the business of a single government office, but a concern worthy of the German people as a whole. Now, Karl Schmidt's condemnation of German industrial production had been phrased in general terms; he merely says that it is minderwertig, without specifying in what aspects it is deficient in quality. This was to be expected; as head of the Hellerau Werkstätten he spoke from within the Arts and Crafts tradition of not distinguishing between visual and material quality in products, of believing them to be automatically related. Muthesius, in complaining of the 'so-called style' used in German Kunstgewerbe is clearly on a different tack. But for the first few years of the Werkbund's existence, it followed Schmidt's more generalised approach and made Qualität³ its watchword. In this condition the most that can be said was that it was a triumph of organisation—an influential part of German production by machine and hand had been brought within the scope of a single body, and within that body, the attention of industry had been drawn to the availability of a body of independent designers, the attention of designers and craftsmen had been drawn to the opportunities that existed for them in industry, while the problem of design, at large, had been brought to the attention of the German nation. But it lacked, as yet, any specific aesthetic direction. That came in 1911, and from Muthesius. At the Werkbund's Congress in that year he delivered what, in a later terminology, would be called the Keynote speech, entitled Wo stehen wir? It was a contribution to the general theme of the Congress "The Spiritualisation of German Production', and so closely involved is this general theme with the detailed argument in Muthesius's speech that it seems possible that he had a large share in deciding the general theme himself. The speech is a long and complex one, its structure is rhetorical rather than logical, but its interest to the present study is that it introduced to the Werkbund the idea that aesthetics could be indepen.dent of material quality, it introduced the idea of standardisation as a virtue, and of abstract form as the basis of the aesthetics of product design, and it introduced these ideas to an audience that included not only the young men who were going to shape the architecture of post-War Germany—Mies van der Rohe, Walter Gropius, Bruno Taut—but of France as well, for Charles Edouard Jeanneret, later Le Corbusier, had been sent to Germany in 191o by the Art School of Chaux de Fonds (Switzerland) to make a study of German progress in design, and of the Werkbund in particular. At the time of the Congress he had ceased working with Behrens, but had only transferred himself to the Werkstätte colony at Hellerau where he was working with Heinrich Tessenow, and was still within the Werkbund orbit. A good deal of what Muthesius said reappears, suitably modified, in Le Corbusier's publications of the early Twenties. Like the later, but apparently unrelated, Manifesto of Futurist Architecture, and like that earlier work of Muthesius himself, Stilarchitektur und Baukunst,4 it opens with an historical survey whose aim is to demonstrate the decay of architecture in the nineteenth century, but here it is linked to a more general theme of the special aptitudes and tasks of different races of men and periods of time-a theme which reappears at the end of the speech, made specific as the destiny of the German people to revivify the arts of design in the twentieth century. Unlike most historical perspectives of this kind, it ends on a note of rising optimism. A recovery had already begun as early as 189o for The first clear and representative literary indication of the beginning of a new spiritual orientation was that forceful book Rembrandt als Erzieher, which recalled to the mind of Germany the importance of artistic as against scientific culture. It may be only a coincidence that Julius Langbehn³ in this book also invited the German people to look for leadership in this spiritual regeneration to Low Germany (a Holsteiner himself, he took Rembrandt as a Low German) and that Peter Behrens, who so often appears as the personification of Muthesius's ideal designer, was a Low German too, from Hamburg. The foundation of the Werkbund, Muthesius proposes, had been another step forward in this spiritual regeneration, but The Deutscher Werkbund was founded at a time when a close association of all men of good will was needed against hostile forces. Its campaigning days in that direction are over now, the ideas that were then in question are nowhere denied today, and enjoy general approval. Has its existence thereby become superfluous? One could only think so by taking a narrow view of the Arts and Crafts.... In truth... the specific task of the Werkbund is only just beginning. Up till now, considerations of quality stood in the forefront of our activities, and and we can now be sure that in Germany a sense of good materials and methods has gained a swift ascendancy; but by that very token it follows that the work of the Werkbund is not completed. Far higher than the material is the spiritual; far higher than function, material and technique, stands Form. 'These three material aspects might be impeccably handled but-if Form were not-we would still be living in a merely brutish world. So there remains before us as an aim a much greater and more important task-to awaken once more an understanding for Form, and the revival of architectonic sensibilities. Form, as it appears here—and not for the first time in the speech—is a thing of the spirit, but before Muthesius has finished it becomes many other things as well; he covers, in fact, pretty well all the shades of meaning that the word was to carry in later writings—except that of mathematically proportioned shapes Form that is not the result of mathematical calculation, that is not fulfilled by mere function, that has nothing to do with systernatic thought but if he is vague about its origins, he is precise about its manifestations It is, above all, architectonic, its creation a secret of the human spirit, like poetry and religion. Form, that is for us an unique and shining achievement of human art-the Greek Temple, the Roman Thermae, the Gothic Cathedral, and the princely salon of the eighteenth century something higher, more exalted, than what came after it, something that we have subsequently lost and it will be observed that his canon of good form, while it subsumes the Rationalist triumphs of Doric and Gothic structure, adds to them a triumph of the shaping of interior volumes, the Roman Thermae, and a triumph—as he saw it—of the fruitful collaboration of the various arts, the eighteenth-century interior. But eighteenth-century architecture had, for him, an interest beyond that of collaboration, it was also the last time that Form had received its due, and then with Schinkel disappeared. Schinkel's output therefore appeared as and lost so completely that Gottried Semper could observe, as early as the Great Exhibition of 1851 that taken all round, the barbaric and semi-civilised peoples have taken the lead over the cultured ones in the arts. Given this admiration for the eighteenth century, and particularly his admiration for Schinkel, often expressed, it is not surprising to find that Form, as he felt it, was a kind of geometrical essence distilled from neo-Classical design. This is confirmed in part by the architecture of the designer who stood closest to him, Peter Behrens, in whom the echoes of neo-Classicism are as clear as they are simplified, and in part by a suggestive literary parallel drawn by Muthesius himself. Towards the end of the speech he refers contemptuously to the instability and changeability of taste in his own lifetime, and to the fallibility of '-isms', and contrasts with them the stability of the 'inmost essence' (innerste Wesen) of architecture, which has ... its own constancy, calm and endurance. Throughout the millenia of its continually enriched tradition, it represents, as it were, the permanent in human history. This, of course, is yet another appeal to the power of tradition over the head of the styles and Art Nouveau, but Muthesius follows it with a sidelook at other arts that gives it a new twist. In its constancy of mind it is unfavourable to the prevailing Impressionist approach in the other arts. In painting, in literature, to some extent in sculpture, Impressionism is conceivable and has conquered these realms of art. But the thought of an Impressionist architecture is altogether terrible—Denken wir ihn micht aus! There have already been individualistic essays in architecture that fill us with alarm—as will the first signs of Impressionism. The point need not be laboured here that reactions against Impressionism in painting were called a renaissance du sentiment classique, and that the reaction of Maillol and other sculptors against Rodin has been termed neo-Classical.º The chief German representative of this sentiment was Adolf Hildebrand, though his book Problem der Form was not directed at any named artists, but only at what he termed Positivism, that is, the concept of truth to nature implicit in Impressionism, and the artistic anarchy, as he saw it, that followed from it. Hildebrand makes, in short form, a linkage between a scientific culture and a failure of architectonic sensibility, that Muthesius makes only diffusely and at great length It is significant of our scientific times that a work of art today seldom rises above the level of imitation. The architectonic feeling is eithe: lacking entirely, or replaced by a purely external . . . arrangement of forms and it is not inconceivable that the insistence in Muthesius on such themes as Form, Architectonic Discipline, and the importance of Space, may be due directly to the influence of Hildebrand's book, which had already achieved five editions,' two outside Germany, by 1907. In German literature the situation was analogous, except that the movements were simultaneous, not sequential, the pioneers of both Impressionist novel-writing, and neo-Classic theatre, being men of Muthesius's own generation (e.g. Emil Strauss, born 1861 as was Muthesius, and Paul Ernst only five years later). The aims, and indeed the terminology, of the neo-Classicists are often remarkably close to those of Muthesius. Paul Ernst's book, in which their aims were set forth, was called Der Weg zur Form,s and had appeared in 1go6. It demanded the restoration, in drama, of a logical inevitability in the action, the preservation of the Classical unities, and the use of blank verse. 'These tenets hardly need paraphrasing to be made applicable to Werkbund architecture with its attempts to develop buildings logically from their functions, its tendencies toward simple, axial compositions, and its use of simplified neo-Classical detailing for which 'blank verse' is an apt metaphor. Ernst prefigures Muthesius also in his demand for the exclusion of the inessential-Nebensachen auszuschliessen—while his couplet ## Wer ist weise, wer ist gut? Wer nach seinem Wesen tut. might stand as a motto not only for Muthesius himself, but for the factories designed by young Werkbund architects like Walter Gropius, who tried to design according to the innerste Wesen not only of architecture, itself, but of the functional programme with which they were confronted. One further point about Muthesius's rejection of Impressionism needs to be noted here: the Individualistic essays that alarmed him so much are, presumably, to be equated with Lindner and Steinmetz's class of designers who opted for untrammelled artistic creation, and were therefore, Expressionists, not Impressionists. Muthesius shows himself less perceptive here than Worringer who, also in 1911, actually coined the word Expressionist to describe, roughly, what Roger Fry had termed post-Impressionism— but only in painting; the word was only later applied to German painting even, and not till very much later to German architecture, in spite of the fact that the tendency to which it was applied had been noticed as early as 1907. What alarmed Muthesius about these Individualistic essays was that they deviated from his concept of the typical, for he goes on immediately to say More than any other art, architecture strives toward the typical. Only in this can it find fulfilment. Only in the all-embracing and continuous pursuit of this aim can it regain that effectiveness and undoubted assurance that we admire in the works of past times that marched along the road of homogeneity. And only that way might it meet painting and sculpture of equal quality... in those times the feeling for the rhythmic and the architectonic was universally alive and governed all the works of man, whereas in more recent times, architecture -called by Semper 'the lawgiver and support that no art dare lack'-has been dragged along in the wake of its sister arts. and in saying this he formulated a group of related ideas that became a kind of unspoken prejudice that underlies a great part of subsequent architectural thought: that under the leadership of architecture, all the arts of design ought to evolve towards the establishment of standards (types, norms) of a homogeneous style—a prejudice that was translated into visible fact for a few years at the Bauhaus in the Twenties. But homogeneity and the typical have more than aesthetic connotations for Muthesius. For him the overtones of these words extend as deep into sociology and history as do those of technique in the hands of Auguste Choisy. Thus, the re-establishment of an architectonic culture is a basic condition of all the arts. . .. It is a question of bringing back into our way of life that order and discipline of which good Form is the outward manifestation. In modern social and economic organisation there is a sharp tendency to conformity under dominant viewpoints, a strict uniformity of individual elements, a depreciation of the inessential in favour of immediate essentials. And these social and economic tendencies have a spiritual affinity with the formal tendencies of our aesthetic movement. And here he has laid the foundation of another prejudice: that certain formal usages are proper to certain conditions of society. This is implicit still in his next paragraph, but his main theme is now a return to the idea of a German destiny in design. Germany enjoys a reputation for the most strict and exact organisation in her businesses, heavy industry and state institutions of any country in the worldour military discipline may be cited as the ground of this. Such being the case, perhaps this is an expression of Germany's vocation-to resolve the great problem of architectonic form. Well as our great economic trusts may appreciate the architectonic tendencies of our time, circumstances make us ask whether we can still rely directly on firms and unions of this kind alone to support the progress of architecture. For it to succeed, the whole class of educated Germans, and above all our wealthier private individuals, must be convinced of the need for pure Form, in order that it may progress farther in our land. If this sounds uncomfortably like a nineteenth-century politician trying to enlist liberal support for some military enterprise, rallying the intellectuals behind the professional soldiers, then it is because that is broadly how Muthesius did regard the situation. The new insistence on spiritualisation and good Form was, in part at least, only another tactic in a continuing trade war in which aesthetics were still a competitive margin. Le Corbusier later accused Behrens of having designed buildings to further Prussian propaganda, citing, e.g. the AEG factories, and there is certainly a nationalist tone about the closing lines of the speech that reminds us that the Werkbund was seen by Muthesius as an adjunct of state policy. Only when every member of our nation instinctively clothes his needs in the best Form, shall we achieve as a race a level of taste worthy of the former progressive efforts of Germany. This development of taste, the enjoyment of the handling of Form, hold a decisive meaning for the future status of Germany in the world. First we must set our own house in order, and when all is clarity and light within, we can begin to have some effect outside. Only then shall we appear in the world as a nation worthy to be entrusted, among other things, with the handling of this task-to restore to the world and our age the lost benefits of an architectonic culture. Just as those who owed most to the Futurists started off, as it were, by discounting Marinetti's patriotic intentions, so those who owed most to Muthesius soon put the Prussianism to one side, but—French and German alike—they did tend to retain the authoritarian tone that accompanied his theory of types and uniformity. T'heir intention is to legislate for, rather than serve, their public. But as far as the Werkbund Congress of 1911 was concerned, the patriotic issue was not the one they wanted to discuss. It was Form, and Type, that dominated the early part of the debate on his paper. Cornelius Gurlitt, in the first speech from the floor, made it clear that the intention to change policy was understood The question of quality alone can no longer be decisive, but the word Form deserves to be set alongside it in the spearhead of our effort and the Muthesian consequence as well So, then, another important question arises; the question: Type or Individubut in spite of his standing as a serious historian of art and architecture he was not prepared to treat this question with quite the earnestness that Muthesius intended That question-when you come to Hellerau-you will find, not solved, but under examination, and that in many witty and interesting ways. There you can see, in the houses and in the house planning, individual creations cheek-byjowl with types-the former after the taste of the designers, the latter after that of the people who live in them... The question of the typical was not completely new—not in Werkstätte circles anyhow, since Bruno Paul's designs for mass-production furniture of the previous year had been termed Typenmöbel—and the second contribution from the floor has the smooth look of a prepared response. K. E. Osthaus of the Folkwang Museum in Hagen, used an argument that was to be repeated ad nauseam for the next forty years as he brought the eighteenth century forward as an historical justification for standardisation and the typical I have come straight here from France, where I found to my surprise a whole series of towns all developed on the same aesthetic pattern. I might take Rennes as an example, where the town was completely gutted in the eighteenth century, and subsequently rebuilt according to an unified architectural scheme. Essentially it is a question there of a Typical plan-form that makes it almost impossible to tell one house from another. Yet though the town expresses a more uniform appearance than perhaps any other in the world, men derive a most vigorous artistic life from it, in spite of outward uniformity. The Typical, as one sees it fully developed there, has formed itself by the equalisation and refinement of personal needs. So it need not necessarily function as a stumbling block to artistic creation. This exposition of the virtues of eighteenth-century typicality more or less closes the ring of the argument begun by Muthesius when he referred his audience back to the eighteenth century for the last visible examples of good Form. The attitudes adopted in 1911 remained good, for the most part until 1914 and far beyond-Henry van de Velde's polemic against Muthesius at the 1914 Congress still left the question in the form "Type or Individuality' and should be regarded, like his elegant theatre at the Werkbund exhibition in Cologne that year, as a spirited rearguard action by an outgoing type of designer. Beyond this it should be noted that Muthesius's preoccupations with problems like national standing, aesthetics, standardisation and mechanisation were to find partial fulfilment—like those of the Futurists—in the ensuing World War. Under the pressure of military necessity and a tight economic situation, DIN-Format began to be applied to an increasing range of industrial products. It was essentially the freezing, ad hoc, of a number of widely-used dimensionings as standard measures for that particular class of product (Deutsche Industrie-Normen), and so 'our military discipline' became indeed the ground of standardisation and the Typical. DIN-Format was never fully abandoned after the war, and was revived and revised in the Second World War.It is commonly taken to be the inspiration of Bauhaus studies in dimensional standardisation of building components, and thus lies at the root of the whole trend toward modular co-ordination that runs right through the Modern Movement. ## 6: The factory aesthetic THE FAGUsWERKE AT Alfeld, designed from 191I onwards by Gropius and Meyer, and in construction until 1913, is frequently taken to be the first building of the Modern Movement properly so-called, the end of the pioneer phase in Modern architecture. There can be little doubt that it owes this high esteem in part to Gropius's personal relationship to the historians of the Modern Movement, and also, in part, to the accidents of photography—it is possible, by a hostile selection of photographs,¹ to make it appear no more 'Modern' than, say, Behrens's Eppenhausen development of 1907. The modernity of this group of buildings is visible, indeed, only on parts of two sides, where the machine-shop and power-house present glazed walls to the south. These two blocks are in such strong contrast to the unadventurous neo-Classical regularity of the rest of the buildings that one may suspect that-like the informal planning, and the strong sculptural forms of the dust-extractor plant-they must have been an unsought consequence of the innerste Wesen of the functional programme. The rest of the factory lies well within the scope and intentions of the current body of Werkbund practice and ideas, but these glazed blocks, with their windows rising continuously through three stories, and wrapped round the corners of the block without corner piers, stand out as major innovations but may not have been designed until as late as the beginning of 1913 when Gropius and Meyer were already working on the Werkbund Pavilion for the 1914 Exhibition in Cologne. But they still lacked the support of any accumulated experience in Werkbund circles of the aesthetics of glazed envelopes, and serious visual research on this subject seems not to have been attempted until the beginning of the Twenties. Nevertheless, if practice lagged, in theoretical writings Muthesius ran well ahead. At an early date he had begun to assemble that canon of nineteenth-century glass and iron masterpieces that was to be extended by Meyer, by J. A. Lux,a by Lindner and Śteinmetz, and receíve its definitive form in Giedion's Bauen in Frankreich of 1928. Already in his Stilarchitektur und Baukunst of 1902, Muthesius lists the Crystal Palace, the two Bibliothègues of Labrouste, the Galerie des Machines and the Eiffel Tower, and he comments on the 'failure' of the Chicago Centennial to maintain the standard set by earlier exhibitions. To this canon of accepted masterpieces is appended a general encomium of station halls, covered markets, glazed museum-courts and department stores. 'Though he did not labour this list when he came to contribute to a symposium on factory design in the Werkbund Jahrbuch for 1913, he did revise it A good deal of engineering structure, bridges, station halls, lighthouses and grain silos, are good aesthetically. and though this list includes structures of a solidly plastic type (lighthouses, silos) it was prefaced by Lethabitic excursion into machine design that throws the emphasis very heavily the other way. The contrary sense appears in the invention of the bicycle wheel with its wire spokes and pneumatic tyre. No one nowadays any longer finds anything abnormal in this, and the light structure of the wire spoking strikes us as fine and elegant. One might expect to find such sentiments echoed by the designer of the transparencies of the Faguswerke and the Cologne pavilion, but in so far as Gropius's humane and intelligent reflections on factory design show any aesthetic preferences, they go against the grain of Muthesius's ideas Compared to other European countries, Germany has a clear lead in the aesthetics of factory-building. But in the motherland of industry, in America, there exist great factory buildings whose majesty outdoes even the best German work of this order. The grain silos of Canada and South America, the coal bunkers of the leading railroads and the newest work halls of the North American industrial trusts, can bear comparison, in their overwhelming monumental power, with the buildings of ancient Egypt. and he continues the monumental theme when he praises Behrens's buildings for AEG as Denkmäler von Adel und Kraft. T'his clearly is not the quality that Muthesius found admirable when he singled out the Eiffel Tower, or station halls, or bicycle wheels for praise, and Muthesius's theoretical position stood far ahead of any support from the practical men. Such support as he did receive came, not from the Zweck-Kunst Classicists who otherwise stood nearest to him, but from the 'Expressionists' of the Breslau group, and from a survivor of Art Nouveau. The latter was August Endell, whose grandstand for the Mariendorf race-track, Berlin, a work of 191o may be regarded as a late, self-conscious, but perfectly controlled survival of nineteenth-century lattice-structure sensibility, enriched by the experiments in three-dimensional arabesque which had characterised some sections of continental Art Nouveau (e.g., Horta, house in Rue Paul-Emile Janson). It is a rare and early approximation to a true space-frame structure.a The Breslau group had the advantage of an exhibition to create an opportunity to exercise their talents, and two small exhibition buildings by Bruno Taut should be discussed first, before turning to the buildings for the Breslau Jahrhundertfeier. These two buildings were both pavilions for industrial marketing combines: one for the Stahleverksverband (Leipzig, 1913) the other for the Glass Industry, at the Cologne Exhibition of 1914. The former is the less interesting, consisting of a glazed stepped-back pyramid of steel post-and-lintel construction on an octagonal base, but surmounted by a large sphere, whose diameter fills the highest octagon, and is seen through the structure immediately below. The glass pavilion is of much greater originality, the greater part of its volume being enclosed by a tall dome of approximately geodesic structure, with steel ribs and glazed panels. This stands on a regular, sixteen-sided lower storey, in which stairs with glass treads and risers ascend in curves between walls of glazed bricks. Both structurally and visually this is the most brilliant combination of glass and steel achieved by any architect in the years immediately preceding 1914. Quite apart from the possibility of its having been influenced by Paul Scheerbart's book Glasarchitektur which came out in the same year, its rare qualities suggest that it was produced in a moment of genius that Taut was unable to repeat. T'he same must be said of Max Berg's Jahrhunderthalle at Breslau (1913). No other work of Berg's long career, both as city architect of Breslau, or as an independent designer, is to be compared to this giant dome, and like Taut's glass dome, this structure in reinforced concrete must rank as the most brilliant use of its materials achieved by anybody in its period (with the possible exception of some of Freyssinet's early vaults). By comparison with the sense of plasticity and three-dimensional form, the understanding of concrete as a material to be poured and moulded, that performs most efficiently in arcuate and vaulted forms, such as Berg exhibits here, the contemporary work of Perret cannot but appear wooden and intellectually circumscribed. Here, alone, in Germany or elsewhere, was a building that could face comparison with Muthesius's canon of nineteenth-century exhibition buildings in terms of scale, originality and exploitation of the material. The way in which it was forgotten and its lessons ignored (much as the lessons of Freyssinet's hangars were ignored, even while lip-service was paid to their designer) in the Twenties, is a mark of the success with which an aesthetic could be applied in defiance of the best use of the material, even by architects who accepted truth to materials as a fundamental tenet in their philosophy of design, and is a tribute also to the power of conviction carried by the Abstract aesthetics of immediately post-War art movements. The other main buildings for the Fahrhundertfeier were the work of Hans Poelzig. They do not show him at his best or his most inventive, their detailing is in a kind of smudged Greek Doric and the planning is academic. But outside such 'representational' contexts Poelzig was one of the most consistently and persuasively inventive designers of his generation in Germany. His buildings for industry really did produce new forms for new needs, were the chief ornament of the Expressionist, or Individualist wing in the Werkbund, and were the prime inspiration of the short-lived Expressionist phase in German architecture after 1918. The chemical plant at Luban, near Berlin, is the best-known of the buildings of this phase of his work; its mannered distribution of Roman windows over otherwise unmodulated façades has attracted criticism, but it was effected with conviction, and appears to bear a functional relation to the innerste Wesen of the building's use. It is a work of the same year as the Faguswerke, but completed more quickly, and it has none of that building's inconsistencies or uncertainties. The effect of the whole is homogeneous and deliberate, even if it bears little superficial resemblance to later Modern buildings. As an exercise in unadorned, but carefully modulated, brick structure, this work of Poelzig's does not stand entirely alone, for a similar aesthetic, though more austerely handled, can be seen in Stoffregen's factory for the Anker Linoleum Company, a work of 1912 whose reputation survived the War but subsequently fell from regard. In the same way, the sculptural treatment of the exterior of Poelzig's water-tower at Posen, designed in igro, finds an echo in the boldly formed roof of Albert Marx's boiler-house at Bad Nauheim, which like the Anker Company, was also a work of 1912. In fact, one can see building up around Poelzig and Berg in the last four years before the war an incipient school of factory designers,5 independently descended from the English Free architecture, almost unaffected by the Classicising preferences of the Behrens wing in the Werkbund, eschewing decoration and handling sculptural forms with great boldness-a boldness to be matched only in Futurist projects at that time. Immediately after the War it looked as if this school could resume where it had broken off, and in a generally expressionist atmosphere that affected even Gropius and Mies van der Rohe, the early works of Erich Mendelsohn and Hugo Häring promised a real continuance.\* But the movement was quickly inhibited by the Dutch and Russian Abstract aesthetics mentioned above, and came to nothing. The comparison with the Futurists may be taken a little further than outward formal similarities, though, as some of Poelzig's immediately pre-War projects show, these were remarkably close—there is one sketch for a factory store that could serve equally well as a prototype of the drying shed of Mendelsohn's Luckenwalde factory, or of some of Sant' Elia's Dinamismo Architettonico sketches. But it is clear beyond this, that Poelzig had something of the Futurists' mechanical sensibility, even as early as 191o, at which time it is doubtful if he could have read any of the manifestoes. The interior of the water-tower at Posen, with its emphasis on mechanical equipment and metallic structure, reveals, beyond the mere fulfilment of operating needs, a sense of the dramatic possibilities inherent in these factors, and the creation of forms and spaces that emphasise them. Compared with the work done on this wing of the Werkbund's creative programme, that achieved on the other side, by Behrens, Gropius and Muthesius himself must appear less adventurous and imaginative. The development of Behrens's great work-halls for AEG does show a consistent growth, away from the massive pseudo-Classicism of the Turbinenfabrik of 19o8-9, where the management of the massively rusticated and battered corners seems to make nonsense of the frame-and-fill and glass-and-steel structure of the sides, to the Grossmaschinenfabrik of 1911-12, where he seems at last to sense that glazed or solid, the walls and roof are only a light envelope drawn over a vast bulk of industrially usable space. Even the brick panels between the windows of the sides seem to have a light and tenuous quality that is quite unlike the solid walling of any of his earlier industrial work. On the other hand, this block also has a rather cheap and unfinished air, as if restrictions on budget had played a larger part in its design than in, say, the Turbinenfabrik, which was clearly intended as a piece of prestige building. But whatever alternative influences may have been at work, he remains faithful to a standard envelope for all these factory halls—the envelope of a Classical temple, qualified only by an industrial necessity (viz. the need to give head-clearance to gantry runs) that militated against plain single-ridged roofs, and accounts for his polygonal gable-forms. The only important exception to this type of gable occurs on the Hochspannungsfabrik, 191o, where paired Classical pediments appear low down on the main façade to express the presence of a pair of parallel work-halls within the building, though these halls do not appear functionally to penetrate to the outer wall at this point. Curiously, these more enterprising designs of Behrens left less mark on subsequent architectural thought and feeling than did the Turbinenfabrik, which seems to have served as a model even for post-War Expressionist architecture. But it is clear, anyhow, that the long-term significance of Behrens's pre-War industrial architecture does not lie altogether in the buildings themselves—except in so far as they demonstrated his ability to clothe industrial needs in forms that would be recognised by his contemporaries as 'architectural' in almost the normal sense of the word. Here Behrens is most closely to be compared with Auguste Perret, the latter having brought a new material-concrete—within the accepted canons of architectural thought,' just as Behrens brought a new set of functional programmes within the accepted formal disciplines, and of this last the Turbinenfabrik was the most exemplary demonstration. It is also another demonstration of the exemplary way in which Behrens embodied Muthesius's ideal of the good designer. Coming from painting, by way of graphic design and Gewerbekunst, to domestic architecture and thence to industrial design in the very broadest sense, he liberated himself from the influence of Art Nouveau and achieved, in the Turbinenfabrik, that kind of Schinkelesque form that Muthesius was to demand in so many words of the Werkbund designers two years later. Yet his Schinkelism was by no means consistent. In 1911, at the same time as the extremely neo-Classical Wiegand house in Dahlem, his office also produced the gasworks buildings in Frankfurt, perhaps the most formally inventive industrial buildings of his pre-War career. It may be because of some such indecision in his own mind, or within his office hierarchy, that he did not exercise an equal, or equally beneficial, neo-Classical influence on his pupil-assistants. Mies van der Rohe clearly accepted it, and—to judge from his project for the Kröller House—could practise it with even greater facility than his master. Le Corbusier rejected it, in practice, and in written word, Gropius, it seems, accepted it, but without benefit to his architecture. There may have been some fundamental disposition of Gropius's mind that accounts for the seeming division of intentions here. His training, at the Charlottenburg Hochschule and in Munich was one that, on other personalities (Poelzig, Berg, Mendelsohn) produced designers of an Expressionist turn of mind, and the blank, plain, glyptic shapes of his early houses at Jankow in Prussia (19o6) suggest, within a neo-Classical envelope, a sculptural attitude to design that might be compared to Poelzig's. The solidly walled storehouse block of the Faguswerke seems to continue this tendency, while the tight functional programme prevented any neo-Classical idea, acquired from Behrens in the intervening years, from appearing in the plan. But in the offices and 'Fabrik' for the Werkbund at their Exhibition in Cologne in 1914, the enforced discipline of an industrial programme did not exist, Gropius and Meyer were at liberty to arrange the elements of the building as they thought fit. A comparison of the finished building with the block plan shown in the fahrbuch for 1913 reveals an extensive rearrangement of the parts, probably connected with a change in the function of half the building—that part which was labelled Werkstätte on the 1913 plan becoming a hall for the display of machine tools, ete. with an additional pavilion for the Deutz motor-company. The plan finally used is fully as academic as that employed by Poelzig in his buildings for the Breslau Fahrhundertfeier but with the addition of certain usages that seem uncommonly French. The office block is disposed axially about the main entrance, and the axis runs back through an open courtyard and down the centre of the Machine Hall. The courtyard is traversed by an axe secondaire, and-on paper, though not as seen by the eye in fact-has bi-axial symmetry, the linking passages between the open sheds that flanked the court and the office on the one hand, the Machine Hall on the other, being disposed in such a way as to create identical patterns of set-backs on both sides, even though the two confronted elevations were utterly different. As can sometimes be seen on more 'experimental' types of Beaux-Arts plans, there is an asymmetrical element, the Deutz Pavilion, aligned on a tertiary axis at the other end of the machine hall. Stylistically, the various elements of this group of buildings are a fairly complete florilegium of the modern eclectic sources from which an up-todate Werkbund designer could draw at the time. That which seems most homogeneous with the aims of the Werkbund and its expressed attitudes is the Machine Hall, clearly based on gable-ended train-sheds such as Muthesius had admired, simple in form and entirely convincing in its shape, as are the open sheds that flank the court, though these have every appearance of being at least the prototypes of standard units drawn from industrial production. An equal certainty of design, though a far less adventurous form, is exhibited by the Deutz Pavilion. Clearly related in its details, plan-form and constructional methods to Taut's Stahlwerksverband Pavilion of the previous year, it makes a strong contrast with Taut's Glass Industry exhibit of 1914. Where this latter steps forward to further structural and formal adventure with its geodesic dome and so forth, the Gropius version is a step back towards an accepted Classicising form, that of the Tholos or polygonal temple-a point which is emphasised by the copy of the Parthenon Hermes that was placed at its base at the end of the long pool which ran down the side of the Machine Hall. But the office block is the most complex part of the whole assembly, stylistically speaking, and also architecturally the weakest. Its overall silhouette can only be described as Palladian, in the manner of Wilton House, with a long two-storey central body, a weakly-marked central entrance, and terminal towers—or nearly so; the position of these towers is architecturally the most debatable part of the design. The source of the silhouette is Wrightian as are some of the details (e.g. the framing of the entrance) and this is the first clear demonstration of Wright's influence in Werkbund circles. Wright's work was fairly well known by 1913-14, not only through the Wasmuth publications but also through the activities of H. P. Berlage. There is a striking similarity between the block form of Gropius's building and Wright's bank in Mason City, Iowa, completed a year earlier, particularly as to the flanking towers and their deeply overhung cornices. Drawings for this building, published in the first Wasmuth volume, are also the source for the use of a close-spaced rhythm of brick piers with narrow slit-like windows between them, and for much of the detailing of the brickwork throughout the whole block. Had Gropius and Meyer been content to follow out this Wrightian exercise to its natural formal conclusion, the result would have been, it seems, a distinguished pioneering work in an idiom new to Europe, though clearly sympathetic to neo-Classic modes of thought. However, their neo-Classical disposition of mind seems to have been insufficiently strong to resist the temptation to make the building a manifesto of Muthesian transparency and fine-structure at the same time. On the courtyard face, the Wrightian basement storey and the Wrightian roof-structures, are separated by a storey of total glazing, carried some three feet clear of the rear structural wall of the block, making a covered passage that links the various first-floor offices with the staircases at the end of the block. These staircases are not as might be imagined, within the towers, but stood proud in front of them on the other façade, in semicircular projections in the manner of the end pavilion of Hoffmann's Villa Ast (Vienna, 19og). But whereas Hoffmann had used a solidly-walled form with two cornices to emphasise its shape, Gropius and Meyer continue their total glazing round the ends of the building at first-floor level and wrap it around the staircases, at which point it is brought down to ground-level, to produce glazed half-drums rising the full height of the main façade. The staircases are thus visible from outside, as is the corner stair of the Faguswerke, and this technical innovation has enjoyed a considerable succès d'éstime ever since, as well as providing the inspiration for some of Mendelsohn's most characteristic designs. But it is difficult to rate it a visual success. The two turns of staircase that are revealed rise at different rates, due to the presence of a half-landing in the upper one, an uncomfortable sight that would have been better hidden, while the glazing of the whole end of the building at first-floor level, reveals the fact that the towers, instead of being firmly based on a continuous structure down to ground level—as they are in the Wrightian prototype— are half-heartedly cantilevered from the internal structure at the level of the main roof. The cantilevers are slight, but in this context most unhappy. The whole building seems to lack any experienced awareness (such as Paul Scheerbart already possessed) of the difficulties of glass walling from the visual angle. The simple strongly-marked rhythm of the vertical ordering of the Faguswerke windows is replaced by an uncontrolled horizontal spread without, however, the appearance of being intended for what would later have been called an endless' façade, and the effect of transparency seems not to have been studied. Compared to van de Velde's Theatre at the same exhibition, this must appear a more clumsy piece of design. But van de Velde's building, though immensely sophisticated, is without innovations, architecturally speaking. The future lay with Gropius and those who felt as he did. All they lacked was an aesthetic discipline that would make sense of transparencies, cantilevers, glass-walling and other technical innovations. That aesthetic discipline was not, however, one that any school of architecture seems to have been capable of finding for itself, and the resolution of the architectural difficulties was to come from the realm of painting and sculpture, from that development towards purely Abstract art that had already been launched by the Cubists and Futurists, but did not become available as a usable discipline until after the War.