# 7: Adolf Loos and the problem of ornament AMONG THE EFFECTIVE contributors to the body of ideas that supported the Modern Movement, one must certainly number Adolf Loos. Yet his contribution was sporadic, personal and not always very serious in tone. As an architect he appears as one of the first to build in a manner that really valued simplicity of form as a virtue in itself, yet usually spoiled that simplicity by usages that wilfully departed from it, or materials that concealed it. As a writer he was prolific and usually well-informed, yet much of his influence depends upon one, or possibly two, of his most opinionated essays. As a person he was turbulent, combative, contradictory and capable of turning personal quarrels into public crusades, yet he was admired and courted, and people are still proud to claim his acquaintance,¹ twenty or more years after his death. His active career divides itself into three main parts. The first, down to his return from the U.S.A. in 1897 does not concern us immediately at this point. The second, of active building, teaching and journalism in Vienna, reaching a peak of productivity around 191o, produced his most influential writings, his most characteristic buildings. The third, which begins with his arrival in Paris in 1923 as an acknowledged celebrity, is the phase of his greatest personal influence, but one that is hardest to deal with historically -one has to accept the testimony of those who knew him then that they were pleased when they pleased him,² and were flattered to be accepted into his circle of friends and admirers. But this third phase was the product of the second. His celebrity on arrival depended only in part on his personal reputation, and hardly at all on his buildings, which seem to have been known only by hearsay. He was famous primarily for certain of his writings which had just been reprinted for the second time in French, writings from the peak years of the second phase, writings which he himself regarded as the most essential expressions of his credo. Like practically everything else he wrote, these had appeared first in Viennese newspapers and periodicals, and were mostly occasional works-as a witty and spritely controversialist he was in demand for feuilletons and exhibition notices, and he wrote on a wide variety of subjects, such as clothing, manners, furnishing, music, etc. besides architecture. These writings all exhibit a similar tendency, anti-Romantic, fastidious, puritanical (though never inhumane) and authoritarian (though opposed to established authorities). The possible appeal of these qualities to later Modern Movement theorists is clear, but they might well have been forgotten and lost in post-War Vienna, but for the activities of one man whose connection with Modern architecture is important, though oblique. This was Herwarth Walden, proprietor of a gallery and magazine, both called Der Sturm, who was one of the chief representatives of revolutionary art, and primarily Expressionism, in Berlin. A conscientious avantgardiste, and despiser of conventions, on the model of Marinetti, he made his magazine, founded in 191o, and gallery, which ran until 1924, a clearing-house of ideas on an international scale, somewhat like Léonce Rosenberg in Paris after 1919. He was one of those who introduced Futurism to the German public, in 1912; and also in 1912 he published in his magazine five of Loos's essays.a These may have been brought to his attention by Arnold Schoenberg, who was a friend of Loos, and also in touch with German Expressionist painters (he was a member of the Munich Blaue Reiter group) at all events, the tone of voice of the essays that appeared in Der Sturm was of a kind to appeal to despisers of convention, even if the logical outcome of their arguments was not. In particular the tone of Ornament und Verbrechen, which Loos had written in 19o8, was likely to appeal by its use of sexual and anthropological arguments, and that of Architektur, by its apotheosis of peasant design. Access to the pages of Der Sturm was access to a limited, but international audience, and bore fruit in an almost immediate reprinting in Paris, in the pages of Les Cahiers d'Aujourd'hui in 1913, in what became the standard French translation, by Georges Besson. The Besson version is lively, but somewhat bowdlerised, and fairly heavily cut, as far as Ornament und Verbrechen is concerned, drastically cut and shortened in the case of Architektur. Nevertheless, the main substance of the argument is present in both cases, and these two essays (all that ever were translated) would appeal to similar persons and frames of mind in Paris as in Berlin—in this case, those who later became members of Dada. For when Ornament und Verbrechen was reprinted again in French, in 192o in L'Esprit Nouveau —perhaps its most influential reprinting, and the one that prepared the way for Loos's arrival in Paris—it was during the period when Paul Dermée, an active fringe Dadaist who did much to break up the attempt to revive La Section d'Or, was still one of L'Esprit Nouveau's editors. It thus carried a double sense; it supported the demand of Le Corbusier for a reform in architecture and an abandonment of the catalogue styles, and it also supported the Dadaists' campaign of mockery against the fine arts, thus gaining Loos the entrée to the circle of 'Tristan 'Tzara and other Dadaists. L'Esprit Nouveau also promised the forthcoming publication of Architektur (under the title of L'Architecture Moderne) but this never took place and the essay finally appeared again in French in Morancé's L'Architecture Vivante, in 1923. Between these two second reprints of his essays in France, Loos had gathered together his papers of the 1897-19oo period and published them in 192r as Ins Leere gesprochen, a publication that bears strong witness to his international reputation at that time—a German language text appearing over a French imprint (that of Crès et Cie, Le Corbusier's publishers). Ornament und Verbrechen, and Architektur achieved their second German reprintings in a further book of collected essays, Trotzdem, which appeared in Innsbruck in 193o. Also in Austria appeared a Festschrift for his sixtieth birthday (193o) and Kulka's study of his work as an architect (1931). This return to a purely Austrian status should be noted, for it is clear that at the beginning of the Thirties Loos was not the commanding figure that he had been at the beginning of the Twenties, and Trotzdem does not appear to be so widely known and cited as Ins Leere gesprochen-in fact, architects who have read the latter are sometimes unaware of the existence of Trotzdem, even though they know Ornament und Verbrechen.4 The reasons for this fall from grace are probably to be sought in the difference of generation between Loos and the practising masters of the New architecture, and for a drastic change in sensibility during the Twenties (occasioned largely by the diffusion of Abstract and Futurist ideas, that made Loos look old-fashioned) and in the probability of personal quarrels with (e.g.) Le Corbusier. At all events, Loos's main impact on his younger contemporaries was made via Paris in the early Twenties, and-beyond his personal influence—appears to depend primarily upon Ins Leere gesprochen and Ornament und Verbrechen. The former acted as a support to Corbusian ideas of architecture as equipment but Ornament und Verbrechen, because it exercised influence of some sort from the time of its first writing, and because it was very clearly a product of a particular time and place, will be dealt with here. The subject of this essay—the status of architectural decoration—was not a new one, and in the early years of the century was a very live issue. But Loos's attitude towards the subject goes far beyond that of any of his contemporaries, and directly contradicts that of some of the most influential bodies of opinion, notably the Werkbund. It will be helpful, therefore, to survey the state of opinion briefly around 1gro. The attitude of the Rationalists, and of the Academics, was effectively one of indifference. T. G. Jackson makes a familiar gibe when he observed ## The man who cannot design flies naturally to ornament but he seems not to have actually envisaged an entirely undecorated architecture, any more than Guadet did, in spite of his indifference to style. Similarly Geoffrey Scott regards ornament as unimportant if the basic control of form is sufficiently sure These means sufficed them (i.e. Renaissance architects). Given these they could dispense at will with sculpture and colour ## a view which is flatly contradicted by Choisy's ## The Renaissance in Italy involved only a reform in the system of ornament and although Choisy does once express a preference for a building because it is free from ornament;5 he is not, in general, hostile to it. Among the English Free architects one finds contempt for the catalogued styles, but no hesitation in using ornament of their own invention, and an exploitation (though less vigorous than in the case of Loos) of the inherent decorative qualities of natural materials. Voysey is on record as objecting to ornamental plaster-work on ceilings, but only because he cricked his neck in looking at it, and one cannot but notice how Voysey turns minor functional necessities (such as the owl-ports in some of his gables) to decorative profit. But what is most remarkable, in view of later developments, is to find within the line of descent from the English Free architecture and the Deutscher Werkbund, no sense of impropriety in the ornamentation of machinery, engineering structures and machine products. The development of such a sense is a tribute to the revolution in taste effected by Loos himself and the Abstract aesthetics of the war years. Before this revolution it is possible to find an anonymous Lethabist in the Architectural Review observing that there is . . . a firestation just outside of Vauxhall where the lookout stage is a simple piece of iron lattice work wonderfully agreeable in its lines. Add to a skeleton like this a little bit of daintily designed and disposed modelling and the result would be charming. More remarkable than this is the Werkbund's only official pronunciation on the subject in the period, an article by Karl Gross in the Fahrbuch for 1912. It is easy to suppose that Muthesius's demands for the elimination of the nebensächlich refers to ornament specifically, but an examination of Werkbund products suggests that it only refers to 'superfluous' ornament, which is not the same thing. It is unlikely that Muthesius would have been able to hold together his heterogeneous organisation if he had deprived one whole wing of it-the artist-designers-of the only element they were trained in or capable of contributing, and he nowhere inveighs against ornament as such. Behrens likewise shows a divided attitude on the subject—his products for industrial users (e.g. arc lamps) are undecorated, but those for domestic use (e.g. electric ovens) are ornate, and Gropius shows himself a capable ornamentalist in his fabric designs, etc. of 1913-14. But Karl Gross's article also reveals a qualifying factor in Werkbund discussions that may be no more than a verbal quibble, or may be the touchstone that distinguishes justifiable ornament from superfluous ornament. It first appears as a question that can hardly be rendered into English ## Muss Schmuck denn ohne weiteres Ornament sein? because no two English words (e.g. Decoration/Ornament) carry the distinction that Gross makes between Schmuck and Ornament. The general sense of Schmuck appears clearly enough in a later sentence Der erste Schmuck eines Gebäudes ist eine gute Massenverteilung (The prime ornament of a building is a good arrangement of the masses) which seems to be comparable to the implication of a passage from Lamprecht cited by Worringer . architecture, apart from its more or less ornamental accessories, such as the comprehension of space.... But, in any case, this is only the erste Schmuck, and he nowhere renders precise the point at which the degrees of Schmuck begin to shade off towards Ornament. And beyond this, though he is clearly dissatisfied with some contemporary ornament (in his second sense), he does not turn his back on it in general. In fact he looks forward to an Ornamentik of the twentieth century. His views about this suggest that, though that ornament may be in a new style, his main interest in it is one that had been declared outmoded at the Werkbund Congress of 1911. Thus, while he admits that Beauty of form is pleasing, even without ornament and complains that industrial style consists of seeking to mislead, by means of worthless ornamental rubbish covering poorlyconceived form his solution does not envisage those formal and intellectual disciplines proposed by Muthesius, nor the absolute anathema proposed already by Loos, but simply a call for Qualität Decoration, even ornament in the technical sense, must remain quality work when we set out on the road to twentieth-century ornament. If ornament is to be again what it once was and must remain, a particular distinction that lifts an object out of the general mass, it must be quality work. The power of survival of the artistic handicrafts rests directly on this premise. Here we have a writer belonging to the most progressive body in the field of design at the time, taking a line that was to be specifically rejected by the next generation of designers belonging to that body, who turned against ornament of any kind, and accepted Loos's views on the subject so wholeheartedly that he had to complain of plagiarism. For him, the idea of a nineteenth-century Ornamentik, was insupportable, let alone an Ornamentik of the twentieth century, and for him ornament was irretrievably connected with poor-quality goods. The reason why Loos's ideas prevailed over a more cautious attitude lies largely in three factors. Firstly, his absolute anathema on ornament solved Gross's problem (and everyone else's) by a swift and surgical means. Secondly, he was timely and specific. At a time when Art Nouveau was falling into discredit, his attack on ornament was launched against named Art Nouveau designers, as well as more generally. And thirdly, his mode of expression gave his argument unwonted force. Both argument and style are effectively summed up in the opening paragraphs of Ornament and Crime. The human embryo goes through the whole history of animal evolution in its mother's womb, and a newborn child has the sensory impressions of a puppy. His childhood takes him thróugh the stages of human progress; at the age of two he is a Papuan savage, at four he has caught up with the Teutonic tribesman. At six he is level with Socrates, and at eight with Voltaire. For at this age he learns to distinguish violet, the colour that the eighteenth century first discovered-before that violets were blue and tyrian was red. Physicists can already point to colours they have named, but that only later generations will be able to distinguish. Children are amoral, and so-by our standards-are Papuans. If a Papuan slaughters an enemy and eats him, that doesn't make him a criminal. But if a modern man kills someone and eats him, he must be either a criminal or a degenerate. The Papuans tattoo themselves, decorate their boats, their oars, everything they can get their hands on. But a modern man who tattooes himself is either a criminal or a degenerate. Why, there are prisons where eighty per cent of the convicts are tattooed, and tattooed men who are not in prison are either latent criminals or degenerate aristocrats. When a tattooed man dies at liberty, it simply means that he hasn't had time to commit his crime. The urge to ornament oneself and everything within reach is the ancestor of pictorial art. It is the baby talk of painting. All art is erotic. The first ornament born, the cross, is of erotic origin; the earliest art-work, the first creative act of the original artist was smudged on the cave wall to let off emotional steam-a horizontal stroke, the reclining woman; a vertical one, the man who transfixes her. The man who did this felt the same impulse as Beethoven, was in the same heaven of delight as Beethoven composing the Ninth. But the man of our own times who smudges erotic symbols on walls is either a criminal or a degenerate. It is clear that this violent impulse might seize one or two unbalanced individuals in even the most advanced cultures, but as a general rule one can rank the cultures of different peoples by the extent to which their lavatory walls have been drawn upon. With children this is a natural condition, their first artistic expressions are erotic scribblings on the nursery walls. But what is natural to children and Papuan savages is a symptom of degeneration in modern man. I have therefore evolved the following maxim, and pronounce it to the world: the evolution of culture marches with the elimination of ornament from useful objects. Rarely-outside the Futurist Manifestoes—has a new doctrine been enunciated in so drastic and dynamic a manner, or in a way which persuades by chiming in with so many bodies of received opinion—albeit combined in new patterns. Loos never made any significant extensions to the argument set out here except the idea (not original) of ornament as wasted effort, but almost unlimited embroideries were possible because of the great number of levels of reference. Many of the ideas were fairly common property. The evolutionary fallacy may be found in Worringer for instance Springer justly compares these productions (cave paintings) to the 'artistic achievements' of African natives; another comparison not far to seek would have been the scribblings of a child but whereas Worringer believed these primitive scribblings to be 'linear abstract' Loos, profiting from Freud (in which he is a pioneer) rates them all symbolically representational. On the other hand, the comparison between tattooing and some kinds of architectural decoration can be found in Lethaby as early as 19r1,⁶ presumably in complete isolation from Loosian ideas. Above all, there was his specific attack on named masters of Art Nouveau, which undoubtedly helped to galvanise a hitherto vague and unorganised distrust into a definite feeling that—at least—Art Nouveau was a past mistake that should not be made again. Now that ornament is no longer organically integrated into our culture, it has ceased to be a valid expression of that culture. The ornament that is designed today has no relevance to ourselves, to mankind at large, nor the ordering of the Cosmos. It is unprogressive and uncreative. What has happened to the ornamental work of Otto Eckmann? What has happened to van de Velde? The artist used to stand for health and strength at the pinnacle of humanity, but the modern ornamentalist is either a cultural laggard or a pathological case. He himself is forced to disown his work after three years. His productions are already unbearable to cultured persons now, and will become so to others in a little while. Where are now the works of Eckmann, and where will those of Olbrich be ten years from now. Modern ornament has neither forbears nor descendants, no past and no future. It may be received with joy by uncultivated folk, to whom the true greatness of our time is a book with seven seals, but even by them it will shortly be forgotten. The specificity and personal nature of this attack have subsequently been somewhat obscured, but they need to be re-emphasised here for reasons that will appear later. Ornament and Crime, whatever else it may have become, was originally an attack on the Wiener Sezession, and the Wiener Werkstätte, with whom Loos had a quarrel going back into the Nineties, occasioned, it would appear, by Josef Hoffmann's failure to entrust him with the decoration and furnishing of the Sezession council chamber. 'The fact that he is only attacking contemporary ornament and contemporary ornamentalists is brought out by the last paragraph of the essay which ends ... and modern man may use the ornament of historic and exotic cultures at his discretion, but his own inventive talents are reserved and concentrated on other things Loos, in fact, is quite permissive to the ornamental activities of those whom he regards as culturally lagging-earlier civilisations, primitive persons, even the labouring poor of Vienna. It is only sophisticated decoration by trained artists of his own time that he attacks, and he himself is fully prepared to use, e.g. the Doric order, when he feels that the situation requires it. Also, like many reformers, he was a Traditionalist and tended to look backward, not forward. One does not find him attacking Ruskin, as Marinetti was to do. In spite of his inevitable distrust for the Deutscher Werkbund (which he seems to regard as a plot of artists to batten on classes of production that ought to be unornamented, the imposition of a false style) he thanked Muthesius in print for Das Englische Haus, and was attached to the English cottage tradition as epitomised in the English Free architecture. He took tradition-bound English tailoring as a model of reticent good taste. 'Though he admired some consequences of American industry and the whole of American plumbing, he had none of the Futurists' sense of machinery as an aid to personal expression, and he mocks the ideas of a high-obsolescence, scrapping economy, such as was already appearing in the U.S., and was accepted enthusiastically by the Futurists in the next five years. He tends to see furniture and utensils as a class of possessions whose market value must be maintained, not as a class of equipment to be discarded when outmoded. A Traditionalist, he was also a Classicist, as the frequent use of Classical details—the coffered ceiling of the American Bar in Vienna, for instance— in his buildings shows, but one can be more specific than this; he was also a Schinkelist. Just as the last paragraph of Ornament and Crime reveals, unexpectedly, a permissive attitude to the ornament of the past, the concluding paragraph of Architektur reveals, somewhat unexpectedly in view of the rest of the essay, a touching faith in the value of the Schinkelschüler tradition Fischer von Erlach in the south, Schlüter in the north, were justly accounted the greatest masters of the eighteenth century. Then on the threshold of the nineteenth century stood Schinkel—but we have forgotten him. May the radiance of his towering achievement shine forth on the coming generations of our builders. One cannot help finding this parting apotheosis of Schinkel somewhat surprising, because the preceding paragraphs of Architektur had been rather anti-Greek in tendency. The ancient Greeks are abused for excessive attention to original detailing and, by inference from the fact that Romans were praised for not doing so, inventing new orders after Doric. The Parthenon is despised for being painted—a point that later Modern-Movement Classicists were happy to overlook. It is Rome and Roman architecture (as he understood them) that receive Loos's approbation. From the Romans we derive our social sense and our spiritual discipline It was no accident that the Romans were not in a position to discover new orders of columns, new decorative styles.... The Greeks squandered their inventiveness on the Orders, the Romans spent theirs on the plan. And he who can resolve the larger problems of the ground plan does not concern himself with new mouldings. Taking a stand on the authority of the plan, Loos brings himself close— closer than anywhere else—to the body of academic discipline. But it is strange that he should praise Roman architecture here and not mention what other German-speaking theorists found praiseworthy in it, Raumngestaltung, nor mention what French theorists found praiseworthy, construction. This highly abstract view of Roman building is balanced against a curiously primitive view of the nature of architecture in general. Continuing to work backwards through the essay, we find him preceding his praise of Rome with a demonstration of his idea that architecture must affect the emotions, and using as an illustrative image the following When we find a mound of earth in the woods, six feet long and three feet wide, shovelled up into the shape of a pyramid, then we turn serious, and a voice inside us says 'Here lies ...' That is Architecture. Now this is not Abstract; as with the cross, the first art work smudged on the cave wall; it is symbolic, it communicates information as well as emotion, unlike Geoffrey Scott's empathetic responses to architectural form. In spite of the apparent contradiction of his insistence on the plan in Roman architecture, it seems doubtful if, for Loos, the seeming Abstract was ever completely so, whether the purity of Pure Form ever really interested him as anything other than a symbol of purity of mind. This view of Loos is reinforced by the opening paragraphs of Architektur, which bring together several of his pet aversions and admirations. He sets a scene on the shores of a mountain lake, and commends the homogeneity of character of the scene; everything in it, mountains, water, peasant houses, trees and clouds, all seem shaped by the hand of God. But Here-what is this? A false note, a scream out of place. Among the houses of the peasants, which were made not by them but by God, stands a villa. Is it the work of a good architect or a bad one? I don't know. I only know that the peace and beauty of the scene have been ruined. The peasant doesn't do this, nor the engineer who builds a railway on the shore or sends ships to plough their deep furrows in the waters of the lake. It is clear, though hardly explicit, in the following paragraphs that the peasant builds well, in harmony with the universe, because he builds without thinking about architecture, and without interference from architects. So, presumably, does the engineer in Loos's view, though he does not refer to engineers again in the essay. Now, to build without interference from architects, and their preoccupations with style and the Styles, has for Loos at this juncture an important consequence. Without direction from an architect ## der Baumeister könnte nur Häuser bauen: im Stile seiner Zeit. In the style of his own time, can only mean, in Loos's view of the evolution of ornament and culture, in an undecorated style. Freedom from ornament is the symbol of an uncorrupted mind, a mind which he only attributes to peasants and engineers. In this view succeeding generations were to follow him, thus laying further foundations to the idea of engineers as noble savages (to which Marinetti also contributed) and also—and this is vital in the creation of the International Style—laying further foundations to the idea that to build without decoration is to build like an engineer, and thus in a manner proper to a Machine Age.