# 11: Holland: Berlage and attitudes to Wright # Section three HOLLAND: THE LEGACY OF BERLAGE: DE STIJL, 1917-1925 Berlage, H. P: Grundlagen und Entwicklung der Architektur, Berlin, 1908. Gedanken über Stil, Leipzig, 1905. de Groot, J. H: Vormharmonie, Amsterdam, 1912. Wright, F. Ll: Introduction to the 'first Wasmuth volume': Frank Lloyd Wright, Ausgeführte Bauten und Entwürfe, Berlin, 1910. Ashbee, C. R: Introduction to the 'second Wasmuth volume': Frank Lloyd Wright (Chicago), Berlin, 1911. de Fries, H: Frank Lloyd Wright, Berlin, 1926. Jaffe, H. L. C: de Stijl 1917–1927, Amsterdam, 1956. Brown, Theodore M: The Work of G. Rietveld, Architect, Utrecht, 1958. Seuphor, M: Piet Mondriaan, London, 1957. Oud, J. J. P: Holländische Architektur (Bauhausbuch 1o), Munich, 1926. Mendelsohn, E: lectures reprinted in Erich Mendelsohn, Das Gesamtschaffen des Architekten rlin, 1930. Whittick, A: Eric Mendelsohn, London (2nd edn.), 1956. Conrads and Sperlich: Fantastic Architecture (English version with notes by G. and C. C. Collins), London, 1962. Malevitsch, K: Die gegenstandslose Welt (Bauhausbuch 11), Munich, 1927. Lissitsky, E: Russland, Vienna, 1930. Wendingen, 1919-1925 (including special issues on Mendelsohn, 192o, and Frank Lloyd Wright, 1925.) de Stijl, 1917–1931. G and ABC, 1923-1925. DURING THE wAR of 1914-18 the Dutch alone, of all nations who had contributed to the growth of a new architecture, enjoyed the benefits of neutrality, and in the development of their architecture alone can the break between the first and second phase of the developing twentieth-century style be seen unobstructed by the confusions of the War. Outside Holland, major architects whose careers effectively span the War years are rare— Gropius and Perret are almost alone in having done work of equal interest before 1914 and after 1918—and most of the personalities who characterised the post-War scene, such as Mendelsohn, Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier, Lurçat, have insignificant or non-existent pre-War careers. But in Holland the war years were, if anything, a period of increased building activity, forcing on the development of talents that were maturing after 191o, which rapidly brought young men to the top, and drove pre-War currents of ideas to their logical (or illogical) conclusions—all without any serious breaks or interruptions of development except those precipitated by the ideas and personalities involved. The break—and it is a real break with the past—comes in late 1917 with the foundation of the group de Stijl, but the ideas of this group, far from being born of the agonising experiences of the War, were the product of discussions, experiments and building work that had been going on since 1911, or thereabouts. That the ideas of de Stijl (and similar bodies of thought) were taken up so enthusiastically in countries that had been involved in the War, seems to be less due to their applicability to post-War conditions (which is doubtful) than to the fact that theorists in most of those countries would have arrived at similar conclusions themselves at about the same time, had they not been otherwise engaged. The rapid evolution of de Stijl theory and practice may be largely attributed to the clear-cut polemical situation in which the group's architects found themselves, with their own Rationalist, mechanistic, abstract approach in direct opposition to the fantasticated, handicraft, figurative approach of the Wendingen group in Amsterdam. But, as is so often the case in polemics of this kind, the violent opponents had a great deal in common—in this case the example of H. P. Berlage, and his advocacy of F. Lloyd Wright. Hendrikus Peter Berlage was born as far back as 1856; he studied in Zurich in the late Seventies and did not return to Holland until after 1881. His studies had brought him into contact with late followers of Gottfried Semper1 while, after his return to Holland, he was associated with P. J. H. Cuijpers, an admirer and—to some extent—follower of Viollet-le-Duc. From these two sources, Berlage seems to have acquired the strain of careful mid-nineteenth Rationalism that runs through his work and his writings. But since his most notable building, the Beurs in Amsterdam, was not completed until after 19oo, and his most influential writings all date from after 19o5, young Dutch architects confused by the collapse of Art Nouveau were able to turn to the works and writings of a man who conceived of architecture in terms that had been current before Art Nouveau appeared on the scene. This is not to say that Berlage did not take cognisance of technical and social developments of his own time; to him, as to any true Rationalist, these were of prime importance, but the way in which he regards them is unlike the attitude of most of the other architectural theorists of his time. In particular one notes in his writings a moralistic tone of voice about the right employment of materials, etc. that is very hard to parallel, but gave his views particular force wherever they were heard. In general he seems to have been understood, and regarded, in the sense that he himself would have preferred to be understood and regarded, as a man who insisted on certain elementary truths, and despised side issues and decorative irrelevancies. The truths on which he insisted were three: the primacy of space, the importance of walls as creators of form, and the need for systematic proportion. As he expresses them, the first two are inseparably linked. In his Grundlagen und Entwicklung der Architektur of 19o8º he relates them thus The art of the master-builder lies in this: the creation of space, not the sketching of façades. A spatial envelope is established by means of walls, whereby a space, or a series of spaces is manifested, according to the complexity of the walling. In view of the brilliant plays upon space later created by his indirect follower G. T. Rietveld and his direct pupil Mies van der Rohe,a it is worth noting here that the kind of space that Berlage appears to have in mind is interior space within the building envelope, not space as an extensive continuum, just as the walling he has in mind is load-bearing and solidly built of brick or masonry. These were both reasonably conventional ideas for the period, but walling, in particular, had for him a more than customary value. In his German texts he persistently speaks of Mauern and Mauerflächen, emphasising the wall's substantial qualities; and he insists, at the end of his Gedanken über Stil Before all else the wall must be shown naked in all its sleek beauty, and anything fixed on to it must be shunned as an embarrassment ## and in the Grundlagen And thus walling would receive its due value again, in the sense that its nature as a plane would remain, while a more heavily articulated surface would not register as wall Like Adolf Loos after him, he takes as an example of good uncluttered structure, the astylar walling of Roman remains, and in the same year as Loos's Ornament and Crime he wrote And thus in architecture, decoration and ornament are quite inessential while space-creation and the relationships of masses are its true essentials. It is not surprising that he was largely remembered as an apostle of 'Truth to Materials', but he himself would have seen both this, and spacecreation, as subservient to overriding claims of proportional systems, to which the bulk of his work is devoted. Proportional systems were a preoccupation of many of his Amsterdam contemporaries as well, and most of them are agreed that the originator of this preoccupation was Jan Hessel de Groot. Berlage himself is quite explicit on his debt to him. The main thing is to work systematically, which may yield remarkable results for the modern theory of proportions; I myself have worked for years in no other way, and I am an ex-pupil of de Groot. However complex the mathematics and the forms employed may have been, de Groot's view of the nature and function of proportion was remarkably simple. In the introduction to one of his numerous published books and papers, the Vormharmonie of 1912, he states T'his is a book of instructions on how to arrive at harmony of form through formal relationships. I call form harmonious when its internal relationships are such that it creates a whole. 'The aim of my research is this; to be able to make from, say, twenty forms, one form. 'Take ten letters, you can make a whole of them through placing them next to one another so that they can be read as a whole, without interruption, as a word. However, he raises the subject to something more like the mystical plane on which it is customarily discussed, by adding a footnote that introduces Berlage's favourite phrase (expressing an idea as old as Aristotle) for formal harmony, which, he says, .. . is also defined as 'Unity in Plurality' (Eenheid in veelheid). Berlage was not alone in following de Groot, as has been said, nor was he alone in distributing his influence outside Holland. It is clear that the contribution of J. G. Lauwericks is of great importance in this respect, for, although he was an Amsterdam architect to begin with, he taught for some years at the Düsseldorf Kunstgewerbeschule, where Adolf Meyer, later a regular collaborator with Gropius, came under his influence, and he may also have provided Le Corbusier with his first sight of a building designed according to systematic proportion.s But whatever Lauwerickx's contribution as a teacher on the practical plane, and whatever may have been written by de Groot himself, and later by his follower Slebos, it was Berlage who gave this school of thought its most eloquent expression, and, although most of his ideas went by default in the work of his followers, they did provide the foundations for a Rational attitude to form. For Berlage, proportion was a guard against mere passing fashions, a guarantee of permanent value, and he quotes at the head of the Grundlagen a phrase from Sheraton's Cabinet Maker: Time alters fashions ... but that which is founded on geometry and real science will remain unalterable. He reinforces this opinion with his own experience I have been driven to this conclusion; namely, that geometry (and thus mathematical science) is not only of the greatest usefulness in the creation of artistic form, but even of absolute necessity he makes the customary appeal to the musical analogy Why should architecture—of all arts most often compared to music, as Schlegel brought out with his famous expression gefrorene Musik-why should architecture be composed without rhythmical, i.e. geometrical laws. and the equally customary appeal to the authority of Greece, by way of a quotation from Ferguson's History The system of definite proportions which the Greeks employed in the design of their temples, was a cause of the effect they produce even on uneducated minds This, however, is the only reference he makes to the supposed physiological Drawings signed by Meyer are reproduced in Berlage's Grundlagen as examples of the work being done at Düsseldorf, under Lauwerickx's instruction, but along purely Berlagian lines. As regards Le Corbusier the evidence is only circumstantial, but conclusive. In his Modulor (London edition, 1954) he relates that 'looking over a modern villa at Bremen, the gardener there had said to him (i.e. Le Corbusier) "This stuff, you see, that's complicated, all these twiddly bits, curves, angles, calculations, it's all very learned". The villa belonged to someone called Thorn Brick (?) a Dutchman, (about 19og).' The inference seems unavoidable that the answer to the parenthetical question mark is the Dutch artist J. Thorn Prikker, and that this was the house built for him in Bremen by Lauwerickx in 19os-and one wonders if it can have been Berlage who directed Le Corbusier's attention to it. responses to proportional effects, probably because the production of such effects was not with him the aim of proportional systems. The aim of all artistic creation, in his mind, was the achievement of repose, and thus of style, the ultimate aesthetic quality . .. one leading and essential property strikes the eye; it is Repose—a charming repose in small work, a noble calm in great monumental architecture. Against this (i.e. ancient architecture) our current work gives the impression of being very unrestful. I might almost say that the two words 'Style' and 'Repose' are synonymous; that, as Repose equals Style, so Style equals Repose. and later he equates these two concepts with proportion as well, by bringing in the characteristic Eenheid in Veelheid tag Nature is not unrestful, since it has Style, and if we direct our attention to the arts of earlier times, we shall not be misled by them either, since they have Style, i.e. Unity in Plurality The possession of style seems to have been held by most of Berlage's Amsterdam associates as a quality to be cultivated; they must have acquired the idea from readings in Semper, whose Der Stil in den technischen Künsten, is familiarly referred to by de Groot simply as Der Stil, and passed it on to the group which, consciously or otherwise, took on the phrase de Stijl as both name and watchword. Just what style meant to de Groot himself is obscured by his own tendency to overfine discrimination, but he seems, at least, not to intend the 'catalogue styles' of the academies. Berlage, without ever attempting to define what style really is, nevertheless, clearly means something of use and value to his own time. He decries Ruskin and other 'philosophers' for being only students, not teachers, of style and says There are, however, great practising artists like Viollet-le-Duc in France, and the well-known Semper in Germany, who are better teachers, and give in their great books a practical aesthetic ... of a sort that can be used. What then is the problem? Why, to have (a) style again. But style is also order, and not necessarily an obvious order such as is given by axial planning. Order prevails wherever settled laws are effective, and for examples of this he turns once more to the Antique, and to Nature. The order of nature raises another problem, which seems never to have been far from his mind, but which he poses here by means of a quotation from Semper; the problem of Norms or Types Just as nature is ever thrifty of motifs even in her endless abundance, constantly repeating her basic forms, but modifying them a thousand different ways according to the condition of her creatures and their mode of life, stretching or curtailing some, hiding or revealing others-just as nature has her evolutionary processes, within whose limits old motifs continually reappear in new creations, so art lies within the scope of a few Norms or Types that derive from old tradition, each constantly reappearing in diverse forms, each with its own history, as in Nature. Nothing, therefore is purely arbitrary, but all is governed by circumstance and relationship. This was published in Berlin three years before Muthesius delivered Wo stehen wir? to the Werkbund Congress of 1911, and though one doubts that Muthesius needed Berlage to remind him of Semper's writings, nevertheless the two men knew one another and one another's ideas, which approach fairly closely in content, though with significant differences in bias. As far as the architect's task in the twentieth century is concerned, there are striking resemblances. Berlage writes as early as 1905 Architecture shall be the creative art of the twentieth century, as it was down to 6oo years ago, and painting and sculpture shall advance together as its servants and, in that employment, could reach their highest development. and thus far he is close to Muthesius's vision of an unified hegemony of the arts under architecture. But he then goes on to prophesy, as a consequence of this and . . . on the basis of present social and artistic evolution: One will soon observe an interest in the growing body of useful arts, and a yearly decrease in the number of easel paintings and statues This, whatever its debts to William Morris, goes beyond anything Muthesius had prophesied, but for all that Berlage sets his sights on a very similar target. A drive toward Unity in Plurality is taking command of things in general, a drive toward Order, toward Style. ... The designer of today stands before an inviting prospect of artistic beautification, i.e. to pioneer the great architectural style of every future community. 'There is no fairer task. Close as this may be to Muthesius, there are notable differences of approach. Berlage does not postulate any pressure of patriotic sentiment nor economic duress—these things are to happen because they are right, not because they are the price of survival. Further, there is no talk of Durchgeistigung, of spiritualisation, but rather, of socialisation (this seems to be another instance of the pre-Art Nouveau quality in Berlage's thought; his politics were of the left, and almost Positivist at times). As our new concept manifests itself, what spiritual idea shall serve as its foundation? Who can answer this? Christianity is dead, and only the preliminary stirrings can yet be felt of a new world-concept based upon the consequences of scientific progress. We need an ethical settlement, and in that connection there comes to the surface of the ferment of our times the question of Altruism. It comes to this—the individual or the Community? With the denial of traditional morality shall the individual alone be served, or, given the principle of equality, shall all? Muthesius and Berlage agree on the supremacy of the community, but the latter has not the former's authoritarian streak, and for him the balance of individual and community was still to be settled. Nevertheless, he was in no doubt in which way things would go, he did his best work for communal patrons, and such work was the necessary end-product for him of his theories, which clearly envisage the architect as involved in society. If one sets out those theories in short form—to manipulate space with walls within an order that gives a style proper to an emergent, irreligious society, one sees that this formula is also the one by which Berlage evaluated the work of Frank Lloyd Wright. He came upon Wright's work apparently unprepared in 1911, although the first Wasmuth volume had appeared in the previous year, and he was thus the third significant European theorist to discover Wright for himself. He had been preceded by Professor Kuno Francke, inspirer of the first Wasmuth volume, in 19og; and by C. R. Ashbee, who wrote the introduction to the second Wasmuth volume, and had visited Wright as early as 19o1. The effect of the buildings he saw, and such Wright texts as he seems to have read, must have been to convince him that in Wright he saw a reflection of his own ideals. 'The sense of repose that he felt in the Martin House, was confirmed by Wright's statement that Simplicity and repose are the qualities that measure the true value of any work and his admiration for Wright's straightforward use of walling by the Wrightian claim that The Wall was let alone from base to cornice or eaves. As a result, the lecture he gave to the Zurich Ingenieur- und Architektenverein, in March 1912, on his American experiences, pays due tribute to Richardson and Sullivan, but is dominated by Wright. In particular the Larkin Building excited his admiration, which should not occasion surprise since it has a good deal in common with his own Beurs. Internally both have large halls surrounded by galleries, executed largely in brick as internal facing, with an alternative material at points of structural importance -stone for the columns and the springing of the arches in his own work, reinforced concrete for the gallery floor slabs in Wright's, both serve groupfunctions, but Wright's had the advantage of being designed around the open office, which was new to Berlage, and, indeed, a recent emergent in American commercial organisation, rather than the time honoured business of the Stock Exchange, which was probably slightly suspect to Berlage's socialist mind. The outcome is one of the most generous and disinterested tributes paid by one architect to another in this century:6 The building encloses only a single space, since, in accordance with the modern American concept, an office is not divided up into separate compartments. The boss sits at the same desk as his private secretary, whence he can supervise the great space in its entirety and the various open stories disposed as galleries around the central hall. It is a brick structure, and looks from the outside like a warehouse. Yet the interior is admirably illuminated, in spite of the corner stair-towers, like those of a church, which are lit from within. The galleries are illuminated by windows between the powerful pillars.. All these opinions of Berlage about Wright are taken from the lecture he gave on his American experiences in Zurich. The text of the relevant parts of this talk is given in H. de Fries, Frank Lloyd Wright (Berlin, 1926) and all the quotations from Wright that support them are from his article, which is discussed later in the chapter, In the Cause of Architecture. Brickwork is the material of the interior as well, giving place to concrete for the floorslabs. The detailing naturally follows Wright's own unique style, and gives a wholly exceptional testimony of his original powers. I care away with the conviction that I had seen a truly modern building, and filled with respect for a master who could create such a work, whose equal is yet to be found in Europe. This was Wright seen as an ideal Berlagian architect, and this lecture and its subsequent reprinting was for many the most convincing intimation of Wright's qualities. But Berlage's own followers regarded Wright in a manner that Berlage's writings do not warrant. For them, after 1917, the Robie House outranked the Larkin Building as the prime example of Wright at his most masterly, and J. J. P. Oud speaks of it in the following terms All the parts of this building, including the furnishings, were developed along mechanistic lines' and Jan Wils took this valuation of Wright even farthers People laughed at the Futurists, who want to demolish tradition and turn everything upside down. They brushed off Marinetti as a lunatic, because he wanted to burn down Venice and rebuild it properly again. And they shrugged up their shoulders when Wright said that the first task of the machine was to render all old work obsolete. This assimilation of Wright to the Futurists is, in part, a mark of the generally syncretic trend of de Stijl, to which both Oud and Wils belonged for a time, but it is equally a testimony of the peculiar way in which Wright became known to the younger generation in Europe. This emphasis on the mechanistic content of his work and theories might be supposed to stem from his lecture on The Art and Craft of the Machine, of 19or, but the text of this seems hardly to have been known in Europe before 1914. Instead, the answer seems to lie with two other documents: one was the essay In the Cause of Architecture, which Wright composed in 1908, and which was published with lavish illustrations in the Architectural Record; the other, which contained extensive quotations from In the Cause, was C. R. Ashbee's introduction to the second Wasmuth volume. The first Wasmuth volume was an édition de luxe of plans and rendered perspectives, large in format, unhandy to use, and-expensive. The second was smaller, illustrated with photographs, and seems to have been much more influential. Like the reprint of Berlage's lecture, it did not go outside the canon of photographic illustrations established by In the Cause, so that, in spite of its late date it had no picture of the Robie House, which remained unknown and unappreciated except to those who had the patience to decipher its exciting features from the very uninformative illustrations in the first Wasmuth volume, or those, like Rob van t'Hoff, who had seen it with their own eyes. As a result, European ideas of Wright seem to have been dominated at first by the Larkin Building and Unity Temple, the Coonley, Dana and Martin Houses. Yet it is clear that, after 1917, the Robie House is the most admired and most imitated of Wright's buildings, and the reason for this seems to be that it, alone, with its bold forms and spectacular cantilevers, could give body to the image of Wright as a machine architect that Ashbee had built up in the second Wasmuth volume. This image of Wright was not accidental, and Ashbee is quite clear about his own intentions It is quite intentional that I do not dilate on the subject of Frank Lloyd Wright's interior architecture, for this does not appear to me to be the core of his creativity, nor is it really typical of him. To repeat it again, one recognises in his architecture the struggle for mastery of the machine, and that is the true province of his powers. This view he supports with suitably mechanistic quotations from In the Cause and directs attention to it by acknowledging their source. Fourteen years later, when the Wendingen group published their album of Frank Lloyd Wright,9 In the Cause (and two rather uninteresting pendants to it) was the only text by Wright himself that they reprinted. Thus the Wright that the young followers of Berlage knew was not the Wright of the vernacular and nature-worshipping mood of the introduction to the first Wasmuth volume (whom members of de Stijl would have despised, as will become apparent) but the Wright of Above all, integrity. The machine is the normal tool of our civilisation, give it work that it can do well; nothing is of greater importance. To do this will be to formulate new industrial ideals, sadly needed. ## and The machine is here to stay. It is the forerunner of the democracy that is our dearest hope. There is no more important task before the architect than to use this normal tool to the best advantage. ## or The old structural forms, which up to the present time have been called architecture, are decayed. Their life went from them long ago and new conditions industrially, steel and concrete, and terra-cotta in particular, are prophesying a more plastic art. This is Wright comparable to the Futurists, and there was also Wright comparable to Berlage, who was equally comparable to Muthesius on occasions. The Wright/Berlage relationship filled in a gap in a spectrum of architectural ideas that ran from the Futurists at one extreme to the Rationalists and Academics at the other, and once that gap was filled the way was clear for the evolution of the syncretic aesthetic doctrines of de Stijl, in which elements of almost every corpus of pre-War theory are present. A special volume, outside the regular series, issued in 1925.