Gropius and Mies van der Rohe, had also begun to abandon what little they had taken up of it; Hugo Häring, whose Garkau farm buildings are one of the masterpieces of the Expressionist phase, began to drop from the foreground, and only Hans Scharoun was to maintain a persistently irregular attitude to design. The dividing line between the two epochs is given by the interval of time that separates the Friedrichstrasse and Chicago Tribune skyscraper competitions, both of which called up remarkable enthusiasm and inventiveness among the progressive architects of Northern Europe, including some of the best work of the outgoing, shortlived anti-Rationalist phase, and equally good work from the protagonists of the alternative approach, based on abstract, constructive art-the approach that finally made the International Style truly international. not old-fashioned, but does not conform to the current progressive norms of the time. There is practically no other sense in which the term can be made to stick to the work of Poelzig, which seems never to have been intended to express anything personal at all, and Mendelsohn is nearly always found to be expressing something about the nature or contents of the building. Since the expression of the function of the building is taken to be one of the touchstones of the non-Expressionist approach, we may suspect that we see here, as in so much twentieth-century architectural polemics, one of those situations where an aesthetic standpoint is defended by accusing the other party of abandoning a theoretical position that is, in fact, common ground to both sides. # 14: De Stijl: the International phase tHouGH IT Is impossible to draw a hard and fast line between the Dutch and International phases of de Stijl, in terms of theoretical writings or artistic productions, the change in membership between 19zo and 1922 is very marked indeed, and gives a fair picture of the transformation that was in process. By the beginning of 1922 van der Leck, van Tongerloo, van t'Hoff, Wils, Oud and Kok had left, and Huszar was about to leave, while Mondriaan, established in Paris since 1919, was no longer a directly effective member, though he did not resign finally until 1925. Severini had also lost contact, so that van Doesburg himself alone remained of the original membership. The new men who filled the gaps were very different from those who had left. Only two of them were Dutch, two were imaginary, one was German, one was Russian. The Dutch pair were Gerrit Rietveld, who had been a member since as early as 1918, but only now came to prominence, and Cor van Eesteren, whom van Doesburg enrolled in Weimar in 1923. Both have gained fame as architects though Rietveld seems to have entered the group as a furniture-maker, and van Eesteren, far from being a convinced Modernist when he met van Doesburg, was on his way to take up a Rome scholarship. The two imaginary members were both pseudo-persons of van Doesburg¹ in his Dadaist mood, I. K. Bonset and Aldo Camini, and it was over these signatures that he made most of his purely literary contributions to de Stijl. The German was Hans Richter, a former Dadaist who had turned to abstraction independently of the Dutch Movement, and the Russian was El Lissitsky, the apostle of Constructivism to Western Europe. The adherence of Lissitsky was brief, though important, and his place was taken by two other members of the Berlin G group, Frederich Kiesler, the Austrian theatrical designer, and Werner Graeff, an ex-student of the Bauhaus who was later connected with the Werkbund. The fourth and most celebrated member of G, Mies van der Rohe, never became a member of de Stijl, and van Doesburg's attitude to him is not clear.a The varying background and activities of these new members are worth noting, because they emphasise the degree to which the second phase of de Stijl differs from the first. No longer constrained by the exigencies of War and restricted communications to faire école on the narrow stage of Dutch art, van Doesburg could exercise his talents on a European scale. From 1919 onwards he travelled extensively, much as Marinetti had done, visiting most of the active centres of progressive art in Germany, as well as Prague, Paris, and certain other towns in France. In the process he established contact with most of the leading figures in art whose ideas were at all sympathetic to his, and the magazine, whose distribution became increasingly international, reflects this new situation not only in a new format, but in an increasing diversity of contents as well. Whereas, in the days of Oud and Mondriaan, it had exhibited the fairly consistent doctrine discussed in chapter 12, it now embraced Dadaism, late Futurism, Russian trends such as Constructivism and Suprematism, and the various Parisian trends that were associated with Léonce Rosenberg's Effort Moderne connection, as well as the new emergents in Berlin. It also published creative literary work, commonly Dadaist or Futurist in tone, and not all of it signed Bonset or Camini, but contributed or quoted from outside sources. However diverse these various tendencies may appear, they all had one or more aspects in common with what de Stijl had already thought or done, and they extend and develop van Doesburg's attitude to art and architecture, without causing any major break or disturbance. Thus from the Futurists, with whom he made direct contact even before the War was over, he gained confirmation of his mechanolatry, and the idea of a liberated typography, which begins to appear in de Stijl in 19zo. He also established contact with the Valori Plastici group, and thus with de Chirico, perhaps the most surprising of his new connections, though he discusses de Chirico's paintings in terms of space, machinery and other themes that were already familiar. By March 192o he was in touch with the Section d'Or group and L'Effort Moderne in Paris, whose interests in Cubism, and machinery, and generally intellectual and progressivist attitude would obviously appeal to him, and an eulogy of L'Esprit Nouveau appeared in de Stijl in February 1921. In the next two months he began to reprint Dadaist texts, which seem to have appealed to him by their extremism, their disgust with tradition and the past, and, most likely, their positive, if perverse attitude to Rationalism. The films of Richter and Eggeling were noticed in July of the same year-their Abstraction and 'space-time' qualities would obviously appeal—while the October issue contained a reproduction of a painting by Fernand Leger, the first photograph of a motor-car to appear in its pages, quasi-Futurist poetry by Nicholas Beaudouin, the Aufruf zur elementaren Kunst and quotations from a book by the German architectural writer, Adolf Behne. The far ranging eclecticism and joie de vivre of this period is nicely symbolised by Aldo Fiozzi's Valeurs Abstraits which was reproduced in January 1921—a Dadaist threedimensional collage with a French title, made by an Italian ex-Futurist, bearing the alarming 'scientific' injunction R $\mathrm { S O } _ { 4 } + \mathrm { H } _ { 2 } \mathrm { O } .$ Yet the most significant item to appear, as far as future developments were concerned, was the Aufruf zur elementaren Kunst, whose importance will be discussed later. This phase of extension and exploration in van Doesburg's career reaches its climax in 1922, the year in which he published his most extended personal statement of aims, found himself confronted by the problem of the Bauhaus, by the personality of Lissitsky, with whom he helped to organise the Düsseldorf Congress of Progressive Artists, and with whom (and others) he signed the foundation Manifesto of the Constructivist International. The statement of aims is, in a good Berlagian tradition, the reprint of a lecture given in Berlin, Jena and the Weimar Bauhaus late in 1921, under the title of Der Wille zum Stil, and much of what he had to say under this equally Berlagian heading was not very new. He rehearsed such established de Stij/ themes as the anathema on Individualism and Expressionism, the opposition of nature and spirit, the analogies of mechanical and artistic design, but in a new and rather laconic tone of voice, of a sort that had been prophesied by Marinetti and, indeed, sound rather Marinettian All that we used to designate as Magic, Spirit, Love, etc. will now be efficiently accomplished. The idea of the Miraculous, that primitive man made so free with, will now be realised simply through electric current, mechanical control of light and water, the technological conquest of space and time. This laconic tone reaches its apotheosis in another document of 1922, the Foundation Manifesto of the Constructivist International, which contains the following remarkable disclaimer This International is not the result of some humanitarian, idealistic or political sentiment, but of that amoral and elementary principle on which science and technology are based. But beside these old sentiments in a new voice (though one suspects that even the sentiments mav have been shocking at the Bauhaus) Der Wille zum Stil does introduce two new themes of importance. One is the Machine Aesthetic as such, the other is Elementarism. Of the former, van Doesburg says Since it is correct to say that culture in its widest sense means independence of Nature, then we must not wonder that the machine stands in the forefront of our cultural will-to-style.... Consequently, the spiritual and practical needs of our time are realised in constructive sensibility. The new possibilities of the machine have created an aesthetic expressive of our time, that I once called 'the Mechanical Aesthetic'. Since his examples are, among others, locomotives, cars, aeroplanes, etc. he is not contributing anything very new except the blanket term to describe the visual qualities that these objects had in common. But this blanket term does appear to be a genuine innovation, dating back to an article in the Bouwkundig Weekblad earlier in 1921, which is the former occasion to which he refers. Conceivably the Futurists may have already been in possession of the term before this, though Bragaglia's Manifesto on the subject did not appear until 1925. Furthermore, a note in de Stijl by Enrico Prampolini seems to imply that for him, at least, the word was a northern discovery, made at the time of the Düsseldorf Congress which he attended. The passage in which this occurs is worth noting, because it also seems to imply that the Futurists consciously handed on the torch of mechanistic aesthetics to those, north of the Alps, whom Prampolini groups as Constructivists (van Doesburg, Richter, Lissitsky, Eggeling and Moholy-Nagy) We today-who have hymned and exalted the suggestive powers of the machine as inspiration and fixed our sensations and plastic emotions in pioneer plastic works—we see the first outlines of the new machine aesthetic sketched on the glowing horizon... the first plastic expressions vouchsafed by a mechanical cosmogony The conjunction of 'the mechanical aesthetic' with 'constructive sensibility' and of 'a new machine aesthetic' with a list of artists termed 'constructivist' is symptomatic, if no more, of a growing feeling, which has much later been codified as a definitive credo, that the art proper to a mechanical age is Russian Abstract art, loosely termed Constructivist. As applied to the work and theory of the year under review, the term is a confusing one, since it has to stand for two opposing tendencies in Soviet art—the idealistic approach of Gabo and Pevsner, later termed Constructivist, but at that time, perversely enough, though like so many other Idealistic creeds, known as Realist, and the other, anti-Idealist and anti-art, approach of Lissitsky and his connection, which Lissitsky probably dubbed Constructivist in the same year of 1922. However, as far as the discussions and writings of 1922 are concerned, the term Elementarist seems much more to the point, since it was used by many of those involved (but not by Gabo and Pevsner, who were not involved anyhow), was derived from the ideas of Malevitsch, like many of the aesthetic practices, and genuinely identifies what the various parties had in common. Whatever the initial debt of the Elementarist idea to the Academic tradition (cf. chapter 1) the word elements appears to have been in use in a more or less Elementarist sense by Malevitsch by about 1915, when he conceived of his Suprematist paintings as being composed of fundamental suprematist elements³—simple geometric forms that are the basic units of his composition. In this he may appear to stand very close to Guadet, but in his sculpture and in the developing Elementarist tradition at large, an element is only a structural part of any volume that really registers in the composition, and is usually restricted to a plain rectangular shape in itself-in van Doesburg's Elementarist paintings the 'elements' are the areas of colour, or the frames around them, but not the coloured forms as a whole, and in such examples of Elementarist architecture as Rietveld's House at Utrecht, the elements are the structure of the building, and not, as they would be with Guadet, its functional volumes. The idea of Elementarism seems to have reached Germany either directly by way of Lissitsky when he came from Moscow in 192r, or in a more roundabout way that included Puni and Moholy-Nagy. It is unlikely that Lissitsky would not have known of such a concept if it were current, but it must be noted that the Aufruf zur elementaren Kunst, to which reference has already been made, was signed by Puni and Moholy-Nagy, as well as the ex-Dadaists Hausman and Arp, and seems to be the earliest record of the word. This Aufruf contained the most succinct yet misleading definition of Elementarism that ever appeared Elementary is the art that does not philosophise, but is built out of its own proper elements alone. which is not so much a tautology, as an equation that could be rephrased (given the necessary background knowledge) in the form: Elementarism equals art made of Malevitsch's elements minus Malevitsch's aesthetic philosophy, for the Elementarists'elements did not, as the Suprematists' did, carry a load of empathetic values,º but were simply units of structure and space-division. This absence of symbolic or mystical overtones is in line with van Doesburg's new laconic manner, but probably derives from the two Dadaists among the Elementarists, both of whom had been members of the Zurich Dada group, with its notorious contempt for metaphysics and 'spiritual values'. Though the paintings of Moholy-Nagy afford the earliest conscious examples of Elementarist art, and Kiesler's Cité dans l'Espace (discussed later in this chapter) is the most spectacular example of Architecture Elementarisée as he himself called it, the most striking example of an Elementarist structure was conceived and built before the word existed—the earliest version of Gerrit Rietveld's arm-chair, which was illustrated in de Stijl in 1919, but seems to have been designed as early as 1917. Curiously enough, the germs of this conception must have come from Wright, as represented to Rietveld by van t'Hoff. The form, a 'Morris chair' with a high plank back, is Wrightian, as is the use of plain machine-cut rails, such as Wright had valued in his own furniture as The straight-line clean-cut forms that the machine can render far better than would be possible by hand. But, to this Wrightian origin, had been applied precisely that type of European abstracting thought that Oud had identified as Wright's opposite. The functions of the chair have been analysed, discriminated, reduced to their 'essentials'—the sitting and enclosing functions are served by four planks (back, seat and two sides) that are visually separated from one another, from the two planks (arms) that serve to support the occupant's arms, and from the network of plain rails that serves the supporting functions, and maintain the various elements in their correct relative positions in space. The phrase 'positions in space' is advisedly used here—immediate commentary on this chair in the pages of de Stijl has two themes; the inviolate and unmutilated condition of each structural member, none of which is mortised or rabbeted by another, and the spatiality of the total structure. Rietveld himself insists that above all, the whole stands free and clear in space and van Doesburg goes further, and having acclaimed such furniture as 'the abstract-real sculpture of our future interior', devoted to it in volume III of de Stijl, a curious poem, in which its mechanistic and spatial qualities are contrasted with those of a painting by de Chirico In the 'Solitude' of de Chirico. In the foreground mathematical man-space-master, space-mastered With every plane, angle and point around at or near him a spatial measurement symbolised ## SPACE ANATOMY and in contrast to mathematical man caught in his space web a sober open space with a factory and a right-angled pipe at hand Rietveld's chair: unwilful but inexorable effect on empty space and in contrast: ## FUNCTION ## TO SIT CHAIR material necessity set against rich, continuous and vast creation of open space. CHAIR Silent eloquence of a machine or, in other words, the chair is, and affects, what the painting can only represent or symbolise, a functional structure in three-dimensional space. It is clear that in this context the concept of space is considerably more than of a void containing objects, and it seems to come nearer to a three-dimensional grid-something more than the continuum discussed in chapter 4, in that it appears to contain a regular, measurable, imaginary structure, an idea that may have been put into circulation among de Stijl by the Futurist Azari in his note on the Futurist Aerial Theatre, which describes aircraft climbing around an invisible spiral staircase.. . gymnastics on the invisible trapezes of the atmosphere and clearly implies some form of structure in space, if only the co-ordinates of a three-dimensional graph. Something similar is implied in the universal geometry of horizontals and verticals that Mondriaan took over from Schoenmaekers, while the key concept in Mondriaan's view of space (as expressed in his essay Le Néoplasticisme), of the rectangle as a form ## :: where lines cross or touch tangentially, but do not cease to continue (his italics is given visible substance by the structural elements of Rietveld's chair, where the lines, embodied as the rails of the structure, do indeed form rectangles by touching tangentially, and continuing an arbitrary distance beyond the point of interception. Space in Elementarist art is, indeed, continuous and open, and the work of art is a structure that makes its rectangularity manifest by giving body to its grid-lines and the planes and volumes between them, and this is still true even when the grid, as in some van Doesburg paintings of the mid-Twenties, has been skewed out of the vertical. Though such concepts were to be put to very effective use at the Bauhaus later in the decade, they seem to have been unknown there at the time van Doesburg first came in contact with it-an encounter that, for a variety of reasons, was a conspicuous disappointment to him. The facts of the case have been effectively obscured by a highly circumstantial version of events put about by his widow, according to which Gropius and van Doesburg met at the house of Bruno Taut in 1919, and Gropius there made van Doesburg the offer of a teaching post at the Bauhaus. When he arrived in Weimar to take this up (as late as 1921, for some unexplained reason) he was refused the post by Gropius. 'This version is denied by the other side, and regarded as improbable by those who knew both men, but the truth is still hard to come at, and the oscillations of van Doesburg's attitude are not easy to explain. It is true, however, that his first attacks do not begin until after he had visited Weimar, in the May 1922 issue of de Stijl. On the other hand, they consist of the kind of observations that a convinced anti-Expressionist Stijlkunstenaar could have made without having been crossed by the Bauhaus administration—confronted by Itten's Freudian pedagogy, by the Vorkurs with its preoccupation with natural materials, and remembering the newly completed Sommerfeld house outside Berlin, it would need very little more to provoke van Doesburg to the magnificent jibe As the church is a parody of Christianity, so is Gropius's Bauhaus in Weimar a parody of the new creativity. .. not only here, but elsewhere (e.g. the anthroposophical art-humbug of Dornach) the new artistic expression degenerates to a sort of ultra-baroque. Yet he had reasons to be friendly to the Bauhaus: he had a friend, Lyonel Feininger established there from an early date, an old admiration and a new acquaintance—Kandinsky and Moholy-Nagy-both joined the staff in this period, and the programme of the school had always been as anti-individualistic as his own. He had welcomed the foundation of the Bauhaus in 1919, and in 1924, after he had left Weimar and moved to Paris, he spoke in favour of the school and against its detractors. It is worth noting too, that only on one other occasion did a hostile note on the Bauhaus appear in de Stijl, and not over van Doesburg's own signature, and that, apart from these two instances, the hostility seems to have been largely retrospective, if not actually posthumous. Conceivably he had expected to galvanise staff and students alike by his lecture, only to find that to the student body he was just another visiting eccentric,® and so conceived a disappointment at the lack of results that had grown into a resentment by the time that he tried to rewrite the history of Modern art, in 1927, as the history of the universal and exclusive influence of de Stijl.º He was, almost certainly, the first of the Abstractionists who helped to alter the Bauhaus outlook, but he was only the first, and the real credit for the alteration must go to Moholy-Nagy (of whom he was reported to be jealous). At all events, his quarrel with the Bauhaus was less that it was too arty, as some of his younger colleagues seem to have thought, than that it had opted for the wrong kind of art. An outright rejection of 'art', in this context, is generally credited to the G group, but although their views on the subject were tough, they shaded off from a hard core of rejection towards less absolute attitudes, and even the determinism of its most determined anti-artists had qualifications. The hard core is represented by Mies van der Rohe, taking his stand on something very like nineteenth-century Rationalism (see chapter 19) and declaring ## We reject all aesthetic speculation, all doctrine, all formalism but the slogans and polemical paragraphs that speckle the newspaper-sized pages of G give a more liberal, though equally emphatic, impression. An overall artistic creativity was permitted, even if the separate 'arts' were despised. The opposition between the new creativity (in art) and the old, restricted art, is principal. We do not intend to bridge it over, but to deepen it and this, clearly, is simply a rewording of the regular de Stijl contrast between old art and new. Similarly, the interpretation of mechanical determinism has to be wide enough to include something almost mystical. Werner Graeff, reputedly the most tough-minded of the group, who is supposed to have left the Bauhaus in disgust, can be found asserting Uninfluenced by the methods of mechanical technology, the new and greater technology begins-the technology of tensions, invisible motions, action-at-a distance, and speeds unimaginable now in 1922 This appears to be Futurism reworded, and it is to be noted that in the same issue of G an extended and enthusiastic review of Lindner and Steinmetz's Ingenieurbauten (cf. chapter 5) has to take second place to pictures (the first of many in many different publications all over Europe) of Giacomo Matte-Trucco's Fiat factory at Turin, with its test-track for cars on the roof, the most nearly Futurist building ever built. It is clear that G opinions were very various in origin,1º but they have one constant theme elementary creativity, elementary means of creation, the elementarism that had been brought to Berlin by Lissitsky. Born in 189o, Lissitsky was one of the great 'ideas-men' of the Modern Movement. He may have had little to contribute that was original, but his impact, as the chief agent in bringing Russian developments to the attention of architects in Western Europe was of great importance. Not only did he bring fresh ideas of Cubo-Futurist extraction to minds that were already prepared for them by other similar developments, but he also enjoyed a prestige of a kind also enjoyed by an Ehrenburg, a Mayakowsky, a Prokofieff, as a species of ambassador at large of the new Soviet culture that appeared to many at that time almost as Futurism made fact. In addition he was endowed with an extremely persuasive, though quite unspectacular personality, and, in Western Europe at least, he gave far more than he received—there is, for instance, no perceptible de Stijl influence on him, but his influence upon even van Doesburg is made clear by the fact that in 1922, almost a complete issue was given over to his ideas, and another issue made over in its entirety to reproductions of his graphic work. Both writings and pictures were devoted to the concept of Proun, which was in many ways, his most characteristic contribution to the common pool of Abstractionist ideas. Proun is merely a Russian word for 'object' but in Lissitsky's hands it takes on a number of specialised collateral meanings, like the word abstract in Mondriaan's usage. Proun occupies a specific place in the history of creative design . . the halting place on the road of development of the new creativity, planted in soil manured by the corpse of painting and its artists. Even pure painting is classed among the dead .. though here the artist began his own transformation-—from the imitator of objects to the creator of a new world of objects and this is a rejection of the 'non-objectivity' of Malevitsch, to whom he was otherwise somewhat indebted. In this new world of objects, Proun was to be the seminal object Proun begins on the flat plane, goes on to the construction of three-dimensional models, and beyond that to the construction of every object of our comm Thus Proun supersedes painting and its artists on the one hand, the machine and its engineers on the other; proceeds to the construction of space, organises its dimensions by means of its elements, and creates a new, manifold yet unified, image of our nature. Proun, in fact, is a sort of aesthetic prototype for something very like a gigantic Berlagian Gesamtkunstwerk, complete with its own version of Eenheid in Veelheid. The emphasis on space-manipulation as the primary function of Proun is perhaps the newest thing, apart from the claim to hegemony over technology, in the Proun programme, but the actual approach to the consideration of space, if one may judge by what Lissitsky wrote later about the 'psychotechnical laboratory' run by his associate Ladowski, was cast in the rather Academic framework of 'Mass, space, plane, proportion, rhythm'. Some further aspects of Proun seem self-contradictory; thus, Lissitsky condemns in one place ...The narrow, limited, isolated and dismembered disciplines of Science yet he seems to be able to accept elsewhere in the same document an almost Choisyesque Rationalism Material becomes form through construction. Contemporary demands and economy of means need one another Proun is creative formation (mastery of space) by means of economical construction with revalued materials. But this last is, on examination, a most important proposition, for it is one of the beginnings of the idea that the formal disciplines of the Modern Movement are in some way the product of a philosophy resembling that of nineteenth-century Rationalism. Whether or not they were so produced is not the point at this juncture, but the art and the writings of Lissitsky were probably the first to bring them together. As for Lissitsky himself, this Rationalistic approach was what he later called 'Constructivism', and under this name became more or less the official credo of Soviet architecture in the Twenties (although his ideas had been suppressed in painting in 1921). The pioneer Constructivist structure was, for him, the Leningrad-Pravda building projected by the brothers A. and W. Wesnin in 1923 The building is characteristic of an age that thirsts after glass, iron and concrete. All the accessories that a metropolitan street imposes on a building-illustrations, publicity, clock, loudspeaker, even the lifts inside-are all drawn into the design as equally important parts and brought to unity. This is the aesthetic of constructivism.12 The description suggests, the drawings confirm, that this is a Futurist conception, subjected to the order of what Oud would have called an 'unhistorical Classicism', almost a square in plan, and almost a pure prism in bulk, with rather diagrammatic structure of stanchions and girders, to which all the mandatory 'accessories' including the lifts are tacked on as independent elements, in the Guadetesque sense of an element as the embodiment of a function, not in the Elementarist sense of an element as an atomic unit of structure or space-division. In Wesnin and in Lissitsky, as much as in Oud or in Le Corbusier, one can see that reabsorption of new concepts into traditional disciplines that made the creation of architecture possible, even at the cost of theoretical contradictions. But before this could be done, the new ideas had to be made familiar and universal, and perhaps the most important outcome of 1922, and its encounters between van Doesburg and Lissitsky, was, for this reason, the Düsseldorf Congress of Progressive Artists. Though this was, to judge from the accounts given of it, little more than a fraternal assemblage of kindred spirits and a certain amount of more or less orderly discussion, its consequences for the arts of design were far greater than were those of the more widely publicised congresses of 1921 (Paris and Weimar, both Dadaist dominated). Chiefly this was due to its genuinely international character, for it brought together not only de Stijl and the G group, its effective instigators, but also the Futurists from Italy, L'Effort Moderne from Paris, the MA group of Hungarian expatriates, Victor Bourgeois's Sept Arts connection from Brussels, various Dadaists and other independents. It thus covered progressive Abstractionists from France, Belgium, Holland, Switzerland, Germany, and Russia, and also opened up lines of communication with Austria, Hungary and Eastern Europe. It created an international awareness of a continent-wide Abstractionist-Architectural Movement, it made that Movement aware of itself, and thus made its members and groups aware of one another, so that questions of primacy and influence become almost insoluble from 1922 onwards—to judge from de Stijl and L'Effort Moderne, for instance, any new thing would get in one magazine as soon as it got into the other, and ideas became common property as quickly as they were printed and the magazines posted. The new state of affairs was formally recognised, so to speak, by the formation of a Constructivist International to whose Foundation Manifesto 1 From Lissitsky's book Russland (Vienna, 193o, p. 13). reference has already been made, and whose signatories were van Doesburg and Lissitsky themselves, Hans Richter and Max Burchardt (Germany) and Karel Maes (Belgium). As an operative body, this international was only a gesture, and soon evaporated—partly because it was not really needed when communications were good enough to keep the various Abstractionists in touch, and partly because its moving spirits left Germany and lost personal touch with one another in 1923. Lissitsky, shortly followed by his protégé Mart Stam, transferred to Zurich (on account of his health-he was consumptive), where he soon founded a new review ABC closely modelled on the short-lived G; and van Doesburg, with his wife and new-found disciple Cor van Eesteren, moved to Paris at the invitation, it is said, of Léonce Rosenberg. His subsequent activities become more and more involved with Paris and its art-world, though he and van Eesteren achieved a major coup when van Eesteren won the competition for the replanning of Unter den Linden with a scheme that is an ingenious recombination of ideas from van Eesteren's Academic training, de Stijl sculpture, and some of the projects executed in Ladowski's 'psychotechnical laboratory' in Moscow, but later published in ABC. About the same time, there was a further wave of recruiting for de Stijl which included such unconformable personalities as Antheil the composer, and the sculptor Constantin Brancusi—the latter having been taken on, seemingly, to replace Mondriaan, who resigned in 1925, as honorary figure-head to the movement. However, before these events took place, van Doesburg, van Eesteren and Rietveld issued a new Manifesto, Vers une Construction Collective,1ª which reveals, in the very first word of its title, the immediate impact of Paris. It is a curious document, with its eclecticism, its pretensions (and they are no more) to scientific objectivity, but it is important because it brings together a number of ideas that were to remain current, in association, for some time r. Working collectively we have examined architecture as an unity created by all the arts, industry, technology, etc. and find that the consequences 2. We have examined the Laws of Space and their infinite variations (that is, the contrast of spaces, their dissonances, their complements, etc.) and we find that these variations can be regulated to a balanced unity 3. We have examined the Laws of Colour in space and continuity, and find that a balanced relationship of these elements will finally give a new and positive 4. We have examined the relationships of Space and Time, and find that the manifestation of these two elements through colour gives a new dimension 5. We have examined the reciprocal relationships of measure, proportion, space, time and materials and have found the definitive method for building them into unity 6. We have, by the destruction of enclosure-walls, ete.—removed the duality of interior and exterior This appeared in de Stijl, VI, columns 91, 92, under the title '-+ =R', and in November of the same year (1924) in L'Effort Moderne under its regular title of Vers une Construction Collective. 7. We have established the true place of colour in architecture, and we declare that painting without architectural construction (that is, the easel-painting) has no further reason for existence 8. The era of destruction is completely finished, a new era begins, of Construc- The incantatory effect of the repetitions and partial repetitions of the middle passages of this document cannot conceal the fact that the lack of anything new to say has been made good by saying things that other people have said before, even as far back as Georges Seurat, whose laws of colourharmony have been barely rewritten to give these 'Laws of Space'. Similarly, there is nothing very new in the other main van Doesburg document of this period, the 'manifesto' Tot een Beeldende Architectuur of 1924. However, one or two of the numbered propositions are worth citing, for the way in which they crystallise certain ideas that were current in Elementarist circles. Thus there is the Lissitskian 4. The new architecture is functional; that is, it is developed out of an accurate setting forth of practical demands, which it establishes in a comprehe —but Lissitskian with the proviso that it may also owe a good deal to Paris, both in the use of the word functioneel (probably for the first time in that sense in a Northern language) and in the emphasis on plan. In a later proposition there is also an attempt to formulate the aesthetic behind the sprawling, space-invading plans, and balcony-broken elevations of Elementarist buildings, thus 11. The new architecture is anti-cubic; that is, it does not seek to fix the various functional space-cells together within a closed cube, but throws the functional space-cells ... away from the centre of the cube towards the outside, whereby height, width, depth +time tend towards a wholly new plastic expression in open space. De Stijl as a generating influence was practically finished by 1924-5, yet some of the most indicative works of art generated by that influence were produced in those two years. Rietveld's Schröder House, at Utrecht was, and remains, the only Elementarist structure to be built in permanent form. It owes a good deal to Oud's factory projects of 1919, and the play of spaces and planes on the outside has very little relation to the interior, but the bold display of horizontal and vertical slabs, steel stanchions and hand-rails, the window-frames, eaves and other 'proper elements' on the outside do form a sort of habitable Elementarist structure on the scale of man. At the same time Kiesler, who joined de Stijl in 1923, when Lissitsky left, was elaborating a completely open spatial aesthetic on a rectangular grid, which was fully and properly seen by the world at large at the Paris exhibition of 1925, when it occupied a large part of the Austrian Pavilion, under the name of La Cité dans l'Espace. It was a suspended construction of wooden rails and flat planes forming and occupying the rectangularities of a spatial grid in the regular Elementarist way, but to judge from Kiesler's notes of the subject in de Stijl, VII, it had also some of the properties of Proun A system of tension in free space A change of space into urbanism No foundation, no walls Detachment from the earth, suppression of the static axis In creating new possibilities for living, it creates a new society In creating this space-structure, he had reached the end of the possibilities of an aesthetic, as Malevitsch had done in 1918 with his White on White, and subsequent exhibition structures have achieved a similar extreme position to Le Cité dans l'Espace without ever being able to go any further. It represents the ultimate condition of the ideas of de Stijl and Elementarism, and the road of progress lay in side-stepping them, or replacing their merely analytical approach by a synthetic one. This process was put in hand by Mart Stam, who delivered the design of chairs from the similar Elementarist impasse into which Rietveld had led it in 1919. Both Marcel Breuer and Le Corbusier produced chairs which were, in terms of their overall conception, Rietveld's chair reworked in fabric and steel. Fabric replaced the planks of the seats and arms, steel tube replaced the wooden rails of the supporting structure, and though sidetubes were needed to keep the fabric in shape and in tension, the backs and seat were clearly conceived as quite separate from the supporting parts, as they had been in the original Rietveld model. Both of these chairs were also armchairs, and where Mart Stam set his foot on the road of development was in undertaking the design of an upright chair. Here, the back and the seat could be made co-planar with the horizontals and verticals of the supporting structure, the separate side-tubes could be eliminated and the fabric could be stretched directly over opposite members of the structural frame, which could, itself, be reduced to a single loop of tube, bending the front legs under to form long feet, extending to the back of the chair, and thus eliminating the need for back legs. This was how Stam conceived his chair late in 1924, but for lack of technical resources the earliest models had to be made of lengths of straight tube joined by elbow-pieces, thus losing the springiness inherent in the design. However, in 1925, the preparations for the Weissenhof exhibition brought him once more into contact with Mies van der Rohe, who had access to the necessary pipe-bending technicians, and in 1926 the Stam chair was realised, as was an alternative by Mies, which set out to exploit the spring possibilities of this design to the full by treating the whole of the front legs as a continuous curved spring (though this made it difficult to get in and out of). The design won immediate acceptance and the proliferation of such integrated designs for steel tube chairs was so rapid and universal that it soon appeared almost an anonymous, automatic creation of the Zeitgeist like Choisy's flying buttress. But one should observe that there existed parties with a definite interest in spreading this idea, and there is a patent disingenuousness in the attempt of del Marle (an ex-Futurist in close touch with de Stijl) to excuse his own obvious cribbing of the Mies chair, by saying in L'Effort Moderne in 1927 For practically a year we laboured, my faithful craftsman and I, upon its Parallel to us, Mies van der Rohe, Marcel Breuer, Mart Stam. Steel, so modern a material, and the Rationalism that commands its use, together give all our realisations a family face. Should the credit go to Mies van der Rohe or to Breuer? Plagiarism? NEvER. Rationalism engenders a collective art. This is altogether too knowing, and a little too quick off the mark in scouting the idea of plagiarism, but it has an interest besides its disingenuousness. It could only have appeared plausible at a time when it was general practice to suppress or ignore the actions that generate history (such as Stam's invention of the integrated chair) and make history the generator of the actions, and so far had this tendency gone by the time that van Doesburg assembled the material for de Stijl's tenth anniversary number in 1927, that even the things that its members and contributors had undoubtedly done were being attributed to the activities of the Zeitgeist," and he made himself and the movement look ridiculous by overcompensating, with wild claims to influence on Malevitsch, Le Corbusier, Mallet Stevens and others. The truth, almost inevitably, lies between the two. The spirit of the times in the plastic arts was largely the creation of an interaction of Cubist forms and Futurist ideas, as was de Stijl, as were most of the movements it encountered or allied itself to. Much of de Stijl's importance lay in its being first in the field with an organised body of ideas, a magazine and an energetic impresario. By this early leadership it was to be enabled to give an international unity to a number of diverse groups, and, through Lissitsky, bring the Russian contribution to the notice of Europe. Paradoxically, it was Russia that offered the way of deliverance from the limitations of de Stijl's own aesthetics, as has been noted in connection with Mart Stam, but as must also be recognised in connection with van Doesburg himself, whose new style, which he developed in the middle Twenties, was not only called by him Elementarist (though it differed from structural Elementarism) but also depended on a diagonal mode of composition that he clearly derived from Ladowskian aesthetics by way of Lissitsky, and has a history in the Russian Movement that goes back to paintings done by Malevitsch during the War. Van Doesburg and Hans Arp used this mode of composition, as well as Arp's newly developed 'biomorphic' abstraction in the decoration of the Aubette café and cinema in Strassburg in 1927-8, but Russianism on an even bigger scale can be seen in some Bauhaus projects of the late Twenties, such as Breuer's scheme for a theatre at Kharkov or