# 15: Architecture and the Cubist tradition so powERFUL wAs the mystique of reinforced concrete in Paris by about 192o that many French writers have accepted the idea that the new architecture of the Twenties was in some way caused by this one material, rather than facilitated by it. This acceptance of Choisy's view of technique as a prime cause of style, was doubtless encouraged by the dominating position of Perret as the sole innovator of consequence in the years immediately before the War, but Rob Mallet-Stevens is speaking in the most general terms when he declares, in 1925,1 Abruptly, everything changed. Reinforced concrete appeared revolutionising the processes of construction... science creates a new aesthetic, forms profoundly modified Indeed, he goes so far as to attribute the lag in architectural development as between Europe and America (dates were not his strong point) to an American preference for the wrong material, iron. Reinforced concrete supervened. The Americans resisted this mode of construction for a long time, and iron reigned supreme in their art of building. The position here adopted by Mallet-Stevens clearly accepts reinforced concrete as something which had imposed itself, just as Choisy supposed the flying buttress to have imposed itself, and this imposition he accepted as a sufficient explanation of the new aesthetic, the profoundly modified forms. However, at a distance of almost forty years in time, it is clear that the modes of employing reinforced concrete were already extremely various, ranging from the careful Classicism of Perret to the bold vault-work of Freyssinet, and that none of these varieties was, in practice, employed by the younger architects who made the French contribution to the mainstream of the International Style. In particular, they avoided vaults, and curved forms in section generally (which even Perret employed), but frequently made use of curved forms in plan. Though they paid frequent lip-service to the achievements of their immediate elders, their only real inheritance from these pioneers of reinforced concrete was Perret's preference for trabeated structural frames. It is clear that their choice of an architectural idiom must have been affected by influences outside the Rationalist and Academic traditions, and at least two of these influences are easy to identify. One is the actual business of building in Paris, its finance, its patronage, its vernacular traditions, which will be dealt with in the next chapter; the other influence is that of the Cubist tradition in the visual arts. This Cubist tradition was, itself, part of that larger and paradoxical tradition of being anti-traditional, that goes back, in painting, at least to Courbet, parallel with an innovating tradition in Rationalist architectural thought that goes back to Labrouste. Both traditions were regarded, with varying justification, as anti-Academic, but Cubism, more than any previous phase of the pictorial revolution, presented aspects that could be approximated to those of Rationalist architectural theory. This could not be done directly with either the works or the recorded utterances of the founding masters, Picasso and Braque, in spite of their occasional use of architectural subject-matter, but already (by 1912) in the work of Gris there was sensibly the employment of structural grids and proportional systems. However, it was from the 'intellectual' wing of Cubism, the Groupe de Puteaux, exhibiting as the Section d'Or, that the most productive line of development was to stem. This group centred around the Duchamp brothers: Marcel, Gaston (who used the nom-de-pinceau of Jacques Villon) and Raymond (who hyphenated Villon on to his legal surname). There are some striking, though probably accidental resemblances between tricks of draughtsmanship employed by Sant'Elia, and some employed by Jacques Villon, and Raymond had architectural leanings, while Fernand Leger, who was also a member of the group, had drawing office experience. However, the one surviving record (a photograph of a model and some interiors) of the Cubist architecture of Raymond Duchamp-Villon suggests that his ideas lay a long way from the progressive trends of the time of its conception, 1912. It is little more than the routine structure of a symmetrical villa in the Mansardic tradition tricked out with fans of prismatic mouldings instead of Rococo (or even Art Nouveau) details. The fact that this no more than superficially Modern design was deemed worthy of illustration in Apollinaire's Les Peintres Cubistes suggests that the Movement as a whole was thoroughly out of touch with forward ideas in architecture-a point that is worth making in view of what has been so often said or implied about the connections between Cubism and the International Style. As has been said elsewhere, it is only in conjunction with Futurist ideas that Cubism was able to make any significant contribution to the mainstream, but the particular conjunction achieved by Marcel Duchamp, the member of the Groupe de Puteaux who is most important in this connection, is very different to that found in the circle of de Stijl or the Elementarists. The peculiar slant given to Cubo-Futurist aesthetics by Duchamp is present as early as a work that has been discussed already as a possible source of Futurist pictorial methods, the 'Coffee Mill' of 191r. Whereas in the work of Picasso and Braque by 1911 the 'decomposition' of subject-matter had been brought to an advanced stage in the interests of certain purely pictorial and personal preoccupations (violent imagery, controlled spaceillusions, etc.), Duchamp decomposes the 'Coffee Mill' in order to reveal its mechanics, as in an exploded view in an instruction manual-there is even an arrow showing which way to turn the crank. He has shifted attention from the business of picture-making to an examination of the innerste Wesen of the picture's subject-matter, though his reasons for doing so are less likely to be those of Werkbund Rationalists than those of Futurist anti-Traditionalists. In the next phase, both wings of Cubism work to eliminate the distinction between picture and subject-matter, but in opposite directions. Picasso and Braque, by applying pieces of the subject-matter directly to the picture surface (collage) eventually arrive at a form of picture which is not a representation, but a thing to be valued in its own right, or, in Ozenfant's words³ The emotion no longer comes from an extrinsic object reproduced or painted on the canvas, but from within the picture: tableau-objet. But if Picasso and Braque had sacrificed their subject-matter for the sake of the picture, Duchamp now did the other thing, and sacrificed the picture for the sake of the subject-matter. The 'Bicycle Wheel', of 1912, was exactly what it claimed to be, and being mounted in such a way that it was free to turn, presented Futurist motion in actuality, not painted illusion. The most celebrated, and instructive of his ready-mades, however, was the 'Bottle-rack' which he exhibited in New York in 1914. This was an objet-objet, so to speak, of the purest type, without the side interests presented by the rotation of the 'Bicycle Wheel'. The subject-matter becomes, without any transformation or qualification, the object presented for the public to view-the shocking effect it had was less concerned with iconography (somewhat similar functional objects were familiar in Cubist stilllifes) than with the elimination of too many stages of the traditional process: subject-artist-painting-public. But the other aspect of this unconventional gesture is of greater historical importance, even if of less interest to Duchamp himself. His intention may have been to deflate the status of 'art', in the Marinettian manner, but the status he conferred on a simple, mass-produced object by having it exhibited in an art gallery went far beyond anything the Futurists or the Werkbund had achieved up to that time. This was the first time (or, at least, the first occasion of consequence) that an ordinary engineering product had, in physical fact, been translated to the realm of art. It seems that for Duchamp himself the gesture was self-sufficient, and self-justifying, but for lesser men it was necessary to produce justificatory arguments. One such was readily available in the New York circle with which Duchamp was connected—Plato's proposition in the Philebus that absolute beauty resides in geometrical and manufactured objects ... understand me to mean straight lines and circles, and the plane or solid figures which are formed out of them by lathes, rulers and protractors; for these I affirm to be . . . eternal and absolutely beautiful. G. H. Hamilton has noted' three uses of this quotation in the circle around Alfred Stieglitz, to which Duchamp belonged: applied to Picasso in 1911; to Cubism, Futurism and pure Abstraction in 1913; and again in 1913 by Duchamp's old associate from Puteaux, Francis Picabia, in discussing his own paintings, which were almost Abstract at that time, but, under Duchamp's influence, soon also turned to Mechanistic satire on 'art'. Although the intention of both these artists remained satirical in an elevated way, it would, clearly, be possible to rephrase this interconnection of Abstract art, machine design, and absolute beauty in an equally elevated, but more serious way. This they were unlikely to do in New York at that time, but other members of their connection in Paris were to achieve this standpoint at a later date, as soon as they disposed of a theory of Norms of Types, like that current in Germany and Holland. At this point, it is worth noting just how much Parisian theorists had in common with their Dutch counterparts, since it is upon these common holdings that much of the ultimate unity of the International Style was to depend. 'T'hey had a common Cubo-Futurist background, though differently interpreted; they had a common tendency to vaguely Platonic ideas (though the Philebus quotation does not appear in de Stijl at all), and they shared Gino Severini, whose analogies between-art and machinery appeared in the Mercure de France in the same year (1917) as they appeared in de Stijl. Actual similarities of opinion will be noted in due course, the immediate interest of Severini in this Parisian context lies in another direction. He was the first to call for a return to order—a return in the literal sense of a turning back, from Cubism to Classicism,º to central perspective and normally-constituted objects. The result, in Severini's paintings of the Twenties, is mere decorative prettiness, but he helped to bridge the gap between painting and architecture, in which the Classical strain and the appeal to the past were equally current in the early post-War years. In this Classicising connection, however, the writing of another member of the Groupe de Puteaux, Albert Gleizes, is of greater consequence. For him, as for some of the younger architects, the recovery of Classical discipline was a step to something beyond Classicism. When the ultimate effort has been made, it will not be Classicism they rediscover, but the tradition, pure and simple; that which used to permit a strict and hierarchical collaboration in the creation of works of impersonal art. Here two concordances with Dutch ideas immediately strike the eye. One, concerned with Gesamtkunstwerk, is fully confirmed by Gleizes elsewhere; the implications of collaboration and hierarchisée are supported by La peinture et la sculpture sont fonction de l'architecture. an idea which was common property but, in the case of Gleizes, could be derived from Charles Blanc\* Leaving their common cradle in architecture, two arts have freed themselves in succession from the maternal womb; sculpture first, painting later. The other Dutch concordance lies in the concept of an Euvre d'art impersonelle, on which his ideas are almost Mondriaanesque. Cubist paintings are impersonal . . . beauty is no longer seizable chance, but unavoidabl While works of painting have hitherto been so fugitive that they could not be duplicated ... these, now, can be multiplied to infinity, whether by the artist who created them, or by scrupulous intermediaries... with paintings so that no copy is more 'original' than another, the selling price will drop of its own accord. The implication, that only works whose qualities are completely determinate can be accurately reproduced, suggests (and the text elsewhere confirms) that Gleizes is thinking of reproduction by hand, since most mechanical means would have to be such (e.g. photographic) that they could reproduce accidental effects as well. However, he speaks also of autres moyens d'ordre mécanigue, and thus implies that the benefits of massproduction, or mass-reproduction, will only be conferred on the buying public by objects which he elsewhere describes as conceived ## ... following well defined, but nevertheless very simple laws This idea, that only geometrically simple designs are cheap to massproduce, was common property by the end of the Twenties, and has remained current ever since. But it was not Gleizes who gave it currency, and its wide distribution is due to those who combined it with a theory of types and with the idea of the objet-objet, the Purists. Though a number of artists in Paris around 1g22 exhibited broadly Purist tendencies, the Purists proper were only two, Amedée Ozenfant and Charles Edouard Jeanneret. They first met in 1918, through the agency of Auguste Perret, to whom Jeanneret, later to be known as Le Corbusier, had been a draughtsman in 1908-9. Later, in 1910-11, he had been in Germany to study the Werkbund and German design at the suggestion of his master at the art school of his native Chaux-de-Fonds. This trip brought him in contact with the ideas of Muthesius and thus with the theory of types. In 1913 he heard Berlage lecture on Wright, which seems to have started an interest in the aesthetics of machine products, an interest which ripened into an admiration for the simple geometrical forms of early aircraft and automobile design during the years following his establishment in Paris in 1917, in connection with the Voisin company. Thus, by the time he met Ozenfant, when they were both aged thirty-three, he had behind him a career rich, already, in experience of practically everything except painting as a pure art, while Ozenfant who seems hardly to have stirred outside the world of art, was better versed in the recent history of Cubism than anything else. The difference of background is startlingly manifest in the paintings they exhibited at their first Purist exhibition, in 1919. Jeanneret's have the studious simplicity of schoolroom exercises in rendering regular geometrical solids, which is all that they are, whereas Ozenfant's have the strained quality of a sophisticated and romantic talent, which indeed he possessed, being disciplined into simplicity for the sake of an intellectual programme. Given this peculiar combination of talents, well-informed on both the recent developments in painting and on recent developments in technology, it is not surprising that the Manifesto Aprés le Cubisme, which appeared as the catalogue to this first exhibition, should read like a continuation of the Classicised Cubo-Futurism of Severini and Gleizes-indeed such a programme is consciously explicit in the magazine Sic which appeared in 1916, and with which, as with another short-lived periodical L'Elan, Ozenfant had been connected. If Après le Cubisme is tamer in its layout than either of these magazines, it is also far more stimulating reading than the writing of either Severini or Gleizes. The main drift of the argument depends on the unity, later doubted by both authors, of art and science. Nothing justifies us in supposing that there should be any incompatibility between science and art. The one and the other have the common aim of reducing the universe to equations. We shall prove that pure art and pure science are not watertight domains. They have a common mind.. . art and science depend on number. ## From this they derive the proposition The aim of pure science is the expression of natural laws through the search for constants. The aim of serious art is also the expression of invariants. The negative aspects of the invariant bring the Purists fairly close to de Stijl theory once more, for among the propositions which appear at the end of Après le Cubisme (like the affirmations at the end of a Futurist Manifesto) is one which reads The work of art must not be accidental, exceptional, impressionist, inorganic, protestatory, picturesque, but, on the contrary, generalised, static, express the invari But the positive aspects of this concept of l'invariant tend in a quite different direction as might be expected, because not only does it subsume the lois axiales de l'œuvre d'art, but it could be extended to cover also the objetobjet, which becomes platonised by the Purists as the objet-type, or objetstandard. By this is implied an absolute object—house, bottle, guitar, etc.— beyond the reach of the accidents of personality, perspective or time, and also mass-produced. Here, the Purists diverge also from the position adopted by Duchamp five years earlier: his 'Bottle-rack' was mass-produced because no other kind of bottle-racks existed, and its metaphysical overtones were almost accidental The ready-mades may be unique as a concept, but they are not necessarily unique as examples. For instance, the original 'Bottle-rack' was lost and replaced by another. This represents a very drastic revision of the status of the work of art, but it follows after the original gesture of exhibition. With the Purists, however, even though the issue was prejudged, the choice of a certain class of objects as the subject-matter of their painting was preceded, not followed, by a variety of metaphysical, aesthetic and other arguments-arguments which originally appeared in L'Esprit Nouveau (and were later reprinted in La Peinture Moderne). L'Esprit Nouveau was the last but one and by far the most substantial of a series of attempts to found a Cubist magazine in Paris, and its success was largely due to the fact that it transcended the merely parochial interests of the School of Paris and became a magazine of general progressive culture. Besides the two Purists whose interests were already very wide, it had, in its early stages, a third founding director, Paul Dermée, the poet. Even without his participation, however, the magazine continued to embrace fields as diverse as architecture, painting, sculpture, product design, music, literature, philosophy, psychology, politics and economics. It enjoyed the support (unreliably) of certain commercial interests8 (Voisin, Pleyel, etc.) and by running for nearly six years, from late 1919 to the middle of 1925, it proved itself more durable than any other Modern-Movement periodicals except Der Sturm and de Stijl, while in terms of sheer wordage and illustrations reproduced, it beats even these. Even the name of the magazine had connections that promised the widest scope. As has already been noted, the phrase l'esprit nouveau had been employed by Choisy in a context that was likely to recommend it to others demanding a rappel à l'ordre, in architecture. But the phrase rappel à l'ordre is notoriously a Cocteauism, and in 1919 Jean Cocteau was also in possession of esprit nouveau, in the sense of a Zeitgeist: ## L'esprit nouveau agite toutes les branches de l'art.' The Purists were in fairly close touch with Cocteau during the early Twenties (he contributed an article on the Groupe de Puteaux painter, Roger de la Fresnaye, to the magazine) but the traditional derivation of the name is via Dermée from Guillaume Apollinaire, who was using the phrase l'esprit nouveau, to describe a kind of Futurist imperative to progress, in the months preceding his death in 192o. At all events, it was a slogan that gratified the sensibilities of several aspects of the Parisian avant-garde, and carried implications that ranged from the Futurist to the Classicist, as did the contents of the magazine itself, which, however, resisted any forwardlooking movements that seemed to spell disorder—its immediate response to Freudian psychology, for instance, was derisive. The arguments which lead up to the concept of the objet-type, or objetstandard, represent a fairly thorough-going fusion of the Futurist, Cubist and Classicising themes, and they start with a hostile assessment (as in Après le Cubisme) of the state of Cubism in 1919. They declare the bankruptcy of ## Cubism Limited, proprietors of a patent process The gait of present civilisation, its future, its character, depend on awaited discoveries, new formulas that provoke ever more economical mechanisms, permitting us to use energy in more efficient ways, thus giving our potentialities, and consequently our minds, a superior liberty and higher ambitions though they declare their admiration for its earlier products. The bankruptcy they attribute to the Cubists' insistence on their droits au lyrisme, which had caused their work to become too disorderly and too personal to be in accord with the spirit of the times, which demanded order and impersonality. The precise nature of their version of the spirit of the times is established by means of a very revealing reworking of existing techniques used by the Futurists. Thus, the illustrations to the chapter headed 'Formation de l'Optique Moderne', begin with a purely Futurist set of images—a car, New York by night, the skeleton of an airship hangar, the equipment of a dentist's surgery—but then follow two final images that were, indeed, foreshadowed by Marinetti's Manifesto of Geometrical and Mechanical Splendour, but belong much more to the Purists' insistence on number, classification and order—a calculating machine and a filing system. The important characteristics of the new times, as they saw them were first: Economy ## second: The separation of techniques and aesthetics Mechanisation has diverted frorm our hands all work of exactitude and quality, and has delegated it to the machine. Our situation appears more clearly thereby: on one side, technical knowledge remains with technology (mechanisation) while, on the other, the plastic question remains untouched.... Mechanisation, having resolved the problems of technology, leaves the problem of art intact. To refuse to recognise the step that has been taken is to impede the progress of art toward its pure and proper ends. ## third: The dominance of simple geometry If we go indoors to work .. . the office is square, the desk is square and cubic, and everything on it is at right angles (the paper, the envelopes, the correspon. dence baskets with their geometrical weave, the files, the folders, the registers. etc.)... the hours of our day are spent amid a geometrical spectacle, our eyes are subject to a constant commerce with forms that are almost all geometry Art was to be judged by the degree in which it was compatible with these characteristics of the times, and most art was found to be so incompatible that one is baffled by an inexplicable spectacle; practically everything proceeds by anti-geometry.. . so that one deduces that these are the works of some improbable race living outside time, in countries where other laws seem to reign than those that we have recognised, and are suited to our faculties of perception However, the reasons why geometry is the touchstone of probity are double: not only is it the thumb-print of modern technology, but it is also the manifestation of perennial laws governing art, justified by the past not the present It is in the past that the axial laws of the work of art are found, time alone proving their durability, their sine qua non. and on the same page, the name of Phidias is cited, not for the first or last time, as an ultimate term of reference in aesthetic value. This double status of geometry, as something both new and perennial, is comparable to the status of abstraction in de Stijl theory, and one might be tempted to regard the two terms as almost interchangeable, particularly since their associated ideas come so close. Thus The vertical and the horizontal are—among the sensorial manifestations of natural phenomena—verifications of one of the most directly apparent laws. The horizontal and the vertical determine two right angles, out of the infinity of possible angles, the right angle is the angle-type; the right angle is one of the symbols of perfection contains nothing to which Mondriaan could not have subscribed, and elsewhere in La Peinture Moderne one can find Impressionism denounced, nature suspected, handicraft despised, universality and internationalism approved. The Purists' quarrel with de Stijl, which was fundamental though not reciprocated, concerned the question of representation. Purist compositions were built up, not of abstract forms, but of representations of objects. Fernand Leger carried this comparison between art and machinery even farther in L'Effort Moderne for February 19z4, contrasting the formal disorder and nuanced colours of the Salon d'Automne, with the precise and simple geometry, the unmodulated 'local' colours of the exhibits in the Salon d'Aviation, with which it shared the Grand Palais in 19z1. He also commented pityingly on the pathetic awe with which the technicians, having slipped through the partition, viewed the works of art-but failed to observe that he must have presented an analogous spectacle to them. These can no longer be the abstract or conventional symbols cf writing or mathematics, which escape those who do not know the code, but facts conditioned in such a manner as to stir our senses effectively, and also to interest our minds. Thus, for example, a negative demonstration is furnished today by a whole movement in painting recently born in Holland, which appears to us to have withdrawn completely from the necessary and sufficient conditions for painting (intelligibility and perceptual apparatus) using only certain geometrical signs bounded by the rectangle. One might, by an art stripped bare, strive for purity of expression; yet the means chosen must permit one to say something, and that worth saying. As to what was worth being said, the Purists were prepared to admit of any theme that might be proposed, but for themselves, true heirs of Puteaux, they accepted a restriction to a limited range of objet-types. This acceptance was as explicit in their writings as in their paintings, and is formulated, in La Peinture Moderne, at the end of a remarkable eulogy of mass-produced utensils. Purism, the authors state, desires to go beyond the purely ornamental pleasures of abstract art, in order to offer une emotion intellectuelle et affective That is why Purism begins with elements chosen from existing objects, extracting their most specific forms. It draws them for preference from among those that serve the most direct of human uses; those which are like extensions of man's limbs, and thus of an extreme intimacy, a banality that makes them barely exist as subjects of interest in themselves, and hardly lend themselves to anecdote. But these objects which figurent le mieux l'objet-type, were endowed with an almost moral importance as products of extreme economy. Purism has brought to light the Law of Mechanical Selection. This establishes that objects tend toward a type that is determined by the evolution of forms between the ideal of maximum utility, and the satisfaction of the necessities of economical manufacture, which conform inevitably to the laws of nature. This double play of laws has resulted in the creation of a certain number of objects that may thus be called standardised.... Without prescribing any theme, Purism has so far limited its choice to these objects As they appear in Purist paintings-an appearance which is of importance for the effect it had upon the formal usages of the architecture produced by Jeanneret in his 'Le Corbusier' persona—these simple objects, mostly bottles, carafes, glasses and smoker's equipment, are presented, not in central perspective, but in a side-elevation convention closely based on that of engineering drawing, but with a form of pseudo-plan shown for the tops of open vessels (more rarely for their bases) which are presented as quartics, or circles. The avoidance of perspective was programmatic, firstly to eliminate accidents Ordinary perspective in its full theorstical rigour, gives only the accidental appearance of objects11 u This is quoted from one of the essays in L'Esprit Nouveau that was somewhat modified when transferred to La Peinture Moderne, and the phrase does not exist, as such, in the book, though it clearly belongs to its argument. and secondly, because such an elimination of the accidents of perspective was held to be particularly necessary in the representation of types. This idea can be traced back, before the War, to Maurice Princet, an actuary who was friendly with Braque and Picasso, and is reported to have asked You represent by means of a trapezium a table as you see it, distorted by perspective, but what would happen if you took it into your head to represent a table-type. You would have to set it up in the picture-plane and revert from a trapezium to a true rectangle. If this table was covered in objects equally distorted by perspective, the same movement of correction would operate for each of them. Thus, the oval of a glass would become an exact circle... ." As they appear in aesthetic theory—an appearance that affected both Le Corbusier's architecture and his views on furnishing-these simple objects can be related to the ideas of at least one other influential thinker, Paul Valéry, also a Classicist fascinated by mathematics. It will be noted that the Purists say that the double play of laws (function and economy) has resulted, in the perfect tense, in the creation of a certain number of standardised objects. That is to say, their objets-type stand at the end of a completed process (a remarkable attitude for two authors who had gone out of their way to indicate that the whole basis of life was undergoing a technical revolution) and a similar view of a terminated process is found in Valéry's almost contemporary Eupalinos, ou l'architecte Phaedrus: There are some admirable tools, neat as bones. Socrates: They are self-made, to some extent; centuries of use have necessarily discovered the best form, uncountable practice achieves the ideal, and there stops. The best efforts of thousands of men converge slowly towards the most economical and certain shape." However, there is evidence that the Purists did not believe, in practice, that the process was finished. In discussing the maison-outil, or maison-type in his architectural writings of the same period, Le Corbusier emphasises that its form is not, as yet, functional, economic or settled. In their paintings too, the Purists practised selection over and above that exercised by industry and commerce, refusing to admit to their range of subject-matter certain objects (such as imitation cut-glass tumblers) that persisted in the catalogue illustrations that were their sources, in defiance of the pseudo-Darwinian Law of Mechanical Selection—they were quite prey-ared, in fact, to finish a process that would not finish itself. What is interesting in this situation is that, as has been seen, most of the ideas deployed by the Purists can be traced back to 1913 and beyond—the object, the type, the platonic, mechanistic and geometric preferences had all been current before the War, but no one then, had been able to weld them into a coherent aesthetic philosophy which, as in Le Corbusier's hands, could embrace buildings, the objects that furnished and equipped them, and the works of art that embellished them. Partly this must have been due to the excessively tumultuous condition of Cubist circles before 1914 but even more it was probably due to the emergence of a sudden early maturity in many branches of machine design immediately after 1918. The Purists' vision of a mechanical and geometrical environment was there for all to see, with even greater force than the earlier vision of the Futurists. Much of the elementary platonic geometry exhibited by the machinery of the Twenties was far from inherent in the nature of mechanical design, but the product of personal and local aesthetic choice, and therefore transient —technology was not on the verge of achieving formules definitives, as Pierre Urbain believed, but was shortly to get on the move again. But the temporary halt and stabilisation of design persisted long enough to convince those who were ready to be convinced that the perennial laws of geometry were about to drive accident and variability from the visual world, that the equipment of daily life was about to achieve final and typical form. Among those who were convinced was Jeanneret-Corbusier, who gave so much weight to the importance of the stabilised, finalised, mass-produced objet-type, that his last word on architecture in 1923, the last illustration in Vers une Architecture, was a plain English briar-pipe, offered without explanation or justification, but with the clear implication that this was the standard to which architecture should aspire. However, the evolution of his ideas on the maison-type was conditioned, warped and finally frustrated by the market in which he hoped to build it, the building world of Paris whose characteristics in the Twenties were so exceptional that they must be described before we turn to the maison-type itself.