# 16: Progressive building in Paris: 1918-1928 THE sITUATION FACING Le Corbusier, or anyone else hoping to erect Modern buildings in Paris in the Nineteen-twenties, was stimulating, frustrating, and complicated.' Intellectually architects might find themselves aspiring to build on a grand scale for a new mechanised society, but economically and socially they would often find themselves driven to erect small buildings of specialised type for a class of patrons they suspected as representatives of a dead social order. Hence their hatred of the established architectural order, of the École and the Académie—hence too their private feuds and passionate attachments to this master or that. 'The combination of intellectual abundance and physical restriction is one of the most striking features of this situation. Intellectually, the climate of ideas could hardly have been richer, and remained so till the end of the decade. Extremist movements may have been short-lived, but they were replaceable. Futurism remained an active force until about the middle of the decade, the survivors of the heroic age of Cubism were still present. The freedoms of Dadaism may have proven unsubstantial, but they were succeeded after 1922 by the more organised programme of liberation of the Surrealists. Purism may have expired in 1925, but van Doesburg was at hand to provoke a ferment of Abstractionist activity toward the end of the decade. L'Esprit Nouveau may have expired with its parent movement, but L'Effort Moderne,2 last of the Cubist magazines, had already been appearing for almost two years, and there was also, by 1925, a magazine devoted specifically to progressive architecture, L'Architecture Vivante,3 edited by Albert Morancé and Jean Badovici. These two last-named publications are important for their internationalism, giving considerable space to Dutch, German and Russian design, and reprinting articles by van de Velde, Oud, Mondriaan, van Doesburg, Loos and others. Furthermore, the range of personalities that a young architect could adopt as a master was widening. Perret and Garnier were both established in Paris by now, as was Adolf Loos, and there were soon new buildings by all three of them to admire-Perret's church at Raincy, Garnier's town hall at Boulogne-sur-Seine, and Loos's house for Tristan Tzara in the Avenue Junot. Only Perret was officially (or unofficially) available as a teacher, and even Loos recommended his disciples to study under him in preference to any of the younger Moderns or himself. ## You come to Paris to learn French, not Esperanto. However, although Perret's school in the Palais de Bois was a formally constituted atelier of the École des Beaux-Arts, official discrimination against his students was such that they had to finish their course under some other master if they hoped to be Diplomé. This is typical of the official attitude to even middle-of-the-road progressive design, but the paucity of official or municipal commissions for younger architects has another reason beyond this. In contrast to the situation in Germany, where progressive architects, at least after 1925, could almost count on employment from progressive official bodies in such work as the design of large housing schemes, work of this scale and nature was unusual in France in the Twenties. Apart from the 'new town' at Villeurbane, and a privately sponsored settlement at Pessac, designed by Le Corbusier, there is little that can be compared with German activity. Michel Roux-Spitz was the nearest to a young Modernist to receive any official work, and that at the very end of the decade, while Henri Sauvage's block of flats in the Rue des Amiraux is as unusual in being a large, modern apartment house as it is in being patently derived from Sant'Elia's case a gradinate. But the range and source of foreign influence in Paris went far beyond the presence of Loos. The city, as the artistic capital of the world, was full of students and artists from overseas, and many of its key figures had foreign backgrounds. To speak only of architects, Le Corbusier's outside connections have already been mentioned, but he had also travelled as far afield as Turkey, while Robert Mallet-Stevens was of Belgian extraction, had a long-standing connection with England, and a professed admiration for Mackintosh. Yet the biggest single source of outside influence on younger Paris architects at this time was undoubtedly the Exposition des Arts Décoratifs in 1925. This has its place in the history of Western taste, in any case, as the source of the popular jazz-modern style that was for some time a rival to the International style, but Mallet-Stevens and the Purists were also involved in it, the former in the design of an entrance and some Cubistic concrete 'trees', the latter, after much backstage intrigue, in the erection of the Pavillon de l'Esprit Nouveau, which will be discussed in a later chapter. From abroad there came a Dutch Pavilion in an overwrought but not untypical Amsterdam idiom, designed by J. F. Staal, a British Pavilion that could have been designed by a Frenchman (in fact, by Easton and Robertson), while an Austrian Pavilion designed by Josef Hoffmann, but containing Keisler's Cité dans l'Espace, which has already been described, brought Elementarist design to Paris for the the first time on a large enough scale to be appreciated as architecture, and had a visible influence on the garden elevation of Le Corbusier's Villa at Garches, designed in the following year. But the pavilion which seems to have made the biggest impact was that from the USSR. At such a time it could hardly have gone unnoticed however it had been designed, but Melnikov's deceptively simple structure in wood must have looked as if it had been deliberately conceived to excite and annoy. Its general form was a glass-walled parallelogram, with a broad processional staircase, partly open to the sky under the truss-work of the roof. This staircase, which brought the visitor up to first-floor level and then down again, traversed the plan on its longer diagonal, thus giving the pavilion a form of symmetry, but not one that was listed among the Academic recipes-—thus provoking the Beaux-Arts aesthetician Borislavlievitch to a violent attack, occupying three pages of the journal La Construction Moderne. Younger and less prejudiced visitors, however, would probably agree with Lissitsky's estimate of it4 ... the project aims at the loosening up of volumes through the free disposition of the staircase.... The building is honestly built of wood, not on the Nationalist log-cabin principle, but in a Modern carpentry technique. It is transparent, the colours are pure. No false monumentality but a new sensibility. All in all, this was a promising environment for younger architects to develop a new architecture—except in the matter of patronage. This came, when it did come, from a small, if cosmopolitan, section of Paris society which was already sufficiently sophisticated visually to accept architectural forms that, however Functional and Rational, were as unconventional as those of Cubist and Futurist art. In other words, the clientele of Modern architecture was composed of artists, their patrons and dealers, and a few casual visitors to the architectural section of the Salon d'Automne. The consequence was, firstly, that they would nearly all require at least one large, well-windowed north-light room, to use as a studio or gallery, secondly that their private lives were apt to be so eccentric as to put anti-typical demands on functional planning, and thirdly that, although a few were as munificent as the Princesse de Polignac, most of them were of only moderate means and needed very economical structures. In addition, buildings of this kind, for a patronage that was often foreign in extraction, seemed often to attract randomly spiteful application of the town-planning by-laws by the Pré- fecture de la Seine. The general consequence was that the bulk of Modern architecture in Paris in the Twenties consisted of one particular maison-type, the studiohouse, twisted out of recognition by random or personal factors. Thus the pure studio-type appears far more frequently in Le Corbusier's projects than in his built work, and André Lurçat, the most prolific builder of studios, only on one occasion approximates really closely to the type, in a house in Boulogne-sur-Seine, late in the decade. Yet, if the type was obscured, it was never absent from architects' thoughts for long, and often coloured their designs for buildings with quite different functions. The existence of the type dates back to the previous century, when it could often be found in its pure form of a long, narrow house, its dimensions fixed by the normal dimensions of a Paris building plot. Since it was usually hard up against other buildings on either side, its windows were all on the ends, those on the more northerly end usually being amalgamated into one single expanse of glass, often two stories high and spreading from wall to wall to light the studio. The two-storey studio can also be taken as a given feature, often with a storage or sleeping balcony across the back of it, reached by a spiral stair or cat ladder, especially where studios were stacked up in multi-storey blocks, as they are at the foot of Montmartre. In these cases any other necessary rooms were usually at the back of the studio, but in singlestudio houses they were more often underneath. The difficulty of spanning the width of the studio with beams strong enough to support further rooms on top was one of the main factors in planning the accommodation this way up, but even when reinforced concrete had obviated this difficulty, this arrangement remains the custom—though Perret, for instance, inverts it in the Orloff house, and has a ground-floor studio. The other form of section, with the smaller rooms behind the studio was the particular preference of Le Corbusier, who continued to use the long narrow plan with double-height studio and sleeping balcony even in his designs of the Fifties (as the flats at Marseilles) even in buildings that were not studio-houses (where the high room becomes a living room) and even in buildings that were not on long narrow sites (as the single house at Weissenhof) and did not need to have their fenestration confined to their end-walls. There was a sharp divergence in the way in which architects faced the problem of the studio-house façade. The north-light window gives on to the street much more often than a statistical average would lead one to expect, and thus has to share the elevation with an entrance, probably garage doors and one or more small windows. Perret and his followers employ a strongly accentuated exposed frame, and distribute the various openings within it in such a way as to create at least an illusion of symmetry. The others, Mallet-Stevens, Lurçat, Le Corbusier and their followers, who were responsible for something like four studios out of every five in the Twenties, exploit the difference in size and function of the openings to create an asymmetrical pattern of holes pierced in a flat white surface,& on which an all-over rendering has been spread to obliterate the distinction between support and load, frame and fill. For this they could plead the support of tradition—not the tradition of the professional architects, but that of the vernacular buildings of the Paris region, for the city still affords many examples of unpretentious utilitarian buildings, with windows of various sizes set asymmetrically in whiterendered walls. Attention had been drawn to such buildings by the paintings of Utrillo, which take them as their prime subject-matter, and by the Cubo-Futurist magazine Sic which exhorted its readers in 1916 ## Aimons la maison neuve Aimons la maison blanche which, judging from the elaborate surface finishes preferred by professional architects of the period, can only refer to whitewashed vernacular buildings. But Le Corbusier, at least, had other reasons for admiring whitewashed architecture, reasons that seem to be involved with his own experiences as a painter, and his theories about the beauty of banality. In reviewing the architectural section of the Salon d'Automne of 1922 in L'Esprit Nouveau he wrote, complaining of a preoccupation with de huxe materials. If the house is entirely white, the design of things stands out without possible transgression, the volumes of things appear clearly, the colour of things is So far, he could be a painter extolling the virtues of working on a white ground, but he pursues the theme to the point where whitewash becomes a sort of couleur-type, with folkloristic overtones. Whitewash is absolute; on it, everything stands out, inscribes itself absolutely; it is sincere and loyal. Whitewash is the riches of poor and rich, of all menjust as bread, milk and water are the riches of the slave and the king. Thus, the vernacular architecture of Paris provokes him to reflections that reach deeply into his experience and theories, but it also provoked him to conceive something more specific: the project for the Maison Citrohan. This simple house is almost a pure studio-type, but he provides for it a derivation as characteristically unexpected as it is deeply indebted to the authority of the vernacular We were eating in a little cabbie's restaurant in the middle of Paris. There was a bar (zinc), the kitchen at the back, a garret-floor divides the height of the premises in two, the front opens directly on the street. Simplification of source of illumination-just one big bay at each end; two lateral bearing walls, a flat roof on top; a veritable box that could usefully become a house. while the fenestration of Maison Citrohan, like that of the bulk of the studiohouses standing in Paris at that time (192o) drew on another vernacular tradition. We had observed that the glazing of factories in the Paris suburbs let light in and kept thieves out without any difficult joinery. And was very attractive aesthetically, judiciously used But Citrohan is an admitted pun on Citroên, and raises a problem that can only be discussed in the context of Le Corbusier's first book over that famous signature, Vers une Architecture.