advanced architects themselves understood it, for it should be noted that whereas the original title Vers une Architecture, simply says 'Towards an Architecture', and implies, from internal evidence in the book, an absolute or essential architecture, which had always existed and had merely been mislaid, the titles of the English and German translations are 'Towards a New Architecture' and 'Kommende Baukunst' respectively, and put an entirely different slant on the matter, though not one that is entirely unsupported by the text. In any case, it was precisely this rediscovery of the old in the new, this justification of the revolutionary by the familiar, that ensured the book its enormous readership, and an influence, inevitably superficial, beyond that of any other architectural work published in this century to date. It enabled men, regarding the author's undoubtedly revolutionary buildings, to find in them justifications for their most ingrained prejudices—it is noticeable that its influence has been greatest where the French Beaux-Arts tradition is strongest. Its great success, however, has not only overwhelmed better-reasoned and more genuinely revolutionary works by other authors, but has also reduced the attention given to other, and better-reasoned books by Le Corbusier himself, which are the subject of the next chapter. # 18: Le Corbusier: town-planning and aesthetics BY 1926, THE year when Le Corbusier committed to print his next important theoretical statements, he had become something of an established figure in the world of Paris architecture. The middle-of-the-road magazine La Construction Moderne included him in a list of celebrities whose views on the housing crisis they canvassed; he had some half dozen schemes completed or in construction, and even his personal appearance was a subject of comment, for he endeavoured to present himself as an homme-type of the age, in the dark clothes, bowler hat, pipe and bow tie of an engineer. But what had established him, more than anything else, was the Pavillon de l'Esprit Nouveau, erected with the powerful and necessary backing of Charles de Monzie, Minister of Fine Arts, at the Exposition des Arts Décoratifs. Though the exhibits designed by Kiesler and Melnikov were, in some ways, more advanced aesthetically and structurally, this pavilion had the advantage of completeness, it envisaged a whole way of domestic life down to its minor details. The structure was, effectively and allowing for an existing tree on the site, a full-scale mock-up of one unit of the Immeuble-Villas, complete with its adjoined terrace, furnished with objets-type and Purist works of art. It created an entirely homogeneous visual setting, a creation of a single mind, so that one is tempted to compare it to those interiors completely designed by such masters of the previous generation as van de Velde or Mackintosh, but there is an extremely important difference. Only the structure is a work of design by the mind that created the environment, the rest was claimed to be a work of selection almost in the Duchamp manner from standard products, objets-type, already on the market, and the homogeneity of the whole came largely from the adaptation of the structure to an aesthetic derived from certain classes of objets-type, and the rejection of any standard products that did not answer this aesthetic. Although certain distortions of intention appear in this process, and some objects had to be diverted from their original functions, e.g. laboratory vessels as flower-vases, the resulting interior owed much of its impact to the directness with which mass-produced equipment, such as Thonet and Maple chairs, could fulfil aesthetic functions that were supposed, even in progressive circles, to require the services of cabinet makers. Even the paintings on the walls were of the type then supposed to be capable of mass-reproduction in the sense intended by Albert Gleizes, and annexed to this appartement-type was a species of rotunda housing large-scale dioramas of Le Corbusier's two town-planning schemes of the period. Thus, the pavilion, taken as a whole, gave visual form to all the main themes of the articles on design that had appeared in L'Esprit Nouveau (which ceased publication at the time of the exhibition) and were at different times reprinted in book form: painting: La Peinture Moderne; architecture: Vers une Architecture; product design: L'Art Décoratif d'Aujourd'hui, a polemical work of only local interest, and town-planning, Urbanisme, which is among his best worked-out books of the period, but not among the most influential. It opens with an Avertissement full of aphorisms and slogans whose import is familiar from Vers une Architecture ## A town is a tool. Towns no longer fulfil this function. They are ineffectual, they use up our bodies, they thwart our souls. ## or again A city! It is the grip of man on nature. ## and yet again Geometry is the means, created by ourselves, whereby we perceive the external world and express the world within us. but if these given grounds are familiar, the procedure of the argument is not. The first chapter opens by picking upon what seems at first to be only a detailcon sideration in town planning, straight roads versus curved. But this is the fundamental consideration for Le Corbusier. In attacking Camillo Sitte he is attacking what he considers to be a philosophy of disorder and mere aesthetics; serpentine roads he dubs Le Chemin des Anes, straight roads Le Chemin des Hommes, apparently because he is under the impression that to travel in straight lines is to reveal the ability to reason and a sense of purpose peculiar to homo sapiens ## L'homme marche droît parcequ'il a un but a statement which is equally true, given a reasonably flat surface, of donkeys that have an end in view. All he is doing, in fact, is restating his familiar aesthetic prejudices in a new rhetorical form, but this particular preference gives a basic inclination to the whole argument of the bookbefore all else, the Ville-outil, the ville-type, will be rectilinear. Even before the beginning of this chapter, at the end of the Avertissement, he had reproduced one of those nemonic charts of regular geometrical forms that used to appear in the back cover of arithmetic exercise books (and not only in France) and the Débat Général of the seven opening chapters rarely strays outside the terms of reference laid down by this chart. Right angles and the Phileban solids are praised, and a curious diagram underlines the value he attaches to these forms. It balances, on one side 'classicisme', epitomised by triangle, square, sphere, etc. against 'barbarisme', characterised by verticals, zigzags and, it should be noted, a sculpture by Rob van t'Hoff and a diagram of a Gothic chevet, with a caption that says, inter alia One is a symbol of perfection, the other of effort only. All the same, one is of a more elevated order than the other, for one is complete and the other is only an attempt. A matching diagram, over the page, shows a rising line of Culture crossing a descending line of Barbarism at 1453 (Prise de Constantinople) with the façade of Notre Dame on one side of the intersection, and the Perrault front of the Louvre on the other-an overwhelmingly clear statement of his Classicist preferences, that introduces a Définition du Sentiment Moderne. This begins with what is effectively a second caption to the diagram described above Our modern culture, acquired by the West, has its roots set deep in the invasions which extinguished antique culture. After the check of Ad rooo it began to build itself again slowly through another ten centuries. With a primitive but admirably ingenious equipment invented in the Middle Ages it inscribed certain points of great splendour in the eighteenth century... Where the eighteenth century defined the fundamental principles of reason, the nineteenth century, by a magnificent effort, gave itself up to analysis and experiment, and created an equipment which was entirely new, formidable, revolutionary and destined to revolutionise society... So far (as so often with Le Corbusier) compressed Choisy, and he makes no attempt to prove that his Sentiment Moderne arises from all this in any consequential manner, but merely asserts that it can now be felt. We are the heirs of that effort, we are aware of our modern feeling and we know that an era of creation is about to commence... This modern sentiment is a spirit of geometry, a spirit of construction and synthesis. Exactitude and order are its essential condition. .. . This is the passion of the age. With what astonishment do we regard the disordered and spasmodic impulses of Romanticism! A period when the soul was thrown back on itself in such an effort of analysis that it was as though a voleano were in eruption. No longer do we get these eruptions of overcharged personality. The amplitude of our means impels us toward the general, and to an appreciation of the simple fact. In place of individualism and its fevered products, we prefer the commonplace, the everyday, the rule to the exception. The everyday, the rule, the common rule seem to us now the strategic base for the journey towards progress and the beautiful. A general beauty draws us in, and the heroically beautiful seems merely theatrical. We prefer Bach to Wagner.. This breaks no new ground, but it sets out his justifications of the typical, of the generalised situation-type in a more concise form than can be found elsewhere, and it is worth noting that while he sets up Bach, the Pantheon, Babylonian and Roman planning and le Roi Soleil, as objects of admiration ## and insists that We love the solution, and we are uneasy at the sigh of failures, however grandiose or dramatic he nevertheless follows this with an almost Futurist appreciation of the grandiose drama of the emergent tendencies, still lacking solution, of the times Throughout the world we see the array of mighty powers, both in the industrial and the social spheres; we see, emerging from chaos, ordered and logical aspirations, and we feel that they are in harmony with the means of realisation at our disposal. New forms come to birth; the world adopts a new attitude. The old prejudices crumble and crack and totter.... An indescribable quiver is passing through everything; it is putting the old machine out of gear; it is the motive force and aim of the age. The Futurist tone of this passage is the more remarkable in that the very next chapter is a flat refutation of the Futurist theory of caducità, of the idea that works of art should be perishable. Le Corbusier distinguishes, along familiar lines, works of art from works of technology, and insists that only the latter are perishable, in a most remarkable chapter, under the heading of Perennité. He opens by rephrasing his earlier praise of engineers in such a way that they are demoted from the status of noble savages to that of a species of perfected, but sub-human Rationalists The industrial achievements of our own age which impress us so profoundly today are created by placid and modest men, whose thoughts are limited and direct, engineers who do their additions on squared paper... yet these men can bring those of us who have something of the poet in us to the very extreme of enthusiasm and emotion. Against the products of reason, which he declares to be expendable and fallible, he sets the products of passion, which he claims are as permanent as human nature is permanent ... reason is an open account stretching to infinity in which each successive stage is registered.... Human passion, since man was man, has been constant... the gauge by which we can measure the permanence of human creations. The activity of the mind continues unendingly, in an ascending curve; it creates its implements; and this we call progress. The components of passion remain constant, coming between two limits which the ages have not altered. On this basis, he can do two things: (a) he can advance a criticism of the beauty of machinery that reverses the Futurist position, and (b) he can call in question the aesthetic status of some of the most admired works of civil engineering. On the first count, he opposes the Futurist position that machines are beautiful in so far as they are not the products of 'art' by proposing that the intervention of 'passion' is vital Let us attempt to formulate the standards of mechanical beauty. If one could admit that mechanical beauty was a matter of pure reason, the question would be settled out of hand: mechanical creation could have no permanent aesthetic value. Each piece of mechanism would be more beautiful than what had preceded it and would inevitably be surpassed by its successors. And so we should get an ephemeral beauty, soon out of date and despised. But in practice things do not happen so; man's sensibilities intervene even in the midst of the most rigorous calculation ... intervention of an individual taste, sensibility and passion. yet in spite of this he inconsistently maintains that the nature of machinery remains perishable even in conception The foaming locomotive, the rearing steed that evoked the hasty lyricism of Huysmans, is rusting iron on the scrap-heap. The cars of the next Salon require that Citroen write off the model that has been all the rage. But the Roman aqueduct endures.. This brings him to his second count. The Roman aqueduct endures, the Coliseum is piously conserved, the Pont du Gard lives on. But will the emotion produced in us by Eiffel's Pont de Garabit endure? The work of Eiffel has often been taken as a touchstone of Modernity, and it is maintained that only true 'Moderns' can admire it. Le Corbusier's attitude to the Eiffel Tower is as hesitant as to the Pont de Garabit, and in a caption to a photograph of the Tower (albeit titled Hommage à Eiffel) he postpones judgement on it to the Greek Kalends, more or less ... when the city is built on the same grand scale, then we shall be in a position to go into the question of the permanence of the Eiffel Tower. But in captioning the Pont du Gard he relapses without hesitation into the rhetoric of the École Le Pont du Gard. Romain. Classé au Panthéon de la gloire. The hesitant attitude toward the work of so great an engineer, whose reputation has proven highly durable, may be due, among other things, to a distrust of the non-Phileban forms of Eiffel's work—a distrust that was fairly general among Parisian aestheticians when confronted with splaylegged lattice structures of any kind, as in this comment, by a captionwriter (who elsewhere revealed himself a mechanical ignoramus) in Cahiers d'Art, on a German coaling gantry. The work of the engineer, pure in its origins, begins gradually to be adulterated by aesthetic pursuits. The crane which is seen on this page is soaked in romantic Expressionism. It would be a great pity if engineers refused to recognise that their work is not meant to communicate emotions, but with a view to rigorously defined utilisation. Emotion comes by super-addition when the work exactly fulfils the function for which it is destined While it is doubtful if Le Corbusier would subscribe to the old-fashioned type of Functionalism revealed in the last sentence of this quotation, any more than he would pass so ill-informed a judgement on what appears to be an exemplary piece of engineering design, it is interesting to record that he did share the caption-writer's suspicion of engineers who had aesthetic ideas 'above their stations'. When a man's passion for creation has taken form, his work will endure through the ages. But this is a dangerous judgement, for shall we see engineers trying to turn themselves into men of aesthetic sensibility? That would be a real danger.... An engineer should stay fixed, and remain a calculator, for his particular justification is to remain within the confines of pure reason. Works of engineering are not to be ranked with works of art, lacking the sanction of time, nor engineers with artists, lacking the sanction of passion -and since the city was intended to last, it too must be a work of passion But it is the city's business to make itself permanent, and this depends on considerations other than those of calculation. And it is only Architecture which can give all the things that go beyond calculation. Between this taking up of position on the grounds of geometry and perenniality, and the actual excursions into town planning that make up the second half of Urbanisme, there are interposed a series of disorderly chapters (disorderly in sequence rather than argument) from which, however, the following important points can be extracted. Firstly, the concept of standardisation is rephrased in such a way that it does not restrict the 'passion' of the town planner, by taking over (with acknowledgements) an idea from the Abbé Laugier r. Chaos, disorder and a wild variety in the general layout (that is, a composition rich in contrapuntal elements like a fugue or a symphony). 2. Uniformity in detail (that is, reticence, decency, 'alignment' of details). which is exemplified later by reference to les villes dites 'd'art' The basis of all this is the existence of a standard. So in Rome, in Venice; all dwelling-houses are stuccoed; in Siena they are of brick; the windows are to one scale, the roofs to the same pitch and covered with the same tiles; the colour is uniform. ## Secondly: ## Il faut planter des arbres! an idea which also seems to derive from his experience of cities of art (he mentions Turkey in particular) as well as a day-to-day familiarity with Haussmann's town planning. Thirdly; two chapters and a supplement of newspaper cuttings reproduit tel, are devoted to an exposition of the increasingly critical condition of vehicular circulation in the great cities of the world. This exposition still carries weight, not only because the crisis is now general to all cities, but also because his means of presentation, ranging from statistical curves to comic drawings, give both quantitative and personal force to his argument. Fourthly; the means to do something to ameliorate this condition, and other ills of great cities. Here, following Futurist precept again, he corrects the proposition of Choisy, only twentyfive years earlier, that the present state of outillage in building was substantially that of the Gothic or even prehistoric periods. He contrasts the navvying equipment used as recently as in Haussmann's public works in Paris, with the fully mechanised system of mixers, conveyors and telpherage employed in pouring the concrete of the Barrage de Barberine, in the Alps, but he also underlines the inadequate use made of current techniques by a further contrast, between the 3ooo hand-made kilometres of the Wall of China and the 14o machine-cut kilometres of the Paris Métro, on which work was still proceeding in the Twenties. This, appropriately, concludes the Débat Général, and brings him to the second part of the book, in which the various ideas he has brought forward are applied to actual town-planning schemes. The manner in which he approaches the problem is entirely characteristic. In direct contrast to Sant' Elia, whose town-planning ideas grew out of a specific topographical location, Milan Central Station, or to Tony Garnier, whose Cité Industrielle stood on a site which, though ideal for his purposes, had the characteristics and limitations of natural topography, Le Corbusier starts on a blank sheet of paper, and rejects even imaginary accidents of site. Proceeding in the manner of an investigator in his laboratory, I have avoided all special cases, and all that may be accidental, and I have assumed an ideal site to begin with. Although this seems to imply a curious view of scientific method, the approach is not an unexpected one. He elaborates first a solution-type, in the abstract, its real life application can wait. This particular système préconise was first developed in 1921-2, and shown at the Salon d'Automne of the latter year, under the title Une Ville Contemporaine pour 3 Millions d'Habitants. It will be noted that he called it a contemporary city, and was offended when it was termed a city of the future, insisting that it could be, and ought to be, built at once. Upon the unrestricted plane of his ideal site, the planning makes a pattern of unmistakable Beaux-Arts extraction, with major and minor axes, star inteisections of orthogonal and diagonal roads, and the rest of the apparatus. As in Garnier's Cité, industry is dismissed to the outskirts In a decent house the servants' stairs do not go through the drawing-roomeven if the maid is charming (or if the little boats delight the loiterer leaning on the bridge). but in contradistinction to Garnier, the circulation-planning, however diagrammatic, is generous and appears free from bottle-necks. At points of maximum traffic-pressure, the means of achieving adequate circulation surface are Sant' Elian (if they do not go back beyond him to Tony Moilin) and at the centre of the city, there are no fewer than seven superimposed levels. Of these, the uppermost is an aircraft landing-deck, thus repeating a suicidal device from Sant'Elia, of asking aircraft to land between ranks of tall buildings, and the Sant'Elian source of this particular device seems underlined by the fact that the main central station is underneath. The contrast between the Beaux-Arts pattern of the plan as a whole and the Futurist quality of the section is very striking, and is heightened by the Futurist tone in which Le Corbusier discusses the skyscraper office-blocks that cluster so dangerously close around the landing deck And actually these skyscrapers will contain the city's brains, the brains of the whole nation. They stand for all the careful working-out and organisation on which the general activity is based. Everything is concentrated in them: apparatus for abolishing time and space, telephones, cables and wireless; the banks, business affairs and the control of industry; finance, commerce, specialisation. The station is in the midst of the skyscrapers, the tubes run below them and the tracks for fast traffic are at their base. The skyscrapers themselves are unique in his work, and unlike any of the subsequent designs for tall slabs and towers that have come from his hand. To judge from the observations he passed on them when they first appeared in Vers une Architecture, they were originally worked up from ideas of Auguste Perret's, but the master's own version, when it finally appeared, had Classical detailing, and bridges spanning from tower to tower several stories up—and was rejected by Le Corbusier as Futurisme bien dangereux! The form which he himself gives to these towers is a cross in plan, with each arm massively pleated, so that many rooms have three exterior walls, and these walls are entirely glazed. He dates the first sketches for this project as early as 192o, so that they are contemporary, within a few months, to Mies van der Rohe's earliest Friedrichstrasse project, which also has walls of glass, prismatically folded. No necessary connection between the two projects need be postulated, beyond a common source in German ideas of the pre-War period, particularly since Le Corbusier had gone out of his way to denounce, in 1921, the strong vertical emphasis that such a façade would give, as an error peculiar to German architecture. One simple fact condemns the lot; in a building one lives floor by floor (on vit par étage) horizontally not vertically. 'The German palaces are just lift cages. . . The Loutre and Bon Marché shops are in horizontals and they are right and the German architects are wrong. The other main class of accommodation envisaged for the Ville Contemporaine, seems to consist entirely of middle-class housing, of the Immeublesvillas type, grouped either in hollow squares as they had appeared in Vers une Architecture, or à redents, that is, in setbacks that advance and retreat symmetrically on either side of the street, a device that does much to account for the elegant abstract pattern of the overall plan. Whatever reservations one may entertain about the use of Beaux-Arts formulae and other aesthetic predeterminations, Une Ville Contemporaine remains a remarkable achievement and a measure of Le Corbusier's powers. Since it was exhibited in a definitive form as early as 1922, it was only four years later than the definitive publication of Garnier's Cité, which did not appear until 1918, but in spirit a whole generation has grown up between the two, and it has clear advantages of boldness and adequacy over Garnier's project. Over Sant' Elia's design it has an equally clear advantage of completeness-it is a whole city, not a series of tactical exercises in solving isolated problems, and over contemporary German projects, such as the Rococo elaborations of Camillo Sitte worked out by Bruno Taut under the influence of Finsterlin, it has clear advantages of order, comprehensibility and feasibility. In the Pavillon de l'Esprit Nouveau, Le Corbusier exhibited this scheme in one diorama, and, facing it, another diorama in which he attempted to apply the système préconise to an actual city, as the Plan Voisin de Paris. At once its weaknesses begin to appear-the destination of the two great motor roads that form the axe primaire and the axe secondaire of the plan is never resolved and they disappear off the map, north, south, east and west. Symmetry, as such, has to be compromised-the towers stand mostly along the axe secondaire, northwards from Chatelet, the Immeubles-villas mostly along the axe primaire, well to the west, north of the Tuileries and the Champs Elysées, and separated from the business towers by the central station, which has no buildings of any importance on top of it. It was immediately noted, when the Plan Voisin was exhibited in 1925, that it would involve the demolition of most of historical Paris north of the Seine, since it occupies a sector extending from the Place de la Republique to points west of the Gare St Lazare, and extending as far north as the Gare de l'Est. Within this pair of overlapping rectangles a few recognised monuments were to be preserved, not always on their original sites, though the Place Vendôme, which Le Corbusier greatly admired, was to be left intact and in place. He was clearly conscious of the shocking effect that such a project was likely to have, even in progressive circles, and he set out to block two lines of protest in advance, one, by pointing out that the small site-area and large capacity of high-rise developments would make it possible to accommodate many without dispossessing more than a few by demolitions, and another by some ingenious guess-work about the finance involved. However, these financial proposals involved the welcoming of foreign, even German, capital investment in the centre of Paris, and he only succeeded in further offending the kind of patriotic Traditionalists whom the whole project was most likely to alarm.ª Yet he himself clearly felt that he stood firmly in a tradition that had native roots in Paris, both intellectually and historically. The concluding words of the text of Urbanisme are against revolution for its own sake Things are not revolutionised by making revolutions. The real revolution lies in the solution of existing problems. and they are faced by a final illustration: an engraving of Louis XIV commanding the construction of the Invalides, with the caption Homage to a great town-planner-This despot conceived great projects and realised them. Over all the country his noble works still fill us with admiration. He was capable of saying, 'We wish it', or 'Such is our pleasure'. to which he adds parenthetically, as if he feared to alarm progressive sentiment (ceci n'est pas une déclaration de 'Action Française'.) The reader, reflecting on these two first books of Le Corbusier, cannot fail to note how little they contain in the way of positive statements about the detail aesthetics of architecture, about the way that a building should look. The Maison Citrohan, its derivatives and multiples, are justified only in terms of function and construction, in spite of all that was said about Functionalism being less than architecture; the towers of the Ville Contemporaine were little more than diagrams, with whose aesthetics he was professedly out of sympathy. It seems likely that it was not until about the year 1925 that he had any settled aesthetic opinions on the subject, for his work of the early Twenties is variable and manifestly tentative. The Villa at Vaucresson, commissioned by a client who had been impressed by the Citrohan project, shows him in two minds about symmetry, and has one asymmetrical façade and one conventional one, though without any really axial qualities in the internal planning; the Ozenfant House had a sawtoothed roof, such as he was never to repeat again; the LaRoche-Jeanneret houses had a sprawling, picturesque plan, such as he also never repeated, and was, in fact, a symmetrical project with one limb amputated. All these works contain good, or even brilliant, parts, but none has the ease or assurance of the house at Chaux-de-Fonds. That quality begins to be recovered in his works of 1925-6 and may be exemplified by the dormitory wing of the Palais du Peuple, near the Gobelins manufactory, and the Maison Cook, in Boulogne-sur-Seine. The first initiates a series of hostel-type structures that he put up in the Twenties and Thirties, a plain rectangular block of four identical dormitory floors, served by a connecting stair at one end, the whole raised on pilotis above a diminutive garden little larger in area than the plan of the block itself. The roof is flat and without visible excrescences, though it was originally intended to sport a pergola at the garden end, commanding a view over the Parc des Gobelins. Since the staircase is partly buried in the adjoining Palais (sic: a converted warehouse) all that one sees is the pure elevated rectangle of the dormitory, with extremely elegant fenestration, repeated identically from floor to floor, drawn on the unmodulated 'blanc de chaux' of the flat façades. The Maison Cook is a more complex affair, though justifiably described by the architect himself as 'La vraie maison cubique'. Both in plan and on its main elevation, it consists of compositions within an almost exact square. Although the main elevation has an open terrace to one side of the highest floor, a concrete 'sun-shade' is carried across in front of this to maintain the rectangular format, and although the main salon, also at this level, is of double height, this fact is not demonstrated on the street side, which emphasises, rather, that 'on vit par étage'. The block is on pilotis again, leaving an almost unobstructed ground floor from party-wall to party-wall, and on the two main floors there are fenêtres en longueur, also spanning from wall to wall, the central structural column being set back behind them to give an uninterrupted run of glass. On plan, this mode of composing within a predetermined rectangular format is even more striking because of the use of curved forms, a usage that also appears in the Guiette house at Antwerp (designed in the same year) and the large and complicated villa at Garches for Charles de Monzie, which must have been put in hand soon after this, and appears to draw heavily on the Maison Cook as a prototype. Not only is the mode of composing with rectangular and curved elements within a rectangular field of predetermined dimensions very similar to the mode of composing his paintings, but many of the curved shapes, whatever their functional justification, appear to derive from the forms of the objets-type in the pictures as well. This group of buildings and projects designed by him around this time has a very strongly characterised style of plain square silhouettes, white rendered walls with the absolute minimum of relief (balanced by a tendency to punch large holes right through them into the interior), compact rectangular plans featuring the use of curved walls and free-standing columns, long horizontal strips of window, flat roofs, and pilotis (or a clearly differentiated basement floor) to lift the main block clear of the ground. In his well-known writings, the justifications of these various usages appear only after the event—sometimes long after it-but there is a document of the exact period, that has largely escaped attention, yet provides a fairly extended explanation of his intentions in the employment of this particular style. Since it appeared in a learned publication-a special issue of the fournal de Psychologie Normale et Pathologique devoted to the arts and aesthetics— it is free both of the rhetorical tone of persuasion used in L'Esprit Nouveau, and also of the polemical pressures of monthly journalism. The consequence is an essay (partly worked up from a lecture given earlier at the Sorbonne) that differs in method from his other writing of the period and differs also in the frankness with which it is prepared to discuss purely aesthetic considerations. It opens with a display of juggling with dictionary definitions of art, architecture, and so forth, from which he emerges with two definitions-by-differentiation of the art of architecture. Firstly by differentiation of two bodies of architects, whose aims are For the first, to introduce into architecture the concept of ornarent, and the presence of fixed rules, settled methods, settled procedures. For the second, the rules are to be fixed, the methods to be settled, the procedures to be discovered. ## and secondly by differentiating two extremes of procedure There are, in the flux of ideas that comprise these definitions, the two poles of architecture, which are: to construct buildings (realm of technique); and to embellish them and make them glorious, delightful, etc. (realm of sentiment). The first distinction is clearly meant to separate the academics from the progressives, the second to continue the distinction between technology and aesthetics. However, having repeated his determination to separate them, he also insists on the necessity of their simultaneous presence ## Technicité et sentiment, synchronisme insécable but throughout this argument, he frequently insists on the primacy of techniques. I have said that the technical consideration comes first before everything and is its condition, that it carries within it unavoidable plastic consequences, and that it leads sometimes to radical aesthetic transformations This is clearly Choisyesque and echoes of Choisy are fairly frequent in the early pages, notably a definition of the nature of walling in reinforced concrete construction that repeats both the meaning and to some extent the actual words of Choisy's definition of the nature of walling in Gothic. ## What was once a load-bearing organ, has becone a simple infilling But, as elsewhere, Choisy's limitations are transcended by Le Corbusier's Futurist sense of the recent mechanical revolution, which he now recognises to have disturbed sentiment as well as technology It makes him travel twenty, fifty times as fast as before, makes him produce a hundred times as much as before, offers him sights and interests a thousand times as varied as before. At that rate we can safely say that the age is new, and the individual out of orbit. That which constituted the very basis of mind, the exact site of permanent things that gave an eternal-seeming basis to the endeavours of the mind and man's way of life—that site is upset, no longer precise nor immediate. From this he deduces, in particular, the need to evolve new plans to suit new need Now, the art of constructing buildings is different, different methods on different plans. We must start again from Zero. an apparent echo of Sant'Elia (si ricomincia da capo) that is partly sustained in the ensuing observation .. . for nothing more exists of the ancient values: a wall no longer needs to carry weight, a house has every interest in being off the ground (on pilotis) and not directly on the earth; a house no longer needs a pitched roof, can be made in a factory. Here, it will be observed, he is, almost for the first time, discussing the shape and construction of a house, frame-built, flat-roofed, on pilotis. But against these new possibilities he sets the permanence of human reactions Past, present, future, it is plainly the reactions of the same man to the same agents of stimulation .. . and our sensations are types, related to forms, lines and Here again we seem to have an echo of Charles Blanc's belief that various forms have a regular relation with human responses, but in the case of Le Corbusier this idea had probably been reinforced by the 'research' of Charles Henry, the academic aesthetician whose findings had been published extensively in L'Esprit Nouveau. In any case, we are faced once again, as so often in his early writings, with an ambiguity-in this case amounting to a contradiction, between two lines of thought, between two concepts of order, between the supposedly progressive and changeable nature of technology and the supposedly eternal and immutable nature of aesthetics. But this time he recognises the dichotomy, and also recognises that something must be done about it. Insofar as the house has repudiated en bloc the traditional baggage of forms, lines and colours, we too find ourselves here forced to start again from zero, and to make a fresh choice in conformity with that sense of harmony that, at all times, balances the equation of reason and passion. That is to say, a technological revolution has devalued the old repertoire of architectural forms, so we must now select a new set of forms, still answerable to the existing rules of aesthetics. Nothing could be farther from the Functionalist-determinist attitude with which Le Corbusier has been so often credited—what is revealed here, and confirmed by his other writings passim, is an attitude in which aesthetics, not function, are both determined and determining. At this point, his argument reaches a dead stop, his first main point has been made, and he takes off again on an entirely different and unexpected tack. He now sets out in tabular form five Éléments Objectifs de Discussion sur le Phénomène Architecturale 1. Architecture: to construct a shelter 2. Shelter: to put a covering over walls 3. Covering: to span an opening and leave clear space 4. Light the shelter: to make windows 5. Window: to span an opening and, as is immediately obvious, this list puts very close limits on the way in which architecture can be discussed. It never allows architecture out of the realm of technicité; it postulates the existence of walls, roofs and windows; and it defines windows in a tendentious manner, in order to be certain of arriving at the form of window to which the author was already committed—la fenêtre en longueur. Elements (3) and (5) define a covering and a window in identical terms, as the spanning of an opening, and not only does this imply that these two spans ought to be the same, i.e. effected by the same structural member, but that changes in the manner of spanning openings should bring with them changes in the form of windows. Before the existence of reinforced concrete, windows ... could not usefully be widened, because that would have necessitated flat vaults that were too long and difficult to build; or arches that would have pushed the ceilings too high. But now a house can be built of reinforced concrete uprights... leaving total voids between them. .. . What good is it, I ask, to fill this space up again, when it has been given me empty? What use is a window, if not to light the walls? It was thus that I came to admit that a fenêtre en longueur, equal in size to a window en hauteur is superior to it, since it permits the illumination of the flanking walls. There follows, after this, the discussion of walls as remplissage in a concrete frame, which is, in fact, a justification of his usages in fenestration, since there the distinction between frame and fill can be seen, whereas his solid walling tends to use an overall rendering to obliterate this distinction. Next comes a justification of flat roofs on functional grounds, supported by a lengthy piece of autobiography about the disastrous behaviour of the pitched roof on his early cinema at Chaux-de-Fonds, where the snow melted from internal heating on the high parts of the roof, and the water ran down until it encountered the unthawed snow at the eaves plate, whereupon it ran back down the inside of the walls. 'This he claims, is avoided on a flat roof laid to fall toward the warmed centre, as in the villa at Chaux, and If this is the only solution to extreme cases, we can be sure it is the solutiontype for all cases. —a most remarkable declaration from one who had earlier refused to argue from le cas d’espèce. In any case, the main argument in favour of flat roofs is aesthetic, and is developed in the latter part of the essay, which is largely a transcript of his lecture at the Sorbonne. What I wish to show, is that there is an established hierarchy of different states of minds, and that certain of them are, perhaps, superior to others. 'This, at all events, I allow myself to affirm since it is for me a certainty: mind manifests itself through geometry. From this I deduce that when geometry is all-powerful, mind has made progress over preceding periods of barbarism ... arrived at a period of intellectual clarity such as the Renaissance, it arrives also at the allpowerful horizontal, the horizontal that closes the composition at its crown. or, put more bluntly, a parapet concealed the pitched roof behind. Now, we dispose today of the means to pursue this magnificent ascent towards geometry, thanks to the invention of reinforced concrete, which offers us the most pure mechanism for orthogonal composition. and the employment of such pure mechanisms carries within it, he asserts, perfection. But the perfections of geometry can be carried further: tracés régulateurs can be used to give eternally valid aesthetic order to the technically valid openings in the wall that are dictated by le plan nouveau, and it is worth noting that this particular argument is argued back from a predetermined rectangular block to the final disposition of the functional openings .. . first the general cube of the building affects you fundamentally and definitively... you pierce a window, open a doorway; immediately, relationships arise between the spaces so defined.... It remains only to polish your labours by introducing the most perfect unity, ruling the work and regulating the various elements; tracés régulateurs take over. The accompanying sketches confirm the method, which could equally have been deduced from the buildings of the period: a given, unmodulated cube is pierced by openings that are then pulled into their final positions by a simple system of diagonals. Since the essay was published Le Corbusier has shown drawings of the actual tracés used on a number of the buildings of the late Twenties, all depending on the creation of an harmonious pattern within the limits of a given rectangular façade. The simplicity of the method, usually deriving from a single diagonal and lines parallel or normal to it, was apparently programmatic, for at this point in the argument Le Corbusier turns aside to upbraid Berlage (not named but clearly implied)s for his close-spaced grids of Quadratur en Triangulatur, of which he says ## That is no longer a tracé régulateur, but the weave of a canvas. Simplicity is also the justification advanced for another usage, which had at that time some significance as a slogan against the École des Beaux-Arts, the suppression of cornices, but simplicity is not to be pursued as an end in itself It would be desolating to find ourselves capsized into a fashion for simplicity.... If it is simplicity derived from great complexity and richness, all is well; but if it is only poverty that is expressed .. . nothing is gained, no progress made. and simplicity of this complex and rich order can only arise from mental discipline and, particularly, the discipline of mathematics. ... but that simplicity demands, on the contrary, great constructional exactitude, absolute precision of intention and reasoning; above all it demands the contributions of proportion, of mathematical relationships; it aims to provoke that enjoyment of mathematical order that is one of the most lawful aspirations of the modern frame of mind. Licite, the lawful aspirations of the modern mind-this is an extraordinary note on which to end a paper by one so widely regarded as a transgressor of laws, as the arch-revolutionary of twentieth-century architecture. But the fact remains that the real revolution lay in his completed buildings, and the main interest of this paper lies in the way in which it does, fairly and completely, describe most of the outstanding characteristics of those buildings. On the technical side, they were to be frame-built, walled in light materials, largely glazed, flat-roofed, raised on stilts; on the aesthetic side they were to be simple and cubic, topped by a horizontal line and without a cornice, with the openings in the walls distributed according to simple geometrical recipes. Only two indirect connections between these two sets of postulates can be observed, however: the identical definition of window and covering, which requires, in frame construction, a particular kind of window opening, and thus, to some extent, a particular kind of façade composition; and the primacy accorded to the plan, which cannot, one would think, be divorced entirely from either the structural frame or the fenestration and thus ought to provide a link between technique and aesthetics. And yet Le Corbusier's two great country houses of the end of the Twenties, at Garches and at Poissy, both make nonsense of this supposition by employing what he later termed 'le plan libre'. At Garches, wall to wall fenestration runs across the whole of the front and two thirds of the rear façade, without any apparent respect for the daylighting needs of the rooms behind, while at the Villa Savoye at Poissy a standard band of fenestration runs right round the main floor of the house, and the only regard it pays to what is behind it is to remain unglazed where it gives on to open courtyard and not on to closed room-space. In both houses the frame is an absolute three-dimensional grid which exists independently of the planning of the various floors-not only do stray columns pass through some rooms in seemingly awkward places, but in some instances walls that could comfortably have filled-in the spaces from column to column, have apparently been deliberately joggled out of line to leave the structure in clear distinction from the partitioning. But this device appears to reveal a fundamental streak in his psychological make-up. The difference between frame and wall must be made manifest at all costs, even at the cost of common-sense logic, just as in his writings it is clearly more important for him to make his ideas manifest than it is to make them logical. But in this, there is no doubt that he succeeded, more than any other architectural theorist of the time. His illogicalities have always been common knowledge, but his ideas have been accepted in spite of that—or more likely, because of that. He has put into circulation a body of formal devices and emotional attitudes that are so intricately entangled in his own mind, and have become so much a part of the common currency of the Modern Movement, that it is rarely observed how little necessary connection they have with one another. But it is worth noting here that the most persuasive of his writings, and the most persuasive of his formal usages, come from epochs almost a decade apart. The formal usages were given currency mostly by buildings completed between 193o and 1933 and the ideas came almost exclusively from Vers une Architecture, of 1923. The same decade encompassed, near enough, the rise and fall of the International Style in Germany, a development in which the synchronisation of theory and practice was never seriously in doubt, and therefore presents a very different picture to the historian.