Giedion, S: Bauen in Frankreich, Eisen, Eisenbeton, Leipzig, 1928. # Section five BERLIN, THE BAUHAUS, THE VICTORY OF THE NEW STYLE Scheerbart, P: Glasarchitektur, Berlin, 1914. Taut, B: Die Stadtkrone, Jena, 1919. Ein Wohnhaus, Stuttgart, 1927. Modern Architecture, London, 1929. (German Version; Die Neue Baukunst, Berlin, 1929.) (no author given): The Tribune Tower Competition, Chicago, 1923. Wingler, Hans M: Das Bauhaus, 1919–1933, Cologne, 1962. Gropius, Gropius and Bayer: Bauhaus 1919–1928, New York, 1938 (for the English texts of Bauhaus documents quoted in the pages that follow). Gropius, W: Internationale Architektur, Munich, 1925. Kandinsky, W: Punkt und Linie zu Fläche, Munich, 1925. Klee, P: Pädagogisches Skizzenbuch, Munich, 1926. Johnson, P: Mies van der Rohe, Museum of Modern Art, New York, (2nd edn.), 1953. Behrendt, W. C: Der Sieg des Neuen Baustils, Stuttgart, 1927. von Senger, A: Krisis der Architektur, Zurich, 1928. Schnaidt, C: Hannes Meyer, Teufen, 1965. Hilbershcimer, L: Internationale Neue Baukunst, Stuttgart, 1927. Grosstadt-Architektur, Stuttgart, 1927. Hallenbauten, Stuttgart, 1928. Beton als Gestalter, Stuttgart, 1928. Korn, A: Glas im Bau und als Gebrauchsgegenstand, Berlin, 1929. Platz, G: Die Baukunst der neuesten Zeit, Berlin, 1927. Mendelsohn, E: Amerika, Berlin, 1928. (English translation: The New Vision, Documents of Modern Art: Vol. 3, George Wittenborn, New Yo 1949, from which most of the quotations in the following pages are taken.) # 19: The Berlin school IN sPITE oF the appearance of notable Modern buildings in cities such as Dessau and Stuttgart, the main power and strength of the German contribution to mainstream Modern architecture came from Berlin—indeed, most of these notable buildings in other towns were the work of architects with, at least, Berlin connections.1 As the second artistic capital of Europe, after Paris, it was clearly likely to produce work of interest, but it contained, in addition, a remarkable group of architectural talents. No other centre in the early Twenties could have boasted, as Berlin could, more than a dozen progressive architects of more than average competence, sufficiently resilient in mental constitution to take in their stride a major aesthetic revolution, from Expressionism to Elementarism, and to design in either style with equal vigour and assurance. Yet Bruno Taut, Mies van der Rohe, Erich Mendelsohn, and Walter Gropius, were as typical of the Berlin architecture of 1919 as of 1926, their contributions to the second phase were as notable as to the first, and all but Mendelsohn did as much to make the skyscraper typical of Expressionism as they did to make the Siedlung typical of the Elementarist phase that runs into the International Style. The theories of Erich Mendelsohn have been discussed in an earlier chapter, those of Gropius will be discussed in the next: for the moment we are concerned with Bruno Taut and Mies van der Rohe. As a mirror of the ideas current in his time, rather than as an original thinker, Taut is of the greatest interest: at the end of the Twenties he contributed to the group of encyclopaedic works on Modern architecture the only one in a 'popular' vein; in the course of the decade he produced a number of minor pieces of documentary interest, and at its very beginning he produced what is, historically, his most important book, because it is one of the few major documents of the Expressionist phase that can be set beside Mendelsohn's lectures—Die Stadtkrone. This book, written in 1919 and dedicated, understandably, to the Friedfertigen, the Peaceable, is primarily concerned with town planning, but in a manner contrary in intention, if not in effect, to anything produced outside the Berlin Expressionist circle. It is, in part, a polemic against advanced town planning as it then stood, with its emphasis on residential planning, zoning and Garden City ideals. These, according to Taut, do not produce a complete city but a Rumpf ohne Kopf—urbanisation without an emphatic central feature. Such a feature, a Stadtkrone, was for Taut a symbolic public building making a bold silhouette against the sky, visible from all over the city, much as an oriental pagoda or minaret, or a Gothic spire could be seen to dominate the surrounding buildings-indeed, the whole tone of the book is summed up by its frontispiece, a reproduction of Van Eyck's St Barbara seated before her Gothic tower. His own positive suggestions envisage a city of more or less radial plan, at little more than Garden City densities, focused on an agglomeration of public buildings disposed biaxially in a central rectangle, and capped by a glass tower, usually shown in his sketches with the sun rising or setting behind it. It is worth noting that Le Corbusier's Ville Contemporaine would have presented a somewhat similar appearance, though designed from a diametrically opposed point of view, for the glass tower of Taut's ideal city has a very different derivation. It appears to have been, by months or only minutes, the first of a number of glass-tower projects that ornamented Berlin architectural thought around i92o, but it is the only one that can be shown to derive directly from an inspiration that can only be suspected in the case of the others—Paul Scheerbart's book Glasarchitektur. Taut and Scheerbart had known one another before 1913 (Scheerbart died in 1915) and whether or not Taut's glass pavilion at Cologne in 1914 was inspired by Scheerbart, it was certainly dedicated to him,² just as Glasarchitektur, which appeared in the same year, was dedicated to Taut. Die Stadtkrone opens and closes with longish quotations, architectural in theme, from Scheerbart's 'Hippopotamus Novel' (Nilpferdroman) Immer Mutig, and is shot through with his faith in glass as a building material and sensitivity to its visual qualities. The appearance of such a person as Scheerbart, best known as an eccentric writer of fantasticated novels verging on what would now be called science-fiction, in the annals of anything so intimately bound up with the more aseptic side of Modern architecture as glass walling, may occasion surprise, but his passionate faith in glass and hatred of masonry ## Glass brings us the new Age Brick-culture does us nothing but harma were backed by a sharp sense of the practicalities of using the new material, while the possible impact of the book on architects of a sachlich turn of mind was heightened by its very sober typography, quite unlike the Yellow-Book style of Scheerbart's novels. In spite of the clearly Art Nouveau aesthetic of detailing and decoration that runs through the book, in spite of its Futurist visions of a night landscape criss-crossed by railways ablaze with coloured lights, illuminated motorboats, liners, and the glazed waterside palaces of a new Venice, Zeppelins cruising overhead picking out the shapes of the Alps with coloured searchlights, and glass-walled hotels gleaming on every mountainside-in spite of all this he had a shrewd appreciation of the problems of condensation, heat-loss, etc. that would arise with all-glass walling, as well as a clear sense of the possibilities of metal and concrete structure in combination with glass. Indeed, technically, his vision anticipates a great deal that was to come about in the Twenties, including such concepts as a new relationship of house to garden through the use of glass walls and movable partitions. In general, Taut does little more than skim off the superficial possibilities that Scheerbart suggests, but others, on whom the influence is too diffuse to be easily demonstrated (because they had the War years in which to digest the book and forget about its author) take it much deeper. In the case of the Bauhaus, which went further than anyone else in research into light and transparency, there are both strong possibilities and strong hints of a direct influence. The first proclamation of the Weimar Bauhaus, which may even have been roughed out in Berlin, has on its cover a woodcut by Lyonel Feininger showing the entirely Scheerbartian conception of a Gothic cathedral topped by beacon lights, while, inside, it has Gropius writing of 'a building like a crystal symbol' and calling for the elimination of snobbish differentiation between hand-workers and brain-workers, just as Scheerbart, in the passages from Immer Mutig that appeared in Die Stadtkrone, had prophesied ## Kings walk with beggar-men... artisans with the men of learning. Scheerbartian ideas could easily have been in Gropius's mind at this time since he was busy recruiting his first Bauhaus staff from the circle of Der Sturm, which had published Glasarchitektur, and was in close touch with both Bruno Taut and his brother Max. Also in close touch with the two 'Tauts at the same time was Mies van der Rohe, whose possible connections with Scheerbart are as intriguing as they are undemonstrable. It seems inconceivable that his two projects for glassskycrapers, one for the Friedrichstrasse Station competition (1919) and the other for an unspecified site (1921) should owe nothing to the prophet of glass, especially in view of the care lavished on investigating their optical qualities as reflectors and refractors of light, and their conspicuously Expressionist forms, which would have fitted them admirably for the role of Stadtkronen, but the fact remains that when Mies came to discuss them in print (in Bruno Taut's magazine Frühlicht) he did so in terms that are almost the opposite of Scheerbart's romanticism. Skyscrapers reveal their bold structural pattern during construction. Only then does the gigantic steel web seem impressive. When the outer walls are put in place, the structural system which is the basis of all artistic design, is hidden in a chaos of meaningless and trivial forms. . .. Instead of trying to solve new problems with old forms, we should develop the new forms from the very nature of the new problems. We can see the new structural principles most clearly when we use glass in place of the outer walls, which is feasible today since in a skeleton building these outer walls do not actually carry weight. The use of glass imposes new solutions. I discovered by working with actual glass models that the important thing is the play of reflections, and not the effect of light and shadow as in ordinary buildings. The tough tone, the fascination with skeletal structure, belong to a different world to Scheerbart's, the world of Lissitsky, Werner Graeff and the G group which was to be formed within less than twelve months of this being written. Also, between the Friedrichstrasse competition and the writing of these words, Berlin architects had involved themselves in two other skyscraper competitions, and had drastically overhauled their ideas in the process. Many entries for the Friedrichstrasse had clearly Scheerbartian inspirations—elaborately faceted glass towers, or towers with curvilinear glass pavilions at their feet—but the Koenigsberg competition and that for the Chicago Tribune Tower produced work of a different order. Some confusion surrounds both competitions because of designs that were completed, but not submitted, yet were subsequently published. Thus the Koenigsberg competition is now remembered chiefly for a design that seems never to have been submitted-Mart Stam's concrete-framed, glass-clad reworking of the Sant'Elian theme of set-back floors and projecting lift-towers, while the Chicago Tribune is remembered now for a whole group of designs that were unnoticed, unplaced or unsubmitted. While the most discussed,4 and most admired, of all the entries was Eliel Saarinen's, placed second and since deservedly forgotten, the competition attracted interest and entries from all over Scandinavia and the German-speaking world. In a modified Wrightian style there were designs from Bijvoet and Duiker (unplaced) and Lönberg-Holm (unsubmitted), both making much of overhangs and cantilevered projections, and in the new, tough Berlin style of severe framed structures in glass and reinforced concrete, there were entries from Max Taut (unplaced) and Ludwig Hilberseimer (unsubmitted), the latter representing an extremity of stark Zweckarchitektur, unrelieved by imagination or aesthetic intent. Between these two groups, stylistically, lies the most interesting German entry, the only one to keep the name of the Chicago Tribune alive in the history-books: Gropius and Meyer's. The design is of double importance historically; it marks the recovery by Gropius of the strong line he had pursued before 1914, and had lost in such Expressionist experiments as the Weimar monument, the Sommerfeld and Otte houses; but it also signals the emergence of'the characteristic features of the second phase of Berlin architecture. It puts vigorous emphasis on function and structure, by means of a formal vocabulary derived partly from an appreciation of engineering structure, and partly from the Elementarist aesthetics of the Dutch and Russian Abstractionists. Its top-heavy silhouette and fly-away balconies seem chiefly Russian in extraction (though the block form can be at least paralleled in Mendelsohn's Carmelkrone drawings of the same year) while the factory-pattern fenestration over the whole block picks up the rhythm of the elevations of the old Tribune printing works at the back of the site in such a way as to integrate it fully into the design-an expression of sympathy with engineer-architecture that can be found in no other entry for the competition, and would probably have been beyond the aesthetic capacity of anyone not trained in the Werkbund factory aesthetics of 191o-14. This was also practically the last of the skyscraper projects, and with the increasing availability of real work, Stadtkrone pipe-dreams recede from the foreground of architectural thought in Berlin, and the accent of design becomes, whatever Le Corbusier may have said to the contrary, predominantly horizontal. At the same time, leadership of the school tends to pass from the Taut connection to that of the G group. However, the school remained professionally coherent, no schism between Expressionists and Elementarists appeared. Men changed their attitudes but not their friends and in 1925 they regularised their solidarity by forming the Ring, whose membership included at different times Gropius, Mies van der Rohe, Bruno and Max Taut, Erich Mendelsohn, the Luckhardt brothers, Hans Scharoun, Hugo Häring, Hans Poelzig, Artur Korn, Richard Doecker, Otto Bartning, Hilberseimer and others—the complete circle of progressive Berlin architects irrespective of their stylistic preferences. With the waning of the influence of the ex-Expressionists, with Gropius largely taken up with the affairs of the Bauhaus, and Mendelsohn deeply involved in his connection with various large Jewish trading houses, the leadership of the Ring went almost automatically to Mies van der Rohe, and he fulfilled this role with increasing authority as the decade grew older. That authority among his fellow architects, whom he overtops as surely as did Le Corbusier those of Paris, seems to have depended less on great force of personality or dazzling originality, than on sheer unshakeable merit as a designer. In whatever style circumstances or inclination led him to design, he was outstanding, possibly because he was, he claimed, indifferent to style. As with many who profess such an indifference, his work, and particularly his sketches, showed in the early Twenties an almost excessive susceptibility to formal influence, but with the proviso that everything that he absorbed was transmuted. Thus, he emerges from his encounters with Stam and Lissitsky as less original than either, but a more convincing designer than both. His accession to the tough-minded school of design, of which they, and Werner Graeff, were the main propulsive force, is marked by a design as important as Gropius and Meyer's Tribune project, and for similar reasons: a concrete office block of dominantly horizontal design. Not a frame structure, it was envisaged as a post-and-slab (or, since the posts were rectangular in section, tapered and connected by beams under the slab, a portal-frame-and-slab) construction, but with a structural and functional peculiarity that seems to have some connection with Wright's Larkin Building. Hilberseimer describes it thus Here, the floor-plate is turned up vertically at the end of the cantilevers and becomes the outer wall, serving as a backing to the filing-cabinets which have been transferred to the outer wall from the inner space for the sake of a betterarranged layout but makes no reference to the fact that the filing systems of the Larkin building were similarly arranged (a device that Mies could have known through Berlage). He also describes the arrangement of the fenestration in a manner reminiscent of Le Corbusier's 'on vit par étage' Above the filing lies a continuous band of window rising to the floor above, without supports or masonry. By this means the ranging of the floors (one above the other) is most energetically emphasised. However, Hilberseimer makes no reference to elements of other styles that linger in this building—the axial planning and disposition of the entrance, and the fact that each floor cantilevers out a little further than that below, giving an almost Expressionist silhouette. The degree of caution revealed here, retaining such parts of past disciplines as are necessary to stabilise new adventures in design, is still present even in the most 'revolutionary' of Mies's projects, the brick villa of 1923. Much has been made of certain superficial resemblances between the plan of this design and paintings by van Doesburg, but it is a richer and more complex concept than that. The slabs of brick that form the structure can be regarded as 'elements' in Kiesler's sense, disposed in an 'unending space' such as Lissitsky might have specified. The relationship of these brick slabs to the volumes they do not completely enclose can indeed be likened to the bars of dark paint that do not completely enclose the areas of colour in van Doesburg's painting 'Rhythm of a Russian Dance', but this loose relationship of house to surroundings might equally well have a Scheerbartian inspiration, just as the carefully preserved purity of the wall slabs has an unmistakable origin in Berlage. Above all, the massing of the composition belongs to an older tradition than the Elementarist approach noted by Barr and others. Although the plan itself is perhaps the first real advance on Wright's Prairie houses, the elevations are less up-to-date in a way than those of some Dutch Wrightians, for there is a complete lack of consequential overhangs. Instead, the elevations pyramid back to a taller central block—the silhouette is that of a Stadtkrone in miniature, or of picturesquely grouped neo-Classical villa, and reveals the strength of Mies's Schinkelschüler inclinations even at this late date. The caution continues through the group of brick buildings, actually executed, that stem from this project. In the Wolf House at Guben something of the pyramidal massing is retained, even in 1926, and the brickwork shows an almost Dutch prettiness in the use of bond-patterns and the use of Dudok-like re-entrants on vertical arrises. The Monument to the Communist 'martyrs' Karl Liebnecht and Rosa Luxemburg, built in Berlin in the same year, has closer affiliations with Abstract art in the massing of its projecting rectangular volumes, but it also presents an appearance of Expressionist cragginess, and its surface of twisted and overburned bricks calls to mind the textured upper storey of Mendelsohn's double villa on the Carolingerplatz, Charlottenburg. It is only in the Lange house at Krefeld, as late as 1928, still in brick, that anything like the entirely tough tone of his earlier writings and associates really comes to the surface. The street front of this house in particular gives an impression of studied gracelessness, in spite of its warm colours, although further inspection will show that a most refined sense (if not system) of proportion relates the parts. Even here, where his manner of design reaches an extreme point, the facts of the building cannot quite be equated with the toughest of his theoretical propositions of the G epoch We reject all aesthetic speculation, all doctrine, all formalism ## or We refuse to recognise problems of form; we recognise only problems of building. Form is not the aim of our work, only the result Form by itself does not exist Form as an aim is formalism, and that we reject. The problems of building' that he was prepared to recognise were structure, planning disciplines, industrialisation of methods—in general, the sort of problem that would attract the attention of Werner Graeff and others who found the Bauhaus too 'arty'. Nevertheless, it is interesting that out of this rather negative approach there does emerge a positive and even familiar philosophy of design: Zeitgeist plus Rationalism equals Raumgestaltung. Greek temples, Roman Basilicas and mediaeval cathedrals are significant to us as the creations of a whole epoch, rather than as works of individual architects. ... They are pure expressions of their time. Their true meaning is that they are symbols of their epoch. Architecture is the will of the epoch translated into space. If we discard all romantic conceptions, we can recognise the stone structures of the Greeks, the brick and concrete construction of the Romans and the mediaeval cathedrals, all as bold engineering achievement Our utilitarian buildings can become worthy of the name of architecture only if they truly interpret their time by their perfect functional expression. Whatever the personal and literary influences bearing on this attitude, there was a growing social pressure, quite outside the G connection, that drove his ideas, and those of other Berlin architects, in this Rationalist and Functionalist direction in the middle of the Twenties. From about 1924 onwards, progressive organs of local government in different parts of Germany began to commission and build designs for large-scale, low-cost housing developments, and a surprisingly large proportion of this work went to comparatively extreme Modernists—the Ring were heavily engaged in the suburbs of Berlin until after 193o. Given the financial condition of the country at the time, these Siedlungen had to be built down to the most stringent budgets, and a ruthlessly rational approach was required to extract the maximum possible performance from materials, machinery, and every square meter of built floor space and occupied site area. Research into economy and maximum performance was carried to its farthest point in this period by Ernst May and his team at the Municipal Building Department at Frankfurt am Main, who developed special building techniques, and special furniture and equipment in order to hold down costs and speed up the work of building. Unusually, for a programme of this kind, the architectural quality of the buildings was high, and the quality of the planning has become a by-word, particularly the Römerstadt scheme. Although Berlin architects did not dispose of an equivalent research organisation their work does not lag far behind that of May's office, and the actual architectural quality of their work is very similar to his. That quality can be fairly simply described: most such developments were in three- to five-storey blocks of some length, strung out along access roads; their structure was of bricks or, more likely, cinder-blocks and almost always rendered over, the windows smallish, their precise size being determined usually by minimum daylighting standards. Any aesthetics these lengthy façades might boast had to be fought for, and had to be expressed from the given elements. In practice this meant that the colour of the rendering might be changed for the 'basement' or 'attic' stories, that rhythmic and proportional effects might be contrived from the disposition of the fenestration, and that the corner of a street, or other given interruption, such as the need to provide local shops, might provide the opportunity for some three-dimensional relief. The generally high standard of at least the façades of these developments is a major achieverent of the German architecture of the Twenties, but this achievement has its ironical aspect, for, since these low cost developments also constituted the bulk of the Modern architecture that could be seen around Berlin, they gave rise to the legend (backed by a certain amount of Corbusian wishful thinking) that Modern architecture is, by its nature, a cheap style of building. Even so, the participation of Mies van der Rohe, with his well-known preference for de luxe finishes, etc. in the business of Siedlung building still comes as something of a surprise, yet his small development on the Afrikanische Strasse, and the related block at Weissenhof, are by far the most distinguished of all such buildings architecturally, though their effect depends almost entirely on the size and spacing of the window-openings. The block at Weissenhof was one of the best known and most widely discussed buildings in the period, partly because of its inherent qualities, and partly because of its situation. In 1925, the Deutscher Werkbund invited Mies to take charge of the overall planning of what was to be their first major exhibition since Cologne, a group of residential buildings, some permanent, some transient, on the small hill of Weissenhof, overlooking Stuttgart, to be opened to the public in the summer of 1927. Since time was short, and most of the buildings would still be in the process of design when the overall plan was complete, the town-planning problem was one of permissive discipline, giving an ordered relationship to a number of blocks whose very bulk was still indeterminate at this early stage. The solution was not the academic one of driving an array of axes across the site and letting the buildings square up to them as best they could the site was too small, too irregular in outline and too beset with topographical accidents for that. Instead, Mies organised his anticipated volumes across the rise of the hill in the form of what might nowadays be termed a 'terrain-sculpture'-a related sequence of rectangular blocks and connecting terraces, organised somewhat in the manner of the brick villa project of 1923, with his own block of flats serving as a Stadtkrone at the highest point. This highly original concept, the first new contribution to threedimensional town planning since Sant'Elia, had to be sacrificed in part to local preferences and financial stringencies (the terraces were replaced by conventional road access, which broke up the continuity of the sculptural whole) but even so, a good deal of the initial concept survived, and can still be appreciated in aerial photographs taken at the time. It is hardly necessary to record that Mies made no written pronouncement about this remarkable piece of planning; instead, he explained his intentions at Weissenhof in two apparently contradictory statements about the problem of residential design. The contradiction, though striking, is in fact superficial, and it will be seen that the libertarian sentiments of the first do not rule out the special case discussed in the second. The problem of the modern dwelling is primarily architectural, in spite of its technical and economic aspects. It is a complex problem of planning and can therefore only be solved by creative minds, not by calculation and organisation. Therefore, I felt it imperative, in spite of current talk about Rationalisation and Standardisation, to keep the project at Stuttgart from being one-sided or doctrinaire. I have therefore invited leading representatives of the Modern Movement to make their contribution to the problem of the modern dwelling. One cannot but notice the deviation from the earlier tough tone which appears in this statement. However, it returns, almost in the language of 1922 in the other statement Today the factor of economy makes Rationalisation and Standardisation imperative for rental housing. On the other hand the increased complexity of our requirements demands flexibility. The future will have to reckon with both. For this purpose skeleton construction is the most suitable system. It makes possible Rationalised building methods and allows the interior to be freely divided. If we regard kitchens and bathrooms, because of their plumbing, as a fixed core, then all other space may be partitioned by means of movable walls. This should, I believe, satisfy all normal requirements. Although his block of flats at Weissenhof did not have what would normally be called movable partitions, it did have a skeleton frame (though this was invisible on the outside), it did treat the kitchens and bathrooms as fixed cores, and did arrange each of the twenty-four main flats differently in plan. Mies here gave the most striking and convincing demonstration of the concept of the flexible plan that had been seen up to this date, even though most of the theoretical pronouncements on the subject had come from Le Corbusier. Comparison with Le Corbusier is both apt and proper at this point, for, quite apart from his achievements as a town planner and a flat planner at Weissenhof, Mies also effected an even bigger feat there; he made the Modern Movement visibly international. Le Corbusier, Oud, Stam and the Belgian, Victor Bourgeois all contributed buildings to the scheme; Oud and Stam in the form of terraces of small cottages, Le Corbusier a double house and a Maison Citrohan, and Victor Bourgeois a single house slightly apart from the rest of the exhibition. However, visitors to Weissenhof could not but notice that the buildings designed by non-Germans were quite at home with their close neighbours designed by members of the Ring, and that a conspicuous harmony of style pervaded the whole Siedlung. This manifest international coherence had a double significance: on the one hand it made Modern architecture the target of chauvinist critics all over the world, whether they were Nazis, the Mauclair connection in France, or the wilder followers of Frank Lloyd Wright; on the other hand, following the lead established by Gropius' book Internationale Architektur, it led Alfred H. Barr to apply to mature Modern architecture of the mainstream that stylistic label that has adhered to it ever since—'The International Style' Yet, in spite of these international overtones, Weissenhof was primarily a manifestation of Ring architecture, and, apart from the four non-German designers mentioned above (and for Stam 'non-German' is a dubiously valid epithet) the remaining eleven were mostly Berliners by professional domicile, birth or attachment—Mies himself, Gropius, Hilberseimer, the Tauts, Scharoun, Doecker, Behrens, etc. The style to which the foreign designs conformed was the style of Berlin by sheer pressure of numbers. No other city at the time could have mustered, as Berlin could by this date, over a dozen convinced Modernists of recognisable talent. Paris might have produced four, the whole of Holland about the same number, the rest of the world another eight or so. In terms of the growth of the Modern Movement, Germany's greatest contribution was the sheer quantity of men and buildings produced by Berlin, but in terms of the subsequent distribution of that Movement across the Western world, Germany's two great contributions are an institution that was an entirely Berlin conception, albeit located elsewhere, the Bauhaus, which will be discussed in the next chapter, and a spate of encyclopaedic books, discussed two chapters hence, of which the most important, Moholy-Nagy's Von Material zu Architektur, was itself a Bauhaus product.