# 22: Conclusion: Functionalism and Technology BY THE MIDDLE of the Thirties it was already common practice to use the word Functionalism, as a blanket term for the progressive architecture of the Twenties and its canon of approved forerunners that had been set up by writers like Sigfried Giedion. Yet, leaving the shortlived G episode in Berlin on one side, it is doubtful if the ideas implicit in Functionalism— let alone the word itself-were ever significantly present in the minds of any of the influential architects of the period. Scholiasts may care to dispute the exact date on which this misleading word was first used as the label for the International Style, but there is little doubt that the first consequential use was in Alberto Sartoris's book Gli Elementi dell'architettura Funsionale, which appeared in Milan in 1932. Responsibility for the term is laid on Le Corbusier's shoulders—the work was originally to have been called Architettura Razionale, or something similar, but, in a letter which is reprinted as a preface to the book, Le Corbusier wrote The title of your book is limited: it is a real fault to be constrained to put the word Rational on one side of the barricade, and leave only the word Academic to be put on the other. Instead of Rational say Functional. Most critics of the Thirties were perfectly happy to make this substitution of words, but not of ideas, and Functional has, almost without exception been interpreted in the limited sense that Le Corbusier attributed to Rational, a tendency which culminated in the revival of a nineteenthcentury determinism such as both Le Corbusier and Gropius had rejected, summed up in Louis Sullivan's empty jingle ## Form follows function Functionalism, as a creed or programme, may have a certain austere nobility, but it is poverty-stricken symbolically. The architecture of the Twenties, though capable of its own austerity and nobility, was heavily, and designedly, loaded with symbolic meanings that were discarded or ignored by its apologists in the Thirties. Two main reasons emerge for this decision to fight on a narrowed front. Firstly, most of those apologists came from outside the countries—Holland, Germany and France-that had done most to create the new style, and came to it late. They thus failed to participate in those exchanges of ideas, collisions of men and movements, congresses and polemics, in which the main lines of thought and practice were roughed out before 1925, and they were strangers to the local conditions that coloured them. Thus, Sigfried Giedion, Swiss, caught only the tail end of this process in 1923; Sartoris, Italian, missed it almost completely; Lewis Mumford, American, in spite of his sociological perceptiveness, was too remotely placed to have any real sense of the aesthetic issues involved—hence his largely irrelevant tergiversations on the problem of monumentality. The second reason for deciding to fight on the narrowed front was that there was no longer any choice of whether or not to fight. With the International Style outlawed politically in Germany and Russia, and crippled economically in France, the style and its friends were fighting for a toehold in politically-suspicious Fascist Italy, aesthetically-indifferent England, and depression-stunned America. Under these circumstances it was better to advocate or defend the new architecture on logical and economic grounds than on grounds of aesthetics or symbolisms that might stir nothing but hostility. This may have been good tactics—the point remains arguable— but it was certainly misrepresentation. Emotion had played a much larger part than logic in the creation of the style; inexpensive buildings had been clothed in it, but it was no more an inherently economical style than any other. The true aim of the style had clearly been, to quote Gropius's words about the Bauhaus and its relation to the world of the Machine Age ## ... to invent and create forms symbolising that world. and it is in respect of such symbolic forms that its historical justification must lie How far it had succeeded in its own terms in creating such terms, and in carrying such symbolism, can best be judged by examining two buildings, widely held to be masterpieces, and both designed in 1928. One of them is the German Pavilion at the Barcelona Exhibition of 1929, a work of Mies van der Rohe, so purely symbolic in intention that the concept of Functionalism would need to be stretched to the point of unrecognisability before it could be made to fit it—the more so since it is not easy to formulate in Rational terms precisely what it was intended to symbolise. A loose background, rather than a precise exposition, of the probable intentions can be established from Mies's pronouncements on exhibitions in 1928 The era of monumental expositions that make money is past. Today we judge an exposition by what it accomplishes in the cultural field. Economic, technical and cultural conditions have changed radically. Both technology and industry face entirely new problems. It is very important for our culture and our society, as well as for technology and industry, to find good solutions. German industry, and indeed European industry as a whole, must understand and solve these specific tasks. The path must lead from quantity towards quality-from the extensive to the intensive. Algthis ath industry and technology will join with the forces of thought We are in a period of transition-a transition that will change the world To explain and help along this transition will be the responsibility of future The ambiguities of these statements were resolved in the Pavilion by architectural usages that tapped many sources of symbolism—or, at least sources of architectural prestige. Attention has been drawn to echoes of Wright, of de Stijl and Schinkelschüler tradition, in the Pavilion, but its full richness is only apparent when these references are rendered precise. All three of these echoes are, in practice, summed up in a mode of occupying space which is strictly Elementarist. Its horizontal planes, which have been likened to Wright, and its scattered vertical surfaces, whose distribution on plan has been referred to van Doesburg, mark out one of Moholy's 'pieces of space' in such a way that a 'full penetration with outer space' is effectively achieved. Further, the distribution of the columns which support the roof slab without assistance from the vertical planes, is completely regular and their spacing suggests the Elementarist concept of space as a measurable continuum, irrespective of the objects it contains. And again, the podium on which the whole structure stands, in which Philip Johnson has found 'a touch of Schinkel', extending on one side a good way beyond the area covered by the roof slab, is also a composition in its own right in plan because of the two pools let into it, and thus resembles the patterned base-boards which form an active part in those Abstract studies of volumetric relations that came from the Ladowski-Lissitsky circle, and, like them, appears to symbolise 'infinite space' as an active component of the whole design. To this last effect the materials also contribute, since the marble floor of the podium, everywhere visible, or at least appreciable even where covered by carpeting, emphasises the spatial continuity of the complete scheme. But this marble, and the marbling of the walls, has another level of meaning—the feeling of luxury it imparts sustains the idea of transition from quantity to quality of which Mies had spoken, and introduces further paradoxical echoes of both Berlage and Loos. These walls are space-creators, in Berlage's sense and have been 'let alone from floor to cornice' in the manner that Berlage admired in Wright; yet, if it be objected that the sheets of marble or onyx with which they are faced are 'decoration hung on them' such as Berlage disapproved, one could properly counter that Adolf Loos, the enemy of decoration, was prepared to admit large areas of strongly patterned marble as wall-cladding in his interiors. The continuity of the space is further demonstrated by the transparency of the glass walls that occur in various parts of the scheme, so that a visitor's eye might pass from space to space even where his foot could not. On the other hand the glass was tinted so that its materiality could also be appreciated, in the manner of Artur Korn's There and not There paradox. The glass of these walls is carried in chromium glazing bars, and the chromium surface is repeated on the coverings of the cruciform columns. This confrontation of rich modern materials with the rich ancient material of the marble is a manifestation of that tradition of the parity of artistic and antiartistic materials that runs back through Dadaism and Futurism to the papiers collés of the Cubists. One can also distinguish something faintly Dadaist and even anti-Rationalist in the non-structural parts of the Pavilion. A Mondriaanesque Abstract logical consistency, for instance, would have dictated something other than the naturalistic nude statue by Kolbe that stands in the smaller pool—in this architecture it has something of the incongruity of Duchamp's 'Bottle-rack' in an art exhibition, though it lives happily enough with the marble wall that serves as a background to it. Again, the movable furniture, and particularly the massive steel-framed chairs flout, consciously, one suspects, the canons of economy inherent in that Rationalism that del Marle had proposed as the motive force behind the employment of steel in chairs; they are rhetorically over-size, immensely heavy, and do not use the material in such a way as to extract maximum performance from it. It is clear that even if it were profitable to apply strict standards of Rationalist efficiency or Functionalist formal determinism to such a structure, most of what makes it architecturally effective would go unnoted in such an analysis. The same is true of the designs of Le Corbusier, whose work, while often extremely practical, does not yield up its secrets to logical analysis alone. In his Dom-ino project for instance, he postulated a structure whose only given elements were the floor slabs and the columns that supported them. The disposition of the walls was thus left at liberty, but some critics have logically extrapolated also that this left Le Corbusier at the mercy of his floor slabs. Nothing could be farther from the truth as far as his completed buildings are concerned which, from the villa at Chaux-de-Fonds onwards, have their floor slabs treated in a most cavalier fashion, and much of their internal architecture created by breaking through from one storey to another. Conversely, if there is a building in which the horizontal slabs are absolute, it is Mies's Barcelona Pavilion— the pools merely diversify the surface of the podium, nothing breaks through the roof slab and nothing rises above it; the whole building is designed almost in two dimensions, and this is true of much of his later work as well. In the case of the other building of 1928 which it is proposed to study here, Le Corbusier's house, Les Heures Claires, built for the Savoye family at Poissy-sur-Seine and completed in 193o, the vertical penetrations are of crucial importance in the whole design. They are not large in plan but, since they are effected by a pedestrian ramp, whose balustrades make bold diagonals across many internal views, they are very conspicuous to a person using the house. Furthermore, this ramp was designed as the preferred route of what the architect calls the promenade architecturale through the various spaces of the building—a concept which appears to lie close to that almost mystical meaning of the word 'axis' that he had employed in Vers une Architecture. The floors connected by this ramp are strongly characterised functionally—on vit par étage—the ground floor being taken up with services and servants, transport and entrance facilities, and a guest room; the first floor given over to the main living accommodation, virtually a week-end bungalow complete with patio; and the highest floor a roof garden with sun-bathing deck and viewing platform, surrounded by a windscreen wall. This, of course, is only the functional breakdown; what makes the building architecture by Le Corbusier's standards and enables it to touch the heart, is the way these three floors have been handled visually. The house as a whole is white-le couleur-type-and square-one of les plus belles formes—set down in a sea of uninterrupted grass-le terrain idéal-which the architect has called a Virgilian Landscape. Upon this traditional ground he erected one of the least traditional buildings of his career, rich in the imagery of the Twenties. The ground floor is set back a considerable distance on three sides from the perimeter of the block, and the consequent shadow into which it is plunged was deepened by dark paint and lightabsorbent areas of fenestration. When the house is viewed from the grounds, this floor hardly registers visually, and the whole upper part of the house appears to be delicately poised in space, supported only by the row of slender pilotis under the edge of the first floor—precisely that species of material-immaterial illusionism that Oud had prophesied, but that Le Corbusier more often practised. However, the setting back of the ground floor has further meaning. It leaves room for a motor-car to pass between the wall and the pilotis supporting the floor above; the curve of this wall on the side away from the road was, Le Corbusier claims, dictated by the minimum turning circle of a car. A car, having set down its passengers at the main entrance on the apex of this curve, could pass down the other side of the building, still under the cover of the floor above, and return to the main road along a drive parallel to that on which it had approached the house. This appears to be nothing less than a typically Corbusian 'inversion' of the test-track on roof of the Matté-Trucco's Fiat factory, tucked under the building instead of laid on top of it, creating a suitably emotive approach to the home of a fully motorised post-Futurist family. Inside this floor, the entrance hall has an irregular plan, but is given a business-like and ship-shape appearance by narrow-paned industrial glazing, by the plain balustrades of the ramp and the spiral staircase leading to the floor above, and by the washbasin, light fittings, etc. which, as in the Pavillon de l'Esprit Nouveau, appear to be of industrial or nautical extraction. On the main living floor above, the planning shows less of that Beaux-Arts formality that had appeared in the slightly earlier house at Garches, but is composed much as an Abstract painting might have been composed, by jig-sawing together a number of rectangles to fit into a given square plan. The feeling of the arrangement of parts within a pre-determined frame is heightened by the continuous and unvaried window-strip—the ultimate fenêtreenlongueur—that runs right round this floor, irrespective of the needs of the rooms or open spaces behind it. However, where this strip runs across the wall of the open patio it is unglazed, as is the viewing window in the screen wall of the roof-garden, a fulfilment, however late and unconscious, of Marinetti's demand for villas sited for view and breeze. 'The screen wall, again, raises painterly echoes: in contrast to the square plan of the main floor; it is composed of irregular curves and short straights, mostly standing well back from perimeter of the block. Not only are these curves, on plan, like the shapes to be found in his Peintures Puristes, but their modelling, seen in raking sunlight, has the same delicate and insubstantial air as that of the bottles and glasses in his paintings and the effect of these curved forms, standing on a square slab raised on legs is like nothing so much as a still-life arranged on a table. And set down in this landscape it has the same kind of Dadaist quality as the statue in the Barcelona Pavilion. Enough has been said to show that no single-valued criterion, such as Functionalism, will ever serve to explain the forms and surfaces of these buildings, and enough should also have been said to suggest the way in which they are rich in the associations and symbolic values current in their time. And enough has also been said to show that they came extraordinarily close to realising the general idea of a Machine Age architecture that was entertained by their designers. Their status as masterpieces rests, as it does with most other masterpieces of architecture, upon the authority and felicity with which they give expression to a view of men in relation to their environment. They are masterpieces of the order of the Sainte Chapelle or the Villa Rotonda, and if one speaks of them in the present, in spite of the fact that one no longer exists and the other is squalidly neglected, it is because in a Machine Age we have the benefit of massive photographic records of both in their pristine magnificence, and can form of them an estimate far more plastically exact than one ever could from, say, the notebooks of Villard d'Honnecourt of the Quattro Libri of Palladio. But because of this undoubted success, we are entitled to enquire, at the very highest level, whether the aims of the International Style were worth entertaining, and whether its estimate of a Machine Age was a viable one. Something like a flat rebuttal of both aims and estimate can be found in the writings of Buckminster Fuller. It was apparent that the going design-blindness of the lay level... afforded European designers an opportunity . to develop their preview discernment of the more appealing simplicities of the industrial structures that had inadvertently earned their architectural freedom, not by conscious aesthetical innovation, but through profit-inspired discard of economic irrelevancies.... 'This surprise discovery, as the European designer well knew, could soon be made universally appealing as a fad, for had they not themselves been so faddishly inspired. The 'International Style' brought to America by the Bauhaus innovators, demonstrated fashion-inoculation without necessity of knowledge of the scientific fundamentals of structural mechanics and chemistry. The International Style 'simplification' then was but superficial. It peeled off yesterday's exterior embellishment and put on instead formalised novelties of quasi-simplicity, permitted by the same hidden structural elements of modern alloys that had permitted the discarded Beaux-Arts garmentation. It was still a European garmentation. The new International Stylist hung 'stark motif walls' of vast super-meticulous brick assemblage, which had no tensile cohesiveness within its own bonds, but was, in fact, locked within hidden steel frames supported by steel without visible means of support. In many such illusory ways did the 'International Style' gain dramatic sensory impingement on society as does a trick man gain the attention of children.... ... the Bauhaus and International used standard plumbing fixtures and only ventured so far as to persuade manufacturers to modify the surface of the valve handles and spigots, and the colour, size, and arrangements of the tiles. The International Bauhaus never went back of the wall-surface to look at the plumbing .. they never enquired into the overall problem of sanitary fittings themselves. .. . In short they only looked at problems of modifications of the surface of end-products, which end-products were inherently sub-functions of a technically obsolete world. There is much more, in an equally damaging vein, picking on other vulnerable points of the International Style besides the lack of technical training at the Bauhaus, the formalism and illusionism, the failure to grip fundamental problems of building technology, but these are his main points. Though there is clearly a strain of US patriotism running through this hostile appraisal, it is not mere wisdom after the fact, nor is it an Olympian judgement delivered from a point far above the practicalities of building. As early as 1927, Fuller had advanced, in his Dymaxion House project, a concept of domestic design that might just have been built in the condition of materials technology at the time, and had it been built, would have rendered Les Heures Claires, for instance, technically obsolete before design had even begun. The Dymaxion concept was entirely radical, a hexagonal ring of dwelling-space, walled in double skins of plastic in different transparencies according to lighting needs, and hung by wires from the apex of a central duralumin mast which also housed all the mechanical services. The formal qualities of this design are not remarkable, except in combination with the structural and planning methods involved. The structure does not derive from the imposition of a Perretesque or Elementarist aesthetic on a material that has been elevated to the level of a symbol for 'the machine', but is an adaptation of light-metal methods employed in aircraft construction at the time. The planning derives from a liberated attitude to those mechanical services that had precipitated the whole Modern adventure by their invasion of homes and streets before 1914. Even those like Le Corbusier who had given specific attention to this mechanical revolution in domestic service had been content for the most part to distribute it through the house according to the distribution of its pre-mechanical equivalent. Thus cooking facilities went into the room that would have been called 'kitchen' even without a gas oven, washing machines into a room still conceived as a 'laundry' in the old sense, gramophone into the 'music room', vacuum cleaner to the 'broom cupboard', and so forth. In the Fuller version this equipment is seen as more alike, in being mechanical, than different because of time-honoured functional differentiations, and is therefore packed together in the central core of the house, whence it distributes services—heat, light, music, cleanliness, nourishment, ventilation, to the surrounding living-space. There is something strikingly, but coincidentally, Futurist about the Dymaxion House. It was to be light, expendable, made of those substitutes for wood, stone and brick of which Sant'Elia had spoken, just as Fuller also shared his aim of harmonising environment and man, and of exploiting every benefit of science and technology. Furthermore, in the idea of a central core distributing services through the surrounding space there is a concept that strikingly echoes Boccioni's field-theory of space, with objects distributing lines of force through their surroundings. Many more of Fuller's ideas, derived from a first-hand knowledge of building techniques and the investigation of other technologies, reveal a similarly quasi-Futurist bent, and in doing so they indicate something that was being increasingly mislaid in mainstream Modern architecture as the Twenties drew to a close. As was said at the beginning of this book, the theory and aesthetics of the International Style were evolved between Futurism and Academicism, but their perfection was only achieved by drawing away from Futurism and drawing nearer to the Academic tradition, whether derived from Blanc or Guadet, and by justifying this tendency by Rationalist and Determinist theories of a pre-Futurist type. Perfection, such as is seen in the Barcelona Pavilion and Les Heures Claires, could only have been achieved in this manner since Futurism, dedicated to the 'constant renovation of our architectonic environment' precludes processes with definite terminations such as a process of perfection must be. In cutting themselves off from the philosophical aspects of Futurism, though hoping to retain its prestige as Machine Age art, theorists and designers of the waning Twenties cut themselves off not only from their own historical beginnings, but also from their foothold in the world of technology, whose character Fuller defined, and rightly, as an ## ... unhaltable trend to constantly accelerating change a trend that the Futurists had fully appreciated before him. But the mainstream of the Modern Movement had begun to lose sight of this aspect of technology very early in the Twenties, as can be seen (a) from their choice of symbolic forms and symbolic mental processes, and (b) their use of the theory of types. The apparent appositeness of the Phileban solids as symbols of mechanistic appropriateness depended in part on an historical coincidence affecting vehicle technology that was fully, though superficially, exploited by Le Corbusier in Vers une Architecture, and partly on a mystique of mathematics. In picking on mathematics as a source of technological prestige for their own mental operations, men like Le Corbusier and Mondriaan contrived to pick on the only important part of scientific and technological methodology that was not new, but had been equally current in the pre-machine epoch. In any case, mathematics, like other branches of logic, is only an operational technique, not a creative discipline. The devices that characterised the Machine Age were the products of intuition, experiment or pragmatic knowledge-no one could now design a selfstarter without a knowledge of the mathematics of electricity, but it was Charles F. Kettering, not mathematics, that invented the first electricstarter on the basis of a sound grasp of mechanical methods. In picking on the Phileban solids and mathematics, the creators of the International Style took a convenient short-cut to creating an ad hoc language of symbolic forms, but it was a language that could only communicate under the special conditions of the Twenties, when automobiles were visibly comparable to the Parthenon, when aircraft structure really did resemble Elementarist space cages, when ships' superstructures really did appear to follow Beaux-Arts rules of symmetry, and the additive method of design pursued in many branches of machine technology was surprisingly like Guadet's elementary composition. However, certain events of the early Thirties made it clear that the apparent symbolic relevance of these forms and methods was purely a contrivance, not an organic growth from principles common to both technology and architecture, and, as it happened, a number of vehicles designed in the USA, Germany and Britain revealed the weakness of the architects' position. As soon as performance made it necessary to pack the components of a vehicle into a compact streamlined shell, the visual link between the International Style and technology was broken. The Burney 'Streamliners' in Britain, and the racing cars designed in Germany in 1933 for the 1934 Grand Prix Formula, the Heinkel He 7o research aircraft, and the Boeing 247D transport aircraft in the US all belong to a radically altered world to that of their equivalents a decade earlier. Though there was no particular reason why architecture should take note of these developments in another field or necessarily transform itself in step with vehicle technology, one might have expected an art that appeared so emotionally entangled with technology to show some signs of this upheaval. What, in fact, happened is of vital importance to the International Style's claims to be a Machine Age architecture. In the same early years of the Thirties, Walter Gropius designed a series of closely related bodies for Adler cars. They were handsomely conceived structures, with much ingenuity in their furnishing, including such features as reclining seats, but they show no awareness of the revolution in vehicle form that was proceeding at the time; they are still elementary compositions, and apart from mechanical improvements in the chassis, engine and running gear, for which Gropius was not responsible, they are no advance on the bodies that had been illustrated in Vers une Architecture. On the other hand, we find Fuller justifying his right to speak slightingly of the International Style by designing, in 1933, a vehicle fully as advanced as the Burney cars, and revealing thereby a grasp of the mind of technology which the International Style had failed to acquire. This failure was followed promptly, though not consequentially, by the emergence of another kind of vehicle designed to take advantage of yet another aspect of technology that the masters of the International Style seem to have failed to grasp. This was the first genuinely stylist-designed car, Harley Earle's Lasalle of 1934, whose aesthetics were conceived in terms of mass-production for a changing public market, not of an unchangeable type or norm. There is a curious point here: Le Corbusier had made great play with the idea of a fairly high rate of scrapping, but he seems not to have visualised it as part of a continuous process inherent in the technological approach, bound to continue as long as technology continues, but merely as stages in the evolution of a final type or norm, whose perfection, he, Pierre Urbain, Paul Valéry, Piet Mondriaan and many others saw as an event of the immediate future, or even the immediate past. In practice, a high rate of scrapping of our movable equipment seems to imply nothing of the sort, but rather a constant renewal of the environment, an unhaltable trend to constantly accelerating change. In opting for stabilised types or norms, architects opted for the pauses when the normal processes of technology were interrupted, those processes of change and renovation that, as far as we can see, can only be halted by abandoning technology as we know it today, and bringing both research and mass-production to a stop. Whether or not the enforcement of norms and types by such a conscious manoeuvre would be good for the human race, is a problem that does not concern the present study. Nor was it a question that was entertained by the theorists and designers of the First Machine Age. They were for allowing technology to run its course, and believed that they understood where it was going, even without having bothered to acquaint themselves with it very closely. In the upshot, a historian must find that they produced a Machine Age architecture only in the sense that its monuments were built in a Machine Age, and expressed an attitude to machinery—in the sense that one might stand on French soil and discuss French politics, and still be speaking English. It may well be that what we have hitherto understood as architecture, and what we are beginning to understand of technology are incompatible disciplines. The architect who proposes to run with technology knows now that he will be in fast company, and that, in order