# An Introduction to Design and Culture An Introduction to Design and Culture provides students with an comprehensive guide to the <sup></sup>anging relationship between design and culture from 1900 to the present day, with an emphasis on <sup>fi</sup>ve main themes: <sup>•</sup> design and consumption; <sup>•</sup> design and te<sup></sup>nology; <sup>•</sup> the design profession; <sup>•</sup> design theory; and <sup>•</sup> design and identities. Design is de<sup>fi</sup>ned broadly to cover product and furniture design, interior design, fashion design and graphic design. <sup></sup>e new edition is international in scope and emphasises the increasingly global role played by design as it gets nearer to the present day. Taking a broadly <sup></sup>ronological approa<sup></sup>, Professor Sparke employs historical methods to show how these themes were all implicated by design<sup>’</sup>s progress through the twentieth century and into the twenty-<sup>fi</sup>rst century. Illustrations throughout the text demonstrate the breadth of design and its multiple contexts, and design examples <sup>–</sup> su<sup></sup> as those of the Sony Walkman, contemporary design in China and James Dyson <sup>–</sup> are used to elaborate key ideas. Penny Sparke is a Professor of Design History and a Pro Vice-Chancellor (Resear<sup></sup>), Director, Modern Interiors Resear<sup></sup> Centre, Kingston University. Her resear<sup></sup> interests include modern design and the modern interior with special interest in role of gender. She is currently resear<sup></sup>ing the meaning of plants and <sup>fl</sup>owers in the modern interior.