## A<sup></sup>nowledgements <sup></sup>is book could not have been wri<sup></sup>en without all the support and stimulation I received over eighteen years spent tea<sup></sup>ing on the joint Royal College of Art/Victoria and Albert Museum History of Design Programme. My thanks go to all the sta<sup>f</sup> I worked with there, among them Dr Gillian Naylor, Professor Jeremy Aynsley, Professor Christopher Breward, John Styles, Marta Ajmar and Helen Cli<sup>f</sup>ord. Special thanks go to the many visiting s<sup></sup>olars <sup>–</sup> too numerous to list here <sup>–</sup> who presented seminars over the years and opened my eyes to new ideas emanating from a number of disciplines hitherto unfamiliar to me and whi<sup></sup> <sup></sup>anged the way I thought about design. Above all it is to the students <sup>–</sup> at both MA and PhD levels (especially, in the la<sup></sup>er category, <sup></sup>intin Colville, Trevor Keeble, Susie McKellar, Nik Ma<sup>f</sup>ei and Viviana Narotzky) <sup>–</sup> that I owe the greatest thanks, as it is they who pushed the boundaries forward through their resear<sup></sup>, continually <sup></sup>allenging my assumptions. I continue to be <sup></sup>allenged by the PhD students I have supervised <sup>–</sup> among them Emma Ferry, Fiona Fisher and Patricia Lara-Betancourt <sup>–</sup> and I am supervising at Kingston University, as well as by the sta<sup>f</sup> who tea<sup></sup> Design History there. My contact with design tutors and students across a range of disciplines, both at the Royal College of Art and at Kingston University, has also ensured that I understand not only where design is coming from but also, I hope, where it is going. At Routledge I would like to thank Rebecca Barden, Julene Knox (for energetic picture resear<sup></sup>) and Helen Faulkner. Above all I must thank John, Molly, Nancy and Celia for pu<sup></sup>ing up with my spending too many holidays and weekends working on my laptop. Every e<sup>f</sup>ort has been made to trace and a<sup></sup>nowledge ownership of copyright. <sup></sup>e publishers will be glad to make suitable arrangements with any copyright holders whom it has not been possible to contact.