Aalto, Alvar (1898–1976) A Finnish aritect–designer best known for his humanistic buildings executed in a modern, organic style (e.g., Viipuri Library, 1927–35 and Paimio Sanitorium, 1929–1933); his furniture, whi was made from wood moulded into two-dimensional curves; his curvaceous glass vases; and his textiles. Anti-Design e name given to the Italian movement of the 1960s and its revival in the 1980s, whi set out to disassociate design from commerce and position it within the cultural area. e term ‘radical design' was used interchangeably. Ettore Sottsass played a key role in the movement from the 1960s onwards. Arad, Ron (1951–) An Israeli designer who made his impact in London, where he seled in 1974, selling his idiosyncratic designs through his shop in Covent Garden. He was associated with the High-Te movement in the 1970s and he formed a company called One-Of. His best-known design is the Rover air, made from a recycled car seat. He is Professor of Design at the Royal College of Art. Arizoom An Italian aritectural group, formed in 1966 in Florence, whi participated in the Anti-Design movement. Its early members included Andrea Branzi and Paolo Deganello. e group created a number of visionary environments and some fantasy furniture as part of its aempt to move Italian design away from its preoccupations with consumerism and high style. Art Deco e name of a design movement that emerged in France in the 1920s, taking its name from the 1925 <sub>Exposition</sub> <sub>des</sub> <sub>Arts</sub> <sub>Décoratifs</sub>, held in Paris. Although it was a term associated with exclusive objects in the first instance, it moved into the popular arena in the 1930s through its mass production and dissemination and its alliance with new materials, su as plastics. Art Nouveau e name of an international aritectural and decorative arts movement whi came into being in the 1890s but whi had disappeared by 1914. It was aracterized by its flowing, organic forms in France, Spain and elsewhere but it had more rectilinear manifestations in Scotland and Austria. It has been described as the first modern design style. Arts and Cras Movement A British aritectural and design movement, based on the ideas of John Ruskin and William Morris in Britain, whi sought to eliminate the bad efects of industrialization on material culture and revert to a pre-industrial model in whi hand making played a part. e ideas and designs of the Arts and Cras protagonists – C. F. A. Voysey and C. R. Ashbee among them – were enormously influential abroad and influenced the early development of modernism internationally. Banham, Peter Reyner (1922–88) A British aritectural and design historian, theorist and critic, who wrote prolifically in the 1950s and 60s about the Modern Movement and its demise. A member of the Independent Group in the 1950s, he introduced the topics of mass culture and design to its meetings. He taught at a number of institutions, including the University of Los Angeles at Santa Cruz where he was Professor of Art History. Bauhaus e most influential design sool of the twentieth century, the Bauhaus was formed in 1919 in Weimar by Walter Gropius and it subsequently moved to Dessau. It took a radical approa to design education, starting from scrat and developing forms in cra workshops in collaboration with fine artists. It was closed by the Nazis in 1933. Behrens, Peter (1868–1940) Peter Behrens was an aritect–designer who worked in the Art Nouveau idiom in Darmstadt before becoming a consultant to the AEG Company, for whi he designed a complete corporate identity in 1907. Walter Gropius, Mies van der Rohe and Le Corbusier all spent time in his studio. Bel Geddes, Norman (1893–1952) Norman Bel Geddes began his career as a portrait painter before moving into stage design, shop-window display and finally consultant industrial design. His ‘streamlined’ fantasies for transport designs were the most expressive of the 1930s, but his work for production was more mundane by comparison. Bellini, Mario (1935–) e Milanese aritect–designer Mario Bellini is best known for his elegant typewriters and ofice maines, whi he created for Olivei in the 1960s and 70s, as well as for his stylish furniture designed for Cassina. An innovative product designer, he also created a wedge-shaped tape de for the Japanese firm Yamaha. He was mu admired and widely emulated in the 1970s. Boontje, Tord (1968–) A Dut designer who first studied industrial design at the design academy of Eindhoven and subsequently at the Royal College of Art in London, where he now teaes. He founded Studio Tord Boontje in 1996 in London. He believes that design should evoke emotion and he has created ranges of glassware, lighting and furniture. Brandt, Marianne (1893–1983) A German painter, designer and metalworker who established her reputation through her work at the German Bauhaus, where she was a graduate. She went on to become the head of the metal workshop and she designed some highly geometric objects there, including a small teapot, whi have become classic designs. Branzi, Andrea (1938–) A Florentine aritect–designer who was a member of Arizoom in the 1960s and who moved later to Milan to play a central role in the second phase of Italian Radical design, whi emerged at the end of the 1970s. He is also a teaer and writer. Breuer, Marcel (1902–81) e Hungarian aritect–designer Marcel Breuer was trained at the German Bauhaus Weimar, where he designed his famous tubular-steel airs. He went on to tea at that institution and, on its closure by the Nazis, came to England to work for Ja Pritchard's Isokon company, for which he developed chairs made from bent plywood. In 1937, he went to the USA to join Walter Gropius at Harvard. Brody, Neville (1957–) Born in London, the graphic designer Neville Brody worked on <sub>The</sub> <sub>Face</sub> magazine in the 1980s, developing radically new typefaces and layouts. He combined early modernist ideas with images emanating from contemporary subculture to create a new look that was highly influential. Brody moved on to work on record covers and a wide range of graphic design projects. Castiglioni, Aille (1918–2002) Of the three Castiglioni brothers, Pier Giacomo (1910–1968), Livio (1912–1952) and Aille, it was the last, a Milan-based designer, who had the greatest influence on twentiethcentury design. His designs for furniture, lighting and appliances – among them the Tractor Seat (Mezzadro) for Zanoa and his Arco light for Floa – won him numerous prizes and made him an important force both in Italy and elsewhere. Chanel, Coco (1883–1971) e Fren fashion couturier Coco Chanel was a pioneer in the field, opening her first millinery shop in 1909 and moving on to create a highly influential fashion house in the inter-war years. She anticipated the idea of selling clothes as part of a lifestyle and launed her perfume, Chanel No. 5, to accompany her clothes, in 1923. Clif, Clarice (1899–1972) A British ceramic designer who came out of the Stoke-on-Trent tradition but who went on to make a reputation for herself as a result of her brightly painted ceramics, whi she sold through her own firm. Her paern named ‘Bizarre’ was among her most successful designs. Her work is avidly collected. Coates, Wells (1895–1958) Born in Tokyo, Wells Coates came to Britain in 1929 and became a major figure in the British aritectural and design modern movement. Aer working on shop interiors, he went on to design an apartment block for Jack Pritchard's Isokon firm and he pioneered modern industrial design through his work for the Ekco Radio Company. Co-design is approa to design works on the principle that all people have diferent ideals and perspectives and that any design process needs to deal with this. Co-designers set out to consider the interests of stakeholders in the design process and include interviews, focus groups and workshops within it to aieve that end. Colombo, Joe (1930–71) One of the most influential of the superstar Italian designers of the 1960s, Colombo is especially remembered for his brightly coloured plastic products designed for Kartell. He began life as a painter but went on to produce influential furniture and product designs for several Italian manufacturers, including Zanoa, Elco and Stilnovo. Conran, Terence (1931–) Trained as a furniture designer in London, Terence Conran’s impact on post-war British and international design was through his role as a retailer of lifestyle products. He opened Habitat in London’s Fulham Road in 1964 and went on from there to influence post-war taste and aspirations through his numerous retailing aievements. Laerly, he has moved into developing restaurants. Constructivism e name given to the modern movement in art, aritecture and design whi is linked to the abstract work that emanated from Russia in the years around the 1917 Revolution. It took its lead from engineering, seeking to move away from the decorative traditions of the applied arts. Contemporary Style A term used to describe the modern yet decorative domestic style of furniture and furnishings that emerged in the years aer the Second World War in Britain. e work exhibited at the 1951 Festival of Britain was highly influential on this essentially popular style, whi was aracterized by its biomorphic forms and bright colours. Cooper, Susie (1902–95) A British ceramic artist and business woman who, like Clarice Clif, grew out of the Stoke-on-Trent tradition but who moved on to sell her own highly abstract, modern work. Her ‘Curlew’ shape of 1933 was among her best known. In the 1960s, her company was absorbed by Wedgwood. Coray, Hans (1906–91) e Swiss designer Hans Coray is best known for his all-aluminium chair, which was shown at the Zurich exhibition of 1939 and is still in production today. Day, Robin (1915–) and Lucienne (1917–) Robin Day was one of Britain’s leading furniture designers in the 1950s and 60s, working with the Hille Company, while his wife, Lucienne, was known for her textile designs, retailed through Heals. ey collaborated on several interiors, notably at the Milan Triennale of 1954. De Lucchi, Michele (1951-) The Milan-based architect-designer, de Lucchi, played a leading role in the Memphis project of the early 1980s. He went on to combine his work for Olivei and for other international product manufacturers with his own experimental work, in whi he continued to push the cultural role of design into new areas. De Stijl The De Stijl Movement, which took its name from a Dutch magazine of the same name, was formed during the First World War in Holland. It combined the fine-art work of Piet Mondrian with the design, graphic and aritectural work of several others, all of whom sought to find a new abstract, geometric aesthetic for their practices. De Wolfe, Elsie (1865–1950) A pioneer American interior decorator, who worked from both New York and Paris, who created a new consultant profession that entailed supplying interior furnishings to clients as a means of increasing the level of taste in their homes. She was one of the first to understand the close link, for consumers, between design, taste and lifestyle. Design inking Design thinking refers to a design-led method of defining problems and finding solutions in a variety of fields. It combines empathy for the context of a problem, creativity in the generation of insights and solutions and rationality to fit solutions to the context. e term is widely used in contemporary design and engineering practice, as well as in business and management. e aim is to use design-related ideation as a means of aieving innovation. Deutser Werkbund One of the first European modern design reform bodies, created in Germany in 1907 as a state and industry partnership, whi set out to promote modern design as a key component of trade and national identity. e Werkbund sponsored the Cologne Exhibition of 1914 and a number of others in later years. It provided a model that several other countries emulated. Dior, Christian (1905-57) The French fashion designer Dior launched his first collection with what he called the ‘New Look’ in 1947. It had an enormous impact and he helped establish Paris as the headquarters of post-war haute couture. Following his sudden death, Yves Saint Laurent took over the design direction of his fashion house. In 1996, the British designer John Galliano became the ief designer at Dior. Dresser, Christopher (1834–1904) Dresser was an English designer who began his career as a botanist but moved later into product design. His metalwork and textiles were greatly influenced by Japan (whi he visited in 1877) and he became one of the first designers internationally to work with manufacturing industry on a freelance basis. Dreyfuss, Henry (1902–72) From his baground in the theatre prop business, Dreyfuss, like Norman Bel Geddes, was a stage designer before he became a consultant industrial designer. His early clients included the Bell Telephone Company, the Hoover Company and the New York Central Railroad. He wrote about his anthropometric approa to design in his book <sub>Designing</sub> <sub>for</sub> <sub>People</sub>, published in 1955. Dunne and Raby A London-based design studio established in 1994 by Tony Dunne and Fiona Raby, who use design to stimulate discussion about the social, cultural and ethical implications of current and emerging tenologies. Dunne heads the Design Interactions course at London’s Royal College of Art and Raby is Professor of Industrial Design at the University of Applied Arts in Vienna. Dyson, James (1947–) A British industrial designer, and founder of the Dyson company, who is best known as the inventor of the bagless vacuum cleaner and the ‘Ballbarrow’, a wheelbarrow using a ball instead of a wheel. Dyson studied furniture and interior design at the Royal College of Art (1966–1970) before moving to engineering. Eames, Charles (1907–78) and Ray (1912–88) e American aritect– designer Charles Eames first came to public notice when his moulded plywood furniture, designed with Eero Saarinen, won a competition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1944. He had a one-man show there two years later, at whi he introduced furniture that combined moulded plywood with steel rod. He went on to design a number of even more innovative furniture items through the 1950s and 60s, as well as venturing, with his wife Ray, who worked collaboratively with him from the 1940s onwards, into experimental film making. Earl, Harley (1893–1969) Earl began his career as a coabuilder in Hollywood but was employed by Alfred. P. Sloan of General Motors (GM) in 1926 to make the company’s mass-produced automobiles look more aractive. e 1927 Cadillac Lasalle made automotive history in this respect and Earl went on to head the Styling Section at GM until the 1950s. El Lissitzky (1890–1940) A Russian graphic designer who worked for various aritects up to 1917 and who subsequently became involved with the artistic propaganda of the Revolution. His work was executed in the Suprematist style, pioneered by the Russian artist Kasimir Malevi, and he is best known for his ‘Proun’ compositions of the early 1920s. Esslinger, Hartmut (1945–) e founder of the German design consultancy frogdesign, whi was based in his home town of Altensteig. In 1982, the consultancy opened a Californian ofice and Apple Computer became an important client, for whom frogdesign created the first allwhite computer. Other clients have included Villeroy and Bos and Sony. Fowler, John (1906–77) A British interior decorator who adopted a historicist approa from the inter-war years onwards. He worked with the National Trust in the years following the Second World War, restoring dilapidated country houses with intz fabrics. He was a partner, with Nancy Lancaster, in Colefax and Fowler. Fran, Kay (1911–88) A Finnish ceramicist, textile and glassware designer who took a more subtle, everyday approa than that of his contemporary ‘superstar’ designers. He was a designer at the Arabia poery for many years, responsible for numerous simple, practical wares, including his 1952 Kilta tableware. Frank, Josef (1885–1947) An Austrian modernist aritect who seled in Sweden in 1934 and who became the ief designer for the Stoholm furnishings company, Svenskt Tenn. He modified his earlier purist aesthetic to include paern and texture in his later furniture, lights and fabrics. An early exponent of the style known as ‘Swedish Modern’, he remained with Svenskt Tenn until his death. Fuller, Riard Buminster (1895–1983) An American designer and visionary who embraced design and wrote and lectured extensively about it, as part of advanced tenology in the service of mankind. He designed a Dymaxion house in 1927, a Dymaxion car in 1932 and, later, a series of geodesic domes. Functionalism A term used by design theorists to describe the ideas of the protagonists of the early twentieth-century Modern Movement in aritecture, who sought to derive their forms through an abstract consideration of their object’s function, a process akin to that of an engineer, rather than by adding decoration to its surface to make it desirable. Gaudí, Antoni (1852–1926) A Spanish aritect and designer, based in Barcelona, who evolved his own idiosyncratic version of Art Nouveau. His buildings – including the Sagrada Familia of 1903–26, the Casa Vicens of 1878–80, and his Parque Guell, begun in 1900 – all displayed the same fantastic aesthetic as his furniture designs. Giacosa, Dante (1905–96) A designer–engineer who worked for the Italian automobile manufacturer Fiat from the late 1920s into the 1970s. His most influential designs included the Fiat 500 of 1936 and the lile 600 of 1956. He approaed the problem of style as an engineer and, as a result, worked very diferently from his contemporary car stylists in the USA. Giedion, Siegfried (1888–1968) A Swiss art historian who, under the tutorship of Heinri Wolflin, developed an approa to ‘anonymous’ history, whi he articulated in his major study <sub>Mechanisation</sub> <sub>Takes</sub> <sub>Command</sub>, published in 1948. e book became an important modernist design-historical text. Giugiaro, Giorgio (1938–) An Italian car designer who set up his own firm, Italdesign, in 1968. Since then Guigiaro has designed a number of very significant cars, including the Alfa Romeo Akfa Sud (1971), the Volkswagen Golf (1974) and the Fiat Panda (1980). He has also worked as a product designer creating, among other goods, a camera for Nikon. Grange, Kenneth (1929–) A British product designer who worked in the neofunctionalist style for, among others, the Kenwood company, from the late 1950s onwards. In 1972, he joined the Pentagram design consultancy in London, becoming its first product designer. He went on to work for many clients, including a number in Japan. Gray, Eileen (1878–1976) An Irish aritect–designer who did most of her work while living in Paris, where she seled in 1907. From a baground in luxurious, lacquered furniture she went on to participate in the Modern Movement, creating a number of seminal furniture designs including models in steel and leather in the 1920s. From the 1930s she dedicated her self to aritecture. Gropius, Walter (1883–1969) e German modernist aritect Walter Gropius began his career in partnership with Adolf Meyer in 1910 – with whom he designed the Fagus Factory in the following year – and became the first director of the German Bauhaus in 1919. He went on to become Professor of Aritecture at Harvard in the USA in 1937. Gugelot, Hans (1920–65) e Dut designer Hans Gugelot set up his own ofice in 1950 aer having worked with Max Bill and collaborated with the Ulm design sool, in his capacity as head of its development group, on designs for the Braun company in the mid-1950s. His work was neofunctionalist in style. Heal, Ambrose (1872–1959) e British designer Ambrose Heal joined the family furniture business in 1893. He became linked to the Arts and Cras Movement and began designing in 1896. e Heal’s store was established in 1840 and Ambrose moved its emphasis from reproduction to simple, modern furniture. He became airman of the business in 1913 and played a role in the formation of the Design and Industries Association in 1915. Henrion, F. H. K. (1914–90) Graphic designer of Fren origin who came to Britain in the 1930s and worked there, throughout the Second World War and the post-war period, as one of the country’s leading graphic designers. High Te An interior and furniture aesthetic popular among the young and stylish in the 1970s, whi borrowed its look and its materials from the industrial sector and applied them to the domestic arena. Shelves made from scafolding epitomized this brutal aesthetic. Hille e British furniture manufacturing company Hille developed from a small business set up in the early part of the twentieth century to become a substantial firm aer the Second World War, sponsoring modern furniture. Robin Day, Roger Dean and Fred Sco all worked for Hille, whi was dissolved in 1983. Day’s polypropylene air of the early 1960s is the company’s most influential product. Hochschüle für Gestaltung, Ulm A German design school, founded in 1953, as a revival of the pre-war Bauhaus. e Swiss designer Max Bill was the first director of the sool and he was replaced at the end of the decade by Tomas Maldonado. In the 1960s, the sool was divided by strong internal ideological diferences and it was forced to close in 1968. Hofmann, Josef (1870–1956) An Austrian aritect and designer who worked in the studio of Oo Wagner but went on to become a founder member of the Viennese Secession and an influential designer of furniture and decorative objects executed in a strikingly modern, geometric style. He worked across of range of products destined for the domestic sphere. Honda e Japanese motor cycle company Honda was founded in 1948. Its first important product was the Super-Cub step-through motor cycle, whi succeeded, through the aggressive marketing that accompanied it, in conquering the American market. Since then the company has diversified into power appliances and motor cars. e Civic, Prelude, Accord and, more recently, the Insight eco-car are all examples of successful Honda designs. IDEO An international design and innovation consultancy founded in Palo Alto, California, in 1991, from a merger of three existing design firms: David Kelley Design (founded by David Kelley), ID Two (founded by British designer, Bill Moggridge) and Matrix Product Design (founded by Mike Nuttall). The current CEO is Tim Brown. The company designs products, services, environments and digital experiences but it has become increasingly involved in management consulting and organizational design in recent years. Inclusive Design is approa means making the design of products and environments usable by all people without the need for adaptation or specialized design. By implication, a product designed for an elderly person with disabilities should, according to this approa, be usable by anyone regardless of age or ability. e terms ‘design for all’ and universal design’ are also widely used. Interaction Design is approa to design is focused on satisfying the needs and desires of the people who will use the outcomes of the design process whether they are interactive digital products, environments, systems and services. e main focus is upon the anticipated behaviour of the user rather than the form of the product. Issigonis, Sir Alec (1906–88) A British car designer who is best known for his designs for the 1948 Morris Minor, the 1959 Austin Mini and the 1962 Morris 1100. Of these, the Mini made the greatest impact on world markets. Itten, Johannes (1888–1967) Ien was largely responsible for the preliminary course at the Bauhaus. His ideas were too mystical for Walter Gropius, who dismissed him in 1923. He went on to form his own sool in Berlin and, later, to become the director of the art sools in Zuri and Krefeld. Ive, Jonathan (1967–) A British designer, who studied industrial design at Northumbria University. Aer university, Ive went on to become a cofounder of London design agency, Tangerine and, subsequently, the senior vice president of industrial design at Apple Inc., based in Palo Alto in the USA. He is best known for his designs for the iMac, the iPod, the iPhone and the iPad. Jacobsen, Arne (1902–71) e work of the Danish aritect and designer Arne Jacobsen is synonymous with the concept of Danish modernism. He was influenced by Le Corbusier and created highly influential bentwood furniture items in the 1950s – ‘Ant’ and ‘Swan’ being the best known. His Cylinda Line stainless steel tableware for Stelton remains mu admired internationally. Jiricna, Eva (1938–) A Cze aritect–designer who came to London in 1968 and became known through her retail interiors for the fashionshop owner Joseph Eedgui. Her simple modernist work became identified with the High-Te style and was aracterized by its use of glass and rome. She went on to collaborate with several modernist aritects on the interiors of their buildings. Jongerius, Hella (1963–) A Dut designer who studied design at the Industrial Design Academy in Eindhoven. She subsequently aracted international aention through her work for the Dut design label, Droog Design. She established her design studio, JongeriusLab, in Roerdam in 2000 and created a range of products, among them ceramic objects, textiles and furnishings. Jugendstil e German name for the Fren term, Art Nouveau, <sub>Judendstil</sub> was used to describe the revolutionary, new, turn-of-the-century style that swept across Europe at that time. e term is used to describe its extensive manifestations in countries of the former Eastern Bloc. Kåge, Wilhelm (1889–1960) Trained as a fine artist, Kåge began working for the Swedish ceramic company Gustavsberg in 1917 and was responsible for encouraging it to use modern, democratic designs. In the 1930s, he produced several ceramic ranges, including Praktika and Pyro, but in 1949 he returned to painting. Kiesler, Frederi (1896–1965) Associated with the Viennese Secession group, the Dadaists and the De Stijl Group in Holland, Kiesler le Europe and went to the USA in the late 1920s, continuing to work as an artist/aritect/designer in that country. His numerous designs included a range of aluminium furniture whi he created in the 1930s. Klint, Kaare (1888–1954) A Danish aritect and furniture designer, working in the 1920s in Copenhagen, who developed an anthropometric approach to designing furniture. His 1933 deck chair is based on a vernacular model, as were several of his other designs. Rud Rasmussen produced many of his designs. Knoll e Knoll furniture company was formed in the USA in the late 1940s by a German cabinet-maker, Hans Knoll, and his wife, Florence Sust, a graduate of the Cranbrook Academy. From the beginning they used modern designers, including Eero Saarinen and Harry Bertoia, and established a reputation as a manufacturer of progressive furniture designs. Kuramata, Shiro (1934–91) A Japanese furniture and interior designer who opened his own ofice in Tokyo in 1965. Kuramata combined traditional Japanese minimalist ideas with contemporary influences to create his highly original furniture designs. He created interiors for a number of the shops of the Japanese fashion designer Issey Miyake. Le Corbusier (1887–1968) Born Charles Edouard Jeanneret, this Swiss aritect became one of the leading figures of the Modern Movement in aritecture and design. His 1920s buildings were typically white and flat-roofed, in imitation of Mediterranean aritecture, and he aieved a simplicity of form in all his work. Where his design is concerned, he is best known for his Grand Confort air and his Chaise Longue whi he worked on with his assistant, Charloe Perriand. Loewy, Raymond (1893–1986) Born in France, Loewy went to the USA in 1919 and became one of the city’s first consultant industrial designers. His first client was Sigmund Gestetner, for whom he restyled a duplicator in 1929. rough the 1930s, 40s and 50s he went on to design many products for a number of clients including the Hupp Motor Company, Frigidaire, Luy Strike and Studebaker. Loos, Adolf (1870–1933) An Austrian aritect who, in 1908, wrote a mu- quoted article entitled ‘Ornament and Crime’ in whi he outlined what he believed to be the decadence of aritectural ornament. His own designs from the early century included the Steiner House and the Müller house. Mackintosh, Charles Rennie (1868-1928) A Scottish architect who worked as part of a group known as the Glasgow Four. He created a number of buildings, interiors, furniture pieces and decorative items in what was seen at the time as a Scoish version of Art Nouveau. His designs were very influential in Vienna. Magistretti, Vico (1920–) An Italian aritect and furniture designer who was trained in Milan and worked there, aer the Second World War, particularly for the Arflex and Cassina furniture companies. His brightly coloured, plastic moulded airs of the early 1960s were among the first of their kind. He has continued to design influential furniture items, including his Sindbad air of 1981. Maldonado, Tomas (1922–) Born in Buenos Aires, the design theoretician Maldonado was invited by Max Bill to take over the directorship of the Hosüle für Gestaltung at Ulm, where he remained until the mid-1960s. Maldonado favoured a systematic approa to the design process. Marimekko A Finnish fabric company and shop established by Armi Ratia in Helsinki in 1951. Marimekko (whi means Mary’s fro) is best known for its bold printed fabrics whi are made up into simple clothing. Mathsson, Bruno (1907–88) A Swedish furniture designer who, with G. A. Berg and Josef Frank, was responsible for creating the Swedish Modern design movement. He used wood and hemp webbing rather than tubular steel and leather and his most famous air, created in 1934, is still produced today by Dux Mobel. Maugham, Syrie (1879–1955) An English interior decorator who took the ideas of Elsie de Wolfe forward in a British context. Maugham was known for her all-white rooms and for her use of modernist components, including rugs by Marion Dorn. She had a number of high-class clients, Wallis Simpson among them. Mellor, David (1930–) A British designer, based in Shefield, who established his own cutlery and product manufacturing company and kiten-equipment retail outlets. Trained at the Royal College of Art in the 1950s, Mellor is best known for his designs for cutlery; ‘Pride’ won him a Design Council award in 1959. Memphis Led in Milan by Eore Sosass and supported by a group of international colleagues and young associates, the Memphis project launed itself with a show of Pop-inspired furniture prototypes in Milan in 1981. Annual shows continued into the 1990s. e group’s aim was to revitalise design as a cultural concept rather than one whi was led by industry and commerce. Mendini, Alessandro (1931–) A participant in the Italian Radical Design movement, Mendini began his professional career working for the aritectural group, Nizzoli Associates. He went on to edit a number of design magazines, among them <sub>Casabella, Modo</sub> and <sub>Domus</sub>. Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig (1886–1969) A German aritect who, along with Walter Gropius and Le Corbusier, is one of the most renowned exponents of the Modern Movement in aritecture and design. Mies was the last director of the Bauhaus. From there he went to the USA, where he worked in Chicago. In design terms, he is best known for his steel and leather furniture items, especially his Barcelona air of 1929. Miyake, Issey (1935–) Trained in Paris as a graphic designer, the Japanese fashion designer Miyake opened his own studio in Tokyo in 1970. He cleverly combined Fren couture (the influence of Vionnet was strong) with Japanese dress to create an internationally appealing new fashion idiom, as at home on the stage as the catwalk. Modernism e general term used to describe the cultural phenomenon of the early years of the twentieth century that sought to ally cultural practice and the aesthetic it embraced with the flow of modern life and its influences. It was especially strong in the arena of aritecture and design, whi constituted the material stuf of modernity. Modern Movement A term coined by Nikolaus Pevsner in 1936 to describe the collective eforts of aritects and designers to develop a new philosophy and aesthetic that was in tune with the spirit of modernity, especially the realities of mass production and the dominance of the maine. Moholy-Nagy, László (1895–1946) Born in Hungary, Moholy-Nagy moved to Berlin in 1920. In 1922, he became a staf member at the Bauhaus in Weimar. Influenced by Eastern European Constructivism be worked as a painter and photographer and went to Chicago in the 1930s to set up the New Bauhaus, later known as the Institute of Design. Mollino, Carlo (1905–73) An Italian furniture designer, based in Turin, who created furniture pieces in the 1940s and 50s, whi he described as ‘streamlined-surreal’. His baroque, wooden forms contrasted sharply with the more rational designs emerging from Milan in those years. Morrison, Jasper (1959–) A British furniture and product designer who introduced a new, slightly nostalgic but eminently modern aesthetic into design in the 1980s. Morrison has worked with many international clients including FSB in Germany and Cappellini in Italy. Murray, Keith (1892–1981) A New Zealander by origin, the aritecttrained Keith Murray turned to designing ceramic and glass products in the 1930s, working with James Powell’s Whitefriars Glassworks and Wedgwood, among others. His simple, geometric designs contrasted strongly with many others whi emerged at that time. Muthesius, Hermann (1861–1934) A German diplomat who travelled to England at the end of the nineteenth century and wrote a book, <sub>Das</sub> <sub>Englische Haus</sub> (1905), about the aritecture he discovered there. He was a major force behind the formation of the German Werkbund and did mu to promote German design for industry in the early twentieth century. Nelson, George (1907–86) e American aritect and designer George Nelson, who began his career as an aritectural journalist, created numerous modern artefacts for progressive clients, including Herman Miller. He is best known for his Storagewall and his ofice designs from the years immediately following the Second World War. Neo-Functionalism A term used to describe the return to an austere, rational geometric aesthetic that occurred in Germany in the years aer 1945. it was epitomized by the work of Dieter Rams for the Braun company and by many of the designs emerging from the design sool at Ulm. Newson, Marc (1963–) Australian by birth the product designer finally seled in London and formed his own studio in the late 1990s. His aracteristic organic form was injected into a wide range of products, from furniture to a car for Ford. He also created a number of interior spaces for shops and restaurants in a similar style. Nike e Nike training shoe manufacturer, based in the USA, was among the first to embrace the idea of developing many diferent stylistics in its products at any one time to make running shoes part of an ever-anging lifestyle oice on the part of the consumer. It was a marketing philosophy that depended upon rapid stylistic turnover and automated manufacturing. Nizzoli, Marcello (1887–1969) Trained as a graphic designer, Nizzoli was hired by Adriano Olivei in 1938. He worked on the Italian company’s electrical maines and produced some elegant typewriters in the 1940s and 50s – among them the Lexicon 80 and the Leera 22. He also designed the Mirella sewing maine for Neci in 1956. Noyes, Eliot (1910–77) An American industrial designer who worked as a curator for the Museum of Modern Art in New York and was subsequently hired by omas Watson, the son of the founder of the IBM Company. From 1956, he worked with the graphic designer, Paul Rand, as the corporate design director creating a number of striking ofice maines. Nurmesniemi, Antti (1927–2003) and Eskolin, Vuokko (1930–) Husband and wife designers. Nurmesniemi was a Finnish interior and industrial designer and his wife is a textile designer, who markets her fabrics under the name of Vuokko. Nurmesniemi set up his own design ofice in Finland in 1956 and worked on interiors for many clients, sometimes in collaboration with his wife and sometimes alone. Olivetti, Camillo (1868–1943) and Adriano (1901–60) e former was the founder of the Olivei Ofice Mainery Company in 1908. He designed the first typewriter himself. His son, Adriano, took over the reins of the company in the 1920s and was responsible for hiring some of the designers who worked with Olivei, including Marcello Nizzoli and Ettore Sottsass. Panton, Verner (1926–98) A Danish aritect and designer, working in Switzerland, who is best known for his furniture designs from the 1960s. He created the first one-piece, cantilever plastic air and his 1960 Staing Chair was produced by Herman Miller. Paulsson, Gregor (1889–1964) e Swedish aritect Paulsson was the first Director of the Swedish design society – the Svenska Sjl df reningen. In 1919, he wrote a book about design entitled <sub>More</sub> <sub>Beautiful</sub> <sub>Everyday</sub> <sub>Things</sub>, whi was highly influential in Sweden. He made a significant contribution to the organization of the 1930 Stoholm Exhibition. Pentagram A British design consultancy that was established in 1971 on the basis of a graphic design consultancy from the 1950s called Fleter, Forbes and Gill. Among several the product designers, Kenneth Grange and Daniel Weil joined the group in the 1970s and 1990s, respectively. Perriand, Charlotte (1903–99) Between 1927 and 1937, the Fren designer Charloe Perriand worked with Le Corbusier on his furniture designs, making a significant input. Later she visited Japan and became an adviser on arts and cras to that country. She continued to design aer the Second World War, focusing on interiors. Pesce, Gaetano (1939–) An Italian aritect–designer who has worked in a highly individual way since the 1960s producing, among other designs, nihilistic, ‘decaying’ objects. He has worked with Cassina on several occasion and divides his time between Venice and New York, where he continues to practise and tea. Pevsner, Nikolaus (1902–83) A German-born art historian whose writings about modern aritecture and design have been very influential. He helped to define and ampion the idea of the Modern Movement in his <sup>book</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>1936,</sup> Pioneers of the Modern Movement <sup>(later</sup> Pioneers of Modern Design<sup>).</sup> Pininfarina, Battista (1893–1966) With his roots in coabuilding, the Italian car manufacturer and designer Pininfarina embraced a sculptural approa to his cra. His creations for Alfa Romeo and Lancia – including the Lancia Aprilia of 1937 – were ahead of their time stylistically and led into dramatic post-war designs su as the 1947 Cisitalia. Ponti, Gio (1891–1979) An Italian aritect–designer and editor of <sub>Domus</sub> magazine, Ponti worked as a designer of aritecture, furniture and decorative objects from the 1920s. He sustained his own, highly individualistic aesthetic through these years and his many clients include Fontana Arte, Arflex and Cassina. Pop e Pop design movement was a spontaneous British phenomenon of the mid-1960s. It focused on fashion and lifestyle accompaniments and stressed instant impact and ephemerality. It was a reaction, on one level, to the timeless forms of modernism. Porsche A Stuttgart-based car manufacturer, named after its founder, Ferdinand Porse, the designer of the Volkswagen ‘Beetle’. Known for its upmarket, stylish products the company created a number of what became classic cars from the 1960s onwards, including the models 911 (designed by ‘Butzi’ Porse), the 928 and, most recently, the Boxster, designed by Harm Lagaay. Postmodernism e cat-all name given to all the aritectural and design manifestations of the late 1980s onwards whi deliberately sidestepped the strategies of high modernism and sought to relate to the sphere of consumption, rather than that of production. It was expressed in a number of diferent ways, from nostalgia to the use of strongly expressive forms of many kinds. Race, Ernest (1913–64) Trained initially as an aritect, the British furniture designer Ernest Race established Race Furniture Ltd in 1946, the same year in whi he designed an influential, aluminium-framed air. He went to create a range of steel rod airs for the 1951 Festival of Britain. Rams, Dieter (1932–) A German product designer who made a name for himself working with the Braun Company, from 1955. He created for them a number of domestic maines that came to typify the sparse, geometric style of mu post-war German design. Rationalism e term used to describe Italy’s contribution to inter-war aritectural and design modernism, as expressed by Guiseppe Terragni and others. For a short period of time Mussolini flirted with Rationalism as his oficial style but he moved away from it towards a more classically inspired Italian modern style, known as Novecento. Rei, Lilly (1885–1947) A German interior and furniture designer, working in the modernist idiom, who collaborated with Mies van der Rohe from 1927. eir first project was for the Weissenhof exhibition of that year. She also worked with him two years later on the Barcelona exhibition and taught him at the Bauhaus from 1932. Riemerschmid, Richard (1868-1957) A German designer, based in Munich, who developed a range of standardized furniture for serial production in the first decade of the twentieth century. He was an early member, with Peter Behrens, of the Deutser Werkbund. Rietveld, Gerrit (1888–1964) Born in Utret and trained as a cabinetmaker, the Dut aritect–designer became a member of the De Stijl group and created a number of highly influential airs, among them the Red-Blue air of 1917/18 and the Zig-Zag air of 1934. Both have become classic designs. Rodenko, Alexander (1891–1956) A Russian Constructivist sculptor– designer who – with his wife, the textile designer Stepanova, and others – worked on interiors and street constructions at the time of the 1917 Russian Revolution. In the 1920s he moved closer to Tatlin’s idea of the ‘artist-engineer’ and began designing utility items, su as furnishings and clothing. Rosenthal A German ceramics manufacturing company, founded in Bavaria in 1897. rough the laer half of the twentieth century Rosenthal encouraged a number of international designers – Tapio Wirkkala, Raymond Loewy and Walter Gropius among them – to work with them on products presented as part of its Studio range. Ruhlmann, Jacques-Emile (1879–1933) An exponent of the exclusive, Fren decorative style of the 1920s Ruhlmann used exotic woods in his furniture and interiors. His Hôtel du Collectionneur pavilion at the 1925 Paris ‘Exhibition of Decorative Arts’ exposed his luxurious style to a large audience. Saarinen, Eero (1910–61) e son of Eliel Saarinen, the Finnish aritect– designer Eero Saarinen went to the USA with his father in 1923. He studied aritecture at Yale and, in 1940, he worked with Charles Eames on a range of moulded plywood furniture pieces. In the 1950s, Knoll manufactured his furniture designs, among them the famous Tulip air. Sapper, Riard (1932–) A German-born designer who gravitated towards Italy, worked in Milan in the ofice of Marco Zanuso, collaborating with him on a number of projects for Brionvega, and set up his ofice there in the mid-1970s. His lighting designs have been especially influential and his Tizio desk-light is a design classic. Sarpaneva, Timo (1926–) A Finnish designer of glass, ceramics, textiles and metalwork who was employed by the Iiala Glassworks in 1950 and who showed his work at the Milan Triennale exhibitions of the 1950s, winning several prizes. He helped make the world aware of modern Finnish design. Sason, Sixten (1912–69) A Swedish consultant product designer who trained as a silversmith and who went on to work for Electrolux, Hasselblad and Saab Motors, for whom he designed the stylish Saab 92 automobile. Sipek, Boris (1949–) A Cze designer who seled in Holland, where he now works. Sipek is known for his designs for domestic objects, whi combine modernism with luxurious decoration. His glass and ceramic designs, in particular, manifest a baroque quality. Sony e Japanese consumer electronics manufacturer that was the first to think about the aesthetic design of its products as well as their advanced technology. The Sony Walkman, launched in the early 1980s, combined innovative design and tenology with an understanding about lifestyle. Sottsass, Ettore (1917–) An Italian aritect–designer who set up a consultant practice in Milan in the years aer the Second World War and who went on to become the leading figure in the world of Radical Design in Italy. He was a consultant for many years for Olivei and masterminded the Memphis experiment of the 1980s. Star, Philippe (1949–) A Fren product designer who is widely anowledged as a ‘designer-star’. His designs range from interior designs to mass produced consumer goods su as toothbrushes, airs and even houses. Star was educated in Paris at the École Camondo and, in 1968, founded his first design firm, whi specialized in inflatable objects. He has worked independently as an interior designer and as a product designer since 1975 and in 1982 he designed the interior for the private apartments of the Fren President François Mierrand. Streamform e name given to the organic style of American automobile and products of the inter-war years the forms of whi had been determined by ‘streamlining’ – making them aerodynamic and fastmoving. In static objects, su as irons and fruit juicers, the style was transferred metaphorically to denote futurity. Superstudio Formed in Florence in 1966 Superstudio was one of the aritectural and design groups that spearheaded the Radical Design movement in Italy in those years. e group worked on a number of experimental projects and designed a table that was manufactured by Zanoa. Sustainable Design Also referred to as environmental design, environmentally sustainable design and environmentally conscious design, this concept means designing physical objects, the built environment and services to support the principles of economic, social and ecological sustainability. Using recycled and ecologically sound materials is an important aspect of it as is the disassembly and reuse of products. Swatch A Swiss watch manufacturer, which rejected the idea of a watch for life’ and introduced, in its place, the concept of the fashion wat that anged according to the clothes and tastes of its wearers. Swedish Modern e term coined at the New York World’s Fair of 1939 to describe the so, humanistic version of modernism that was evolved by the Swedish designers su as Bruno Mathsson and Josef Frank. It became a very influential style in the post-war years. Tatlin, Vladimir (1885–1953) A Russian Constructivist sculptor who turned, aer the 1917 Revolution, to working on functional projects su as clothing. He is best known for his Monument to the ird International of 1919–20, in the creation of whi he set out to work like an engineer in the service of the Revolution. Teague, Walter Dorwon (1883–1960) A pioneer American consultant industrial designer of the 1930s, Teague is oen called the ‘dean of industrial design’. His ofice worked with Eastman Kodak for many years, among other clients, and he aired the Board of Design for the New York World’s Fair of 1939, as well as designing a number of its exhibits. van de Velde, Henry (1863–1957) A Belgian Art Nouveau aritect and designer who moved to Germany in 1900 to run the Weimar Sool of Applied Arts. He was influenced by William Morris, wrote extensively about design and was a founder member of the Deutser Werkbund. Van Doren, Harold (1895–1957) An American consultant industrial designer who, like his colleagues, worked with a number of companies throughout the 1930s, including Philco and Goodyear. He moved into this new profession from the museum world and in 1940 he published a <sup>book entitled</sup> Industrial Design: A Practical Guide<sup>.</sup> Venturi, Robert (1925–) An American aritect who, in 1966, wrote his <sup>influential book</sup> Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture<sup>, whi</sup> heralded the advent of postmodernism in aritecture and design. rough the 1960s and 70s, he worked on a number of Pop aritectural projects and he designed a range of furniture pieces for Knoll in the early 1980s. More recently he designed an extension for London’s National Gallery. Wagenfeld, Wilhelm (1900–79) A German Bauhaus graduate who worked at the Lausitzer Glassworks from 1935 to 1947 and who went on to run his own design studio in Stugart. Considered one of Germany’s leading designers, he worked on a wide range of products, from glass to ceramics to cutlery to lighting. Wagner, Otto (1841–1918) An Austrian proto-modernist aritect–designer who, in the 1890s, worked at the edge of Art Nouveau but who showed more classical tendencies by the end of the decade. He pioneered the use of aluminium in buildings – for example, in his design for the Post Ofice in Vienna and for the feet of some of his furniture designs from the turn of the century. Westwood, Vivienne (1941–) A British fashion designer who emerged from the subculture of Punk in the 1970s and who has remained a subversive figure in spite of her commercial success. She is known for her nostalgic clothes and her unconventional approa towards fashion and the fashion industry. Wirkkala, Tapio (1915–85) One of Finland’s superstar designers of the postwar era, who was employed by the Iiala glass company in 1947 and who went on to create striking decorative art objects and designs through the next three decades. He came to international recognition through his work that was exhibited at the Milan Triennales in the 1950s. Outside Finland, he worked both for Venini and Rosenthal. Wright, Russel (1904–76) An American product designer who made his name through his ceramic dinner services created in the 1930s, whi were marketed under the name American Modern. He was one of the first to use aluminium in a progressive manner, again in hospitality objects. His furniture designs also reaed a large audience.