## Introduction 1 Foster, H. <sub>Design</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Crime</sub>. London and New York: Verso; 2002. p. 22. <sup>2</sup> <sup>McCraen,</sup> <sup>G.</sup> Culture and Consumption: New approaches to the symbolic character of consumer <sub>goods</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>activities</sub>. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press; 1990. p. xi. <sup>3 Huyssen, A.</sup> After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture and Postmodernism<sup>. (Bloomington</sup> and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press; 1986) and Bourdieu, P. <sub>Distinction:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>Social</sub> <sub>Critique</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Judgement</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Taste</sub> (London and New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986). ## 1 Consuming modernity <sup>Saisselin, R. G.</sup> Bricobracomania: The Bourgeois and the Bibelot <sup>(London: ames and Hudson,</sup> 1985), p. 64. 2 McKendri, N., Brewer, J., Plumb, J. H. (eds) <sub>The Birth of Consumer Society: The</sub> Commercialization of Eighteenth-Century England <sup>(London: Hutinson, 1982); Campbell, C.</sup> The Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of Modern Consumerism <sup>(Oxford, Basil Blawell, 1987); Weatherill,</sup> <sup>L.</sup> Consumer Behaviour and Material Culture in Britain 1660–1760 <sup>(London</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Routledge,</sup> <sup>1988);</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Viery,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> The Gentleman’s Daughter: Women’s Lives in Georgian England (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1998). 3 Weatherill, 1988, p. 77. 4 See Logan, T. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Victorian</sub> <sub>Parlour:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>Cultural</sub> <sub>Study</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). 5 Girling Budd, A. ‘Comfort and Gentility, Furnishings by Gillows, Lancaster 1840–1855’ in McKellar, S. and Sparke, P. <sub>Interior Design and Identity</sub> (Manester: Manester University Press, 2004). Fraser, W. H. <sub>The Coming of the Mass Market, 1850–1914</sub> (London and Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1981). <sup>Bushman,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> <sup>L.</sup> <sup>e</sup> Refinement of America: Persons, Houses, Cities <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Vintage</sup> <sup>Books,</sup> 1993). 8 <sup>Bronner,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> <sup>J.</sup> Consuming Visions: Accumulation and Display of Goods in America, 1880–1920 (Wintherthur, Delaware: e Henry Francis du Pont Wintherthur Museum, 1989). 9 Hultenen, K. ‘From Parlor to Living Room: Domestic Space. Interior Decoration, and the Culture of Personality’ in Bronner, 1989. pp. 157–189. <sup>10 Walkowitz, J.</sup> Prostitution and Victorian Society: Women, Class and the State <sup>(Cambridge:</sup> Cambridge University Press, 1980) and Rappoport, E. D. <sub>Shopping for Pleasure: Women in the</sub> <sub>Making</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>London’s</sub> <sub>West</sub> <sub>End</sub> (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2000). 11 Wolf, J. ‘e Culture of Separate Spheres: e Role of Culture in 19th Century Public and Private <sup>Life’</sup> <sup>in</sup> Feminine Sentences: Essays on Women and Culture <sup>(Cambridge:</sup> <sup>Polity,</sup> <sup>1990).</sup> 12 Wilson, E. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Sphinx</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>City</sub> (London: Virago, 1991). <sup>13</sup> <sup>Lea,</sup> <sup>W.</sup> Lands of Desire: Merchants, Power and the Rise of a New American Culture <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> Vintage Books, 1994). <sup>14</sup> <sup>ese</sup> <sup>include</sup> <sup>Bowlby,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Just Looking: Consumer Culture in Dreiser, Gissing and Zola <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Methuen,</sup> <sup>1985)</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Miller,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> <sup>B.</sup> The Bon Marche: Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store <sub>1869–1920</sub> (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1981). 15 Bronner, 1989, p. 8. <sup>16</sup> <sup>Giedion,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> Mechanisation Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>W.</sup> W. Norton and Co., 1948). 17 Giedion, 1948. 18 Sparke, P. <sub>A Century of Car Design</sub> (London: Mitell Beazley, 2002), p. 10. 19 Wharton, E. and Codman Jr, O. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Decoration</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Houses</sub> (London: Batsford, 1898). 20 Milan, S. ‘Refracting the gaselier: understanding Victorian responses to domestic gas lighting’ in <sup>Bryden,</sup> <sup>I.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Floyd,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> Domestic Space: Reading the Nineteenth-Century Interior <sup>(Manester</sup> <sup>and</sup> New York: Manester University Press, 1999). 21 Wilson, S. <sub>Adorned in Dreams: Fashion and Modernity</sub> (London: Virago, 1985) and Breward, C. <sub>The</sub> Hidden Consumer, Masculinities, Fashion and City Life <sup>(Manester: Manester University Press,</sup> 1999). 22 Barthes, R. <sub>Mythologies</sub> (London, Jonathon Cape, 1983). 23 Veblen, T. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Theory</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Leisure</sub> <sub>Class</sub> (London: Unwin, 1970 [originally 1899]). 24 Wulf, K. H. (ed.) <sub>The Sociology of Georg Simmel</sub> (Glencoe: e Free Press, 1950). <sup>25 Beetham, M.</sup> A Magazine of Her Own: Domesticity and Desire in the Woman’s Magazine, 1800– <sub>1914</sub> (New York and London: Routledge, 1996) and Scanlon, J. <sub>Inarticulate Longings: The Ladies’</sub> Home Journal and the Promises of Consumer Culture <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>London:</sup> <sup>Routledge,</sup> <sup>1995)</sup> 26 Hine, T. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Total</sub> <sub>Package</sub> (Boston: Lile Brown, 1995). <sup>27 Strasser, S.</sup> Satisfaction Guaranteed: The Making of the American Mass Market <sup>(New York:</sup> Pantheon Books, 1989). 28 Slater, D. <sub>Consumer</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Modernity</sub> (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1997). 29 Alexander, S. ‘Becoming a Woman in London in the 1920s and 1930s’ in Alexander, S, (ed.) Becoming a Woman and Other Essays in Nineteenth- and Twentieth-Century Feminist History (London: Virago, 1994), pp. 203–24. <sup>30</sup> <sup>Harrison,</sup> <sup>H.</sup> <sup>A.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> Dawn of a New Day: The New York World’s Fair, 1939/40 <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>New</sup> York University Press, 1980). <sup>31</sup> <sup>See</sup> <sup>Strasser,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> Satisfaction Guaranteed: The Making of the American Mass Market <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Pantheon,</sup> <sup>1989)</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Tedlow,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> <sup>S.</sup> New and Improved: The Story of Mass Marketing in America (New York: Basic Books, 1990). 32 Forde, K. ‘Celluloid Dreams: e Marketing of Cutex in America, 1916–1935’, <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 2002; 15 (3): 175–90. <sup>33</sup> <sup>Scanlon,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> Inarticulate Longings: The Ladies’ Home Journal, Gender and the Promises of Consumer <sub>Culture</sub> (New York and London: Routledge, 1995). 34 Forde, 2002, p. 178. <sup>35</sup> <sup>Peiss,</sup> <sup>K.</sup> Hope in a Jar: The Making of America’s Beauty Culture <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Henry</sup> <sup>Holt</sup> <sup>&</sup> <sup>Co.</sup> Inc., 1998). 36 See Bayley, S. Harley Earl (London: Trefoil, 1990) and Clarke, S. ‘Managing Design: the Art and Colour Section at General Motors, 1927–1941’ <sub>Journal of Design History</sub> 1999; 12, (1): 65–79. 37 Clarke, 1999. <sup>38</sup> <sup>Frederi.</sup> <sup>C.</sup> Selling Mrs. Consumer: Christine Frederick & The Rise of Household Efficiency <sup>(New</sup> York: Business Bourse, 1929). 39 Frederi, 1929, p. 22. 40 Swiencii, M. A. ‘Consuming Brotherhood: Men’s Culture, Style and Recreation as Consumer <sup>Culture, 1880–1930’ in Gliman, L. B.</sup> Consumer Society in American History: A Reader <sup>(Ithaca</sup> and London: Cornell University Press), 1999, p. 207. 41 Swiencii, 1999, p. 226. <sup>42</sup> <sup>Gartman,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> Auto Opium: A Social History of American Automobile Design <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York</sup> <sup>and</sup> London: Routledge, 1994). 43 Jeremiah, D. ‘Filling Up: e British Experience, 1896–1940’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1995; 8 (2): 97–116. 44 Lewis, D.L. and Goldstein, L. (eds) <sub>The</sub> <sub>Automobile</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>American</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (Miigan: University of Miigan Press, 1980, 1983). <sup>45 O’Connell, S.</sup> The Car in British Society: Class, Gender and Motoring, 1896–1939 <sup>(Manester:</sup> Manester University Press, 1998), p. 43. <sup>46</sup> <sup>Gronberg.</sup> <sup>T.</sup> Designing Modernity: Exhibiting the City in 1920s Paris <sup>(Manester:</sup> <sup>Manester</sup> University Press, 1998), p. 62. 47 Gieben-Gamal, E. ‘Feminine spaces, modern experiences: e design and display strategies of British hairdressing salons in the 19230s and 1930s’ in McKellar, S. and Sparke, P. (eds) <sub>Interior</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Identity</sub> Manester: Manester University Press, 2004). <sup>48</sup> <sup>Clarke,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> Tupperware: The Promise of Plastic in 1950s America <sup>(Washington</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>London:</sup> Smithsonian Institution Press, 1999). <sup>49 Light, A.</sup> Forever England: Femininity, Literature and Conservatism Between the Wars <sup>(London</sup> and New York: Routledge, 1991.) 50 Ryan, F. S. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Ideal</sub> <sub>Home</sub> <sub>Through</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Twentieth</sub> <sub>Century</sub> (London: Hazar Publishing, 1997) 51 Massey. A. <sub>Hollywood</sub> <sub>Beyond</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Screen</sub> (Oxford: Berg, 2000). 52 Fine, B. and Leopold, E. <sub>The</sub> <sub>World</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Consumption</sub> (London: Routledge, 1993). ## 2 The impact of technology 1 Ford, H. ‘Mass Production’ in <sub>Encyclopaedia Britannica</sub> (1926). 2 For a longer discussion see Fine, B. and Leopold, E. <sub>The World of Consumption</sub> (London: Routledge, 1993), in whi the authors outline the concept of ‘systems of provision’, whi cross the production/consumption divide. 3 Examples su as James Nasmyth’s steam hammer of 1838 and James Wya’s pumping engine of 1783 were among the many tools developed to exploit this new source of power. 4 <sup>Clark,</sup> <sup>H.</sup> The Role of the Designer in the Early Mass Production Industry <sup>(unpublished</sup> <sup>PhD</sup> <sup>thesis,</sup> University of Brighton, 1982). 5 <sup>Habakkuk, H. J.</sup> American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century: The Search for <sub>Labour-Saving Inventions</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962). 6 <sup>Giedion,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> Mechanisation Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>W.</sup> W. Norton and Co., 1969 [1948]). 7 <sup>Hounshell, D. A.</sup> From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932 <sup>(Baltimore and</sup> London: John Hopkins Press, 1984). 8 e Austrian Postal Savings Bank building of 1904–06 and the ofice building for the <sub>Die</sub> <sub>Zeit</sub> newspaper of the same years both used aluminium. For more examples of early work in aluminium see Niols, S. <sub>Aluminum</sub> <sub>by</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (Pisburgh: Carnegie Museum of Art, 2001). 9 Cliford, H. and Turner, E. ‘Modern Metal’ in Greenhalgh, P. (ed.) <sub>Art Nouveau 1890–1914</sub> (London: V & A Publications, 2000). <sup>10</sup> <sup>Friedel,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Pioneer Plastic: The Making and Selling of Celluloid <sup>(Wisconsin:</sup> <sup>University</sup> <sup>of</sup> Wisconsin Press, 1983). 11 e interior decorator, Elsie de Wolfe, was responsible for this innovation. 12 Frederi W. Taylor developed a system of rationalization through the analysis of work whi came to be known as ‘time and motion studies’. 13 Beeer, C. and Stowe, H. B. <sub>The American Woman’s Home</sub> (New York: J. B. Ford and Co., 1869). <sup>14 Cowan, R. S.</sup> More Work for Mother: The Ironies Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Basic</sup> <sup>Books,</sup> <sup>1983)</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Strasser,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> Never Done: A History of American <sub>Housework</sub> (New York: Pantheon Books, 1982. <sup>15</sup> <sup>Frederi,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> The New Housekeeping: Efficiency Studies in Home Management <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Garden</sup> City, Doubleday Page, 1913). 16 Sparke, P. ‘Cookware to Cotail Shakers’ in Niols, 2001. 17 Forty, A. <sub>Objects of Desire</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1986). 19 Sparke, P. <sub>Electrical</sub> <sub>Appliances</sub> (London, Bell and Hyman, 1987). 18 Habakkuk, 1962. 20 P. Frankl, <sub>New Dimensions</sub> (New York: Payson & Clarke, 1928), p. 23. 21 Kwint, M., Breward, C., and Aynsley, J. <sub>Material</sub> <sub>Memories:</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Evocation</sub> (Oxford: Berg, 1999). 22 Barthes, R. <sub>Mythologies</sub> (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1957), p. 97. <sup>23 Freidel. R.</sup> Pioneer Plastic: The Making and Selling of Celluloid <sup>(Wisconsin: University of</sup> Wisconsin Press, 1983). 24 Meikle, J. L. <sub>American</sub> <sub>Plastic:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>Cultural</sub> <sub>History</sub> (New Brunswi, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1995.), p. 6. 25 Meikle, 1995, p. 106. 26 Meikle, 1995, p. 118. <sup>27 Bayley, S.</sup> In Good Shape: Style in Industrial Products 1900–1960 <sup>(London: Design Council, 1979).</sup> 28 Niols. S. (ed.) <sub>Aluminum</sub> <sub>by</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2000). 29 See Sparke, P. ‘Cookware to Cotail Shakers: e Domestication of Aluminum in the United States, 1900–1939’ in Niols, 2000. 30 D. Dohner, ‘Modern tenique of designing’ <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Plastics</sub>, (14 Mar 1937), p. 71. <sup>31</sup> <sup>Grief.</sup> <sup>M.</sup> Depression Modern: The Thirties Style in America <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Universe</sup> <sup>Books,</sup> <sup>1975).</sup> <sup>32</sup> <sup>Pulos,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> American Design Ethic: A History of Industrial Design to 1940 <sup>(Cambridge,</sup> <sup>MA:</sup> <sup>e</sup> <sup>MIT</sup> Press, 1983), pp. 348–53. 33 Blaser, W. <sub>Mies</sub> <sub>van</sub> <sub>der</sub> <sub>Rohe:</sub> <sub>Furniture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Interiors</sub> (Hauppauge, NY: Barrons Educational Series, Inc., 1982), De Fusco, R. <sub>Le Corbusier designer i mobile del 1929</sub> Milan: Documenti di Casabella, Electa, 1976) and Wilk, C. <sub>Marcel</sub> <sub>Breuer:</sub> <sub>Furniture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Interiors</sub> (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981). 34 Davies, K. ‘Finmar and the Furniture of the Future: the sale of Alvar Aalto’s plywood furniture in the UK, 1934–1939’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1998; 11 (2): 145–56. ## 3 <sup></sup>e designer for industry 1 <sup>Clark.</sup> <sup>H.</sup> The Role of the Designer in Early Mass Production Industry <sup>(unpublished</sup> <sup>PhD</sup> <sup>thesis,</sup> University of Brighton, 1986). 2 Forty, A. <sub>Objects of Desire</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1986). 3 Aerbury, P. and Irvine, L. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Doulton</sub> <sub>Story</sub> (London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 1979). 4 Sparke, P. <sub>Electrical</sub> <sub>Appliances</sub> (London: Bell and Hyman, 1987). 5 <sup>oted</sup> <sup>in</sup> <sup>Naylor,</sup> <sup>G.</sup> The Arts and Crafts Movement: A Study of its Sources, Ideals and Influence <sub>on</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Theory</sub> (London: Studio Vista, 1971). 6 Halen, S. <sub>Christopher Dresser</sub> (Oxford: Phaidon, 1990). 7 Swartz, F. ‘Commofirt Signs: Peter Behrens and the AEG, and the Trademark’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1996; 9 (3): 153–84. 8 Aynsley, J. <sub>A</sub> <sub>Century</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Graphic</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Mitell Beazley, 2001). p. 6. 9 Hine, T. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Total</sub> <sub>Package</sub> (Boston: Lile, Brown and Company, 1995. p. 84. 10 Hine, 1995, p. 87. <sup>11</sup> <sup>Lea,</sup> <sup>W.</sup> Lands of Desire: Merchants, Power and the Rise of a New American Culture <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> Vintage Books, 1994). 12 Walker, L. ‘Women and Aritecture’ in Afield, J. and Kirkham, P. (eds) <sub>A Vire from the Interior:</sub> <sub>Feminism, Women and Design</sub> (London: e Women’s Press, 1989). 13 Howe, K. S., Frelinghuysen, A. C. and Voorsanger, C. H. (eds) <sub>Herter</sub> <sub>Brothers:</sub> <sub>Furniture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Interiors for a Gilded Age</sub> (New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., Publishers, in association with the Museum of Fine Atrs, Houston, 1994). <sup>14</sup> <sup>Pe,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Irish,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> Candace Wheeler: The Art and Enterprise of American Design 1875–1900 (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2002). <sup>15</sup> <sup>Hampton.</sup> <sup>M.</sup> Legendary Decorators of the Twentieth Century <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Doubleday,</sup> <sup>1992).</sup> 16 Kirkham, P. Sparke, P and Gura, J. B. ‘ “A Woman’s Place…”? Women Interior Designers’ in <sup>Kirkham (ed.)</sup> Women Designers in the USA 1900–2000: Diversity and Difference <sup>(New Haven and</sup> London: Yale University Press, 2000). 17 Pevsner, N. <sub>Pioneers</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1968), pp. 34–5. 18 P. McConnell, ‘SID – American hallmark of design integrity’ <sub>Art</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Industry</sub> 1949; 47, p. 84. 19 Sloan, A. P. <sub>My Years with General Motors</sub> (New York: Mcfadden-Bartell, 1965). 20 Sloan, 1965, p. 269. <sup>21</sup> <sup>Meikle,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> <sup>L.</sup> Twentieth Century Limited: Industrial Design in America, 1925–1939 <sup>(Philadelphia:</sup> Temple University Press, 1979). 22 Meikle, 1979, p. 8. 23 See Sparke, P. ‘From a Lipsti to a Steamship: e Growth of the American Industrial Design Profession’ in Bishop, T. (ed.) <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History:</sub> <sub>Fad</sub> <sub>or</sub> <sub>Function?</sub> (London: Design Council, 1978). <sup>24</sup> <sup>Ewen,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> All Consuming Images: The Politics of Style in Contemporary Culture <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Basic</sup> Books, 1988). 25 Ewen, 1988, p, 45. <sup>26</sup> <sup>Teague,</sup> <sup>W.</sup> <sup>D.</sup> Design This Day: the Technique of Order in the Machine Age <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>e</sup> <sup>Studio</sup> Publications, 1940). 27 Bel Geddes, N. <sub>Horizons</sub> (Boston: Lile, Brown and Company, 1932). <sup>28</sup> <sup>Forty,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Objects of Desire: Design and Society, 1850–1980 <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>ames</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Hudson,</sup> <sup>1986).</sup> <sup>29 Bourdieu, P.</sup> Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste <sup>(London and New York:</sup> Routledge, 1986). 30 Bel Geddes Arive, Humanities Index, University of Texas, Austin, USA, File 199. <sup>31</sup> <sup>See</sup> <sup>Sparke,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> Consultant Design: The History and Practice of the Designer in Industry <sup>(London:</sup> Pembridge Press, 1983). 32 Wilk, C. <sub>Marcel</sub> <sub>Breue:</sub> <sub>Furniture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Interiors</sub> (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981). <sup>33</sup> <sup>Aynsley,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> A Century of Graphic Design: Graphic design pioneers of the 20th century <sup>(London:</sup> Mitell Beazley, 2001), p. 15. <sup>34</sup> <sup>Rothsild,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> Design and Feminism: Revisioning Spaces, Places and Everyday Things <sup>(New</sup> Brunswi, New Jersey and London: Rutgers University Press, 1999). <sup>35</sup> <sup>Seddon,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Worden,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> <sup>(eds)</sup> Women Designing: Redefining Design in Britain between the Wars (Brighton: University of Brighton, 1994). <sup>36</sup> <sup>Sparke,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> As Long as It’s Pink: The Sexual Politics of Taste <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Pandora,</sup> <sup>1995).</sup> ## 4 Modernism and design 1 G. Dorfles, <sub>Introduction</sub> <sub>à</sub> <sub>l’Industrial</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (Paris: Casterman, 1974), p. 15. 2 Pevsner. N. <sub>Pioneers</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin 1960). 3 Banham, P. R. <sub>Theory</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>First</sub> <sub>Machine</sub> <sub>Age</sub> (London, Aritectural Press, 1960). 4 Banham, p. 14. 5 Banham, p. 27. 6 Banham, p. 46. 7 Bourke, J. ‘e Great Male Renunciation: Men’s Dress Reform in inter-war Britain’ <sub>Journal of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1996; 9 (1): 23–33 and Burman, B. ‘Beer and Brighter Clothes: e Men’s Dress Reform Party’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1995; 8 (4): 275–90. 8 Naylor. G. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Arts</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Crafts</sub> <sub>Movement</sub> (London: Studio Vista, 1971). 9 Steadman, P. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Evolution</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Designs</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), p. 33. 10 Durant, S. <sub>Victorian</sub> <sub>Ornamental</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Academy Editions, 1972). <sup>11</sup> <sup>Saefer.</sup> <sup>H.</sup> Nineteenth-Century Modern: The Functional Tradition in Victorian Design <sup>(London:</sup> Studio Vista. 1970). <sup>12</sup> <sup>Hounshell.</sup> <sup>S.</sup> From the American System to Mass Production 1800–1932: The Development of <sub>Manufacturing</sub> <sub>Technology</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>U.S</sub>. (Baltimore and London: John Hopkins University Press, 1990). 13 Giedion, S. <sub>Mechanisation Takes Command</sub> (New York, Norton, 1948). <sup>14</sup> <sup>Greenough,</sup> <sup>H.</sup> Form and Function: Remarks on Art, Design and Architecture <sup>(Berkeley:</sup> <sup>University</sup> of California Press, 1947). 15 Greenough, 1947, p. 131. 16 Loos. A. ‘Ornament and Crime’ reprinted in Conrads, U. <sub>Programmes and Manifestoes on</sub> Twentieth-Century Architecture <sup>(London: Lund Humphries, 1970).</sup> 17 B. Colomina <sub>Sexuality</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Space</sub> (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton Aritectural Press, 1992) 18 Greenhalgh, P. (ed.) <sub>Art Nouveau 1890–1914</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). 19 Naylor, 1971, p. 184. 20 S. Tsudi-Madsen, <sub>Art</sub> <sub>Nouveau</sub> (London: Wiedenfeld and Niolson, 1967), pp. 54–5. 21 Collins, P. <sub>Changing</sub> <sub>Ideals</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Architecture</sub> (London: Faber and Faber, 1965), pp. 267–8. 22 Greenhalgh, P. (ed.) <sub>Modernism and Design</sub> (London: Reaktion Books, 1990). 23 See Bojko, S. <sub>New</sub> <sub>Graphic</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Revolutionary</sub> <sub>Russia</sub> (New York/Washington: Praeger Publishers, 1972). 24 Troy. N. <sub>The</sub> <sub>De</sub> <sub>Stijl</sub> <sub>Environment</sub> (Cambridge, MA: e MIT Press, 1983), p. 5. 25 Overy, P. <sub>De</sub> <sub>Stijl</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1991). 26 Overy, 1991, p. 32. 27 Naylor, G. ‘Swedish Grace … or the Acceptable Face of Modernism’ in Greenhalgh, 1990, pp. 164– 83 and Sparke, P. ‘Swedish Modern: Myth or Reality’ in <sub>Svensk</sub> <sub>Form</sub> (London: Design Council, 1981), pp. 15–20. 28 Sparke, 1980. p. 16. 29 Gropius, W. <sub>The</sub> <sub>New</sub> <sub>Architecture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Bauhaus</sub> (London: Faber and Faber, 1935), p. 19. 30 Gropius, 1935, p. 51. 31 Klee, P. <sub>Pedagogical Sketchbook</sub> (London: Faber and Faber, 1953). 32 Gropius, 1935, p. 71. 33 De Zurko, E. R. <sub>Origins</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Functionalist</sub> <sub>Theory</sub> (New York: Columbia University Press, 1957). 34 Collins, 1965. 35 Le Corbusier <sub>Towards</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>New</sub> <sub>Architecture</sub> (London: e Aritectural Press, 1974 [1927]), p. 7. 36 Le Corbusier, 1974, p. 22. 37 Rietveld built the Sroder house in 1924/25 while Le Corbusier’s Villa Savoie was created in 1927. 38 Bullo, N. ‘First the Kiten – en the Façade’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1988; 1 (3 & 4): 177–92. 39 omson, E. M. ‘ “e Science of Publicity”: An American Advertising eory, 199–1920’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1996; 9 (4): 253–69. 40 Bourke, J. ‘e Great Male Renunciation: Men’s Dress Reform in Inter-war Britain’ <sub>Journal of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1996; 9 (1): 23–33 and Burman, B. ‘Beer and Brighter Clothes: e Men’s Dress Reform Party’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1995; 8 (4): 275–90. 41 Greenhalgh, 1990, p. 9. 42 Gropius, 1935, p. 92. <sup>43</sup> <sup>Sparke,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> As Long As It’s Pink: The Sexual Politics of Taste <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Pandora,</sup> <sup>1995).</sup> 44 Sparke, 1995, p. 118. ## 5 Designing identities 1 McCarthy, F. <sub>A</sub> <sub>History</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>British</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>1830–1970</sub> (London: George Allen And Unwin Ltd., 1979). 2 Heske, J. <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Germany</sub> <sub>1870–1918</sub> (London: Trefoil), 1986. 3 Heske, 1986. p. 58. 4 <sup>Greenhalgh, P.</sup> Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions, and World’s <sub>Fairs 1851–1939</sub>. (Manester: Manester University Press, 1988). 5 See Naylor, G. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Arts</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Crafts</sub> <sub>Movement</sub> (London: Studio Vista, 1971). 6 <sup>Ernyey, G.</sup> Made in Hungary: The Best of 150 Years in Industrial Design <sup>(Budapest: Rubik</sup> Innovation Foundation, 1993). 7 <sup>Exhibition</sup> <sup>catalogue,</sup> Josef Hoffmann 1870–1956: Architect and Designer <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Fiser</sup> <sup>Fine</sup> <sup>Art</sup> Gallery, 1977), pp. 5–6. 8 See Crowley, D. ‘Budapest: International Metropolis and National Capital’ in Greenhalgh, P. (ed.) <sub>Art</sub> <sub>Nouveau</sub> <sub>1890–1914</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). Ernyey, 1993. 10 Ernyey, 1993, p. 24. 11 Lamarova, M. ‘e New Art in Prague’ in Greenhalgh, P. (ed.) <sub>Art</sub> <sub>Nouveau</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). <sup>12 Campbell, J.</sup> The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts <sup>(Princeton, NJ:</sup> Princeton University Press, 1978), Burardt, L. The Werkbund: Studies in the History and Ideology <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Deutscher</sub> <sub>Werkbund</sub> (London: Design Council, 1980) and Swartz, F. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Werkbund:</sub> Design Theory and Mass Culture Before the First World War <sup>(New Haven and London: Yale</sup> University Press, 1996). 13 Campbell, 1978, p. 10. 14 Swartz, 1996. 15 McFadden, D. <sub>Scandinavian</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>1880–1980</sub> (New York: Harry Abrams, Inc., 1982). 16 Opie, J. ‘Helsinki: Saarinen and Finnish Jugend’ in Greenhalgh. P., 2000, p. 375. 17 See Moller, S. E. (ed.) <sub>Danish Design</sub> (Copenhagen: Det danske Selskab, 1974). <sup>18</sup> <sup>Silverman,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> <sup>L.</sup> Art Nouveau in Fin-de-Siècle France: Politics, Psychology and Style <sup>(Berkeley:</sup> University of California Press, 1989). <sup>19</sup> <sup>Tiersten,</sup> <sup>L.</sup> Marianne in the Marketplace: Envisioning Consumer Society in Fin-de-Siècle France (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001). 20 Hobsbawm, E. J. <sub>Nations</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Nationalism</sub> <sub>since</sub> <sub>1780</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), p. 141. 21 Hobsbawm, 1990, p. 141. 22 See Hitco, H. R. and Johnson, P. <sub>The International Style</sub> (New York: W.W. Norton and Co. Inc., 1966). 23 Newman, G. ‘A survey of design in Britain, 1915–1939’ in <sub>British</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (Milton Keynes: e Open University, 1975). 24 Greenhalgh, P. (ed.) <sub>Art Nouveau 1890–1914</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). <sup>25</sup> <sup>Gronberg,</sup> <sup>T.</sup> Designs on Modernity: Exhibiting the City in 1920s Paris <sup>(Manester:</sup> <sup>Manester</sup> University Press, 1998), p. 11. 26 Gronberg, 1998, p. 30. 27 Dell, S. ‘e Consumer and the Making of the Exposition Internationale des Arts Decoratifs et Industriels Modernes, 1907–1925’ <sub>Journal of Design History</sub> 1999; 12 (4): 311–25. 28 Doordan, D. <sub>Twentieth-Century Architecture</sub> (London: Lawrence King, 2001). <sup>29</sup> <sup>See</sup> <sup>Meikle,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> <sup>L.</sup> Twentieth-Century Limited: Industrial Design in the USA, 1925–1939 <sup>(Philadelphia,</sup> USA: Temple University Press, 2001), p. 62. <sup>30</sup> <sup>Stuart</sup> <sup>Ewen</sup> Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and the Social Roots of Consumer Culture (New York: McGraw Hill, 1977). 31 Bowlby, R. <sub>Shopping</sub> <sub>with</sub> <sub>Freud</sub> (London: Routledge, 1993). <sup>32</sup> <sup>Frederi,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> Selling Mrs. Consumer: Christine Frederick & The Rise of Household Efficiency <sup>(New</sup> York: Business Bourse, 1929). <sup>33</sup> <sup>Sheldon,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Arens,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> Consumer Engineering: A New Technique for Prosperity <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> Arno Press, 1932), p. 154. 34 ‘Building the World of Tomorrow’ <sub>Art</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Industry</sub> 1939; 26 (154) April: 126. 35 Susman, W. I. ‘e People’s Fair: Cultural Contradictions of a Consumer Society’ in Harrison, H. <sup>A. and Cusker, J. P.</sup> Dawn of a New Day: The New York World’s Fair, 1939/40 <sup>(New York: eens</sup> Museum of Art, 1980), p. 17. 36 Susman, 1980, p. 27. 37 See Woodham, J. ‘Images of Africa and Design in British Empire Exhibitions between the Wars Journal of Design History <sup>1989; 2 (1): 15–33.</sup> 38 Woodham, 1989, p. 22. 39 Examples include the De La Warr Pavilion in Bexhill, London Zoo’s penguin pool and the Highpoint, arry Hill and Lawn Road housing semes. 40 Ryan, D. S. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Ideal</sub> <sub>Home</sub> <sub>Through</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>20th</sub> <sub>Century</sub> (London: Hazar Publishing, 1997). <sup>41</sup> <sup>Ellio,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> <sup>‘Introduction’</sup> <sup>to</sup> Devetsil: Czech Avant-garde Art, Architecture and Design of the 1920s <sub>and</sub> <sub>1930s</sub> (Oxford and London: Museum of Modern Art, 1990), p. 6. 42 Guidici, G. <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Process:</sub> <sub>Olivetti,</sub> <sub>1908–1983</sub> (Torino, Italy: Edizioni di Comunità, 1983), p. 16. ## 6 Consuming postmodernity 1 <sup>Hopkins,</sup> <sup>H.</sup> The New Look: A Social History of the Forties and Fifties <sup>(London,</sup> <sup>Seer</sup> <sup>and</sup> Warburg, 1964), p. 231. 2 See Hebdige, D. ‘Towards a Cartography of Taste 1935–1962’ in Hebdige, D. <sub>Hiding</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Light</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1988), pp. 45–76. 3 De Grazia. V. ‘Changing Consumption Regimes in Europe’ in Strasser, S., McGovern, C. and Judt, <sup>M.</sup> Getting and Spending: European and American Consumer Societies in the Twentieth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), p. 61. 4 Merkel, I. ‘Consumer Culture in the GDR’ in Strasser, McGovern and Judt, <sub>Getting</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Spending:</sub> European and American Consumer Societies in the Twentieth Century <sup>(Cambridge:</sup> <sup>Cambridge</sup> University Press, 1998), pp. 282–3. 5 Hopkins, 1964. 6 Galbraith, J. K. <sub>The Affluent Society</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1958) and Carter. E. <sub>How German</sub> is She? National Reconstruction and the Consuming Woman in the FRG and West Berlin 1945–1960 (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Miigan, 1996). 7 Williams, R. <sub>Culture and Society 1780–1950</sub> (London: Chao and Windus, 1958). 8 See writings by eodor W. Adorno and Max Horkeheimer on the subject, among them <sub>Dialect</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Enlightenment</sub> (London: Verso, 1979 [1944]). 9 Williams, R. <sub>Communications</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1968), p. 99. 10 Williams, 1968, p. 85 <sup>11</sup> <sup>Marling,</sup> <sup>K.</sup> <sup>A.</sup> As Seen on TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in America in the 1950s (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994). 12 See McDermo, C. ‘Popular Taste and the Campaign for Contemporary Design in the 1950s’ in <sup>Sparke, P. (ed.)</sup> Did Britain Make It? British Design in Context, 1946–1986 <sup>(London: Design Council,</sup> 1986), pp. 156–64. <sup>13 Wilson, R.</sup> Only Halfway to Paradise, Women in Postwar Britain, 1945–1968 <sup>(London and New</sup> York: Tavisto Publications, 1980) p. 38. <sup>14 Riesman, D.</sup> The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character <sup>(New Haven and</sup> New York: Yale University Press, rev. ed., 1970). <sup>15</sup> <sup>1948</sup> <sup>Newson</sup> <sup>report,</sup> <sup>quoted</sup> <sup>in</sup> <sup>Wilson,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> Only Halfway to Paradise: Women in Postwar Britain <sub>1945–1968</sub> (London and New York: Tavisto Publications, 1980). 16 Mort, F. ‘Boy’s own? Masculinity, style and popular culture in Chapman, R. and Rutherford, J. (eds) <sub>Male Order</sub> (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1988). <sup>17 Hine, T.</sup> Populuxe: The Look and Life of America in the 1950s and 1960s<sup>,</sup> From Tailfins and TV Dinners to Barbie Dolls and Fallout Shelters <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Alfred</sup> <sup>A.</sup> <sup>Knopf,</sup> <sup>1986).</sup> 18 During, S. (ed.) <sub>Cultural</sub> <sub>Studies</sub> <sub>Reader</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1993). <sup>19</sup> <sup>Massey,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> The Independent Group: Modernism and Mass Culture in Britain, 1945–1959 (Manester: Manester University Press, 1995) and Whiteley, N. <sub>Pop Design: Modernism to Mod</sub> (London: Design Council, 1987). 20 Afield, J. ‘Inside Pram Town: A Case-Study of Harlow House Interiors, 1951–1961’ in Afield, J. <sup>and</sup> <sup>Kirkham,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> A View From the Interior: Feminism, Women and Design <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>e</sup> <sup>Women’s</sup> Press, 1989), pp. 215–38. 21 Afield and Kirkham, 1989, p. 17. 22 Friedan, B. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Feminine</sub> <sub>Mystique</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1993 [1963]). 23 Hebdige, D. ‘Object as Image’: e Italian Scooter Cycle’ in Hebdige, D. <sub>Hiding</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Light</sub> (London: Comedia, 1988), pp. 77–115. <sup>24 See Clarke, A.</sup> Tupperware: The Promise of Plastic in 1950s America <sup>(Washington and London:</sup> Smithsonian Institution Press, 1999) and Peiss, K. <sub>Hope</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>Jar</sub> (New York: Metropolitan Books, 1998). 25 See Moller, S. E. (ed.) <sub>Danish Design</sub> (Copenhagen: Der Danske Selskab, 1974). 26 See Venturi, R. Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York: e Museum of Modern Art, 1966). 27 Venturi, 1966, p. 23. 28 Sparke, P. <sub>Theory</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Age</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Pop</sub> (unpublished PhD thesis, University of Brighton, 1975). 29 Lyotard, F. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Postmodern</sub> <sub>Condition:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>report</sub> <sub>on</sub> <sub>knowledge</sub> (Manester: Manester University Press, 1984), p. 81. <sup>30</sup> <sup>Haug,</sup> <sup>W.</sup> <sup>H.</sup> Critique of Commodity Aesthetics: Appearance, Sexuality and Advertising in <sub>Capitalist</sub> <sub>Society</sub> (Oxford: Polity Press, 1986), p. 45. 31 Lehtonen, T. K. and Maenpaa, P. ‘Shopping in the East Centre Mall’ in Fall, P. and Campbell, C. (eds) <sub>The</sub> <sub>Shopping</sub> <sub>Experience</sub> (London: Sage, 1997). 32 Baudrillard, J. <sub>Simulations</sub> (New York: Semiotext(e), 1983). <sup>33 Mort, F.</sup> Cultures of Consumption: Masculinities and Social Space in Late Twentieth-Century <sub>Britain</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1996). 34 Joanne Entwhistle ‘“Power dressing” and the Construction of the Career Woman’ in Nava, M., <sup>Blake,</sup> <sup>A.,</sup> <sup>MacRury,</sup> <sup>I.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Riards,</sup> <sup>B.</sup> Buy This Book: Studies in Advertising and Consumption (London and New York: Routledge, 1997). <sup>35</sup> <sup>Lunt,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Livingstone,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> <sup>M.</sup> Mass Consumption and Personal Identity: Everyday Economic <sub>Experience</sub> (Buingham and Philadelphia: Open University Press, 1992). <sup>36</sup> <sup>Douglas,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Isherwood,</sup> <sup>B,</sup> The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption (Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1978), p. 59. 37 Du Gay, P., Hall, S., Maay, H. and Negus, K. (eds) <sub>Doing</sub> <sub>Cultural</sub> <sub>Studies:</sub> <sub>The</sub> <sub>Story</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Sony</sub> <sub>Walkman</sub> (Milton Keynes: e Open University, 1997). 38 Bauman, Z. quoted in Warde, A. ‘Consumers, Identity and Belonging: Reflections on Some eses of Zygmunt Bauman’ in Keat, R., Whiteley, N., and Abercrombie, N. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Authority</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Consumer</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1994). 39 Pavi, J. (ed.) <sub>Brand New</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). 40 Klein, N. <sub>No</sub> <sub>Logo</sub> (London: Flamingo, 2001), p. 4. 41 Dyson, J. Against the Odds: An Autobiography (London: Orion, 1997). <sup>42 Hewison. R.</sup> The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline <sup>(London: Methuen, 1987),</sup> <sup>Samuel,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Theatres of Memory, Vol. I: Past and Present in Contemporary Culture <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Verso,</sup> <sup>1995)</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Wright,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> On Living in an Old Country: The National Past in Contemporary Britain (London: Verso, 1985). 43 Urry, J. <sub>Consuming Places</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1995). 44 Wright. 1985, p. 5. 45 Urry, 1995, p. 177. 46 Eco, U. <sub>Travels on Hyperreality</sub> (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovi, 1986). 47 <sup>Zukin, S.</sup> Landscapes of Power: from Detroit to Disneyland <sup>(University of California Press,</sup> California, 1992). <sup>48</sup> <sup>Papanek,</sup> <sup>V.</sup> Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>ames</sup> <sup>and</sup> Hudson, 1972). 49 Jégou, F. ‘Design and Social Innovation’ <sub>Azimuts</sub> 2007; 29: 276. 50 Design Council. Case Studies: Design for Patient Dignity [hp://www.design-council.org.uk/Casestudies/Design-for-Patient-Dignity/] (accessed 17.07.2012). 51 University of the Arts, London. Design Against Crime: A Practice-Led Design Initiative [hp://www.designagainstcrime.com/about-us/baground-history/] (accessed 17.07.2012). 52 Herman Miller, Inc. Environmental Advocacy [hp://www.hermanmiller.com/About-Us/Environmental-Advocacy] (accessed 17.07.2012). 53 Nike, Inc. sustainable Business at Nike, Inc. [hp://www.nikebiz.com/responsibility/] (accessed 17.07.2012). ## 7 Te<sup></sup>nology and design: a new alliance <sup>1</sup> Dupont: The Autobiography of an American Enterprise <sup>(Wilmington,</sup> <sup>Delaware:</sup> <sup>E.</sup> <sup>I.</sup> <sup>Du</sup> <sup>Pont</sup> <sup>de</sup> Nemours & Company, 1952), p. 119. 2 <sup>Hine,</sup> <sup>T.</sup> Populuxe: The Look and Life of America in the ‘50s and ’60s, From Tailfins and TV Dinners to Barbie Dolls and Fallout Shelters <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Alfred</sup> <sup>A.</sup> <sup>Knopf,</sup> <sup>1986),</sup> <sup>p.</sup> <sup>70.</sup> 3 Hine, 1986, p. 128. 4 <sup>See</sup> <sup>Hogan,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> <sup>J.</sup> The Marshall Plan: America, Britain and the Reconstruction of Western Europe, <sub>1947–1952</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987). 5 Sparke, P. <sub>Italian Design: 1870 to the Present</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1988). 6 Sparke, 1988 and Sparke, P. <sub>Japanese</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Miael Joseph, 1987). 7 <sup>White,</sup> <sup>N.</sup> Reconstructing Italian Fashion: America and the Development of the Italian Fashion <sub>Industry</sub> (London and New York: Berg, 2000), p. 21. 8 Sparke. P. ‘e Straw Donkey: Tourist Kits or Proto-Design? Cra and Design in Italy, 1945– 1960’ Journal of Design History 1998; 11 (1): 59–69. <sup>9</sup> <sup>Palmer,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Couture and Commerce: The Transatlantic Fashion Trade in the 1950s <sup>(Toronto:</sup> <sup>UBC</sup> Press, 2001). 10 Palmer, 2001, p. 20. 11 Pulos, A. J. <sub>The</sub> <sub>American</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Adventure</sub> <sub>1940–1975</sub> (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1988). 12 Pulos, 1988, p. 79. <sup>13 Jason, L.</sup> Robin and Lucienne Day: Pioneers of Contemporary Design <sup>(London: Mitell Beazley,</sup> 2001). 14 Caerall, C. ‘Perceptions of Plastics: A Study of Plastics in Britain 1945–1956’ in Sparke, P. (ed.) The Plastics Age: From Modernity to Postmodernity <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>V&A</sup> <sup>Publications,</sup> <sup>1990),</sup> <sup>pp.</sup> <sup>68–9.</sup> 15 Sparke, P. ‘Plastics and Pop Culture’ in Sparke, P. (ed.) <sub>The Plastics Age: From Modernity to Post-</sub> <sub>Modernity</sub> (London, Victoria and Albert Museum, 1990), pp. 92–104. 16 Afield, J. ‘e Tued Carpet in Britain: Its Rise from the Boom of the Pile, 1952–70’ <sub>Journal of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1994; 7 (3): 205–16. 17 Pile, S. ‘e Foundation of Modern Comfort: Latex foam and the Industrial Impact of Design on <sup>the</sup> <sup>British</sup> <sup>Rubber</sup> <sup>Industry,</sup> <sup>1948–1958’</sup> <sup>in</sup> One-Off: A Collection of essays by Postgraduate Students on the V&A/RCA Course in the History of Design <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Victoria</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Albert</sup> <sup>Museum,</sup> 1997). <sup>18</sup> <sup>Clarke,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> <sup>J.</sup> Tupperware: The Promise of Plastic in 1950s America <sup>(Washington</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>London:</sup> Smithsonian Institution Press, 1999). 19 Clarke, 1999, p. 10. 20 Handley, S. <sub>Nylon:</sub> <sub>The</sub> <sub>Manmade</sub> <sub>Fashion</sub> <sub>Revolution</sub> (London: Bloomsbury, 1999). 21 Sparke, P. <sub>Italian Design: 1870 to the Present</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1988). <sup>22</sup> <sup>Blaszszyk,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Imagining Consumers: Design and Innovation from Wedgwood to Corning <sup>(Baltimore</sup> and London: John Hopkins University Press, 2000). 23 Blaszszyk, 2000, p. 275. 24 Kron, J. and Slesin, S. <sub>High</sub> <sub>Tech</sub> (New York: Poer, 1978). 25 Du Gay, P., Hall, S., Janes, L., Maay, H. and Negus, K (eds) <sub>Doing Cultural Studies: The Story of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Sony</sub> <sub>Walkman</sub> (Milrin Keynes: e Open University, 1997). <sup>26 Riesman, D.</sup> The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character <sup>(New Haven: Yale</sup> University Press, 2nd rev. ed., 2001) <sup>27 Postman, N.</sup> Technolopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology <sup>(New York: Vintage Books,</sup> 1993). 28 Postman, 1993, p. 7. 29 See <sub>The Design Journal</sub> 2011; 14 (2) June. 30 Ive, J. ‘e Apple Bites Ba’ <sub>Design</sub> 1998; (1) Autumn: 36–41. <sup>31 Hounshell, D.</sup> From the American System to Mass Production 1800–1932: The Development of <sub>Manufacturing</sub> <sub>Technology</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>US</sub> (Baltimore and London: John Hopkins University Press, 1982). 32 Sparke, P. <sub>Japanese</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Miael Joseph, 1987). <sup>33</sup> <sup>Sabel,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> <sup>F.</sup> Work and Politics: The Division of Labor in Industry <sup>(Cambridge:</sup> <sup>Cambridge</sup> University Press, 1982). 34 Wright, Paul K. <sub>21st</sub> <sub>Century</sub> <sub>Manufacturing</sub> (New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc., 2001). 35 <sub>Brit</sub> <sub>Insurance</sub> <sub>Designs</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Year</sub> (London: Design Museum, 2010), p. 56. 36 Design Museum. Droog Design Collective [hp://designmuseum.org/design/droog] (accessed 17.07.12). 37 Wajcsman, J. <sub>Feminism</sub> <sub>Confronts</sub> <sub>Technology</sub> (Cambridge: Poloty, 1991), p. 137. 38 Sarf, V. ‘Gender and Genius: e Auto Industry and Femininity’ in Martinez, K. and Ames, K. L. The Material Culture of Gender, the Gender of Material Culture <sup>(Wintherthur,</sup> <sup>DE:</sup> <sup>Henry</sup> <sup>Francis</sup> du Pont Wintherthur Museum, 1997), p. 137. <sup>39</sup> <sup>Volvo</sup> <sup>Car</sup> <sup>Corporation.</sup> YCC: Your Concept Car – by Women for Modern People<sup>.</sup> <sup>Press</sup> <sup>Information</sup> [hp://www.volvoclub.org.uk/press/pdf/presskits/YCCPressKit.pdf] (accessed 17.07.12) and Wikipedia. Volvo YCC [hp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volvo\_YCC] (accessed 17.07.12). <sup>40</sup> <sup>Horowitz,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Boys and their Toys? Masculinity, Class and Technology in America <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York</sup> <sup>and</sup> London: Routledge, 2001). <sup>41</sup> <sup>Manzini,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> The Materials of Invention: Materials and Design <sup>(Milan:</sup> <sup>Arcadia,</sup> <sup>1986),</sup> <sup>p.</sup> <sup>66.</sup> 42 Manzini, 1986, p. 68. 43 Antonelli. P. ‘Aluminum and the New Materialism’ in Niols, S. <sub>Aluminum</sub> <sub>by</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2000), p. 185. ## 8 Designer culture 1 See Jason, L. <sub>The New Look: Design in the Fifties</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1991, Jason, L. The Sixties: Decade of Design Revolution <sup>(London: Phaidon, 2000) and Hines, T.</sup> Populuxe: The Look and Life of America in the ‘50s and ‘60s, from Tailfins to TV Dinners to Barbie Dolls and <sub>Fallout Shelters</sub> (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1986). 2 Day, R. ‘At the Robin Days’ in <sub>Daily</sub> <sub>Mail</sub> <sub>Ideal</sub> <sub>Home</sub> <sub>Yearbook</sub> <sub>1953–4</sub> (London: Daily Mail Publication, 1954). 3 Race, E. ‘Design in Modern Furniture’ in <sub>Daily</sub> <sub>Mail</sub> <sub>Ideal</sub> <sub>Home</sub> <sub>Book</sub> <sub>1952–3</sub> (London: Daily Mail Publication, 1953), p. 62. 4 Hard af Segerstad, U. <sub>Scandinavian</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (Stoholm: Nordisk Rotogtavyr, 1961), p. 16. 5 Sparke, P. <sub>Italian</sub> <sub>Design:</sub> <sub>1870</sub> <sub>to</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Present</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1988). <sup>Kirkham,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> Charles and Ray Eames: Designers of the Twentieth Century <sup>(Cambridge,</sup> <sup>MA,</sup> <sup>and</sup> London: MIT Press, 1995). 7 Kirkham, 1995, p. 61. 8 Kaufmann Jr, E. <sub>Introductions</sub> <sub>to</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (New York: e Museum of Modern Art, 1950), p 9. 9 Kaufmann, 1950, p. 8. 10 Bayley, S. <sub>Art</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Industry</sub> (London: Boilerhouse Project, 1982). <sup>11</sup> Kenneth Grange at the Boilerhouse: An Exhibition of British Product Design <sup>(London: Boilerhouse</sup> Project, 1983). 12 See Aloi, R. <sub>L’Arredamento Moderno</sub> (Milan: Hoepli, 1955). 13 See Murgatroyd, K. <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Graphics</sub> (London, Studio Vista, 1969) and Aynsley, J. <sub>A</sub> <sub>Century</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Graphic</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London, Mitell Beazley, 2001). <sup>14</sup> <sup>Banham,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> The Aspen Papers: Twenty Years of Design Theory from the International Design <sub>Conference in Aspen</sub> (London: Pall Mall Press, 1974). 15 Paard, V. <sub>The Hidden Persuaders</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1957), Paard, V. <sub>The Status</sub> <sub>Seekers</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1963) and Paard, V. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Waste-Makers</sub> (London: Longmans, 1961). <sup>16</sup> <sup>Ambasz,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> Italy: The New Domestic Landscape, Achievements and Problems of Italian Design (New York: e Museum of Modern Art, 1972). 17 Foster, H. <sub>Design and Crime</sub> (London and New York: Verso, 2002). 18 Dyer, R. <sub>Stars</sub> (London: British Film Institute, 1992). 19 McDermo, C. <sub>Street</sub> <sub>Style:</sub> <sub>British</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>’80s</sub> (London: Design Council, 1987). 20 Radice, B. and Sosass, E. <sub>Ettore</sub> <sub>Sottsass:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>Critical</sub> <sub>Biography</sub> (New York: Rizzoli, 1993). 21 Sweet, F. <sub>Alessi:</sub> <sub>Art</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Poetry</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1998) and <sub>Alessi</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Factory</sub> (London: Academy Editions, 1998). 22 Boissiere, O. <sub>Philippe</sub> <sub>Starck</sub> (Muni: Tasen, 1991) and Sweet, F. <sub>Philippe</sub> <sub>Starck:</sub> <sub>Subverchic</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Watson-Guptil, 1999). 23 See Sparke, P. <sub>A</sub> <sub>Century</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Car</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Mitell Beazley, 2002). 24 See Wollen, P. and Kerr, J. (eds) <sub>Autopia:</sub> <sub>Cars</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (London: Reaktion Books, 2002). 25 J. Mays, lecture given at the Design Museum, London, 15 August 2002. 26 Bayley, S. Philippe Star’s new reality TV show <sub>The</sub> <sub>Observer</sub> (6 September 2009) [hp://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2009/sep/06/philippe-star-reality-tv-show] (accessed 18.07.12). 27 Nussbaum, B. ‘e Power of Design’ <sub>Bloomberg Businessweek</sub> 2004; May 16: 6–7 [hp://www.businessweek.com/stories/2004-05-16/the-power-of-design] (accessed 18.07.12). 28 Nussbaum, 2004. 29 Brown, T. and Wya, J. <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Thinking</sub> <sub>for</sub> <sub>Social</sub> <sub>Innovation</sub> (Palo Alto: Stanford Social Innovation Review, Winter 2012), p. 32. <sup>30</sup> <sup>Kelley,</sup> <sup>T.,</sup> <sup>Liman,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Peters,</sup> <sup>T.</sup> The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Creativity from IDEO, America’s Leading Design Firm <sup>(New York: Doubleday, 2001).</sup> 31 Julier, G. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Sage, 2000), pp. 22–3. 32 Andersson, N. <sub>Designed in Umeå</sub> (Sweden: Infotain and Infobooks, 2009), p. 14. 33 Andersson, 2009, p. 116. <sup>34 Rose, M.</sup> The Emergence and Practice of Co-design as a Method for Social Sustainability under New <sub>Labour</sub> (Dra PhD thesis, University of East London, Aug. 2011). ## 9 Postmodernism and design 1 Arnheim, R. ‘From Function to Expression’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Aesthetics</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Arty</sub> <sub>Criticism</sub> 1964; Fall: 31. 2 Raymond Loewy, Norman Bel Geddes and others claimed to be following in the footsteps of the European modernists whom they admired. 3 Banham. R. ‘A row-away Aesthetic’ in Sparke, P. (ed.) <sub>Reyner Banham: Design by Choice</sub> (London: Academy Editions. 1980) pp. 90–3. 4 Kaufmann Jr, E. ‘Borax or the Chromium-Plated Calf’ <sub>Architectural</sub> <sub>Review</sub> 1948; August: 88–93. 5 Whiteley, N. <sub>Pop Design: Modernism to Mod</sub> (London: Design Council, 1987), Massey, A. <sub>The</sub> Independent Group: Modernism and Mass Culture in Britain 1945–59 <sup>(Manester:</sup> <sup>Manester</sup> University Press, 1995), Massey, A. and Sparke, P. ‘e Myth of the Independent Group’ in <sub>Block</sub>, (Middlesex University, 10, 1985), pp. 48–56 and Hebdige, D. ‘In Poor Taste: Notes on Pop’ in <sub>Hiding</sub> <sub>in the Light</sub> (London and New York, Routledge, 1988), pp. 116–43. 6 McCale, J. ‘e Expendable Icon’ <sub>Architectural Review</sub> 1959; Feb/Mar. 7 Barthes, R. <sub>Mythologies</sub> (London, Jonathan Cape, 1972), pp. 88, 99. 8 Dorfles, G. <sub>Kitsch</sub> (London: Studio Vista, 1969) and Moles, A. <sub>Le Kitsch</sub> (Paris, Maison Mame, 1971). 9 Boorstin, D. J. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Image</sub> (London: Weidenfeld and Niolson, 1962), p. 186. 10 Boorstin, 1962, p. 16. 11 Masson, P. and orburn, A. ‘Advertising: the American influence on Europe’ in Bigsby, C. W. E. <sup>(ed.)</sup> Superculture: American Popular Culture and Europe <sup>(London: Paul Elek, 1975), p. 98.</sup> 12 See Hoggart, R. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Uses</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Literacy</sub> (New Brunswi and London: Transaction Publishers, 1998) and Williams, R. <sub>Culture and Society 1780–1950</sub> (London: Chao and Windus, 1958). 13 Hughes-Stanton, C. ‘What comes aer Carnaby Street? <sub>Design</sub> 1968; 230 Feb: 42–3. 14 Sparke, P. <sub>Theory</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Age</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Pop</sub> (unpublished PhD thesis, Brighton University, 1975). 15 Sparke, P. <sub>Ettore Sottsass</sub> (London: Design Council, 1982). <sup>16 Venturi, R.</sup> Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture <sup>(New York: Museum of Modern Art,</sup> 1966). <sup>17 Lindinger, H. (intro.)</sup> Hochschüle fur Gestaltung, Ulm: Die Moral der Gegenstande <sup>(Berlin: Ernst &</sup> Sohn, 1987). <sup>18 Lyotard, J. F.</sup> The Post-modern Condition: A Report on Knowledge <sup>(Manester: Manester</sup> University Press, 1984). 19 <sup>ese included Jean-Francois Lyotard’s</sup> The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge<sup>,</sup> originally published in 1979 by Editions de Minuit; Hal Foster (ed.) <sub>The</sub> <sub>Anti-Aesthetic:</sub> <sub>Essays</sub> <sub>on</sub> <sub>postmodern culture</sub> (Port Townsend: Bay Press, 1983); Frederic Jameson’s essay ‘Postmodernism, or the cultural logic of late capitalism’ whi appeared in <sub>New</sub> <sub>Left</sub> <sub>Review</sub> (1984; 146, July/Aug: 53– <sup>92); Andreas Huyssen’s</sup> After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture and Postmodernism (London: MacMillan, 1986); David Harvey <sub>The</sub> <sub>Condition</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Postmodernity</sub> (Oxford: Blawell, 1989); and Linda Huteon <sub>The Politics of Postmodernism</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1989). 20 See Habermas, J. ‘Modernity – An Incomplete Project’ in Foster, H. (ed.) <sub>The</sub> <sub>Anti-Aesthetic:</sub> <sub>Essays</sub> <sub>on</sub> <sub>postmodern</sub> <sub>culture</sub> (Port Townsend: Bay Press, 1983). 21 Wolf, J. <sub>Feminine</sub> <sub>Sentences:</sub> <sub>Essays</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Women</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (Cambridge, Polity Press, 1990), p. 87. <sup>22</sup> <sup>Huyssen,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture and Postmodernism <sup>(London:</sup> Macmillan, 1986). 23 Harvey, 1989, p. 39. <sup>24</sup> <sup>Jamieson,</sup> <sup>1984.</sup> <sup>See</sup> <sup>also</sup> <sup>Bourdieu,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste<sup>.</sup> (London and New York: Routledge, 2010 [1979]). <sup>25</sup> <sup>Douglas,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Isherwood,</sup> <sup>B.</sup> The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropoly of Consumption (London and New York: Routledge, 1996 [1979]). 26 Featherstone, M. <sub>Consumer Culture and Postmodernism</sub> (London: Sage, 1983). <sup>27</sup> <sup>Clarke,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> <sup>J.</sup> Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the 21st Century <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Springer,</sup> <sup>2010)</sup> <sup>28</sup> <sup>Giddens,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age <sup>(California:</sup> Stanford University Press, 1991). 29 Said, E. <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Imperialism</sub> (New York: Vintage Books, 1994). <sup>30</sup> <sup>Jameson,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> <sup>in</sup> <sup>Foster,</sup> <sup>H.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> The Anti-Aesthetic: Essays on postmodern culture <sup>(Port</sup> <sup>Townsend:</sup> Bay Press, 1983), p. 111. <sup>31</sup> <sup>McCraen,</sup> <sup>G.</sup> Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer <sub>Goods</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Activities</sub> (London: John Wiley and Sons, 1990), p. 105. <sup>32</sup> <sup>Jameson,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> <sup>in</sup> <sup>Foster,</sup> <sup>H.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> The Anti-Aesthetic: Essays on postmodern culture <sup>(Port</sup> <sup>Townsend:</sup> Bay Press, 1983), p.113. <sup>33</sup> <sup>Venturi,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Museum</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>Modern</sup> <sup>Art,</sup> 1966). <sup>34</sup> <sup>Venturi,</sup> <sup>R.,</sup> <sup>Sco-Brown,</sup> <sup>D.,</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Izenour,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> Learning from Las Vegas: The forgotten Symbolism of <sub>Architectural</sub> <sub>Form</sub> Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1972). 35 Jens, C. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Language</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Post-Modern</sub> <sub>Architecture</sub> (London: Academy Editions, 1977), p. 96. 36 See Collins, M. and Papadakis, A. <sub>Post-Modern</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Academy Editions, 1989). 37 See Sparke, P. <sub>Japanese</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London, Miael Joseph, 1987). <sup>38</sup> <sup>Multi-disciplinary</sup> <sup>Design</sup> <sup>Network.</sup> Lessons from America: Report on the Multi-disciplinary Design Education Fact-Finding Visit to the United States <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Design</sup> <sup>Council,</sup> <sup>2006).</sup> 39 Multi-disciplinary Design Network, 2006. 40 Multi-disciplinary Design Network, 2006. ## 10 Rede<sup>fi</sup>ning identities 1 Huygen, F. <sub>British</sub> <sub>Design:</sub> <sub>Image</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Identity</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1989), pp. 19, 23. 2 <sup>Sparke, P. (ed.)</sup> Did Britain Make It? British Design in Context, 1946–86 <sup>(London: e Design</sup> Council, 1986). 3 Oram, S. ‘Constructing Contemporary’: Common-sense Approaes to ‘Going Modern’ in the 1950s’ in McKellar, S. and Sparke, P. (eds) <sub>Interior</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Identity</sub> (Manester: Manester University Press, 2004). 4 McFadden, D. <sub>Scandinavian</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1982). 5 McFadden, 1982, p. 21. 6 Hard Af Segerstad, U. <sub>Scandinavian</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Studio Books, 1961). <sup>7 Pulos. A.</sup> The American Design Ethic <sup>and</sup> The American Design Adventure <sup>(Cambridge, MA: MIT</sup> Press, 1983 and 1988). 8 Sparke, P. <sub>Italian Design, 1879 to the Present</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1988) and <sub>Japanese</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Miael Joseph, 1987). 9 <sup>Sabel,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> <sup>F.</sup> Work and Politics: The Division of Labour in Industry <sup>(Cambridge:</sup> <sup>Cambridge</sup> University Press, 1982). 10 Sparke, P. ‘Nature, Cra, Domesticity and the Culture of Consumption: e Feminine Face of Design in Italy 1945–60’ <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Italy</sub> 1999; 4 (1): 59–78. 11 See Bayley, S. <sub>Coca-Cola</sub> <sub>1886–1986:</sub> <sub>Designing</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>Megabrand</sub> (London: e Boilerhouse, 1986). 12 Bayley, 1986, p. 63. 13 Bayley, 1986, p. 62. 14 Hobsbawm, E. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Invention</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Tradition</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992). <sup>15</sup> Design Francais 1960–1990: Trois Décennies <sup>(Paris:</sup> <sup>Centre</sup> <sup>Georges</sup> <sup>Pompidou,</sup> <sup>1990).</sup> <sup>16</sup> <sup>Narotzky,</sup> <sup>V.</sup> An Acquired Taste: The Consumption of Design in Barcelona, 1975–1992 <sup>(unpublished</sup> PhD thesis, Royal College of Art, London, 2003). <sup>17</sup> <sup>Wright,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> On Living in an Old Country: The National Past in Contemporary Britain <sup>(London:</sup> Verso, 1985). p. 2. <sup>18</sup> <sup>Hewison,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Methuen,</sup> <sup>1987),</sup> <sup>p.</sup> <sup>24.</sup> <sup>19 Crowley, D.</sup> National Style and National State: Design in Poland from the Vernacular Revival to the <sub>International</sub> <sub>Style</sub> (Manester: Manester University Press, 1992). 20 Foxconn Electronics Co. About Foxconn [hp://www.foxconn.com/CompanyIntro.html] (accessed 19.07.12) and [hp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foxconn] (accessed 19.07.12). 21 Lenovo Group Ltd [hp://www.lenovo.com/uk/en/] (accessed 19.07.12) and [hp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lenovo] (accessed 19.07.12). 22 Beijing National Stadium [hp://www.n-s.cn/en/] (accessed 19.07.12) and [hp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beijing\_National\_Stadium] (accessed 19.07.12). 23 oted in Franklyn, S., Lury, C., and Stacey, J. <sub>Global Nature, Global Culture</sub> (London: Sage, 2000), p. 2. 24 Zygmunt Bauman term ‘neo-tribes’ is referred to in Warde, A. ‘Consumers, Identity and Belonging: Reflections on Some eses of Zygmunt Bauman’ in Keat, R., Whiteley, N. and Abercrombie, N. (eds) <sub>The</sub> <sub>Authority</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Consumer</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1994), p. 58. 25 Oliver, T. <sub>The Real Coke: The Real Story</sub> (London: Elm Tree, 1986), Pendergast, M. <sub>For God, Country</sub> <sub>and Coca-Cola</sub> (London: Weidenfeld and Niolson, 1993) and Miller, D. ‘Coca-Cola: a bla sweet drink from Trinidad’ in Miller, D. (ed). <sub>Material Cultures: Why Some Things Matter</sub> (London: UCl Press, 1998). 26 Falk, P. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Consuming</sub> <sub>Body</sub> (London: Sage, 1994), pp. 180–2 and ‘e Beneon-Toscani Efect: Testing the Limits of Conventional Advertising’ in Nava, M., Blake, A., MacRury, I. and Riards. <sup>B.</sup> Buy This Book: Studies in Advertising and Consumption <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Routledge,</sup> 1997) and Lury, C. ‘e United Colors of Diversity’ in Franklin, S., Lury, C. and Stacey, J. (eds) <sub>Global</sub> <sub>Nature,</sub> <sub>Global</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (London: Sage, 2000), pp. 146–87. 27 Lury, 2000, p. 167. 28 Du Gay, P., Hall, S., Janes, L., Maay, H. and Negus, K. (eds) <sub>Doing</sub> <sub>Cultural</sub> <sub>Studies:</sub> <sub>The</sub> <sub>Story</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the Sony Walkman</sub> (Milton Keynes: e Open University Press, 1997). 29 <sub>Newdesign</sub> <sub>Magazine</sub> (London: Design Council, July/August, 2002), p. 22. 30 Kirkham, P. (ed.) <sub>The</sub> <sub>Gendered</sub> <sub>Object</sub> (Manester and New York: Manester University Press, <sup>1996)</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Martinez,</sup> <sup>K.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Ames,</sup> <sup>K.</sup> <sup>L.</sup> <sup>(eds)</sup> The Material Culture of Gender: The Gender of 31 Kirkham, 1996, p. 199. <sub>Material</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (Winterthur, Delaware: Henry Francis de Pont Wintherthur Museum, 1997). 32 Kirkham, 1996, p. 205.