Bibliography ## Introduction Since the 1986 publication, the subjects of ‘design’ and ‘material culture’ have been discussed more widely in the English-speaking world than they had been before that date and a number of books have emerged whi take a broad, analytical/critical approa to the subjects. ese include: Adamson, G. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Craft</sub> <sub>Reader</sub> (London: Berg, 2009). <sup>Afield,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> Wild Things: The Material Culture of Everyday Life <sup>(Oxford</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Berg,</sup> <sup>2000).</sup> Clark, H. and Brody, D. <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Studies:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>Reader</sub> (London: Berg, 2009). <sup>Dormer, P.</sup> The Meanings of Modern Design: Towards the Twenty-First Century <sup>(London: ames and</sup> Hudson, 1990). Fallan, K. <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> (London: Berg, 2010). Foster, H. <sub>Design</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Crime</sub> <sub>(and</sub> <sub>other</sub> <sub>diatribes)</sub> (London and New York: Verso, 2002). Heske, J. <sub>Toothpicks</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Logos:</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Everyday</sub> <sub>Life</sub> (Oxford: Oxford University press, 2002). Highmore, B. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>Reader</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 2008). <sup>Inns,</sup> <sup>T.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> Designing for the 21st Century: Interdisciplinary Questions and Insights <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Gower,</sup> 2010). Julier, G. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Sage, 2000). Kwint, M., Breward, C. and Aynsley, J. <sub>Material</sub> <sub>Memories:</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Evocation</sub> (Oxford: Berg, 1999). Lees-Mafei, G. and Houze, R. (eds) <sub>The Design History Reader</sub> (London: Berg, 2010). Margolin, V. (ed.) <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Discourse:</sub> <sub>History,</sub> <sub>Theory,</sub> <sub>Criticism</sub> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989). <sup>Margolin,</sup> <sup>V.</sup> The Politics of the Artificial: Essays on Design and Design Studies <sup>(Chicago</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>London:</sup> Chicago University Press, 2002). Raizman, D. <sub>History</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Laurence King, 2010). Sparke, P. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Genius</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: adrille Publishing), 2010. Walker, J. Design History and the History of Design (London: Pluto Press, 1989). Woodham, J. <sub>Twentieth-Century</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997. A number of overviews of design in the twentieth century have also emerged, most of them focusing on a single design discipline. ese include: Aynsley, J. <sub>A</sub> <sub>Century</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Graphic</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Mitell Beazley, 2001). Breward, C. <sub>Fashion</sub> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003). <sup>Calloway,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> Twentieth-Century Decoration: The Domestic Interior from 1900 to the Present Day (London: Weidenfeld and Niolson, 1988). <sup>Crowley,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Jobling,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> Graphic Design: Reproduction and Representation since 1800 <sup>(Manester:</sup> Manester University Press, 1996). Doordan, D. P. <sub>Twentieth-Century Architecture</sub> (London: Lawrence King, 2001). <sup>Edwards, C.</sup> Twentieth-Century Furniture: Materials, Manufacture and Markets <sup>(Manester:</sup> Manester University Press, 1994). <sup>Forty,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Objects of Desire: Design and Society 1750–1980 <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>ames</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Hudson,</sup> <sup>1986).</sup> Massey, A. <sub>Interior</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>20th</sub> <sub>Century</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1990). Pile, J. <sub>A History of Interior Design</sub> (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2000). Sparke, P. <sub>A</sub> <sub>Century</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Car</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Mitell Beazley, 2002). Sparke, P. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Interior</sub> (London: Reaktion Books, 2008). <sup>Sparke,</sup> <sup>P.,</sup> <sup>Keeble,</sup> <sup>T.,</sup> <sup>Martin,</sup> <sup>B.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Massey,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Designing the Modern Interior: From the Victorians to <sub>the</sub> <sub>Present</sub> <sub>Day</sub> (London, Berg, 2009). Mu of the work in the areas of design history and material culture undertaken over the last two decades has adopted a cultural slant. While a wide range of cultural issues have been focused upon, that of ‘identity’ has tended to dominate debates, especially in relation to gender but also, albeit to a lesser extent to date, in relation to race and ethnicity, especially in the context of post-imperialism and the unification of Europe. Class issues remain important to design historical work as well. Work on the relationship between women and design and material culture, influenced by concurrent work being undertaken within cultural studies, has been especially visible in the last two decades. Publications in this area include: Afield, J. ‘Feminist Critiques of Design’ in Walker, J. <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>History</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Pluto Press, 1989). <sup>Afield, J. and Kirkham, P.</sup> A View from the Interior: Feminism, Women and Design <sup>(London: e</sup> Woman’s Press, 1989). Buley, C. ‘Made in Patriary: Towards a Feminist Analysis of Women in Design’ <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Issues</sub> 1986; 3 (2): 251–62. Davis, F. <sub>Fashion, Culture and Identity</sub> (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1992). De Grazia, V. and Furlough, E. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Sex</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Things</sub> (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996). Evans, C. and ornton, M. <sub>Women</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Fashion:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>New</sub> <sub>Look</sub> (London: artet, 1989). <sup>Ferguson.</sup> <sup>M.</sup> Forever Feminine; Women’s Magazines and the Cult of Femininity <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Heinemann,</sup> 1983). Kirkham, P. (ed.) <sub>The</sub> <sub>Gendered</sub> <sub>Object</sub> (Manester and New York: Manester University Press, 1996). <sup>Martinez,</sup> <sup>K.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Ames,</sup> <sup>K.</sup> <sup>L.</sup> The Material Culture of Gender: The Gender of Material Culture (Winthertur, Delaware: Henry Francis du Pont Wintherthur Museum, 1997). McKellar, S. and Sparke, P. (eds) <sub>Interior</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Identity</sub> (Manester: Manester University Press, 2004). <sup>Sparke,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> As Long as It’s Pink: The Sexual Politics of Taste <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Pandora,</sup> <sup>1995).</sup> Most significantly, in relation to this publication, an enormous body of theoretical work emanating from tangential disciplines – including cultural studies, sociology, consumption theory, anthropology, social psyology, literary studies and cultural geography – has had a dramatic impact on the way in whi work on the subjects of design and material culture has been undertaken. Among the many – too numerous to list here – important and useful studies are the following: <sup>Apparudai,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective <sup>(Cambridge:</sup> Cambridge University Press, 1986). Baudrillard, J. <sub>The</sub> <sub>System</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Objects</sub> (London: Verso, 1996). <sup>Bourdieu, P.</sup> Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste <sup>(London and New York:</sup> Routledge, 1986). <sup>Campbell, C.</sup> The Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of Modern Consumerism <sup>(London: Basil Blawell,</sup> 1987). Dimar, H. ‘Gender Identity: relation meanings of personal possessions’ <sub>British</sub> <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Social</sub> <sub>Psychology</sub> 1989; 28: 159–71. <sup>Douglas,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Isherwood,</sup> <sup>B.</sup> The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption (London and New York: Routledge, 1996). <sup>Ewen, S.</sup> All Consuming Images: The Politics of Style in Contemporary Culture <sup>(New York: Basic</sup> Books, 1988). Falk, P. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Consuming</sub> <sub>Body</sub> (London: Sage, 1994). Fine, B. and Leopold, E. <sub>The</sub> <sub>World</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Consumption</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1993). Fiske <sub>Understanding Popular Culture</sub> (London: Routledge, 1989). Haug, W. F. <sub>Critique</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Commodity</sub> <sub>Aesthetics</sub> (Cambridge: Polity, 1986). Hebdige, D. <sub>Hiding</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Light:</sub> <sub>On</sub> <sub>Images</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Things</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1988). <sup>Huyssen,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture and Postmodernism <sup>(London:</sup> Macmillan, 1986). <sup>Lund,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Livingstone,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> <sup>M.</sup> Mass Consumption and Personal Identity: Everyday Economic <sub>Experience</sub> (Buingham and Philadelphia: Open University Press, 1992). <sup>McCraen, G.</sup> Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer <sub>Goods</sub> (Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1988). <sup>McDowell,</sup> <sup>L.</sup> Gender, Identity and Place: Understanding Feminist Geographies <sup>(Cambridge:</sup> <sup>Polity,</sup> 1999). Miller, D. <sub>Material</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Mass</sub> <sub>Consumption</sub> (Oxford: Basil Blawell, 1987). <sup>Mort,</sup> <sup>F.</sup> Cultures of Consumption: Masculinities and Social Space in Late Twentieth-Century Britain (London and New York: Routledge, 1996). <sup>Stewart, S.</sup> On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Collection (Durham and London: Duke University Press, 1993). <sup>Sudjic,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> The Language of Things: Design, Luxury, Fashion, Art: How We are Seduced by the Things <sub>Around</sub> <sub>Us</sub> (London: Penguin, 2011). e emergence of important journals – <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> <sub>Journal</sub> (Oxford University Press) and <sub>Design</sub> Issues: History, Theory, Criticism <sup>(MIT</sup> <sup>Press),</sup> The Design Journal <sup>(Berg)</sup>, Fashion Theory <sup>(Berg),</sup> <sub>Home</sub> <sub>Cultures</sub> (Berg) and <sub>Interiors</sub> (Berg) – has helped to provide an outlet for work in this area. ## 1 Consuming modernity ## Recommended reading Many books deal with the relationship between consumer culture, material culture and modernity. While some focus on it through a single area of material culture, be it advertising, magazines, retailing or fashion, others, su as Don Slater’s <sub>Consumer Culture and Modernity</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997) provide useful overviews; Simon J. Bronner’s book of edited essays, Accumulation and Display of Goods in America, 1880–1920 <sup>(New York and London: W. W. Norton and</sup> Company, 1989) shows how consumer culture and material culture worked together in the USA; Elizabeth Wilson’s two books – <sub>Adorned</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Dreams:</sub> <sub>Fashion</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Modernity</sub> (London: Virago, 1985) <sup>and</sup> The Sphinx in the City: Urban life, the Control of Disorder and Women <sup>(London: Virago. 1991) –</sup> deal with issues relating to fashion, gender, the urban landscape and modernity; in <sub>Lands of Desire:</sub> Merchants, Power and the Rise of a New American Culture <sup>(New York: Vintage Books, 1994), William</sup> Lea focuses on the impact of the visual culture of the department store on the American urban landscape; while ad Logan, in <sub>The Victorian Parlour; A Cultural Study</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), provides a model for a cultural analysis of a room in the private sphere. ## Further reading Adburnham, E. S. <sub>Shops and Shopping 1800–1914</sub> (London: Allen and Unwin, 1981). <sup>Beetham,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> A Magazine of her Own: Domesticity and Desire in the Woman’s Magazine, 1800–1914 (London and New York: Routledge, 1996). <sup>Berman, M.</sup> All That is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity <sup>(New (New York: Simon and</sup> Suster, 1982). <sup>Bowlby,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Carried Away: The Invention of Modern Shopping <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Haber</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Faber,</sup> <sup>2000).</sup> Bowlby, R. <sub>Shopping</sub> <sub>with</sub> <sub>Freud</sub> (London: Routledge, 1993). <sup>Bryden, I. and Floyd, J. (eds)</sup> Domestic Space: Reading the Nineteenth-Century Interior <sup>(Manester</sup> and New York: Manester University Press, 1999). <sup>Bushman,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> The Refinement of America: Persons, Houses, Cities <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Vintage</sup> <sup>Books,</sup> <sup>1993).</sup> Chaney, D. ‘e Department Store as a Cultural Form’ <sub>Theory,</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Society</sub> 1983; 1 (3): 22–31. <sup>Davidof, L. and Hall, C.</sup> Family Fortunes: Men and Women of the English Middle Class, 1780–1850 (London: Routledge, 1987). <sup>Ewen, S.</sup> Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and the Social Roots of Consumer Culture <sup>(New York:</sup> McGraw Hill, 1977). <sup>Forde.</sup> <sup>K.</sup> Hope in a Jar: The Making of America’s Beauty Culture <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Henry</sup> <sup>Holt</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Co.</sup> <sup>Inc.,</sup> 1998). Fraser. W. H. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Coming</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Mass</sub> <sub>Market,</sub> <sub>1850–1914</sub> (London and Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1981). <sup>Frederi,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> Selling Mrs. Consumer: Christine Frederick and The Rise of Household Efficiency <sup>(New</sup> York: Business Bourse, 1929). <sup>Frisby, D.</sup> Fragments of Modernity: Theories of Modernity in the Work of Simmel, Kracauer and <sub>Benjamin</sub> (Cambridge: Polity, 1985). Gliman, L. B. (ed.) <sub>Consumer Society in American History: A Reader</sub> (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1999). <sup>Grier, K. C.</sup> Culture and Comfort: People, Parlors and Upholstery 1850–1930 <sup>(New York: e Stron</sup> Museum, 1988). <sup>Harris,</sup> <sup>N.</sup> <sup>‘e</sup> <sup>Drama</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>Consumer</sup> <sup>Desire’</sup> <sup>in</sup> Cultural Excursions: Marketing Appetites and Cultural <sub>Tastes</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>America</sub> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990). Hine, T. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Total</sub> <sub>Package</sub> (Boston: Lile, Brown and Company, 1995). Jefreys, J. B. <sub>Retail</sub> <sub>Trading</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Britain</sub> <sub>1850–1950</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1954). Laermans, R. ‘Learning to Consume: Early Department Stores and the Shaping of the Modern Consumer Culture (1860–1914)’ <sub>Theory,</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Society</sub> 1993; 10 (4): 79–102. <sup>Marand, R.</sup> Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity 1920–1940 <sup>(Berkeley:</sup> University of California Press, 1985). <sup>Mason,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Conspicuous Consumption: A Study of Exceptional Consumer Behaviour <sup>(Hampshire:</sup> Gower, 1981). <sup>Miller,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> <sup>B.</sup> The Bon Marche: Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store, 1869–1920 <sup>(Princeton,</sup> <sup>NJ:</sup> Princeton University Press, 1981). <sup>Rappaport,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> <sup>D.</sup> Shopping for Pleasure: Women in the Making of London’s West End <sup>(Princeton,</sup> <sup>New</sup> Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2000). <sup>Riards,</sup> <sup>T.</sup> The Commodity Culture of Victorian England: Advertising and Spectacle 1851–1914 (London and New York: Verso, 1990). Saint, A. (introduction) <sub>London Suburbs</sub> (London: Merrill Holberton, 1999). <sup>Scanlon, J.</sup> Inarticulate Longings: The Ladies Home Journal, Gender and the Promise of Consumer <sub>Culture</sub> (New York and London: Routledge, 1995). <sup>Strasser,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> Satisfaction Guaranteed: The Making of the American Mass Market <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Pantheon</sup> Books, 1989). Tester. K (ed.) <sub>The Flaneur</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1994). Veblen, T. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Theory</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Leisure</sub> <sub>Class</sub> (London: Unwin, 1970). ## 2 The impact of technology ## Recommended reading e most important book to deal with the story of American industrialization and its efect upon material culture is, without doubt, David Hounshell’s <sub>From the American System to Mass Production</sub> 1800–1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the US <sup>(Baltimore and London: John</sup> Hopkins University Press, 1982), although he stops short of an analysis of ‘design’. S. Giedion’s Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History <sup>(New York: Norton, 1949) was</sup> an early aempt to look ba at the efects of industrialization on the material culture of the USA. Ruth Swartz Cowan’s ‘e Industrial Revolution in the Home: Household Tenology and Social Change in the 20th Century’ in <sub>Technology</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (vol. 17, no. 1, Jan. 1976) provides a useful overview of the efects of tenology in the domestic sphere. On the subjects of materials and modernity, the two most useful books are J. Meikle’s <sub>American</sub> <sub>Plastic:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>Cultural</sub> <sub>History</sub> (New Brunswi: Rutgers University Press, 1995) and Niols, S. <sub>Aluminum by Design</sub> (New York: Harry N. <sup>Abrams,</sup> <sup>2000),</sup> <sup>pp.</sup> <sup>12–140.</sup> <sup>Robert</sup> <sup>Friedel’s</sup> <sup>book,</sup> Pioneer Plastic: The Making and Selling of Celluloid (Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 1983), is also an important source. ## Further reading Arnold, E. and Burr, L. ‘Housework and the Appliance of Science’ in Failkner, W. and Arnold, E. (eds) <sub>Smothered</sub> <sub>by</sub> <sub>Invention</sub> (London: Pluto Press, 1985). Bayley, S. <sub>Harley</sub> <sub>Earl</sub> (London: Trefoil, 1990). Beeer, C. and Stowe, H. B. <sub>The</sub> <sub>American</sub> <sub>Woman’s</sub> <sub>Home</sub> (New York: J. B. Ford and Co., 1870). Bullo, N. ‘First the Kiten – en the Façade’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1988; 1 (3 and 4): 177–92. Cliford, H. and Turner, R. ‘Modern Metal’ in Greenhalgh, P. (ed.) <sub>Art</sub> <sub>Nouveau</sub> <sub>1890–1914</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). <sup>Cowan,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> <sup>S.</sup> More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the <sub>Microwave</sub> (New York: Basic Books, 1983). De Wolfe, E. <sub>The</sub> <sub>House</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Good</sub> <sub>Taste</sub> (New York: Century, 1913). Dubois, J. H. <sub>Plastics History USA</sub> (Boston: Cahners, 1972). <sup>Frederi,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> Household Engineering and Scientific Management in the Home <sup>(Chicago:</sup> <sup>American</sup> Sool of Home Economics, 1919). <sup>Frederi,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> The New Housekeeping: Efficiency Studies in Home Management <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Garden</sup> City, Doubleday Page, 1913). Horowitz, R. and Mohun, A. (eds) His and Hers: Gender, Consumption and Technology (Charloesville and London: e University of Virginia Press, 1998). <sup>Ierley,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> The Comforts of Home: The American House and the Evolution of Modern Convenience (New York: ree Rivers Press, 1999). Katz, S. <sub>Plastics: Design and Materials</sub> (London: Studio Vista, 1978). Kaufman, M. <sub>The First Century of Plastics</sub> (London: Plastics Institute, 1963). <sup>Lupton,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Abbo</sup> <sup>Miller,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> The Bathroom, the Kitchen and the Aesthetics of Waste: A Process of <sub>Elimination</sub> (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1992). MacKenzie, D. and Wajcman, J. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Social</sub> <sub>Shaping</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Technology</sub> (Milton Keynes and Philadelphia: Open University Press, 1985). <sup>Mayr,</sup> <sup>O.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Post,</sup> <sup>R.C.</sup> <sup>(eds)</sup> Yankee Enterprise: The Rise of the American System of Manufactures (Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1981). Meikle, J. ‘New Materials and Tenologies’ in Benton, T., Benton, C. and Wood, G. <sub>Art</sub> <sub>Deco</sub> <sub>1910–</sub> <sub>1919</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2003). Sparke, P. <sub>Electrical</sub> <sub>Appliances</sub> (London: Bell and Hyman, 1987). <sup>Stage,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Vincenti,</sup> <sup>V.</sup> <sup>B.</sup> <sup>(eds)</sup> Rethinking Home Economics: Women and the History of a Profession (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1997). Strasser, S. <sub>Never</sub> <sub>Done:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>History</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>American</sub> <sub>Housework</sub> (New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1982). ## 3 <sup></sup>e designer for industry ## Recommended reading ere is a paucity of literature on the important subject of the emergence of the designer for industry and the cultural ramifications of that modern phenomenon. My book, <sub>Consultant Design: The History</sub> <sub>and Practice of the Designer in Industry</sub> (London: Pembridge Press, 1983), ofers a brief, albeit dated, introduction to the subject, while my essay, ‘From a Lipsti to a Steamship: e Growth of the American Industrial Design Profession’ in Bishop, T. (ed.) <sub>Design History: Fad or Function?</sub> (London: Design Council, 1878), serves to open up the discussion about the origins about the modern industrial <sup>designer. Jefrey Meikle’s</sup> Twentieth-Century Limited: Industrial Design in America 1925–1939 (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1979) is still the best subject on the inter-war American designer for industry seen from a cultural perspective, while Gregory Votolato’s <sub>American</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the Twentieth Century</sub> (Manester: Manester University Press, 1998) is a good complement to it. <sup>Isabelle</sup> <sup>Anscombe’s</sup> A Woman’s Touch: Women in Design from 1860 to the Present Day <sup>(London:</sup> Virago, 1984) is a useful introduction to all the female designers who have been le out of the picture. ## Further reading Bel Geddes, N. <sub>Horizons</sub> (New York: Dover Publications, 1977). Buley, C. ‘Design, Femininity, and Modernism: Interpreting the work of Susie Cooper’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1994; 7 (4): 277–93). <sup>Callen,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Angel in the Studio: Women in the Arts and Crafts Movement <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Astragal</sup> <sup>Books,</sup> 1979). Campbell, N. and Seebohm, C. <sub>Elsie</sub> <sub>de</sub> <sub>Wolfe:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>Decorative</sub> <sub>Life</sub> (London: Aurum Press, 1992). Cheney, S. and M. <sub>Art and the Machine</sub> (New York: McGraw Hill, 1936). <sup>Clark,</sup> <sup>H.</sup> The Role of the Designer in the Early Mass Production Industry <sup>(unpublished</sup> <sup>PhD</sup> <sup>thesis:</sup> University of Brighton, 1982). De la Haye, A. and Tobin, S. <sub>Chanel:</sub> <sub>The</sub> <sub>Couturiere</sub> <sub>at</sub> <sub>Work</sub> (London: Overlook Press, 1994). De Marly, D. <sub>Worth: Father of Haute Couture</sub> (London: Elm Tree Books, 1980). Dreyfuss, H. <sub>Designing for People</sub> (New York: Viking Press, 1955). <sup>Flinum,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Henry Dreyfuss, Industrial Designer: The Man in the Brown Suit <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Cooper-</sup> Hewi, National Design Museum and Rizzoli, 1997). Halen, S. <sub>Christopher Dresser</sub> (London: Phaidon, 1990). <sup>Hampton,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> Legendary Decorators of the Twentieth Century <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Doubleday,</sup> <sup>1992).</sup> Howe, K. S., Frelinghuysen, A. C. and Voorsanger, C. H. (eds) <sub>Herter</sub> <sub>Brothers,</sub> <sub>Furniture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Interiors</sub> <sub>for a Gilded Age</sub> (New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., Publishers, in association with the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, 1995). Loewy, P. <sub>Never</sub> <sub>Leave</sub> <sub>Well</sub> <sub>Enough</sub> <sub>Alone</sub> (New York: Simon and Suster, 1951). <sup>Naylor,</sup> <sup>G.</sup> The Arts and Crafts Movement: A Study of its Sources, Ideals ands Influence on Design <sub>Theory</sub> (London: Studio Vista, 1971). <sup>Pe,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Irish,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> Candace Wheeler: The Art and Enterprise of American Design 1875–1900 <sup>(New</sup> York: e Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2002). Pulos, A. <sub>The</sub> <sub>American</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Ethic</sub> (Cambridge, Mass: e MIT Press, 1983). Riards, C. <sub>Art in Industry</sub> (New York: Macmillan, 1922). Swartz, F. ‘Commodity Signs: Peter Behrens, the AEG and the Trademark’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1996; 9 (3): 153–84. <sup>Seddon,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Worden,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> Women Designing: Redefining Design in Britain Between the Wars (Brighton: University of Brighton, 1991). Sloan, A. J. <sub>My</sub> <sub>Years</sub> <sub>at</sub> <sub>General</sub> <sub>Motors</sub> (New York: Macfadden-Bartell, 1965). <sup>Teague, W. D.</sup> Design This Day: The Technique of Order in the Machine Age <sup>(London: Studio</sup> Publications, 1946). omson, E.M. ‘“e Science of Publicity”: An American Advertising eory’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1996; 9 (4): 253–72. Van Doren, H. <sub>Industrial Design: A Practical Guide</sub> (New York: McGraw Hill, 1940). <sup>Weltge, S. W.</sup> Bauhaus Textiles: Women Artists and the Weaving Workshop <sup>(London: ames and</sup> Hudson, 1998). ## 4 Modernism and design ## Recommended reading e literature relating to the subject of modern aritecture and its theoretical underpinnings is extensive but that relating to modern design is less so. Because early twentieth-century design thinking took its lead from aritecture a dependency on that literature exists to a significant extent. us Reyner Banham’s <sub>Theory</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>First</sub> <sub>Machine</sub> <sub>Age</sub> (London: Aritectural Press, 1960) is a seminal text on this context as is Benton, T. and C. and Sharp, D. (eds) <sub>Form</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Function:</sub> <sub>A</sub> Source Book for a History of Architecture and Design 1890–1939 <sup>(London: Crosby, Lowood and</sup> Staples, 1975), whi, although wrien some time ago, still provides a useful introduction to a study of modernist design. Paul Greenhalgh’s book of edited essays, <sub>Modernism</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Reaktion Books, 1990), is the only one to focus directly on the relationship between this broad-based cultural <sup>movement and design, while Mark Wigley’s</sup> White Walls, Designer Dresses: The Fashioning of Modern <sub>Architecture</sub> (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1995) is a more critical, retrospective analysis of aritectural and design modernism. ## Further reading Bojko, S. <sub>New</sub> <sub>Graphic</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Revolutionary</sub> <sub>Russia</sub> (New York and Washington: Praeger, 1972). Bourke, J. ‘e Great Male Renunciation: Men’s Dress Reform in inter-war Britain’ <sub>Journal of Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1996; 9 (1): 23–33. Burnam, B. ‘Beer and Brighter Clothes: e Men’s Dress Reform Party’ <sub>Journal of Design History</sub> 1995; 8 (4): 275–90. <sup>Collins,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture, 1750–1950 <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Faber</sup> <sup>And</sup> <sup>Faber,</sup> <sup>1965).</sup> <sup>Colomina, B.</sup> Privacy and Publicity: Modern Architecture as Mass Media <sup>(Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press,</sup> 1994). Colomina, B. <sub>Sexuality</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Space</sub> (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton Aritectural Press, 1992). <sup>Conrads,</sup> <sup>U.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> Programmes and Manifestoes on Twentieth-Century Architecture <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Lund</sup> Humphries, 1970). De Zurko, E. R. <sub>Origins</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Functionalist</sub> <sub>Theory</sub> (New York: Columbia University Press, 1957). Frampton, K. <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Architecture:</sub> <sub>A</sub> <sub>Critical</sub> <sub>History</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1985). Greenhalgh, P. (ed.) <sub>Art Nouveau 1890–1914</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). <sup>Greenough,</sup> <sup>H.</sup> Form and Function: Remarks on Art, Design and Architecture <sup>(Los</sup> <sup>Angeles:</sup> <sup>University</sup> of Californian Press, 1969). Gropius, W. <sub>The New Architecture and the Bauhaus</sub> (London: Faber and Faber, 1968). Jens, C. <sub>Modern Movements in Architecture</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973). Le Corbusier <sub>The</sub> <sub>Decorative</sub> <sub>Art</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Today</sub> (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1987). Le Corbusier <sub>Towards</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>New</sub> <sub>Architecture</sub> (London: e Aritectural Press, 1974). <sup>Loos,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Spoken into the Void: Collected Essays 1897–1900 <sup>(Cambridge,</sup> <sup>MA:</sup> <sup>MIT</sup> <sup>Press,</sup> <sup>1982).</sup> Naylor, G. ‘Swedish Grace … or the Acceptable Face of Modernism’ in Greenhalgh, P. <sub>Modernism</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Reaktion Books, 1990), pp. 15–20. <sup>Naylor,</sup> <sup>G.</sup> The Bauhaus Re-Assessed: Sources and Design Theory <sup>(London;</sup> <sup>Herbert</sup> <sup>Press,</sup> <sup>1985).</sup> <sup>Overy,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> Light, Air and Openness: Modern Architecture Between the Wars <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>ames</sup> <sup>and</sup> Hudson, 2008). <sup>Pevsner,</sup> <sup>N.</sup> Pioneers of Modern Design: From William Morris to Walter Gropius <sup>(Harmondsworth:</sup> Penguin, 1960). <sup>Saefer,</sup> <sup>H.</sup> Nineteenth-Century Modern: The Functional Tradition in Victorian Design <sup>(London:</sup> Studio Vista, 1970). Steadman, P. <sub>The Evolution of Design</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979). Troy, N. <sub>The</sub> <sub>De</sub> <sub>Stijl</sub> <sub>Environment</sub> (Cambridge, Mass: e MIT Press, 1983). ## 5 Designing identities ## Recommended reading A number of studies have focused on design as an ideological tool in the hands of nations. Paul <sup>Greenhalgh’s</sup> Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions, and World’s Fairs <sub>1851–1939</sub> (Manester: Manester University Press, 1988) provides an overview of all the important exhibitions in the first half of the twentieth century at whi design made an appearance. Wendy <sup>Caplan’s collection of essays, entitled</sup> Designing Modernity: The Arts of Reform and Persuasion 1885– <sub>1945</sub> (Miami and London: Wolfsonian/ames and Hudson, 1995) is a useful account of the ways in whi a number of nations sought to exploit the links between design and modernity. In his book, <sub>Design in Germany 1870–1918</sub> (London: Trefoil, 1986), John Heske explores Germany’s strategic <sup>relationship</sup> <sup>with</sup> <sup>modern</sup> <sup>design</sup> <sup>while,</sup> <sup>in</sup> Designs on Modernity: Exhibiting the City in 1920s Paris (Manester: Manester University Press, 1998), Tag Gronberg shows how France developed a quite diferent model of modernity through design. ## Further reading Aynsley, J. <sub>Graphic</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Germany</sub> <sub>1890–1945</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 2000). <sup>Burhardt,</sup> <sup>L.</sup> The Werkbund: Studies in the History and Ideology of the Deutcher Werkbund <sup>(London:</sup> Design Council, 1980). Bush, D. <sub>The Streamlined Decade</sub> (New York: George Braziller, 1975). Calkins, E. ‘Beauty, the New Business Tool’ <sub>The</sub> <sub>Atlantic</sub> <sub>Monthly</sub> 1927; 14 August: 145–6. <sup>Campbell, J.</sup> The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts <sup>(Princeton, New</sup> Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1978). Commune di Milano <sub>L’anni</sub> <sub>trenta,</sub> <sub>arte</sub> <sub>e</sub> <sub>cultura</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Italia</sub> (Milan: Mazoa, 1982). Crowley, D. ‘Budapest: International Metropolis and National Capital’ in Greenhalgh, P. <sub>Art</sub> <sub>Nouveau</sub> <sub>1890–1914</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). Crowley, D. ‘Finding Poland in the Margins: e case of the Zakopane Style’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 2001; 14 (2): 105–16. <sup>Crowley,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> National Style and National State: Design in Poland from the Vernacular Revival to the <sub>International Style</sub> (Manester: Manester University Press, 1992). <sup>Fell,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> <sup>‘e</sup> <sup>Consumer</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>Making</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>the</sup> Exposition des Arts Decoratifs et Industriels Modernes, 1907–1925<sup>’</sup> Journal of Design History <sup>1999;</sup> <sup>12,</sup> <sup>(4):</sup> <sup>311–25.</sup> <sup>Ellio,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> <sup>‘Introduction’</sup> <sup>to</sup> Devetsil: Czech Avant-GardeArt, Architecture and Design of the 1920s and <sub>1930s</sub> (Oxford and London: Museum of Modern Art, 1990). Gebhard, D. ‘e Moderne in the USA, 1920–41’ <sub>Architectural</sub> <sub>Association</sub> <sub>Quarterly</sub> 1970; 2 July. <sup>Gordon Bowe, H. (ed.)</sup> Art and the National Dream: The Search for Turn of the Century Vernacular <sub>Design</sub> (Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 1993). <sup>Grief, M.</sup> Depression Modern – the ’30s Style in America <sup>(New York: Universe Books, 1975).</sup> Guidici, G. <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Process:</sub> <sub>Olivetti,</sub> <sub>1908–1983</sub> (Torino, Italy: Edizioni di Comunità, 1983). <sup>Harrison, H. A. (ed.)</sup> Dawn of a New Fay: the New York World’s Fair, 1939/40 <sup>(New York: New York</sup> University Press, 1980). Hobsbawn, E. <sub>Nations</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Nationalisms</sub> <sub>since</sub> <sub>1780</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). Johnson, P. and Hitco, H. R. <sub>The</sub> <sub>International</sub> <sub>Style</sub> (New York: W. W. Norton & Co. Inc., 1966). Lamarova, M. ‘e New Art in Prague’ on Greenhalgh, P. <sub>Art</sub> <sub>Nouveau</sub> <sub>1890–1914</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). <sup>Light,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Forever England: Femininity, Literature and Conservatism Between the Wars <sup>(London</sup> <sup>and</sup> New York: Routledge, 1991) Opie, J. ‘Helsinki: Saarinen and Finnish Jugend’ in Greenhalgh, P. <sub>Art</sub> <sub>Nouveau</sub> <sub>1890–1914</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). <sup>Swartz,</sup> <sup>F.</sup> The Werkbund: Design Theory and Mass Culture before the First World War <sup>(New</sup> <sup>Haven</sup> and London: Yale University Press, 1996). <sup>Sheldon,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Arens,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> Consumer Engineering: A New Technique for Prosperity <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Arno</sup> Press, 1976). <sup>Silverman, D. L.</sup> Art Nouveau in Fin-de-Siecle France: Politics, Psychology and Style <sup>(Los Angeles:</sup> University of California Press, 1989). <sup>Tiersten,</sup> <sup>L.</sup>Marianne in the Market: Envisioning Consumer Society in Fin-de-Siècle France <sup>(Berkeley:</sup> University of California Press, 2001). <sup>Troy,</sup> <sup>N.</sup> Modernism and the Decorative Arts in France: Art Nouveau to Le Corbusier <sup>(New</sup> <sup>Haven:</sup> <sup>Yale</sup> University Press, 1991). ## 6 Consuming postmodernity ## Recommended reading A number of studies focus on the way in whi the climate of mass consumption anged in the years <sup>aer the Second World War. In</sup> The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry in the Origins of Cultural <sub>Change</sub> (Oxford: Basil Blawell, 1989), the geographer, David Harvey explores some of those anges. In his essay ‘Towards a Cartography of Taste 1935–1962’ in Hebdige, D. <sub>Hiding</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Light</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1988), pp. 45–76, the cultural critic, Di Hebdige, looks at the influence of American culture on Britain in the early post-war years, while Frank Mort’s essay, ‘Mass Consumption in Britain and the USA since 1945’ in Nava, M., Blake, A., MacRury, I. and Riards, B. <sup>(eds)</sup> Buy This Book: Studies in Advertising and Consumption <sup>(London and New York: Routledge,</sup> 1997), looks specifically at anging consumption paerns in those countries. Rob Shields’ selection of essays in Lifestyle Shopping: The Subject of Consumption (London and New York: Routledge, 1992) show how the idea of lifestyle became linked to the acquisition of goods through the act of consumption in the years. ## Further reading Afield, J. ‘Inside Pram Town: A Case-Study of Harlow House Interiors’ in Afield, J. and Kirkham, P. <sup>(eds)</sup> A View from the Interior: Feminism, Women and Design <sup>(London: e Women’s Press, 1989).</sup> Baudrillard, J. <sub>Simulations</sub> (New York: Semiotext[e], 1983). <sup>Bigsby,</sup> <sup>C.W.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> Superculture: American Popular Culture and Europe <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Paul</sup> <sup>Elek,</sup> <sup>1975).</sup> Boorstin, D. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Americans:</sub> <sub>The</sub> <sub>Democratic</sub> <sub>Experience</sub> (New York: Random House, 1973). <sup>Breward,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Wood,</sup> <sup>G.</sup> British Design From 1948: Innovation in the Modern Age <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>V&A</sup> Publishing, 2012). <sup>Carter,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> How German is She? National Reconstruction and the Consuming Woman in the FRG and <sub>West Berlin 1945–1960</sub> (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Miigan, 1996). Cooper, R. <sub>Constructing</sub> <sub>Futures</sub> (London: Wiley-Blawell, 2010). De Grazia, V. ‘Changing Consumption Regimes in Europe’ in Strasser, S., McGovern, C. and Judt, M. Getting and Spending: European and American Consumer Societies in the Twentieth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998). Du Gay, P., Hall, S., Janes, L., Maay, H. and Negus, K. (eds) <sub>Doing</sub> <sub>Cultural</sub> <sub>Studies:</sub> <sub>The</sub> <sub>Story</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Sony Walkman</sub> (Milton Keynes: e Open University, 1997). Eco, U. <sub>Travels</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Hyperreality</sub> (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovi, 1986). Entwhistle, J. ‘“Power Dressing” and the Construction of the Career Woman’ in Nava, M., Blake, A., <sup>MacRury,</sup> <sup>I.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Riards,</sup> <sup>B.</sup> Buy This Book: Studies in Advertising and Consumption <sup>(London</sup> <sup>and</sup> New York: Routledge, 1997). <sup>Fuad-Luke,</sup> <sup>A.</sup> The Eco-Design Handbook: A Complete Sourcebook for the Home and Office <sup>(London:</sup> ames and Hudson, 2009). Galbraith, K. <sub>The Affluent Society</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1958). <sup>Gartman, D.</sup> Auto Opium: A Social History of the American Automobile <sup>(London and New York:</sup> Routledge, 1994). Hebdige, D. ‘Object as Image: e Italian Scooter Cycle’ in Hebdige, D. <sub>Hiding</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Light</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1988), pp. 77–115. Heller, S. <sub>Citizen Designer</sub> (New York: Allworth Press, 2003). <sup>Hewison,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Methuen,</sup> <sup>1987).</sup> Lewis, F. L. and Goldstein, L. (eds) <sub>The</sub> <sub>Automobile</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>American</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (Miigan: University of Miigan Press, 1998). Lowenthal, D. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Past</sub> <sub>is</sub> <sub>a</sub> <sub>Foreign</sub> <sub>Country</sub> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985). <sup>Lyotard,</sup> <sup>F.</sup> The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge <sup>(Manester:</sup> <sup>Manester</sup> <sup>University</sup> Press, 1984). <sup>Marling,</sup> <sup>K.</sup> <sup>A.</sup> As Seen on TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in America in the 1950s (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1994). McDonagh, D. <sub>Design and Emotion</sub> (New York, CRC Press, 2003). Merkel, I. ‘Consumer Culture in the GDR’ in Strasser, McGovern, C., Hudt, M. <sub>Getting</sub> <sub>And</sub> <sub>Spending:</sub> European and American Consumer Societies in the Twentieth Century <sup>(Cambridge:</sup> <sup>Cambridge</sup> University Press, 1998). Mort, F. ‘Boy’s Own? Masculinity, style and popular culture’ in Chapman, R. and Rutherford, J. (eds) <sub>Male Order</sub> (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1995). <sup>Norman,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Basic</sup> <sup>Books,</sup> 2005). Proctor, R. <sub>1000</sub> <sub>New</sub> <sub>Eco</sub> <sub>Designs</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Where</sub> <sub>to</sub> <sub>Find</sub> <sub>Them</sub> (London: Laurence King, 2009). <sup>Reisman,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character <sup>(New</sup> <sup>Haven</sup> <sup>and</sup> London: Yale University Press, 1970). <sup>Samuel. R.</sup> Theatres of Memory, Vol. 1: Past and Present in Contemporary Culture <sup>(London: Verso,</sup> 1995). Siferstein, H. N. J. and Hekkert, P. (eds) <sub>Product</sub> <sub>Experience</sub> (London: Elsevier Science, 2007). <sup>Scranton,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> Beauty and Business: Commerce, Gender and Culture in Modern America <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York</sup> and London: Routledge, 2001). Urry, J. <sub>Consuming</sub> <sub>Places</sub> (London: Routledge, 1995). <sup>Urry,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Sage,</sup> <sup>1990).</sup> Warde, A. ‘Consumers, Identity and Belonging: Reflections on some theses of Zygmuny Bauman’ in Kear, R., Whiteley, N., and Abercrombie, N. <sub>The Authority of the Consumer</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1994). Whiteley, N. <sub>Design for Society</sub> (London: Reaktion Books, 1994). Williams, R. <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Society</sub> <sub>1780–1950</sub> (London: Chao and Windus, 1958). <sup>Wilson, E.</sup> Only Halfway to Paradise, Women in Postwar Britain 1945–1968 <sup>(London and New York:</sup> Tavisto Publications, 1980). Wollen, P. and Kerr, J. (eds) <sub>Autopia:</sub> <sub>Cars</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (London: Reaktion Books, 2002). <sup>Wright,</sup> <sup>P.</sup> On Living in an Old Country: The National Past in Contemporary Britain <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Verso,</sup> 1985). ## 7 Te<sup></sup>nology and design: a new alliance ## Recommended reading One important aspect of the years following the Second World War was the shi to what has been called ‘post-industrialism’. One face of this was linked to the move away from standardized mass production. is is the subject of Charles Sabel’s and Jonathan Zeitlin’s <sub>World of Possibilities:</sub> Flexibility and Mass Production in Western Industrialisation <sup>(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,</sup> 1997). Two important books appeared in 1999 – Alison Clarke’s <sub>Tupperware: the Promise of Plastics in</sub> <sub>1950s America</sub> (Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1999) and Susannah Handley’s <sub>Nylon:</sub> <sub>The</sub> <sub>Manmade</sub> <sub>Fashion</sub> <sub>Revolution</sub> (London: Bloomsbury, 1999), both of whi focus on the important links between materials, culture and design. Paola Antonelli’s <sub>Mutant</sub> <sub>Materials</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Contemporary Design</sub> (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1995), shows how new materials and design worked together at the end of the twentieth century. ## Further reading Attfield, J. The Tufted Carpet in Britain: Its Rise from the Bottom of the Pile, 1952-70’ Journal of <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1994; 7 (3): 205–16. Berger, S. and Piore, M.J. Dualism and Discontinuity in Industrial Society (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980). <sup>Blaszczyk,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Imagining Consumers: Design and Innovation from Wedgwood to Corning <sup>(Baltimore</sup> and London: e John Hopkins Press, 2000). <sup>Borries, F. Von</sup> Apple Design: the History of Apple Design (AT) <sup>(New York: Hatje Cantz, 2011).</sup> Dupont: The Autobiography of an American Enterprise <sup>(Wilmington:</sup> <sup>DE:</sup> <sup>E.</sup> <sup>I.</sup> Dupont de Nemours and Company, 1952). <sup>Hogan,</sup> <sup>M.</sup> <sup>J.</sup> The Marshall Plan: America, Britain and the reconstruction of Western Europe 1947–1952 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987). <sup>Horowitz,</sup> <sup>R.</sup> Boys and Their Toys? Masculinity, Class and Technology in America <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York</sup> <sup>and</sup> London: Routledge, 2001). Kron, J. and Slesin, S. <sub>High</sub> <sub>Tech</sub> (New York: Poer, 1978). Lash, D. and Urry, J. <sub>The</sub> <sub>End</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Organised</sub> <sub>Capitalism</sub> (London: Polity, 1987). <sup>Lupton,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> Mechanical Brides: Women and Machines from Home to Office <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Cooper</sup> <sup>Hewi</sup> National Museum of Design, 1993). Manzini, E. <sub>The Material of Invention</sub> (Milan: Arcadia, 1986). Niols, S. <sub>Aluminum</sub> <sub>by</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2000), pp. 140–89. Norman, D. <sub>The Design of Everyday Things</sub> (London: Basic Books, 2002). <sup>Palmer, A.</sup> Couture and Commerce: The Transatlantic Fashion Trade in the 1950s <sup>(Toronto: UBC Press,</sup> 2001). Pile, S. ‘e Foundation of Modern Comfort: Latex Foam and the Industrial Impact of Design on the <sup>British Rubber Industry, 1948–1958’ in</sup> One-Odd: A Collection of Essays by Postgraduate Students on the V&A/RCA Course in the History of Design (London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 1997). <sup>Postman,</sup> <sup>N.</sup> Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology <sup>(New</sup> <sup>York:</sup> <sup>Vintage</sup> <sup>Books,</sup> <sup>1993).</sup> <sup>Rogers,</sup> <sup>Y.</sup> Interaction Design: Beyond Human–Computer Interaction <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>John</sup> <sup>Wiley</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Sons,</sup> 2011). <sup>Sabel,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> <sup>F.</sup> Work and Politics: The Division of Labour in Industry <sup>(Cambridge:</sup> <sup>Cambridge</sup> <sup>University</sup> Press, 1982). Sparke, P. <sub>Italian Design</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1988). Sparke, P. ‘Plastics and Pop Culture’ in Sparke, P. (ed.) <sub>The Plastics Age: From Modernity to</sub> <sub>Postmodernity</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 1990), pp. 92–104. Sparke, P. ‘e Straw Donkey: Tourist Kits or Proto-Design? Cra and Design in Italy, 1945–1960 Journal of Design History <sup>1998;</sup> <sup>11</sup> <sup>(1):</sup> <sup>59–69.</sup> <sup>Tevfik,</sup> <sup>B.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> The Role of Product Design in Post-Industrial Society <sup>(Ankara:</sup> <sup>Middle</sup> <sup>East</sup> <sup>Tenical</sup> University, 1998). <sup>White,</sup> <sup>N.</sup> Reconstructing Italian Fashion: America and the Development of the Italian Fashion <sub>Industry</sub> (Oxford: Berg, 2000). ## 8 Designer culture ## Recommended reading e maturation of designer culture whi took place in the years aer 1945 has still not been fully analyzed from a cultural perspective. However, a vast body of literature exists about the designers themselves, whi ofers many insights into the phenomenon. Hugh Aldersey-Williams is among the few to address the subject directly in his essay ‘Star and Stardom’ published in <sub>Industrial</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sup>(no. 34), pp. 46–51. Pat Kirkham’s</sup> Charles and Ray Eames; Designers of the Twentieth Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995), is one of the best of its kind, while Andrea Brabzi’s study of twentieth century design in Italy – <sub>The Hot House: Italian New wave Design</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1984) shows the importance of designer culture to that country. P. Kunkel’s <sub>Digital</sub> <sub>Dreams:</sub> <sub>The</sub> <sub>work</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Sony</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Center</sub> (New York: Universe Publishers, 1999) shows how, in contrast, Japanese industry sought to promote its products through the names of its corporations rather than of its designers. ## Further reading Alessi, A. <sub>The Dream Factory: Alessi since 1921</sub> (Milan: Electa/Alessi, 1999). <sup>Ambasz,</sup> <sup>E.</sup> <sup>(ed.)</sup> Italy: The New Domestic Landscape, Achievements and Problems of Italian Design (New York: e Museum of Modern Art, 1972). <sup>Brown,</sup> <sup>T.</sup> Change by Design: How Design Thinking Creates New Alternatives for Business and Society: How Design Thinking Can Transform Organizations and Inspire Innovation <sup>(London:</sup> Collins Business, 2009). Caplan, R. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Herman</sub> <sub>Miller</sub> (New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1976). <sup>Cross,</sup> <sup>N.</sup> Design Thinking: Understanding How Designers Think and Work <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Berg,</sup> <sup>2011).</sup> <sup>Drexler, A.</sup> Charles Eames: Furniture from the Design Collection <sup>(New York: Museum of Modern Art,</sup> 1973). <sup>Dormer, P. (intro.)</sup> Jasper Morrison: Designs, projects and drawings 1981–1989 <sup>(London: Aritecture</sup> and Tenology Press, 1990). Ferrari, P. <sub>Achille Castiglioni</sub> (Milan: Electa, 1984). Fossati, P. <sub>Il Design in Italia</sub> (Milan: Einaudi, 1972). Gere, C. <sub>Digital Culture</sub> (London: Reaktion Books, 2002). Ive, J. ‘Apple Bites Ba’ <sub>Design</sub> 1998; (1) Autumn: 36–41. Jason, L. <sub>The New Look: Design in the 1950s</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1991). <sup>Jason,</sup> <sup>L.</sup> Robin and Lucienne Day: Pioneers of Contemporary Design <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Mitell</sup> <sup>Beazley,</sup> 2001). <sup>Jason,</sup> <sup>L.</sup> The Sixties: Decade of Design Revolution <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Phaidon,</sup> <sup>2000).</sup> <sup>Julius,</sup> <sup>G.</sup> Design and Creativity: Policy, Management and Practice <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Berg,</sup> <sup>2009).</sup> <sup>Kelley,</sup> <sup>T.</sup> The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Creativity from Ideo, America’s Leading Design Firm <sup>(New</sup> York: Doubleday, 2001). Kenneth Grange at the Boilerhouse; An Exhibition of British Product Design <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Boilerhouse</sup> Project, 1983). <sup>Kirkham, P. (ed.)</sup> Women Designers in the USA 1900–2000: Diversity and Difference <sup>(New Haven and</sup> London: Yale University Press, 2000). Larrabee, E. and Vignelli, M. <sub>Knoll</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1989). <sup>Martin, R. L.</sup> Design of Business: Why Design Thinking is the Next Competitive Advantage <sup>(Boston:</sup> Harvard Business Sool Press, 2009). McCarty, C. <sub>Marion Bellini, Designer</sub> (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1987). <sup>Papanek,</sup> <sup>V.</sup> The Green Imperative: Ecology and Ethics in Design and Architecture <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>ames</sup> and Hudson, 1995). Pulos, A. <sub>The</sub> <sub>American</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Adventure</sub> <sub>1940–1975</sub> (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1988). Sudjic, D. <sub>Ron Arad</sub> (London: Lawrence King, 1999). Sweet, F. <sub>Philippe</sub> <sub>Starck:</sub> <sub>Subverchic</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1999). ## 9 Postmodernism and design ## Recommended reading Numerous writings exist whi deal with the subject of ‘postmodernism’. Not so many, however, relate that broad-based cultural phenomenon to the world of material culture and design. Anne <sup>Massey’s</sup> The Independent Group: Modernism and Mass Culture in Britain, 1945–1959 <sup>(Manester:</sup> Manester University Press, 1995) outlines ideas whi showed that modernism was in crisis in the 1950s in Britain while Nigel Whiteley, <sub>Pop Design: Modernism to Mod</sub> (London: Design Council, 1987), showed where this crisis led in terms of material culture. In the USA Eobert Venturi diagnosed a similar crisis in American aritecture in <sub>Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture</sub> (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1966). Miael Collins and Andreas Papadakis documented its efect on design production in the 1980s, in <sub>Post-Modern Design</sub> (New York: Rizzolu, 1989). ## Further reading <sup>Adamson,</sup> <sup>G.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Pavi,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> <sup>(eds)</sup> Postmodernism: Style and Subversion, 1970–90 <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>V&A</sup> Publishing, 2011). Banham, R. ‘A rowaway Aesthetic’ in Sparke, P. (ed.) <sub>Reyner Banham: Design By Choice</sub> (London: Academy Editions, 1981), pp. 90–3. Boorstin, D. J. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Image</sub> (London: Wiedenfeld and Niolson, 1962). Featherstone, M. <sub>Consumer</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Postmodernism</sub> (London: Sage, 1983). Dorfles, G. <sub>Kitsch</sub> (London: Studio Vista, 1969). Foster, H. <sub>Postmodern Culture</sub> (London: Pluto Press, 1990). Gablik, S. <sub>Has Modernism Failed?</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1984). <sup>Giddens, A.</sup> Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age <sup>(California: Stanford</sup> University Press, 1991). Hebdige, F. ‘In Poor Taste: Notes on Pop’ in <sub>Hiding</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Light</sub> (London and New York: Routledge, 1988), pp. 116–43. Hochschüle fur Gestaltung, Ulm: Fie Moral der Gegenstande <sup>(Berlin:</sup> <sup>Ernst</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Sohn,</sup> <sup>1987)</sup> Horn, R. <sub>Memphis: Objects, Furniture and Patterns</sub> (New York: Simon and Suster, 1986). Jamieson, F. ‘Postmodernism, or the Logic of Late Capitalism’ <sub>New</sub> <sub>Left</sub> <sub>Review</sub> 1984; 146: 53–92. <sup>Jens,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> The Language of Post-Modern Architecture <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Academy,</sup> <sup>1973).</sup> Kaufmann Jr, E. <sub>Introduction</sub> <sub>to</sub> <sub>Modern</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1969). Massey, A. and Sparke, P. ‘e Myth of the Independent Group’ in <sub>Block</sub> <sub>(Middlesex</sub> <sub>University)</sub> 1985; 10: 48–56. Moles, A. <sub>Le</sub> <sub>Kitsch</sub> (Paris: Maison Mame, 1971). Paard, V. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Hidden</sub> <sub>Persuaders</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1957). Paard, V. <sub>The Status Seekers</sub> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1963). Paard, V. <sub>The Waste-Makers</sub> (London: Longmans, 1961). Sparke, P. <sub>Ettore</sub> <sub>Sottsass</sub> <sub>Jr</sub> (London: Design Council, 1982). Sparke. P. <sub>Reyner Banham: Design by Choice</sub> (London: Academy Editions, 1981). Sweet, F. <sub>Alessi:</sub> <sub>Art</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Poetry</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1998). aera, J. (ed.) <sub>Design</sub> <sub>after</sub> <sub>Modernism:</sub> <sub>Beyond</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Object</sub> (London: ames and Hudson, 1988). <sup>Venturi,</sup> <sup>R.,</sup> <sup>Sco-Brown,</sup> <sup>D.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Izenour,</sup> <sup>S.</sup> Learning from Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbolism of <sub>Architectural Form</sub> (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1972). ## 10 Rede<sup>fi</sup>ning identities ## Recommended reading e globalism of the late twentieth century gave rise to a number of studies. ese include Celia Lury’s analysis of Beneon, ‘e United Colours of Diversity: Essential and Inessential Culture’ in Franklyn, S., Lury, C. and Stacey, J. <sub>Global</sub> <sub>Nature,</sub> <sub>Global</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (London: Sage, 2000). At the same time, with the destruction of the Berlin Wall, new nationalisms came into being and design was used to demarcate it. Studies of this new phenomenon include David Crowley’s <sub>Design</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Poland and Hungary 1890–1990</sub> (Brighton: Brighton University, 1992) and Gert Selle’s ‘e Lost Innocence of Poverty: On the Disappearance of Cultural Diference’ in <sub>Design</sub> <sub>Issues:</sub> <sub>History;</sub> <sub>Theory:</sub> <sub>Criticism</sub> (Vol. 8, no. 2, Spring 1992), pp. 61–73. ## Further reading Aldersey-Williams, H. <sub>Nationalism</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Globalism</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (New York: Rizzoli, 1992). Aynsley, J. <sub>Nationalism</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Internationalism</sub> <sub>in</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 1993). Banham, M. and Hillier, B. A Tonic to the Nation: The Festival of Britain (London: ames and Hudson, 1976). Breward, C., Conekin, B. and Cox, C. (eds) <sub>The</sub> <sub>Englishness</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>English</sub> <sub>Dress</sub> (Oxford and New York: Berg, 2002). Bullig, M. <sub>Banal Nationalism</sub> (London: Sage, 1995). Council of Industrial Design <sub>Design in the Festival</sub> (London: HMSO, 1951). Erlhof, M. (ed.) <sub>Designed in Germany since 1949</sub> (Muni: Prestel, 1990). <sup>Ernyey, G.</sup> Made in Hungary: The best of 150 Years in Industrial Design <sup>(Budapest: Rubik Innovation</sup> Foundation, 1993). Falk, P. ‘e Beneon-Toscani Efect: Testing the Limits of Conventional Advertising’ in Nava, M., <sup>Blake,</sup> <sup>A.,</sup> <sup>MacRury,</sup> <sup>I.</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>Riards,</sup> <sup>B.</sup> Buy This Book: Studies in Advertising and Consumption (London and New York: Routledge, 1997). <sup>Heske,</sup> <sup>J.</sup> Philips: A Study of the Corporate Management of Design <sup>(London:</sup> <sup>Trefoil,</sup> <sup>1989).</sup> Julier, G. ‘Barcelona Design, Catalonia’s Political Economy and the New Spain’ <sub>Journal</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Design</sub> <sub>History</sub> 1996; 9 (2): 117–28. <sup>Justice,</sup> <sup>L.</sup> <sup>And</sup> <sup>Xin</sup> <sup>Xinyang</sup> China’s Design Revolution (Design thinking, Design Theory) <sup>(Cambridge,</sup> Mass: MIT Press, 2012). Klein, N. <sub>No</sub> <sub>Logo</sub> (London: Flamingo, 2001). Lury, C. <sub>Consumer</sub> <sub>Culture</sub> (Cambridge: Polity, 1996). <sup>McDermo,</sup> <sup>C.</sup> Made in Britain: Tradition and Style in Contemporary British Fashion <sup>(London:</sup> Mitell Beazley, 2002). <sup>Marling,</sup> <sup>K.</sup> <sup>A.</sup> Designing Disney’s Theme Parks: The Architecture of Renaissance <sup>(Paris:</sup> <sup>Flammarion,</sup> 1997). Miller, D. ‘Coca-Cola: a bla sweet drink from Trinidad’ in Miller, F. (ed.) <sub>Material</sub> <sub>Cultures:</sub> <sub>Why</sub> <sub>Some</sub> <sub>Things</sub> <sub>Matter</sub> (London: UCL Press, 1998). <sup>Narotzky,</sup> <sup>V.</sup> An Acquired Taste: The Consumption of Design in Barcelona, 1975–1992 <sup>(unpublished</sup> PhD thesis, Royal College of Art, London, 2003). Oliver, T. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Real</sub> <sub>Coke:</sub> <sub>The</sub> <sub>Real</sub> <sub>Story</sub> (London: Elm Tree, 1986). Pavi, J. (ed.) <sub>Brand</sub> <sub>New</sub> (London: V&A Publications, 2000). Sparke, P. ‘“ A Home for Everybody?”: Design, Ideology and the Culture of the Home in Italy, 1945– 72’ in Greenhalgh, P. (ed.) <sub>Modernism in Design</sub> (London: Reaktion Books, 1990), pp. 185–202. <sup>Sparke, P. (ed.)</sup> Did Britain Make It? British Design in Context 1946–1986 <sup>(London: Design Council,</sup> 1986). Sparke, P. <sub>Japanese</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (London: Miael Joseph, 1987). Vukic, F, <sub>A</sub> <sub>Century</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Croatian</sub> <sub>Design</sub> (Zagreb: Meander, 1998). Zukin, S. <sub>Landscapes of Power: From Detroit to Disney World</sub> (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995. Zukin, S. <sub>The</sub> <sub>Cultures</sub> <sub>of</sub> <sub>Cities</sub> (Cambridge, Mass: Blawell, 1995).