# Acknowledgment So many scores of persons heiped me with this book, wittingly and unwirtingly, that I shall never fully be able to acknowledge the appreciation I owe aud feel. In particular I am grateful for information, aid or criticism given by the folowing persons: Saul Alinsky, Norris C. Andrews, Edmund Bacon, Jure Blythe, John Decker Butzner, Jr., Henry Churchill, Grady Clay, William C. Crow, Vernon De Mars, Monsignor John J. Egan, Charles Farmnsley, Carl Feiss, Robert B. Filley, Mrs. Rosario Folino, Chadbourne Gilpatric, Victor Gruen, Frank Havey, Goldie Hoffman,. Frank Hotchkiss, Leticia Kent, Wiliam H. Kirk, Mr. and Mrs. George Kostritsky, Jay Landesman, The Rev. Wilbur C. Leach, Glennie M. Lenear, Melvin F. Levine, Edward Logue, Ellen Lurie, Elizabeth Manson, Roger Montgomery, Richard Nelson, Josph Passonneau, Ellen Perry, Rose Porter, Ansel Robison, James W. Rouse, Samuel A. Spiegel, Sranley B. Tankel, Jack Volkman, Robert C. Weinberg, Enk Wensberg, Henry Whimey, Willian H. Wbyte, Jr., Willian Wilcox, Mildred Zucker, Beda Zwicker. None of these people is, of course, responsible for what 1 have written; indeed, some disagree heartily with my point of view but have helped me generously nevertheless. 1 am grateful also to the Rockefeller Foundation for the financial support which made my research and writing possible, to the New School for Social Research for its hospitality, and to Douglas Haskell, the Editor of Architectural Forum, for his eneouragement and forbearance. Most of all I arn gratefui to my husband, Robert H. Jacobs, Jr.; by this time I do nor know which ideas in this book are mine and which are his. JANEJACOBS