# Contents ## 1 Introduction, 3 Part OMe THE PECULIAR NATURE OF CITIES 2 The uses of sidewalks: safety, 29 3 The uses of sidewalks: contact, 55 4 The uses of sidewalks: assimilating children, 74 5 The uses of neighborhood parks, 89 6 The uses of city neighborhoods, 1z Part TWO THE CONDITIONS FOR CITY DIVERSTIY 7 The generators of diversity, 143 8 The need for primary mixed uses, 152 ## Part TUrEE FORCES OF DECLINE AND REGENERATION ## Part FOur DIFFERENT TACTICS Index, 449 ## Illustrations The cenes that illustrate this book are all about us. For illustrations, please look closely at real cities. While you are looking, you might as well also listen, linger and think about what you see. THE DEATH AND LIFE OF GREAT AMERICAN CITIES "Until lately the best thing that I was able to think of in favor of civilization, apart from blind acceptance of the ordetr of the universe, was that it made possible the artist, the poet, the phitosopher, and the man of science. But I think that is not the greatest thing. Now I believe that the greatest thing is a matter that comes directly home to us all. When it is said that we are too much occupied with the means of living to live, I answer that the chief worth of civilization is just that it makes the means of living more complex; that it calls for great and combined intellectual efforts, instead of simple, uncoordinated ones, in order that the crowd may be fed and clothed and boused and moved from place to place. Because more complex and Intense intellectual efforts mean a fuller and richer life. They mean more life. Life is an end in itself, and the only question as to whether it is worth living is wbether you have enough of it. "I will add but a word. We are all very near despair. The sheathing that Roats us over its waves is compounded of bope, faith in the unexplainahle worth and sure issue of effort, and the deep, sub-conscious content wbich comes from the exercise of our powers."