# Introduction This book is an atack on current city planning and rebuilding. It is also, and mostly, an attempt to introduce new principles of city planning and rebuilding, diferent and even opposite from those now taught in everything from schools of architecture and planning to the Sunday supplements and women's magazines. My attack is not based on quibbles about rebuilding methods or hairsplitting about fashions in design. It is an attack, rather, on the principles and aims that have shaped modern, orthodox city planning and rebuilding. In setting forth diferent principles, I shall mainly be writing about common, ordinary things: for instance, what kinds of city streets are safe and what kinds are not; why some city parks are marvelous and others are vice traps and death traps; why some slums sty slums and other slums regenerate themselves even against financial and official opposirion; what makes downtowns shifr their centers; what, if anything, is a city neighborhood, and what jobs, if any, neighborhoods in great cities do. In short, I shall be writing about how cities work in real life, because this is the only way to learn what principles of planning and what practices in rebuilding can promote social and economic vitality in cities, and what practices and principles wil deaden these attributes. There is a wistful myth that if only we had enough money to spend—the figure is usually put at a hundred billion dollarswe could wipe out all our slums in ten years, reverse decay in the great, dull, gray belts that were yesterday's and day-before-yesterday's suburbs, anchor the wandering middle class and its wandering x money, and perhaps even solve the trafc problem. But look what we have built with the first several billions: Low-income projects that become worse centers of delinquency, vandalism and general social hopelessness than the slums they were supposed to replace. Middle-income housing projects which are truly marvels of dullness and regimentation, sealed against any buoyancy or vitality of city life. Luxury housing projects that mitigate their inanity, or try to, with a vapid vulgarity. Cultural centers that are unable to support a good bookstore. Civic centers that are avoided by everyone but bums, who have fewer choices of loitering place than others. Conunercial centers that are lackluster imitatons of standardized suburban chain-store shopping. Promenades that go from no place to nowhere and have no promenaders. Expressways that eviscerate great cities. This is not the rebuilding of cit ies. This is the sacling of cities. Under the surface, these accomplishments prove even poorer than their poor pretenses. They seldom aid the city areas around them, as in theory they are supposed to. These amputated areas typically develop galloping gangrene. To house people in this planned fashion, price tags are fastened on the population, and each sorted-out chunk of price-tagged populace lives in growing suspicion and tension against the surrounding city. When rwo or more such hostile islands are juxtaposed the result is called “a balanced neighborhood." Monopolistic shopping centers and monumental cultural centers cloak, under the public relations hoohaw, the subtraction of commerce, and of culture too, from the intimate and casual life of cities. That such wonders may be accomplished, people who get marked with the planners' hex signs are pushed about, expropriated, and uprooted much as if they were the subjects of a conquering power. Thousands upon thousands of small businesses are destroyed, and their proprietors ruined, with hardly a gesture at compensation. Whole communities are torn apart and sown to the winds, with a reaping of cynicism, resentnent and despair that must be heard and seen to be believed. A group of clergymen in Chicago, appalled at the fruits of planned city rebuilding there, asked, Could Job have been thinking of Chicago when he wrote: Here are men that alter their neighbor's landmark ... shoulder the poor aside, conspire to oppress the friendless. Reap they the field that is none of theirs, strip they the vineyardwrongfully seized f om its owner . . A cry goes up from the city streets, where wounded men lie groaning . . If so, he was also thinking of New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Washington, St. Louis, San Francisco and a number of other places. The economic rationale of current cìty rebuilding is a hoax. The economics of ciry rebuilding do not rest soundly on reasoned investment of public tax subsidies, as urban renewal theory proclaims, but also on vast, involuntary subsidies wrung out of helpless site victims. And the increased tax returns from such sites, accruing to the cities as a result of this "investnent," are a mirage, a pitiful gesture against the ever increasing sums of public money needed to combat disintegration and instability chat flow from the cruelly shaken-up city. The means to planned city rebuilding are as deplorable as the ends. Meantime, all the art and science of city planning are helpless to stem decayand the spiritlessness that precedes decay---in ever more massive swatches of cities. Nor can this decay be laid, reassuringly, to lack of opportunity to apply the arts of planning. It seems to matter little whether they are applied or not. Consider the Morningside Heights area in New York City. According to planning theory it should not be in trouble at all, for it enjoys a great abundance of parkland, campus, playground and other open spaces. It has plenty of grass. It occupies high and pleasant ground with magnificent river views. It is a famous educational center with splendid instirutionsColumbia University, Union Theological Seminary, the juilliard School of Music, and half a dozen others of eminent respectability. It is the beneficiary of good hospitals and churches. It has no industries. Its streets are zoned in the main against "incompatible uses" intruding into the preserves for solidly constructed, rœomy, middle- and upper-class apartnents. Yet by the early r9so's Momingside Heights was becoming a slum so swiftly, the surly kind of slum in which people fear to walk the streets, that the situation posed a crisis for the institutions. They and the planning arns of the city government got together, applied more planning theory, wiped out the most run-down part of the area and built in its sread a middle-income cooperative project complete with shopping center, and a public ousing project, all interspersed with air, light, sunshine and landscaping. This was hailed as a great demonstration in city saving. After that, Morningside Heiglts went downhill even faster. Nor is this an unfair or irrelevant example. In city after city precisely the wrong areas, in the light of planning theory, are decaying. Less noticed, but equally. significant, in city after city the wrong areas, in the light of planning theory, are refusing to decay. Cities are an immense laboratory of trial and error, failure and success, in city building and city design. This is the laboratory in which city planning should have been learning and forning and testing its theories. Instead the practitioners and teachers of this discipline (if such it can be caled) have ignoted the study of success and failure in real life, have been incurious about the reasons for unexpected success, and are guided instead by principles derived from the behavior and appearance of towns, suburbs, tuberculosis sanatoria, fairs, and imaginary dream cities—from anything but cities themselves. " If it appears that the rebuilt portions of cities atid the endless new developments spreading beyond the cities are reducing city and countryside alike to a monotonous, unnourishing grucl, this is not strange. It all comes, frst-, second-, third+ or fourth-hand, out of the same iritellectual dish of mush, a mush in which the qualities, necessities, advantages and behavior of great cities have been utterly confused with the qualities, necessities, advantages and behavior of other and more inert types of scttlements. There is nothing economically or socially inevitable about either the decay of old cities or the fresh-minted decadence of the new unurban urbanization. On the contrary, no other aspect of our economy and society has been more purposefully manipulated for a full quarter of a century to achieve precisely what we are getting. Extraordinary governmental hnancial incentives have been required to achieve this degre of monotony, sxerility and vulgarity. Decades of preaching, writing and exhorting by exper have gone into convincing us and our legislators that mush like this must be good for us, as long as it comes bedded with grass. Automobiles are often conveniently tagged as the villains responsihle for the ills of cities and the disappointments and futilities of city planning. But the destrucrive effects of automobiles are much less a cause than a symptom of our incompetence at city building. Of course planners, including the highwaymen with fabulous sums of money and enormous powers at their disposal, are at a loss to make automobiles and cities compatible with onc another. They do not know what to do with automobiles in cities because they do not know how to plan for workable and vital cities anyhow—with or without automobiles. The simple needs of autonobiles are more easily understood and satisfied than the complex needs of cities, and a growing number of planners and designers have come to believe that if they can on!y solve the problems of traffc, they will thereby have solved the major problem of cities. Cities have much more intricate economic and social concerns than automobile traffic. How can you know what to ty with trafhc until you know how the city itself works, and what else it needs to do with its streets? You can't. It may be that we have become so feckless as a people that we no longer care how things do work, but only what kind of quick, easy outer impression they give. If so, there is little hope for our cities or probably for much else in out society. But I do not think this is so. Specifcally, in the case of planning for cities, it is clear that a large number of good and earnest people do care deeply about building and renewing. Despite some corruption, and considerable greed for the other man's vineyard, the intentions going into the messes we make are, on the whole, exemplary. Planners, architects of city design, and those they have led along with them in their beliefs are not consciously disdainful of the importance of knowing how things work. n the contrary, they have gone to great pains to learn what the saints and sages of modern orthodox planning have said about how cities ought to work and what ought to be good for people and businesses in them. They take this with such devotion that when contradicrory reality intrudes, threatening to shatter their dearly won learning, they must shrug reality aside. Consider, for example, the orthodox planning reaction to a district called the North End in Boston.\* This is an old, low-rent area merging into the heavy industry of the waterfront, and it is officially considered Boston's worst slum and civic shame. It embodies attributes wlich all enlightened people know are evil because so many wise men have said they are evil. Not only is the North End bumped right up against industry, but worse still it has all kinds of working places and commerce mingled in the greatest complexity with its residences. Ir has the highest concentration of dwelling units, on the land that is used for dwelling units, of any part of Boston, and indeed one of the highest concentrations to be found in any American city. it has little parkland. Children play in the streets. Instead of super-blocks, or even decently large blocks, it has very small blocks; in planning parlance it is “badly cut up with wasteful streets." Its buildings are old. Everything conceivable is presumably wrong with the North End, In orthodox planning terms, it is a three-dimensional textbook of "megalopolis" in the last stages of depravity. The North End is thus a recurring assignment for M.I.T. and Harvard planning and architectural students, who now and again pursue, under the guidance of their teachers, the paper exercise of converting it into super-blocks and park promenades, wiping away its nonconforming uses, transforming it to an ideal of order and gentility so simple it could be engraved on the head of a pin, Twenty yeats ago, when I fhrst happened to see the North End, its buildings—town houses of different kinds and sizes converted to flats, and four- or fve-story tenements built to house the food of immigrants first from Ireland, then from Eastern Europe and finally from Sicily—were badly overcrowded, and the general effect was of a district taking a terrible physical beating and certainly desperately poor. When I saw the North End again in 1959, I was amazed at the change. Dozens and dozens of buildings had been rehabilitated. Instead of mattresses against the windows there were Venctian blinds and glimpses of fresh paint, Many of the small, converted houses now had only one or two families in them instead of the old crowded three or four. Some of the families in the tenements (as I learned later, visiting inside) had uncrowded themselves by throwing two older apartments together, and had equipped these with bathrooms, new kitchens and the like. I looked down a narrow alley, thinking to find at least here the old, squalid North End, but no: more neatly repointed brickwork, new blinds, and a burst of music as a door opened. Indeed, this was the only city district I had ever seen—or have seen to this day--in which the sides of buildings around parking lots had not been left raw and amputated, but repaired and painted as neatly as if they were intended to be seen. Mingled all among the buildings for living were an incredible number of splendid food stores, as well as such enterprises as upholstery making. metal working, carpentry, food processing. The streets were alive with children playing, people shopping, people strolling, people talking. Had it not been a cold January day, there would surely have been people sitting. The general street atmosphere of buoyancy, friendliness and good health was so infectious that I began asking directions of people just for the fun of getting in on some talk. I had seen a lot of Boston in the past couple of days, most of it sorely distressing, and this struck me, with relief, as the healthiest place in the city. But I could not imagine where the money had come from for the rehabilitation, because it is almost impossible today to get any appreciable mortgage money in districts of American ciries that are not either high-rent, or else imitations of suburbs. To find out, I went inro a bar and restmurant (where an animated conversation about fshing was in progress) and ealled a Boston planner I know. "Why in the world are you down in the North End?" he said. "Money? Why, no money or work has gone into the North End. Nothing's going on down there. Eventually, yes, but not yet. That's a slum!" "It doesn't seem like a slum to me," I said. "Why, that's the worst slum in the city. It has two hundred and seventy-hve dwelling units to the net acre? I hate to admit we have anything like that in Boston, but it's a fact." 2 Do you have any other figures on it?" I asked. "Yes, funny thing. It has among the lowest delinquency, disease and infant mortality rates in the city. It also has the lowest ratio of reat to income in the city. Boy, are those people getting bargains. Let's see . . . the child population is just about averáge for the city, on the nose. The death ratc is low, 8.8 per thousand, against the average city rate of t1.z. The TB death rate is very low, less than 1 per ten thousand, can't understand it, it's lower even than Brookline's. In the old days the North End used to be the city's worst spot for tuberculosis, but all that has changed. W.ell, they must be strong people. Of course it's a terrible slum." "You should have more slums like this,"I said. "Don't tell me there are plans to wipe this out. You ought to be down here learning as much as you can from it." "I know how you feel," he said. "I often go down there myself just to walk around the streets and feel that wonderful, cheerful street life. Say, what you ought to do. you ought to come back and go down in the summer if you think it's fun now. You'd be crazy about it in summer. But of course we have to rebuild it eventually. We've got to get those people off the streets." Here was a curious thing. My friend's instincts told him the North End was a good place, and his social sratistics confirnned it. But everything he had learned as a physical planner about what is good for people and good for city neighborhoods, everything that made him an expert, told him the North End had to be a bad place. The leading Boston savings banker, "a man 'way up there in the power structure," to whom my friend referred me for my inquiry about the money, confirmed what 1 learned, in the meantirne, from people in the North End. The money had not come through the grace of the great American banking system, which now knows enough about planning to know a slum as well as the planners do. "No sense in lending money into the North End," the banker said. "Ir's a slum! It's still gerting some immigrants! Furthermore, back in the Depression it had a very large number of foreclosures; bad record." {I had heard about this too, in the meantime, and how families had worked and pooled their resources to buy back some of those foreclosed buildings.) The largest mortgage loans that had been fed into chis district of soine 1s,ooo people in the quarter-century since the Great Depression were for \$3,ooo, the banker told me, "and very, very few of those."There had been some others for \$,ooo and for \$2,ooo. The rehabilitation work had been almost entirely financed by business and housing earnings within the district, plowed back in, and by skilled work bartered among residents and relatives of residents. By this time I knew that this inability to borrow for improvement was a galling worry to North Enders, and that furtherrnore some North Enders were worried because it seemed impossible to get new building in the area except at the price of seeing themselves and their community wiped out in the fashion of the students' dreams of a city Eden, a fate which they knew was not academic because it had already smashed completely a so-.cially similar--although physically more spacious—nearby distict called rhe West End. They were worried because they were aware also that patch and hx with norhing else could nor do forever. "Any chance of loans for new construction in the North End?" I asked the banker. "No, absoluteły nor!" he said, sounding impatient at my denseness. "That's a slum!" Bankers, like planners, have theories about cities on which they act. They have gotten their theories from the same intellectual sources as the planners. Bankets and government administrative officials wlio guarantee mortgages do not invent planning theories nor, surprisingly, even economic doctrine about cities. They are enlightened nowadays, and they pick up cheir ideas from idealists, a generation late. Since theoretical city planning has embraced no major new ideas for considerably more than a generation, theoretical planners, financers and bureaucrats are all just about even today. And to put it bluntly, they are al in the same stage of elaborately learned superstition as medical science was early in the last century, when physicians put their faith in bloodletting, to draw out the evil humors which were believed to cause disease. With bloodletting, it took years of learning to know precisely which veins, by what rituals, were to be opened for what symptoms. A superstructure of technical complication was erected in such deadpan detail that the literature still sounds almost plausible. However, because people, even when they are thoroughly enmeshed in descriptions of reality which are at variance with reality, are still seldom devoid of the powers of observation and independent thought, the science of bloodletting, over most of its long sway, appears usually to have been tempered with a certain amount of common sense. Or it was tempered until it reached its highest peaks of technique in, of all places, the young United States. Bloodletting went wild here. Ir had an enormously infuential proponent in Dr, Benjamin Rush, still revered as the greatest statesman-physician of our revolutionary and federal periods, and a genius of medical administration. Dr. Rush Got Things Done. Among the things he got done, some of them good and useful, were to develop, practice, teach and spread the custom of blood letting in cases where prudence or mercy had heretofore restrained is use. He and his students drained the blood of very young children, of consumptives, of the greatly aged, of almost anyone unfornunate enough to be sick in his realms of infuence. His extreme practices aroused the alarm and horror of European bloodletting physicians. And yet as late as 185t, a committee appointed by the State Legislature of New York solemnly defended the thoroughgoing use of bloodleting. It scathingly ridiculed and censured a physician, William Turner, who had the temerity to write a pamphlet criticizing Dr. Rush's doctrines and calling "the practice of taking blood in diseases contrary to common sense, to general experience, to enlightened reason and to the manifest laws of the divine Providence." Sick people needed fortifying, not draining, said Dr. Turner, and he was squelched. Medical analogies, applied to social organisms, are apt to be farfetched, and there is no point in mistaking mammalian chemistry for what occurs in a city. But analogies as to what goes on in the brains of earnest and learned men, dealing with complex phenomena they do not understand at all and trying to make do with a pseudoscience, do have point. As in the pseudoscience of·bloodletting, just so in the pseudoscience of city rebuilding and planning, years of learning and a plethora of subtle and complicated dogma have arisen on a foundation of nonsense. The tools of technique have steadily boen perfected. Naturally, in time, forceful and able men, admired administrators, having swallowed the initial fallacies and having been provisioned with tools and with public confdence, go on logically to the greatest destructive excesses, which prudence or mercy might previously have forbade. Bloodletting could heal only by accident or insofar as it broke the rules, until the time when it was abandoned in favor of the hard, complex business of assembling, using and testing, bit by bit, true descriptions of reality drawn not from how it ought to be, but from how it is. The pseudoscience of city planning and its companion, the art of city design, have not yet broken with the specious comfort of wishes, familiar superstitions, oversimplifications, and symbols, and have not yet embarked upon the adventure of probing the real world. So in this book we shall start, if only in a small way, adventuring in the real world, ourselves. The way to get at what goes on in the seemingly mysterious and perverse behavior of cities is, I think, to look closely, and with as little previous expectation as is possible, at the most ordinary scenes and events, and attempt to see what they mean and whether any threads of principle emerge among them. This is what I try to do in the first par of this book. One principle emerges so ubiquitously, and in so many and such complėx different forms, that I turn my attention to its narure in the second patt of this book, a part which becomes the heart of my argument. This ubiquitous principle is the need of cities for a most intricate and close-grained diversity of uses that give each other constant mutual support, both economically and socially. The components of this diversity can differ enormously, but they must supplement each other in cerain concrete ways. [ think that unsuccessful city areas are areas which lack this kind of intricate mutual support, and that the science of city planning and the art of city design, in real life for real cities, must become the science and art of catalyzing and nourishing these close-grained working relationships. I think, from the evidence I can find, that there are four primaty conditions required for generating useful great city diversity, and that by deliberately inducing these four conditions, planning can induce city vitality (something that the plans of planners alone, and the designs of designers alone, can never achieve). While Part I is principally about the social behavior of people in cities, and is necessary for undetstanding what follows, Part II is principally about the economic behavior of cities and is the most important part of this book. Cities are fantstically dynamic places, and this is strikingly true of their successful parts, which offer a fertile ground for the plans of thousands of people. In the third part of this book, I examine some aspects of decay and regeneration, in the light of how cities are used, and how they and their people behave, in real life. The last part of the book suggests changes in housing, trafic, design, planning and administrative practices, and discusses, finally, the kind of problem which cities pose-a problem in handling organized complexity. The look of things and the way they work are inextricably bound together, and in no place more so than cities. Bur people who are interested only in how a'city "ought" to look and uninterested in how it works will be diseppointed by this book. Ir is futile to plan a city's appearance, or speculate on how to endow it with a pleasing appearances of order, without knowing what sort of innate, functioning order it has. To seek for the look of things as a primary purpose or as the main drama is apt to make nothing but trouble. In New York's East Harlem there is a housing project with a conspicuous rectangular lawn which became an object of hatred to the project tenants. A social worker frequently at the project was astonished by how ofren the subject of the lawn came up, usually gratuitously as far as she could see, and how much the tenants despised it and urged that it be done away with. When she asked why, the usual answer was, "What good is it?" or "Who wants it?"Finally one day a tenant more articulate than the others made this pronouncement: "Nobody cared what we wanted when they built this place. They threw our houses down and pushed us here and pushed our friends somewhere else. We don't have a place around here to get a cup of coffee or a newspaper even, or borrow fifty cents. Nobody cared what we need. But the big men come and look at that grass and say, 'Isn't it wonderful! Now the poor have everything!" " This tenant was saying what moralisrs have said for thousands of years: Handsome is as handsome does, All that glitters is not gold. She was saying more: There is a quality even meaner than outright ugliness or disorder, and this meaner quality is the dishonest mask of pretended order, achieved by ignoring or suppressing the real order that is struggling to exist and to be served. In trying to explain the underlying order of cities, I usc a preponderance of examples from New York because that is where I live. Bur most of the basic ideas in this book come from things I first noticed or was told in other cities. For example, my first inkling about the powerful effects of certain kinds of functional mixtures in the city came from Pittsburgh, my first speculations about street safety from Philadeiphia and Baltimore, my first notions about the meanderings of downtown from Boston, my first clues to the unmaking of slums from Chicago, Most of the material for these musings was at my own front door, but perhaps it is easiest to see things hsst where you don't take them for granted. The basic idea, to try to begin understanding the intricate social and economic order under the seeming disorder of cities. was not my idea at all, but that of Wiliam Kirk, head worker of Union Settlement in East Harlem, New York, who, by showing me East-Harlemn, showed me a way of seeing other neighborhoods, and downtowns too. In every case, I have tried to test out what l saw or heard in one city or neighborhood against others, to fnd how relevant each city's or each place's lessons might be outside its own special case. I have concentrated on great cities, and on their inner areas, because this is the problern that has been most consistently evaded in planning theory. I thiak this may also have somewhat wider usefulness as time passes, because many of the parts of today's cities in the worst, and apparently most bafing, trouble were suburbs or dignibed, quiet residential areas not too long ago; eventually many of today's brand-new suburbs or semisuburbs are going to be engulfed in cities and will succeed or fail in that condition depending on whether they can adapt to functioning successfully as city districts. Also, to be frank, I like dense cities best and care about them most. But I hope no reader will try to transfer my observations into guides as to what goes on in towns, or little cities, or in suburbs which still are suburban. Towns, suburbs and even little cities are totally different organisms from great cities. We are in enough trouble already from trying to understand big cities in terms of the behavior, and the inagined behavior, of towns. To ty to understand towns in terms of big cities will only compound confusion. I hope any reader of this book will constantly and skeptically test what I say against his own knowledge of cities and their behavior. If I have been inaccurate in observations or mistaken in inferences and conclusions, I hope these faults will be quickly corrected. The point is, we need desperately to learn and to apply as much knowledge that is true and useful abour cities as fast as possible. I have been making unkind remarls about orthodox city planning theory, and shall make more as occasion arises to do so. By now, these orthodox ideas are part of our folklore. They harm us because we take themn for granted. To show how we got them, and how little they are to the point, I shail give a quick outline here of the most influential ideas that have contributed to the verities of orthodox modern city planning and city architectural design.\* The most important thread of infuence starts, more or less, with Ebenezer Howard, an English court reporter for whom planning was an avocation. Howard looked at the living conditions of the poor in late-nineteenth-century London, and justifiably did not l'ike what he smelled or saw or heard. He not only hated the wrongs and mistakes of the city, he hated the city and thought it an outright evil and an affront to nature that so many people should get themselves into an agglomeration. His prescription for saving the people was to do the city in. 1 The program he proposed, in 1898, was to hait the growth of London and also repopulate the countryside, where villages were declining, by building a new kind of town—the Garden City, where the city poor might again live close to nature. So they might earn their livings, industry was to be set up in the Garden City, for while Howard was not planning cities, he was not planning ormitory suburbs either. His aim was the creation of selfsufficient small towns, really very nice towns if you were docile and had no plans of your own and did not nind spending your life among others with no plans of their own. As in all Utopias, the right to have plans of any signifcance belonged only to the planners in charge. The Garden City was to be encircled with a belt of agriculture. Industry was to be in its planned preserves; schools, housing and greens in planned living preserves; and in the center were to be conunercial, club and cultural places, held in common. The town and green belt, in their totality, were to be pernanently controlled by the public authority under which the town was developed, to prevent speculation or supposedly irrational changes in land use and also to do away with temptations to increase its density—in brief, to prevent it from ever becoming a city. The maximum population was to be held to thirty thousand people. Nathan Glazer has summed up the vision well in Architectural Forum: "The image was the English country town—with the manor house and its park replaced by a community center, and with some factories hidden behind a screen of trees, to supply work." The closest American equivalent would probably be the model company town, with proft-sharing, and with the Parent-Teacher Associations in charge of the rourine, custodial political life. For Howard was envisioning not simply a new physical environment and social life, but a paternalistic political and economic society. Nevertheless, as Glazer has pointed out, the Garden City was 'conceived as an alternative to the city, and as a solution to city problems; this was, and is still, the foundation of its immense power as a planning idea." Howard managed to get two garden cities built, Letchworth and Welwyn, and of course England and Sweden have, since the Second World War, built a number of satellite towns based on Garden City principles. In the United States, the suburb of Radburn, N.J., and the depression-built, government-sponsored Green Belt towns (acrually suburbs) were all incomplete modifications on the idea. But Howard's influence in the literal, or reasonably literal, acceptance of his program was as nothing compared to his infuence on conceptions underlying all American city planning today. City planners and designers with no interest in the Garden City, as such, are still thoroughly governed intellectually by its underlying principles. Howard set spinning powerful and city-destroying ideas: He conceived that the way to deal with the city's functons was to sort and sift out of the whole cértain simple uses, and to arrange each of these in relative self-containment. He focused on the provision of wholesome housing as the central problem, to wlich everything else was subsidiary; furthermore he defned wholesome housing in terms only of suburban physical qualities and small-town social qualities. He conceived of conmerce in terms of routine, standardized supply of goods, and as serving a selflimited market. He conceived of good planning as a. series of static acts; in each case the plan must anticipate all that is needed and be protected, after it is built, against any but the most minor subsequent changes. He conceived of planning also as essentially paternalistic, if not authoritarian. He was uninterested in the aspects of the city which could not be abstracted to serve his Utopia. In particular, he simply wrote off the intricate, manyfaceted, cultural Fe of the metropolis. He was uninterested in such problems as the way great cities police themselves, or exchange ideas, or operate politically, or invent new economic arrangements, and he was oblivious to devising ways to strengthen these functions because, after all, he was not designing for this kind of life in any case. Both in his preoccupations and in his omissions, Howard made sense in his own terms but none in terms of city planning. Yet virtually all modern city planning has been adapted from, and embroidered on, this silly substmnce. Howard's infuence on American city planning converged on the city from two directions: from town and regional planners on the one hand, and from architects on the other. Along the avenue of planning, Sir Patrick Geddes, a Scots biologist and philosopher, saw the Garden City idea not as a fortuitous way to absorb population growth otherwise destined for a great city, but as the starting point of a much grander and more encompassing pattern. He thought of the planning of cities in terms of the planning of whole regions. Under regional planning, garden cities would be rationally distributed throughout large territories, dovetailing into natural resources, balanced against agriculture and woodland, forning one far-fung logical whole. Howard's and Geddes' ideas were enthusiastically adopted in America during the 19ro's, and developed further by a group of extraordinarily effective and dędicated people--among them Lewis Mumford, Clarence Stein, the late Henry Wright, and Catherine Bauer. Whie they thought of themselves as regional planners, Catherine Bauer has more recently called this group the "Decentrists," and this name is more apt, for the primary result of regional planning, as they saw it, would be to decentralize grear cities, thin them out, and disperse their enterprises and populations into snaler. separated cities or, better yet, towns. At the time, it appeared that the American population was both aging and leveling off in numbers, an the problem appeared to be not one of accommodating a rapidly growing populatiun, but simply of redistributing a static popular on. As with Howard himself, this group's inAuence was less in getting literal acceptance of its program—that got nowhere—than in influencing city' planning and legislation affecting housing and housing finance. Model housi'ng schemes by Stein and Wright, built mainly in suburban settings or at the fringes of cities, together with the writings and the diagrams, sketches and photographs presented by Mumford and Bauer, demonstrated and popularized ideas such as these, which arc now taken for granted in orthodox planning: The street is bad as an environment for humans; houses should be turned away from it and faced inward, toward sheltered greens. Frequent streets are wasteful, of advantage only to real estate speculators who measure value by the front foot. The basic unit of city design is not the street, but the block and more particularly the supcr-block. Commerce should be segregated from residences and greens. A neighborhood's demand for goods should be calculated "scientifically," and this much and no more commercial space allocated. The presence of many other people is, at best, a neccssary evil, and good city planning must aim for at least an ilusion of isolation and suburbany privacy. The Decentrists also pounded in Howard's premises that the planned community must be islanded off as a self-contained unit, that it mu'. resist future change, and that every significant detal must be controlicd by the planners from the start and then stuck to. In short, good planning was project planning. To reinforce and dramarize the necessi'ty for the new order of things, the Decentrists hammered away at the bad old city. They were incurious about successes in great cities. They were interested only in failures. All was failure. A book like Mumford's The Culture of Cities was largely a morbid and biased caralog of ills. The great city was Megalopolis, Tyrannopolis, Nekropolis, a monstrosity, a tyranny, a living death. It must go. New York's midtown was "solidified chaos" (Mumford). The shape and appearance of cities was nothing but “a chaotic accident . . . the summation of the haphazard, antagonistic whims of many self-centered, ill-advised individuals" (Stein). The centers of cities amounted to “a foreground of noise, dirt, beggars, souvenrs and shrill ompetitive advertising" (Bauer). How could anything so bad be worth the attempt to understand it? The Decentrists' analyses, the architectural and housing designs which were companions and offshoots of these analyses, the national housing and home financing legislation so directly infuenced by the new vision—none of these had anything to do with understanding cities, or fostering successful large cities, nor were they nuitended to. They were reasons and means for. jettisoning cities, and the Decentrists were frank about this. But in the schools of planning and architecture, and in Congress, state legislatures and city halls too, the Decentrists' ideas were gradually accepted as basic guides for dealing constructively with big cities themselves. This is the most amazing event in the whole sorry tale: that finally people who sincerely wanted to strengthen great cities should adopt recipes frankly devised for undermining their economi es and killing them. The man with the most dramatic idea of how to get all this anti-city planning right into the citadels of iniquity themselves was the European architect Le Corbusier. He devised in the 192o's a dream city which he called the Radiant City, composed not of the low buildings beloved of the Decentrists, but instead mainly of skyscrapers within a park. "Suppose we are entering the city by way of the Great Park," Le Corbusier wrote. "Our fast car takes the special elevated motor track between the majestic skyscrapers: as we approach nearer, there is seen the repetition against the sky of the twenty-four skyscrapers; to our left and right on the outskirts of each particular area are the municipal and administrative buildings; and enclosing the space are the museums and university buildings. The whole city is a Park." In Le Corhusier's vertical city the common run of mankind was to be housed at 1,2o0 inhabitants to the acre, a fantastically high city density indeed, but because of building up so high, 95 percent of the ground could remai'n open. The skyscrapers would oceupy only 5 percent of the ground. The high-income people would be in lower, luxury housing around courts, with 85 percent of their ground left open. Here and there would be restaurants and theaters. Le Corbusier was planning not only a physical environment. He was planning for a social Utopia too. Le Corhusier's Utopia was a condition of what he called maximum individual liberty, by which he seems to have meant not liberty to do anything much, but liberty from ordinary responsibility. In his Radiant City nobody, preşumably, was going to have to be his brother's keeper any more. Nobody was going to have to struggle with plans of his own. Nobody was going to be tied down. The Decentrists and other loyal advocates of the Garden City were aghast at Le Corbusier's city of towers in the park, and still are. Their reaction to it was, and remains, much like that of progressive nursery school teachers confronting an utterly institutional orphanage. And yet, ironically, the Radiant City comes directly out of the Garden City. Le Corbusier accepted the Garden City's fundamental image, superficially at least, and worked to make it practical for high densities. He described his creation as the Garden City made àttainable. "The garden city is a willo'-the-wisp," he wrote. "Nature melts under the invasion of roads and houses and the promised seclusion becomes a crowded settlement . . . The solution will be found in the 'vetrical garden city.' In another sense too, in its relatively easy public reception, Le Corbusier's Radiant City depended upon the Garden City. The Garden City planners and their ever increasing following among housing reformners, students and architects were indefatigably popularizing the ideas of the super-block, the project neighborhood, the unchangeable plan, and grass, grass, grass; what is more they were successfully establishing such attributes as the hallmarks of humane, socially responsible, functional, high-minded planning. Le Corbusier really did not have to justify his vision in either humane or city-functional terms. If the great object of city planning was that Christopher Robin might go hoppety-hoppety on the grass, what was wrong with Le Corbusier? The Decentrists' cries of institutionalization, mechanization, depersonalizarion seemed to others foolishly secrarian. Le Corbusier's dream city has had an immense impact on our ciries. It was hailed deluiously by architects, and has gradually been embodied in scores of projects, ranging from low-income public housing to office building projects. Aside from making at least the superficial Garden City principles superficially practicable in dense city, Le Corbusier's dream contained other marvels. He attempted to make planning for the automobile an integrl part of his scheme, and this was, in the 192o's and early 193o's, a new, exciting idea. He included great arterial roads for express one-way traffic: He cut the number of streets because "cross-roads are an enemy to trafic." He proposed underground streets for heavy vehicles and deliveries, and of course l'ike the Garden City planners he kept the pedestrians off the streers and in the parks. His city was l'ike a wonderful mechanical toy. Furthernore, his conception, as an architectural work, had a dazzling clarity, simplicity and harmony. It was so orderly, so visible, so easy to understand. It said everything in a flash, like a good advertisement. This vision and its bold symbolism have been all but irresistible to planners, housers, designers, and to developers, lenders and mayors too. It exerts a great pull on "progressive" zoners, who write rules calculated to encourage nonproject builders to refleet, if only a little, the dream. No matter how vulgarized or clumsy the design, how dreary and useless the open space, how dull the close-up view, 'an imitarion of Le Corbusier shours "Look what I made!" Like a great, visible ego it tells of someone's achievement. But as to how the city works, it tells, like the Garden City, nothing but lies. Although the Decentrists, with their devotion to the ideal of a cozy town life, have never made peace with the Le Corbusier vision, most of their disciples have. Virtually all sophisicated city designers today combine the two conceptions in various permutations. The rebuilding rechnique variously known as "selective removal" or "spor renewal" or "renewal planning" or "planned conservation"—meaning that toral clearance of a run-down area is avoided-is largely the trick of seeing how many old buildings can be left standing and the area still converted into a passable version of Radiant Garden City. Zoners, highway planners, legislators, land-use planners, and parks and playground planners—none of whom live in an ideological vacuum--constantly use, as fixed points of reference, these two powerful visions and the more sophisticated merged vision. They may wander from the visions, they may compromise, they may vulgarize, but these are the points of departure. We shall look briefly at one orher, less important, line of ancestry in orthodox planning. This one begins more or less with the great Columbian Exposition in Chicago in t893, just about the same time that Howard was formulating his Garden City ideas. The Chicago fair snubbed the exciting modérn architecture which had begun to emerge in Chicago and instead dramatized a retrogressive imitation Renaissance style. ne heavy, grandiose monument after another was arrayed in the exposition park, like frosted pasrries on a tray, in a sort of squat, decorated forecast of Le Corbusier's later reperitive ranls of towers in a park. This orgiastic assemblage of the rich and monumental captured the imagination of both planners and public, It gave impetus to a niovement called the City Beautiful, and indeed the planning of the exposition was dominated by the man who became the leading City Beautiful planner, Daniel Burnham of Chicago. The aim of the City Beautiful was the City Monumental. Great schemes were drawn up for systems of baroque boulevards, which mainly camne to nothing. What did come out of the movement was the Center Monumental, modeled on the fair. City after city built its civic center or its cultural center. These buildings were arranged along a boulevard as at Benjamin Franklin Parkway in Philadelphia, or along a mall like the Government Center in Cleveland, or were bordered by park, like the Civic Center at St. Louis, or were interspersed with park, like the Civic Center at San Francisco. However they were arranged, the important point was that the monuments had been sorted out from the rest of the city, and assembled into the grandest effect thought possible, the whole being treated as a complete unit, in a separate and well-defned way. People were proud of them. but the centers were not a success. For one thing, invariably the ordinary city around them ran down instead of being uplifted, and they always acquired an incongruous rim of rarty tattoo parlors and second-hand-clothing stores, or else just nondescript, dispirited decay. For another, people stayed away from them to a remarkable degree. Somehow, when the fair became part of the city, it did not work like the fair. The architecture of the City Beautiful centers went out of style. But the idea behind the cenrers was not questioned, and it has never had more force than it does'today. The idea of sorting out certain cultural or public functions and decontmminating their relationship with the workaday city dovetailed nicely with the Garden City teachings. The conceptions have harmoniously merged, much as the Garden City and the Radiant City merged, inro a sort of Radiant Garden City Beautiful, such as the immense Lincoln Square project for New York, in which a monumental City Beautiful cultural center is one among a series of adjoining Radiant City and Radiant Garden City housing, shopping and campus centers. And by analogy, the principles of sorting out—and of bringing order by repression of all plans but the planners'--have been easily extended to all manner of city functions, until today a land-use master plan for a big city is largely a matter of proposed placenent, often in relation to ansportation, of many series of decontam'inated sortings. From beginning to end, from Howard and Burnham to the latest amendment on urban-renewal law, the entire concoction is irrelevant to the workings of cities. Unstudied, unrespocted, cities have setved as sacrihcial victims. Part One THE PECULIAR NATURE OF CITIES ## 2 The uses of sidewalks: safety Sreets in cities serve many purposes besides carrying vehicles, and city sidewallthe pedestrian parts of the streetsserve many purposes besides carrying pedestrians. These uses arc bound up with circulation but are not identical with it and in their own right they are at least as basic as circulation to the proper workings of cities. A city sidewalk by itself is nothing. It is an abstraction. It means something only in conjunction with the buildings and other uses that border it, or border other sidewalks very near it. The same might be said of streets, in the sense that they serve other purposes besides carrying wheeled traffic in their middles. Streets and their sidewalks, the main public places of a city, are its most vital organs. Think of a city and what comes to mind? Its streets. If a city's streets look interesting, the city lools interesting; if they look dull, the city lools dull. More than that, and here we get down to the first problem, if a city's streets are safe from barbarism and fear, the city is thereby tolerably safe from barbarism and fear. When people say that a city, or a part of it, is dangerous or is a jungle what they mean primarily is that they do not feel safe on the sidewalls. Bút sidewalks and those who use them are not passive beneficiaries of safety or helpless victions of danger. Sidewalks, their bordering uses, and their users, are active participants in the drama of civilization versus barbarism in cities. To keep the city safe is a fundamenral task of a city's streets and its sidewalks. This task is totally unlike any service that sidewalk and streets in little towns or true suburbs are called upon to do. Great cities are not like towns, only larger. They are not like suburbs, only densr. They differ from towns and suburbs in basic ways, and one of these is that cities are, by definition, full of strangers. To any one person, strangers are far more common in big cities than acquaintances. More common not just in places of public assembly, but more common at a man's own doorstep. Even residents who live near each other are strangers, and must be, because of the sheer number of people in small geographical compass. The bedrock attribute of a successful city district is that a per-, son must feel personally safe and secure on the street among all these strangers. He must not feel automatically menaced by them. A city district that fails in this respect also does badly in other ways and lays up for itself, and for its city at large, mounmin on mountain of trouble. Today barbarism has taken over many city streets, or people fear' it has, which comes to much the same thing in the end. "I live in a lovely, quiet residential area," says a friend of mine who is hunting another place to live. ‘The only disturbing sound at night is the occasional scream of someone being mugged." It does not take many incidents of violence on'a city street, or in a city district, to make people fear the streets. And as they fear them, they use them less, which makes the streets still more unsafe. To be sure, there are people with hobgoblins in rheir heads, and such people will never feel safe no matter what the objective circumstances are. But this is a different matter from the fear that besets nornally prudent, toleranr and cheerful people who show nothing more than common sense in refusing to venture after dark--or in a few places, by day--into streets where they may well be assaulted, unseen or unrescued until too late. The barbarism and'the real, not imagined, insecurity that gives rise to such fears cannot be tagged a problem of the slums. The problem is most serious, in fact, in genteel-looking "quiet residential areas" like that my friend was leaving. It cannot be tagged as a problem of older parts of cities. The problem reaches ins most bafing dimensions in some examples of rebuilt parts of cities, including supposedly the best examples of rebuilding, such as middle-income projects. The police precinct captain of a nationally admired project of this kind (admired by planners and lenders) has recently admonished residents not only about hanging around outdoors after dark but has urged them never to answer their doors without knowing the caller. Life here has much in common with life for the three little pigs or the seven little kids of the nursery thrillers. The problem of sidewalk and doorstep insecurity is as serious in cities which have made conscientious eforts at rebuilding as it is in those cities that have lagged. Nor is it illuminating to tag minority groups, or the poor, or the outcast with responsibility for city danger. There are immense variations in the degree of civilization and safety found among such groups and among the city areas where they live. Some of the safest sidewalks in New York City, for example, at any time of day or night, are those along which poor people or minority groups live. And some of the most dangeróus are in streets occupied by the same kinds of people. All this can also be said of other cities. Deep and complicated social ills must lie behind delinquency and crime, in suburbs and towns as well as in great cities. This book will not go into speculation on the deeper reasons. It is sufficient, at this point, to say that if we are to maintain a city society that can diagnose and keep abreast of deeper social problems, the starting point must be, in any case, to strengthen whatever workable forces for maintaining safety and civilization do exist in the cities we do have. To build city districts that are custom made for easy crime is idiotic. Yet that is what we do. The first thing to underscand isthat the publicpeace-the sidewalk and street peace—ofcities is not kept primarily by the police, necessary as police are. It is kept primarily by an intricate, almost unconscious, network pf voluntary controls and standards among the people themselves, and enforced by the people themselves. In some city areasolder public housing projects and streets with very high population turnover are often conspicuous examples--the keeping of public sidewalk law and order is left almost entirely to the police and special guards. Such places are jungles. No amount of police can enforce civilization where the normal, casual enforcement of ir has broken down. The second thing to understand is that the problem of insecurity cannot be solved by spreading people out more thinly, trading the characteristics of cities for the characteristics of suburbs. f this could solve danger on the city streets, then Los Angeles should be a safe city because superficially Los Angelesis almost all suburban. It has virtually no districts compact enough to qualify as dense city areas. Yet Los Angeles cannot, any more than any other great city, evade the truth that, being a city, it is composed of strangers not all of whom are nice. Los Angeles' crime figures are fabbergasting. Among the seventeen standard metropolitan areas with populations over a million, Los Angeles srands so pre-eminent in crime that it is in a category by itself. And this is markedly true of crimes associated with personal attack, the crimes that make people fear the streets. Los Angeles, for example, has a forcible rape rate (t958 fgures) of 3t.9 per 10o,ooo population, more than twice as high as either of the next two cities, which happen to be St. Louis and Philadelphia; three times as high as the rate of 1o.! for Chicago, and more than four times as high as the rate of 7.4 for New York. In aggravared assault, Los Angeles has a rate of 18s, compared with [49.5 for Baltimore and [39.2 for St. Louis (the two next highest), and with 9o.9 for New York and 79 for Chicago. The overall Los Angeles rate for major crimes is ¿,5o7.6 per ioo,ooo people, far ahead of St. Louis and Houston, which come next with 1,634.5 and t,541,, and of New York and Chicago, which have raes of t,145.3 and 943.5. The reasons for Los Angeles' high crime rates are undoubtedly complex, and at least in part obscure. But of this we can be sure: thinning out a city does not insure safety from crime and fear of crime. This is one of the conclusions that can be drawn within individual ciries too, wlere pseudosuburbs or superannuated suburbs are ideally suited to rape, muggings, beatings, holdups and the like. Here we come up against an al-important quesrion about any city street: How much easy opportunity docs it offer to crime? It ay be that there is some absolute amount of crime in a given city, which will find an outlet somehow (I do not believe this). Whether this is so or not, different kinds of city streets garuer radically different shares of barbarism and fear of barbarism. Some city streets afford no opportunity to street barbarism. The streets of the North End of Boston are outstnding examples. They are probably as safe as any place on earth in this respect. Although most of the North End's residents are Italian or of ltalian descent, the district's streets are also heavily and constantly used by people of every race and background. Some of the strangers from outside work in or close to the district; some come to shop and stroll; many, including members of minority groups who have inherited dangerous districts previously abandoned by others, make a point of cashing their paychecks in North End stores and immediateiy making their big weekly purchases in streets where they know they will not be parted from their money between the gerting and the spending. Frank Havey, durector of the North End Union, the local settlement house, says, "I have been here in the North End twentyeight years, and in all that time I have never heard of a single case of rape, mugging, molestation of a child or other street crime of that sort in the district. And if there had been any, I would have heard of it even if it did not reach the papers." Half a dozen times or so in the past three decades, says Havey, wouldbe molesters have made an attempt at luring a child or, late at night, attacking a woman. In every such case the try was thwarted by passers-by, by kibitzers from windows, or shopkeepers. Meantime, in the Elm Hill Avenue section of Roxbury, a part of inner Boston that is suburban in superhcial character, street assaults and the ever present possibility of more street assaults with no kibirzers to protecr the victims, induce prudent people to stay off the sidewalks at night. Not Şurprisingly, for this and other reasons that are related (dispiritedness and dullness), most of Roxbury has run down. It has become a place to leave. I do not wish to single out Roxbury or its once fine Elm Hill Avenue section especially as a vulnerable area; its disabilities, and pecially its Great Blight of Dullness, are all too common in other cities too. But differences like these in public safety within the same city are worth noting. The Elm Hill Avenue section's basic troubles are not owing to a criminal or a discriminated against or a poverty-stricken population. Its troubles stem from the fact that it is physically quite unable to function safely and with related vitality as a city district. Even widuin supposedly similar parts of supposedly similar places, drastic differences in public safety exist An incident at Washington Houses, a public housing project in New York, illustrates this point. A tenants' group at this project, struggling to establish itself, held some outdoor ceremonies in mid-December 1958, and put up three Christmas trees. The chief tree, so cumbersome it was a problem to transport, erect, and trim, went into the project's inner "street," a landscaped central mall and promenade. The other two trees, each less than six feet tall and easy to carry, went on two small fringe plots at the outer corners of the project where it abuts a busy avenue and lively cross streets of the old city. The frst night, the laige tree and all its trimmings were stolen. The two smaller trees rema'ined intact, lights, ornaments and all, until they were taken down at New Year's. "The place where rhe tree was stolen, which is theoretically the most safe ad sheltered place in the project, is the same place that is unsafe for people too, especially children," says a social worker who had been helping the tenants' group. "People are no safer in that mall than the Christmnas tree. On the other hand, the place where the other trees were safe, where the project is just one corner out of four, happens to be safe for people." This is something everyone already knows: A well-used city street is apt to be a safe street. A deserted city street is apt to be unsafe. But how does this work, really? And what makes a city wreet well used or shunned? Why is the sidewalk all in Washington Houses, which is supposed to be an attraction, shunned? Why are the sidewalks of the old city just to its west not shunned? VVhat about streets that are busy part of the time and then empty abruptly? A city street equipped to handle strangers. and to make a safety asset, in itself, out of the presence of strangers, as the streets of successful city neighborhoods always do, must have three main qualities: First, there must be a clear demarcaton between whatis public spaceand what is private space.Public and private spacescannot ooze into each other as they do typically in suburban settings or in projects. Second, there must he eyes upon the street, eyes belonging to thosewe might call the natural proprietors of the street. The buildings on a street equipped to handle strangers and to insure the safety of both residents and strangers, must be oriented to the street. They cannot turn their backs or blank sides on it and leave it blind. Andthird, the sidewalk must have users on it fairlycontinuously, both to add to the number of effective eyes on the street and to induce the people in buildings along the street to watch the sidewalks in sufficient numbers, Nobody enjoyssitting on a stoop or looking out a window at an empty street. Almost nobody does such a thing. Large numbers of people entertain themselves, off and on, by watching street activity. In settlements that are smaller and simpler than big cities, controls on acceptable public behavior, if not on crime, seem to operate with greater or lesser success through a web of reputation, gossip, approval, disapproval and sanctions, all of which are powerful if people know each other and word aveis. But a city's streets, which must control not only the behavior of the people of the city but also of visitors from suburbs and towns who want to have a big time away from the gossip and sanctions at home, have to operate by more direct, straightforward methods. It is a wonder cities have solved such an inherently difficult problem at all. And yet in many streets they do it magnificently. It is futile to try to evade the issue of unsafe city streets by attempting to make some other features of a locality. say interior courtyards, or sheltered play spaces, safe instead. By dehnition again, the streets of a city must do most of the job of handling strangers for this is where strangers come and go. The streets must not only defend the city against predatory strangers, they must prorect the many, many peaceable and well-meanung strangers who use them, insuring their safety too as they pass through. Moreover, no normal person can spend his life in some arrihcial haven, and chis includes children. Everyone must use the streets. On the surface, we seem to hav: here some simple aims: To ery to secure streers where the public space is unequivocally public, physically unmixed with private or with nothing-at-all space, so that the area needing surveillance has clear and practicable limits; and to see that these public stret spaces have eyes on them as continuously as possible. But it is not so simple to achieve these objects, especially the latter. You can't make people use streets they have no reason to use. You can't make people watch streets they do not want to watch. Safety on the streets by suveillance and mutual policing of one another sounds grim, but in real life it is not grim. The safety of the street works best, most casually, and with least fre-,quent taint of hostility or suspicion precisely where people are using and most enjuying the city streets voluntarily and are least conscious, nornally, that they are policing. The basic requisi'te for such surveillance is a substential quantity of stores and other public places sprinkled along the sidewalks of a district; enterprises and public places that are used by evening and night must be among them especially. Stores, bars and resraurants, as the chief examples, work in several different and complex ways to abet sidewalk safety. First, they give people--both residents and scrangersconcrete reasons for using the sidewalks on which these enterprises face. Second, they ðraw people along the sidewalks past places which have no attractions to public use in themselves but which become traveled and peopled as routes to somewhere else; this influence does not cary very far geographically, so enterprises must be frequent in a city district if they are to populate with walkers those other stretches of street that lack public places along the sidewalk. Moreover, there should be many different kinds of enterprises, to give people reasons for crisscrossing paths. Third, storekeepers and other small businessmen are typically strong proponents of peace and order themselves; they hate broken windows and holdups; they hate having customers made nervous about safety. They are great street watchers and sidewalk guardians if present in sufhcient numbers. Fourth, the activity generated by people on errands, or people aiming for food or drink, is itself an attraction to still other people. T'his last point, that the sight of people attracts still other people, is something that city planners and city architectural designers seemn to find incomprehensible. They operate on the premise that city people seek the sight of emptiness, obvious order and quiet. Nothing could be less true. People's love of watching activity and other people is consmntly evident in cities everywhere. This trait reaches an almost ludicrous extreme on upper Broadway in New York. where the street is divided by a narrow central mall, right in the middle of traffic. At the cross-street inter sections of this long north-south mall, bcnches have been placed behind big concrete buffers and on any day when the wearher is even barely tolerable these benches are filled with people at block after block after block, watching the pedestrians who cross the mall in front of them, watching the traffic, watching the people on the busy sidewalks, watching each other. Eventually Broadway reaches Columbia University and Barnard College, one to the right, the other to the left. Here all is obvious order and quiet. No more stores, no more activity generated by the stores, almost no morc pedestrians crossing---and no more watchers. The benches are there but they go empty in even the finest weather. I have tried them and can see why. No place could be more bor'ing. Even the srudents of these institutions shun the solitude. They are doing their outdoor loitering, outdoor homework and general street watching on the steps overlooking the busiest campus crossing. It is just so on city streets elsewhere. A lively street always has both its users and pure watchers. Last year I was on such a street in the Lower East Side of Manhattan, waiting for a bus. I had not been there longer than a minute, barely long enough to begin taking in the street's activiry of errand goers, children playing, and loiterers on the stoops, when my attention was attracted by a woman who opened a window on the third floor of a teriement across the street and vigorously yoo-hooed at me. When I caught on that she wanted my attention and responded, she shouted down, "The bus doesn't run here on Saturdays!" Then by a combination of shouts and pantomime she directed me around the corner. This woman was one of thousands upon thousands of people in New York who casually take care of the stree. They notice strangers. They observe everything going on. If they need to take action, whether to direct a stranger waiting in the wrong place or to call the police, they do so. Acrion usually requires, to be sure, a certain self-assurance about the actor's proprierorship of the street and the support he will get if necesary, matters which will be gone into later in this book. But even more fundamental than the action and necessary to the action, is the watching itself. Not everyone in cities helps to take care of the streets, and many a city resident or city worker is unaware of why his neighborhood is safe. The other day an incident occurred on the street where I live, and it interested me because of this point. My block of the street, I must explain, is a small one, but it contains a remarkable range of buildings, varying from several vintages of tenements to three- and four-story houses that have been converted into low-rent flas with stores on the ground foor, or rerurned to single-family use like ours. Across the street there used to be mostly four-story brick tenements with stores below. But twelve years ago several buildings, from the corner to the middle of the block, were converted into one building with elevator apartments of small size and high rents. The incident that attracted my attention was a suppressed struggle going on between a man and a little girl of eight or nine years old: The man seemed to be trying to get the girl to go with hiin. By turns he was directing a cajoling atrention to her, and then assuming an air of nonchalance. The girl was making herself rigid, as children do when they resist, against the wall of one, of the tenements across the street. As I watched from our second-foor window, making up my mind how to intervene if it seemed advisable, I saw it was not going to be'necesary. From the butcher shop beneath the tenement had emerged the woman who, with her husband, runs the shop; she was standing within earshot of the man, her arms folded and a look of deternination on her face. Joe Cornacchia, who with his sons-in-law keeps the delicatessen, emerged about the saine moment and stood solidly to the other side. Several heads poked out of the tenement windows above, one was withdrawn quickly and its owner reappeared a moment later in the doorway behind the man. Two men from the bar next to the butcher shop came to the doorway and waited. On my side of the street, 1 saw that the locksmith, the fruit man and the laundry proprietor had all come out of their shops and that the scene was also being surveyed from a number of windows besides ours. That man did not know it, but he was surrounded. Nobody was going to allow a little girl to be dragged off, even if nobody knew who she was. I am sorry---sorry purely for dramatic purposesto have to report that the little girì turned out to be the man's daughter. Throughout the duration of the lictle drama, perhaps five minutes in all, no eyes appeared in the windows of the high-rent, small-apartment building. It was the only building of which this was true, When we first moved to our block, I used to anticipate happily thar perhaps soon all the buildings would be rehabilitated like that one. I know better now, and can orly anticipate with gloom and foreboding the recent news that exactly this transformation is scheduled for the rest of the block frontage adjoining the high-rent building. The high-rent tenants, most of whom are so transient we cannot even keep track of their faces.\* have not the remotest idea of who takes care of their stect, or how. A city neighborhood can absorb and protect a substantial number of these birds of passage, as our neighborhood does. But if and when the neighborhood fnally becomes them, they will gradually fnd the streets less secure, they wilì be vaguely mystifed about it, and if things get bad enough they will drift away to another neighborhood which is mysteriously safer. In some rich city neighborhoods, where there is little do-ityourself surveillance, such as residential Park Avenue or upper Fifth Avenue in New York, stteet watchers are hired. The monotonous sidewalks of residential Park Avenue, for example, arc surprisingly little used; their puttive users are populating, instead, the interesting store-, bar- and restaurant-filled sidewalks of Lexington Avenue and Madison Avenue to east and west, and the cross streets leading to these. A network of doormen and superintendents, of delivery boys and nursemaids, a forn of hired neighborhood, keeps residential Park Avenue supplied with eyes. At night, with the security of the doormnen as à bulwark, dog walkers safely venture forth and supplement the doorrnen. But this street is so blank of built-in eyes, so devoid of concrete reasons for using or watching it instead of turning the frst corner off of it, that if its rents were to slip below the point where they could support a plenriful hired neighborhood of doornien and elevator men, it would undoubtedly become a woefully dangerous street. Once a street is well equipped to handle strangers, once it has both a good, effeαive demarcation between private and public spaces and has a basic supply of activity and eyes, the more strangers the merrier. Strangers become an enormous asset on the street on which I live, and the spurs off it, particularly at night when safety assets are most needed. We are fortunate enough, on the street, to be gifted not only with a locally supported bar and another around the corner, but also with a famous bar that draws continuous troops of strangers ftom adjoining neighborhoods and even from out of town. It is famous because the poet Dylan Thomas used to go there, and mentioned it in his writing. This bar, indeed, works two distinct shifts. In the morning and early afternoon it is a social gathering place for the old community of Irish longshoremen and other craftsmen in the area, as it always was. But beginning in midafternoon it takes on a different life, more like a college bull session with beer, combined with a literaty cocktail party, and chis continues untl the early hours of the morning. On a cold winter's night, as you pass the White Horse, and the doors open, a solid wave of conversation and animation surges out and hits you; very warming. The comings and goings from this bar do much to keep our street reasonably populated until three in the moring, and it is a street always safe to come home to. The only nstance I know of a beating in our street occurred in the dead hours between the closing of the bar and dawn. The beating was halted by one of our neighbors who saw it from his window and, unconsciously certain that even at night he was part of a web of strong street law and order, intervened. A friend of mine lives on a street uptown where a church youth and community center, with many night dances and other activiries, perforins the same service for his street that the Wlite Horse bar does for ours. Orthodox planning is much imbued with puritanical and Utopian conceptions of how people should spend their free time, and in planning, these moralisms on people's private lives are deepiy confused with concepts about the workings of cities. In maintaining city street civilization, the Wlite Horse bar and the church-sponsored youth center, diferent as they undoubtedly are, perform much the same publi'c street civilizing service. There is not only room in cities for such differences and many more in taste, puipose and interest of occupation; cities also have a need for people with al these differences in taste and proclivity. The preferences of Utopians, and of other compulsive managers of other people's leisure, for one kind of legal enterprise over others is worse than irrelevant for cities. It is harmful. The greater and more plentiful the range of all legitimate interes (in the strictly legal sense) that city streets and their enterprises can satisfy, the better for the streets and for the safety and civilization of the city. Bars, and indeed all commerce, have a bad name in many city districts precisely because they do draw strangers, and the strangers do not work out as an asset at all. This sad circumstance is especialiy true in the dispirited gray belts of great cities and in once fashionable or at least once solid inner residential areas gone into decline. Because these neighborhoods are so dangerous, and the streets typically so, dark, it is commonly believed that their trouble may be insufficient street lighting. Good lighting is imporant, but darkness alone does not account for the gray areas’ deep, functional sickness, the Great Blight of Dullness. The value of bright street lights for dispirited grày areas rises from the reasurance they offer to some people who need to go out on the sidewalk, or would like to, but lacking the good light would not do so. Thus the lights induce these people to contribute their own eyes to the upkeep of the street. Moreover, as is obvious, good lighting augments every pair of eyes, makes the eyes count for more because their range is greater. Each additional pair of eyes, and every increase in their range, is that much to the good for dull gray areas. But unless eyes are there, and unless in the brains behind those eyes is the almost unconscious reassurance of general street suppoπ in upholding civilization, lights can do no good. Horrifying public crimes can, and do, occur in welllighted subway stations when no effective eyes are present. They virtually never occur in darkened theaters where many people and eyes are present. Street lights can be like that famous stone that falls in the desert where there are no ears to hear. Does it make a noise? Without effective eyes to see, does a light cast light? Not for practical purposes. To explain the troubling effect of strangers on the streets of city gray areas, I shall árst point out, for purposes of analogy, the peculiarities of another and 6igutative kind of street-the corridors of high-rise public housing projects, those derivatives of Radiant City. The elevators and corridors of these projeers are, in a sense, streets. They are streets piled up in the sky in order to eliminate streets on the ground and pertnit the ground to become deserted parks like the mall at Washington Houses where the tree was stolen. Not only are these interior parts of the buildings streets in the sense that they serve the comings and goings of residents, most of whom may not know each other or recognize, necessarily, who is a resident and who is not. They are streets also in the sense of being accessible to the public. They have been designed in an imitation of upper-class standards for apartanent living without upper-class cash for doormen and elevator men. Anyone at all can go into these buildings, unqucstioned, and use the traveling street of the elevator and the sidewalks that are he corridors. These interior streets, although completely accessible to public use, are closed to public view and they thus lack the checks and inhibitions exerted by eye-policed city streets. Troubled, so far as I can determine, less by the amply proved dangers'to human beings in these blind-eyed streets than by the vandalism to propetty that occurs in them, the New York City Housing Authority some years back experimented with corridors open to public view in a Brooklyn project which I shall call Blenheim Houses although that is nor its name, (I do not wish to add to its troubles by advertising it.) Because the buildings of Blenheim Houses are sixteen stories high, and because their height permits generous expanses of shunned ground area, surveillance of the open corridors from the ground or from other buildings offers little more than psychological effect, but this psychological openness to view does appear effective to some degree. More important and effective. the corridors were well designed to induce surveillance from within the buildings themselves. Uses other than plain circulation were built into them. They were equipped as play space, and made sufficiently generous to act as narrow porches, as wel as passageways. This all turned out to be so lively and interesting that the tenants added still another use and much the favorite: picnic grounds--this in spite of continual pleas and threats from the management which did not plan that the balcony-corridors should xrve as picnic grounds. (The plan should anticipate everything and then permit no changes.) The tenants are devoted to the balcony-corridors; and as a result of being intensi vely used the balconies are under intense surveillance. There has been no problem of crime in these particular corridors, nor of vandalism either. Not even light bulbs are stolen or broken, although in projects of similar size with blind-eyed corridors, light bulb replacements solely because of theft or vandalism customarily run into the thousands each month. So far so good. A striking demonstration of the ditect connection between city surveillance and city safety! Nonetheless, Blenheim Houses has a fearsome problem of vandalism and scandalous behavior. The lighted balconies which are, as the manager puts it, "the brightest and most arractive scene in sight," draw strangers, especially teen-agers, from all over Brooklyn. Bur these strangers, lured by the magnet of the publicly visible corridors, do not halt at the visible corridors. They go into other "streets"of the buildings, streets that lack surveillance. These include the elevators and, more imporant in this case, the fre stairs and their landings. The housing police run up and down after the malefactors--who behave barbarously and viciously in the blind-eyed, sixteen-story-high stairwaysand the malefactors elude them. It is easy to run the elevators up to a high floor, jam the doors so the elevators cannot be brought down, and then play hell with a building and anyone you can catch. So serious is the problem and apparently so uncontrollable, that the advantege of the safe corridors is all but canceled--at least in the harried manager's eyes. What happens at Blenheim Houses is somewhat the same as what happens in dull gray areas of cities. The gray areas' pitifully few and thinly spaced patches of brightness and life are like the visible corridors at Blenheim Houses. They do attract strangers. But the relatively deserted, dull, blind streets leading from these places are like the fire stairs at Blenheim Houses. These are not equipped to handle strangers and the presence of strangers in them is an automatic menace. The temptation in such cases is to blame the balconies—or the commerce or bars that serve as a magnet. A typical tain of thought is exemplified in the Hyde Park-Kenwood renewal project now under way in Chicago. This piece of gray area adjoining the University of Chicago contains many splendid houses and grounds, but for thirty years it has been plagued with a frightening street crime problem, accompanied in latter years by considerable physical decay. The "cause"of Hyde Park-Kenwood's decline has been brilliantly identifed, by the planning heirs of the bloodletting doctors, as the presence of "blight." By blight they mean that too many of the college professors and other middleclass families steadily deserred this dull and dangerous area and their places were often, quite nanurally, taken by those with little economic or sociai choice among living places. The plan designates and removes these chunks of blight and replaces them with chunks of Radiant Garden City designed, as usual, to minimize use of the streets. The plan also adds still more empty spaces here and there, blurs even further the district's already poor distinctions between private and public space, and ampuoates the existing commerce, which is no great shakes. The early plans for this renewal included a relatively large imitation-suburban shop ping center. But the thoughts of thu's brought a faint reminder of realities and a glimmer of apprehension in the course of the planning process. A large center, larger than that required for the standard shopping needs of residents in the renewal district itself, "might draw into the area extraneous people," as one of the architectural planners put it. A snall shopping center was thereupon settled on. Large or small matters little. It matters little because Hyde Park-Kenwood, like all city districts, is, in real life, surrounded by "extraneous" people. The area is an embedded part of Chicago. It cannot wish away its location. It cannot bring back its one-t'me condition, long gone, of semisuburb'ta. To plan as if it could, and to evade its deep, functional inadequacies, can have only one of two possible results. Either extraneous people will continue to come into the area as they please, and if so they will include some strangers who are not at all nice. So far as security is concered, nothing will have changed except that the opportunity for street crime will be a litte easier, if anything, because of the added emptiness. Or the plan can be accompanied by determined, extraordinary means for keeping extraneous people out of this area, just as the adjoining University of Chicago, the institution that was the moving spirit in getting the plan under way, has itself taken the extraordinary measure, as reported in the press, of loosing police dogs evety night to patrol its campus and hold at bay any human being in this dangerous unurban inner keep. The barriers formed by new projects at the edges of Hyde Park-Kenwood, plus extraordinary policing, may indeed keep out extraneous peopie with sufficient effectiveness. If so, the price will be hostility from the surrounding city and an ever more beleaguered feeling within the fort. And who can be sure, either, that all those thousands rightfully within the fort are tustworthy in the dark? Again, I do not wish to single out one are, or in chis case one plan, as uniquely opprobrious. Hyde Park-Kenwood is significant mainly because the diagnosis and the corrective measures of the plan are typical—just slightly more ambitiousof plans conceived for gray area renewal experiments in cities all over the country. This is City Planning, with all the stamp of orthodoxy on it, not some aberration of local wil fulness. Suppose we continue with building, and with deliberate rebuilding, of unsafe cities. How do we live with this insecuriry? From the evidence thus far, there seem to be three modes of living with it; maybe in time others will be invented but I suspect these three will simply be further developed, if that is the word for it. The frst mode is to let danger hold sway, and let those unfortunate enough to be stuck with it take the consequences. This is the policy now followed with respect to low-income housing projects, and to many middle-income housing projects. The second mode is to take refuge in vehicles. This is a technique practiced in the big wild-animal reservarions of Africa, where tourists are warned to leave their cais under no circumstances until they reach a lodge. It is also the technique practiced in Los Angeles. Surprised visitors to that city are forever recounting how the police of Beverly Hills stopped them, made them prove their reasons for being afoot, and warned them of the danger. This technique of public safety does not seem to work too effectively yet in Los Angeles, as the crime rate shows, but in time it may. And think what the crime figures might be if more people without metal shells were helpless upon the vast, blind-eyed reservation of Los Angeles. People in dangerous parts of other citries often use automobiles as protection too, of course, or try to. A letter to the editor in the New Y'ork Post, reads, "I live on a dark street off Utica Avenue in Brooklyn and therefore decided to take a cab home even though it was not late. The cab driver asked that I get off at the corner of Utica, saying he did not want to go down the dark strect. If I had wanted to walk dowo the dark street, who needed him?" The third mode, at which I have already hinted while discusing Hyde Park-Kenwood, was developed by hoodlum gangs and has been adopted widely by developers of the rebuilt city. This mode is to cultivate the institution of Turf. Under the Turf system in its historical foru, a gang appropriates as its territory certain streets or housing projects or parboften a combination of the thrce. Members of other gangs cannot enter this Turf without pennission from the Turfowning gang, or if they do so it is at peril of being beaten or run off. In 19s6, the New York City Youth Board, fairly desperate because of gang warfare, arranged through its gang youth workers a series of truces among fighting gangs. The truces were reported to stipulate, among other provisions, a mutual understanding of Turf boundaries among the gangs concerned and agreement not to trespass. The city's police commisioner, Stephen P. Kennedy, thereupon expressed outrage at agreeinents respecting Turf. The police, he said, aimed to protect the right of every person to walk any part of the city in safety and with impunity as a basi'c right. Pacts about Turf, he indicated, were intolerably subversive both of public rights and public safety. I think Commissioner Kennedy was profoundly right. However, we must reflect upon the problem facing the Youth Board workers. It was a real one, and they were rying as well as they could to meet it with wlatever empirical means they could. The safety of the city, on which public right and freedom of movement ultimately depend, was missing from the unsuccessful streers, parks and projects dominated by these gangs. Freedom of the city, under these circumstances, was a rather academic ideal. Now consider the redevelopment projects of ciries: the middle- and upper-income housing occupying many acres of city, many forner blocks, with their own grounds and their own streets to serve these "islands within the city,""cities within the city," and "new concepts in city living," as the advertisements for them say. The technique here is also to designate the Turf and fence the other gangs out. At first the fences were never visible. Patrolling guards were suffcient to enforce the line. But in the past few years the fences have become literal. Perhaps the first was the high cyclone fence around a Radiant Garden City project adjoining Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore (great educarional instirutions seem to be deplorably inventive with Turf devices). In case anyone mistakes what the fence means, the signs on the project stroet also say "Keep Out. No Trespassing." It is uncanny to see a city neighborhood, in a civilian city, walled off like this. It lools not only ugly, in a deep sense, but surrealistic. You can imagine how it sits wirh the neighbors, in spite of the antidote message on the project church's bulletin board: "Christ's Love Is The Best Tonic Of All" New York has been quick to copy the lesson of Baltimore, in its own fashion.. Indeed, at the back of Amalgamated Houses on the Lower East Side, New York las gone further. At the northern end of the project's parklike central promenade, an iron-bar gate has been permanently padlocked and is crowned not with mere metal netting but with a tangle of barbed wire. And does this defended promenade give out on depraved old megalopolis? Not at all. Its neighbor is a public playground and beyond this more project housing for a different income class. In the rebuilt city it takes a heap of fences to make a balanced neighborhood. The "juncture" between two differently pricetagged populations, again in the rebuilt Lower East Side, that between middle-income cooperative Corlears Hook and lowincome Vladeck Houses, is especially elaborate. Corlears Hook buffers its Turf against its next-door neighbors with a wide parking lot'running the full width of the super-block juncture, next a spindly hedge and a six-foot-high cyclone fence, ncxt a copletely fenced-in no man's land some thirty feet wide consisting mainly of dirty blowing papers and deliberately inaccessible to anything else. Then begins the Vladeck Turf. Similarly, on the Upper West Side, the rental agent of Park West Village, "Your Own World in the Heart of New York," on whom I have foisted myself as a prospective tenant, tells me rasuringly, "Madam, as soon as the shopping center is completed, the entire grounds will be fenced in." "Cyclone fences?" "That is correct, madam. And eventually"--waving his hand at the city surrounding his domain--"all that will go. Those people will go. We are the pioneers here." I suppose it is rather like pioneer life in a stockaded vilage, except that the pioneers were working toward greater security for their civilization, not less. Some members of the gangs on the new Turfs find this way of life hard to take. Such was one who wrote a letter to the New York Post in t959: "The other day for the first time my pride at being a resident of Stuyvesant Town and of New York City was replaced by indignation and shame. I noticed two boys about 12 years old sitting on a Stuyvesant Town hench. They were deep in conversation, quiet, well-behaved—and Puerto Rican. Suddenly two Stuyvesant Town guards were approaching—one from the north and one from the south. The one signaled the other by pointing to the two boys. One went up to the boys and after several words, quietly spoken on both sides, the boys rose and left. They tried to look unconcerned . . . How can we expect people to have any dignity and self-respect if we rip it from them even before they reach adulthood? How really poor are we of Stuyvesant Town and of New York City, too, that we can't share a bench with two boys." The Letters Editor gave this communication the headline, "Stay in Your Own Turf." But on the whole, people seem to get used very quickly to living in a Turf with either a figurative or a literal fence, and to wonder how they got on without it formerly. This phenomenon was described, before the Turf feņces carme into the city, by the New Yorker, with reference not to fenced city but to fenced town. It seems that when Oak Ridge, Tennessee, was demilitarized after the wàr, the prospect of losing the fence that went with the militarization drew frightened and impassioned protests from many residents and occasioned town meetings of high excitement. Everyone in Oak Ridge had come, not many years before, from unfenced towns or cities, yet stockade life had become normal and they feared for their safety without the fence, Just so, my ten-year-old nephew David, born and brought up in Stuyvesant Town, "A City Within a City," comments in wonder that anyone at all can walk on the street outside our door. "Doesn't anybody keep track whether they pay rent on this street?" he asks. "Who puts them out if they don't belong here?" The technique of dividing the city into Turfs is not simply a New York solution. It is a Rebuilt American City solution. At the Harvard Design Conference of 1959, one of the topics pondered by city architectural designers turned out to be the puzzle of Turf, although they did not use that designation. The examples discussed happened to be the Lake Meadows middle-income project of Chicago and the Lafayette Park high-income project of Detroit. Do you keep the rest of the city out of these blind-eyed purlieus? How difficult and how unpalatable. Do you invite the rest of the city in? How difficult and how impossible. Like the Youth Board workers, the developers and residents of Rad'iant City and Radiant Garden City and Radiant Garden City Beautiful have a genuine diffculty and they have to do the best they can with it by the empirical means at their disposal. They have little choice. Wherever the rebuilt city rises the barbaric concept of Turf must follow, because the rebuilt city has junked a basic function of the city street and with it, necessarily, the freedom of the city. Under the seemi'ng disorder of the old city, wherever the old city is working successfully, is a marvelous order for maintaining the safety of the streets and the freedom of the city. It is a conplex order. Its essence is intricacy of sidewalk use, bringing with it a constant succession of eyes. This order is all composed of movement and change, and although it is life, not art, we may fancifully call it the att forn of the city and liken it to the dance—not to a simple-minded precision dance writh everyone kicking up at the same time, twirling in unison and bowing off en masse, but to an intricate ballet in which the individual dancers and ensembles all have distinctive parts which miraculously reinforce each other and compose an orderly whole. The ballet of the good city sidewalk never repeats itself from place to place, and in any one place is always replete with new improvisations. The stretch of Hudson Street where I live is each day the scene of an intricate sidewalk ballet. I make my own first entrance into it a lirtle after eight when I put out the garbage can, surely a prosaic occupation, but I enjoy my part, my little clang, as the droves of junior high school students walk by the center of the stage dropping candy wrappers. (How do they eat so much candy so early in the morning?) While I sweep up the wrappers I watch the other rituals of morning: Mr, Halpert unlocking the laundry's handcart from its mooring to a cellar door, Joe Cornacchia's son-in-law stacking out the empty crates from the delicatessen, the barber bringing out his sidewalk folding chair, Mr. Goldstein arranging the coils of wire which proclaim the hardware store is open, the wife of the tenement's superintendent depositing her chunky three-year-old with a toy mandolin on the stoop, the vantage point from which he is learning the English his mother cannot speak. Now the primary children, heading for St. Luke's, dribble through to the south; the children for Sr. Veronica's cross, heading to the west, and the children for P.S. 4t, heading toward the east. Two new entrances are being made from the wings: welldressed and even elegant women and men with brief cases emerge from dootways and side streets. Most of these are headi'ng for the bus and subways, but some hover on the curbs, stopping taxis which have miraculously appeared at the right moment, for the taxis are part of a wider morning ritual; having dropped passengers from midtown in the downtown financial district, they are now bringing downtowners up to midtown. Simultaneousły, numbers of women in housedresses have emerged and as they crisscross with one another they pause for quick conversations that sound with either laughter or joint indignation, never, it seems, anything between. It is time for me to hurry to work too, and I exchange my ritual farewell with Mr. Lofaro, the short, thick-bodied, white-aproned fruit man who stands outside his doorway a little up the streer, his arms folded, his feet planted. looking solid as earth itseif. We nod; we each glance quickly up and down the street, then look back to each other and smile. We have done this many a morning for more than ten years, and we both know what it means: All is well. The heart-of-the-day ballet I seldom see, because part of the nature of it is that working people who live there, like me, are mostly gone, filling the roles of strangers on other sidewalks. But from days off, I know enough of it to know that it becomes more and more intricate. Longshoremen who are not working that day gather at the White Horse or the Ideal or the International for beer and conversation. The executives and business lunchers from the industries just to the west throng the Dorgene restaurant and the Lion's Head coffee house; meat-market workers and comrnunications scientists fill rhe bakery lunchroom. Character dancers come on, a strange old man with strings of old shoes over his shoulders, motor-scooter riders with big beards and girl friends who bounce on the back of the scooters and wear their hair long in front of their faces as well as behind, drunks who follow rhe advice of the Hat Council and are always turned out in hats, but not hats the Council would approve. Mr. Lacey, the locksmith, shuts up his shop for a while and goes to exchange the time of day with Mr. Slube at the cigar store. Mr. Koochagian, the taitor, waters the luxuriam jungle of plants in his window, gives them a critical look from the outside, accepts a compliment on them from two passers-by, fingers the leaves on the plane tree in front of our house .with a thoughtful gardener's appraisal, and crosses the street for a bite at the Ideal where he can keep an eye on customers and wigwag across the message that he is coming. The baby carriages come out, and clusters of everyone from toddlers with dolls to teen-agers with homework gather at the stoops. When I get home after work, the ballet is reaching its crescendo. This is the time of roller skates and stilts and tricycles, and games in the lee of the stoop with bottletops and plastic cowboys; this is the time of bundles and packages, zigzagging from the drug store to the fruit stand and back over to the butcher's; this is the time when teen-agers, al dressed up, are pausing to ask if their slips show or their collars look right; this is the time when beautiful girls get out of MG's; chis is the time when the fire engines go through; this is the time when anybody you know around Hudson Street will go by. As darkness thickens and Mr. Halpert moors the laundry cart to the cellar door agaın, the ballet goes on under lights, eddying back and forth but intensifying at the bright spotlight pools of Joe's sidewalk pizza dispensary, the bars, the delicatessen, the restaurant and the drug store. The night workers stop now at the delicatessen, to pick up salami and a container of milk. Things have settled down for the evening but the street and its ballet have not come to a stop. I know the deep night ballet and its seasons best from waking long after midnight to tend a baby and, sitting in the dark, seeing the shadows and hearing the sounds of the sidewalk. Mostly it is a sound like inhnitely pattering snatches of party conversation and, about three in the morning, singing, very good singing. Sometimes there is sharpness and anger or sad, sad weeping, or a furry of search for a string of beads broken. One night a young man came roaring along, bellowing terrible language at two girls whom he had apparently picked up and who were disappointing him. Doors opened, a wary semicircle formed around him, not too close, until the police came. Out came the heads, too, along Hudson Street, offering opinion, "Drunk . . . Crazy . . . A wild kid from the suburbs."\* Deep in the night, I am almost unaware how many people are on the street unless something calls them together, like the bagpipe. Who the piper was and why he favored our street I have no idea. The bagpipe just skiried out in the February night, and as if it were a signal the random, dwindled movements of the sidewalk took on direction. Swiftly, quietly, aìmost magically a little crowd was there, a crowd that evolved into a circle with a Highland fing inside it. The crowd could be seen on the shadowy sidewalk, the dancers could be seen, but the bagpiper himself was almost invisible because his bravura was all in his music. He was a very little man in a płain brown overcoat. When he finished and vanished, the dancers and watchers applauded, and applause came from the galleries too, half a dozen of the hundred windows on Hudson Street. Then the windows closed, and the little crowd dissolved into the random movemens of the night street. The strangers on Hudson Street, the allies whose eyes help us natives keep the peace of the street, are so many that they always seem to be different people from one day to the next. That does not matter. Whether they are so many always-different people as they seem to be, I do not know. Likely they are. When Jimmy Rogan fell through a plate-glass window (he was separating some scuffling friends) and almost lost his arn, a stranger in an old T shirt emerged from the Ideal bar, swiftly applied an expert tourniquet and, according to the hospital's emergency staff, saved Jimmy's life. Nobody remembered seeing the man before and no one has seen him since. The hospital was called in this way: a woman sitting on the steps next to the accident ran over to the bus stop. wordlessly snatched the dime from the h:nd of a stranger who was waiting with his ffteen-cent fare ready, and aced into the Ideal's phone booth. The stranger raced after her to ofer the nickel too. Nobody remembered seeing him before, and no one has seen him since. When you see the same stranger three or four times on Hudson Street, you begin to nod. This is almost getuing to be an acquaintance, a public acquaintance, of course. 1 have made the daily ballet of Hudson Street sound more frenetic than it is, because writing it telescopes it. In real life, it is not that way. In real life, to be sure, something is always going on, the ballet is never at a halt, but the general effect is peaceful and the general tenor even leisurely. People who know well such animated city streets will know how it is. I am afraid people who do not will always have it a little wrong in their heads—like the old prints of rhinoceroses made from travelers descriptions of rhinoceroses. On Hudson Street, the same as in the North End of Boston or in any other animated neighborhoods of great cities, we are not innately more competent at keeping the sidewalks safe than are .the people who try to live off the hostile truce of Turf in a blind-eyed city. We are the lucky possesors of a city order that makes it relatively sumple to keep the peace because there are plenty of eyes on the street. But there is nothing simple about that order itself, or the bewildering' number of components that go into it. Most of those components are specialized in one way or another. They unite in their joint effect upon the sidewalk, which is not specialized in the least. That is its strength.