# The uses of sidewalks: contact Reforners have long observed city people loitering on busy corners, hanging around in candy stores and bars and drinking soda pop on stoops, and have passed a judgmnent, the gist of which is: "Tbis is deplorable! If these people had decent homes and a more private or bosky outdoor place, they wouldn't be on the street!" This judgment represents a profound misunderstanding of cities. It makes no more sense than to drop in at a testimonial banquet in a hotel and conclude that if these people had wives who could cook, they would give their parties at hore. The point of both the testimonial banquet and the social life of city sidewalks is precisely that they are public. They bring together people who do not know each other in an intimate, private social fashion and in most cases do not care to know each other in that fashion. Nobody can keep open house in a great city. Nobody wants to. And yet if interesting, useful and significant contacts among the people of cities are confined to acquaintanceships suitable for private life, the city becomes stultified. Cities are full of people with whom, from your viewpoint, or mine, or any other individual's, a certain degree of contact is useful or enjoyable; but you do not want them in your hair. And they do not want you in theirs either. In speaking about city sidewalk safety, I mentioned how necessary it is that there should be, in the brains behind the eyes on the street, an almost unconscious assumption of general street support when the chips are down—when a citizen has to choose, for instance, whether he will take responsibility, or abdicate it, in combating barbarism or protecting strangers. There is a short word for this assumption of support: trust. The trust of a city street is formed over time from many, many little public sidewalk contacts. Itgrows outof people stopping by at the bar for a beer, getting advice from the grocer and giving advice to the newsstand man, comparing opinions with other customers at the bakery and nodding hello to the two boys drinking pop on the stoop, eying the girls while waiting to be called for dinner, admonishing the children, hearing about a job from the hardware man and borrowing a dollar from the druggist, admiring the new babies and sympathizing over the way a coat faded.,Customs vary:in some neighborhoods people compare notes on their dogs; in others they compare notes on their landlords. Most of itis ostensibly utterlytrivial but the sum is not trivial at all. The, sum of such casual, public contact at a local leyel most of ir fortuitous, most of it associated with errands, all of it metered by the person concerned and not thrust upon him by anyone—is a feeling for the public identity of people, a web of public respect and trust, and a resource in time of personal or neighborhood need. The absence of this trust isa disasterto a city street. Its cultivation cannot be institutionalized. And above all, itimplies no private commitments. I have seen a striking difference between presence and absence of casual public trust on two sides of the same wide streer in East Harlem, composed of residents of roughly the same incomes and same races. On the old-city side, which was full of public places and the sidewalk loitering so deplored by Uropian minders of other people's leisure, the children were being kept well in hand. On the project side of the street across the way, the children, who had a fre hydrant open beside their play area, were behaving destructively, drenching the open windows of houses with water, squirting it on adults who ignorantly walked on the project side of the street, throwing it into the windows of cars as they went by. Nobody dared to stop them. These were anonymous children, and the identities behind them were an unknown. W'hat if you scolded or stopped them? Who would back you up over there in the blind-eyed Turf? Would you get, instead, revenge? Berter to keep out of it. Impersonal city streets nake anonymous people, and chis is not a marrer of esthetic quality nor of a mystical emotional effect in architectural scale. It is a matter of what kinds of tangible enterprises sidewalks have, and therefore of how people use the sidewalks in practical, everyday life. The casual public sidewalk life of cities ties directly into other types of public l'tfe, of which I shall mention one as illustrative, although there is no end to heir variety. Fornal types of local city organizations are frequently as suned by planners and even by some social workers ro grow in direct, common-sense fashion out of announcements of meetings, the presence of mceting rooms, and the existence of problerns of obvious public concern. Perhaps they grow so in suburbs and towns. 'Γhey do not grow so in cities. Fornal public organizations in cities require an informal public life underlying them, mediating between them and the privacy of the people of the city. We catch a hint of what happens by conrrasting, again, a city area possessing a public sidewalk life with a city area lacking it, as told about in the report of a settlementhouse social researcher who was stuidying problems relating to public schools in a section of New York City: Mr. W [principal of an elementary school] was questioned on the effect of J Houses on the school, and the uprooting of the community around the school. He felt that there ## SB] TH& DEATH AND LIFE OF GREAT AMERICAN CITIES had been many effects and of these most were negative. He mentioned that the project liad torn out numerous institutions for socializing. The present atmosphere of the project was in no way similar to the gaiety of the streets before the project was built. He noted that in general there seemed fewerpeopleon the sreets because there were fewer places for people togather. He also contended thar before the projects were built the Parents Association had been very strong, and now there were only very few active members. Mr. W was wrong in one respect. There were not fewer places (or at any rate there was not less space) for people to gather in the project, if we count places deliberately planned for constructive socializing. Of course there were no bars, no candy stores, no hole-in-the-wall bodeges, no restaurants in the projecr. But the project under discussion was equipped with a model complement of meeting roomns, craft, art and game rooms, outdoor benches, malls, etc., enough to gladden the heart of even the Garden Ciry advocates. Why are such places dead and useless without the most determined efforts and expense to inveigle users-and then to maintain control over the users? What services do the public sidewalk and its enterprises fulfill that these planned gathering places do not? And why? How does an informal public sidewalk life bolster a more fornal, organizational public life? To understand such problens—to understand why drinking pop on the stoop differs from drinking pop in the game room, and why getting advice from the grocer or the bartender differs from getting advice from either your next-door neighbor or from an institutional lady who may be hand-in-glove with an institutional landlord—we must look into the matter of city privacy. Privacy is precious in cities. It is indispensable. Perhaps it is precious and indispensable everywhere, but most places you cannot get it. In small settlements everyone knows your affairs, In the city everyone does notonly those you choose to tell will know much about you, This is one of the attributes of cities that is precious to most ciry people, whether their incomes are high or their incomes are low, whether they are white or colored, whether they are old inhabitants or new, and it is a gift of greatcity life deeply cherished and jealously guarded. Architectural and planning literature deals with privacy in terms of windows, overlooks, sight lines. The idea is that if no one from outside can peek into where you livebehold, privacy. This is simple-minded. Window privacy is the easiest commodity in the world to get. You just pull down the shades or adjust the bl'inds. The privacy of keeping one's personal affairs to those selected to know themn, and the privacy of having reasonable control over who shall make inroads on your time and when, are rare commodities in most of this world, however, and they have nothing to do with the orientation of windows. Anthropologist Elena Padilla, author of Up from Puerto Rico, describing Puerto Rican life in a poor and squalid district of New York, tells how much people know about each other-who is to be trusted and who not, who is defiant of the law and who upholds it, who is competent and well informed and who is inept and ignorant—and how these things are known from the public life of the sidewalk and its associated enterprises. These are matters of public character. But slie also tells how select are those permitted to drop into the kitchen for a cup of coffee, how sttong are the ties, and how l'umited the number of a person's genuine conbdants, those who share in a person's private life and private affairs. She tels how it is not considered dignifed for everyone to know one's affairs. Nor is it considered dignified to snoop on others beyond the face presented in public. It does violence to a person's privacy and righs. In this, the people she describes are essentially the same as the people of the mixed, Americanized city street on which I live, and essentially the same as the people who live in high-income apartments or fine town houses, too. A good city street neighborhood achieves a marvel of balance between its people's deterinination to have essential privacy and their simultaneous wishes for differing degrees of contact, enjoyment or help from the people around. Thuis balance is largely made up of small, sensitively managed deils, practiced and accepted so casually that they are normally taken for granted. Perhaps I can best explain this subtłe but all-important balance in terns of the stores where people leave keys for their friends, a, common custom in New York. In our family, for example, when a friend wants to use our place while we are away for a week end or everyone happens to be out during the day, or a visitor for whom we do not wish to wait up is spending the night, we tell such a friend that he can pick up the key at the delicatessen across the street, Joe Cornacchia, who keeps the delicatesscn, usualy has a dozen or so keys at a tie for handing out like this. He has a special drawer for them. Now why do I, and many others, select Joe as a logical custodian for keys? Because we trust him, first, to be a responsible custodian, but equally important because we know that he combines a feeling of good will with a feeling of no personal responsibility about our private affairs. Joe considers it no concern of his whom we choose to permnit in our places and why. Around onthe other side of our block, people leave their keys ar a Spanish grocery. On the other side of Joe's block, people leave them at the candy store. Down a block they leave them at the coffee shop, and a few hundred feet around the corner from that, in a barber shop. Around one corner from two fashionable błocks of rown houses and apartments in the Upper East Side, people leave their keys in a butcher shop and a bookshop; around another corer they leave them in a cleaner's and a drug store. In unfashionable Éast Harlem keys are left with at least one florist, in bakeries, in luncheonettes, in Spanish and Ital'ian groceries. The point, wherever they are left, is not the hind of ostensible service that the enterprise offers, but the kind of proprietor it has. A service like this cannot be formalized. Identifcations . . questions . . . insurance against mishaps. The al-essential line between public service and privacy would be transgressed by institutionalization. Nobody in his right mind would leave his key in such a place. The service must be given as a favor by someone with an unshakable understanding of the difference between a person's key and a person's private life, or it cannot be given at all. Or consider the l'ine drawn by Mr. Jaffe at the candy store around our cornera line so well understood by his customers and by other storekeepers too that they can spend their whole lives in its presence and neiwer think about it consciously. One ordinary morning last winter, Mr. Jaffe, whose formal business name is Bernie, and his wife, whose formal business name is Ann, supervised the small children crossing at the corner on the way to P.S. 4t, as Bernie always does because he sees the need; lent an umbrella to one customer and a dollar to another; took custody of two keys; took in some packages for people in the next building who were away; lectured two youngsters who asked for cigarettes; gave street directions; took custody of a watch to give the repair man across the street when he opened later; gave out inforation on the range of rents in the neighborhond to an apartment seeker; listened to a tale of domestic difficulty and offered reassurance; told sore rowdies they could not come in unless they behaved and then defined (and got) good behavior; ptovided an incidental forum for half a dozen conversations among customers who dropped in for oddments; set aside certain newly arrived papers and magazines for regular customers who would depend on gett ing ther; advised a mother who came for a birthday present not to get the ship-model kit because another child going to the same birthday parry was giving that; and got a back copy (this was for me) of the previous day's newspaper out of the deliverer's surplus returns when he came by. After considering thi's multiplicity of extra-merchandising services I asked Bernie, "Do you ever introduce your customers to each other?" He looked startled at the idea, even dismayed. "No," he said thoughtfully. "That would just not be advisable. Sometimes, if I know two customers who arc in at the same time have an interest in common, I bting up the subject in conversation and let them carry it on from there if they want to. But oh no, I wouldn't introduce them." When I told this to an acquaintance in a suburb, she promptly assumed thar Mr. Jaffe felt tliat to make an introduction would be to step above his social class. Not at all. In our neighborhood, storekeepers like the Jaffes enjoy an excellent social stanus, that of businessmen. In income they are apt to be the peers of the general run of customers and in independence they ate the superiors. Their advice, as men or women of common sense and experience, is sought and respected. They are well known as individuals, rather than unknown as class symbols. No; this is that almost unconsciously enforced, well-balanced line showing, the line between the city public world and the world of privacy. This line can be maintained, without awkwardness to anyone, because of the great plenty of opportunities for public contact in the enterprises along the sidewalks, or on the sidewalks themselves as people move to and fro or deliberately loiter when they feel like it, and also because of the presence of many public hosts, so to speak, proprietors of meeting places l'ike Bernie's where one is free either to hang around or dash in and out, no strings attached. Under this system, it is possible in a city street neighborhood to know all kinds of people without unwelcome entanglements, without boredom, necessity for excuses, explanations, fears of giving offense, embarrassmnenrs respecting impositions or commitments, and all such paraphemalia. of obligations which can accompany less limited relationsh ps. It is possible to be on excellent sidcwalk terms with people who are very different from oneself, and even, as time passes, on familiar public terms with them. Such relationships can, and do, endure for many years, for decades; they could never have formed without that line, much less endured. They form precisely because they are by-the-way to people's normal public sorti'es. "Togetherness" is a firringly nauseating name for an old ideal in planning theory. This ideal is that if anything is shared among people, much should be shared. "Togetherness," apparently a spiritual resource of the new suburbs, worls destructively in cities. The requirement that mueh shall be shared drives city people apart. When an area of a city lacks a sidewalkıfe, the people of the place must enlarge their private lives if they are to have anything approaching equivalent contact with their neighbors. They must settle for some forn of "togetherness," in which more is shared with one another than in the life of the sidewalks, or else they must settle for lack of contact. Inevitably the outcome is one or the other; it has to be; and either has distress'ing results. In the case of the first outcome, where people do share much, they become exceedingly choosy as to who their neighbors are, or with whom they associate at all. They have to become so. A friend of mine, Penny Kostritsky, is unwittingly and unwillingly in this fx on a street in Baltimore. Her street of nothing but residences, embedded in an area of almost nothing but residences, has been experimentally equipped with a charming sidewalk park. The sidewalk has been widened and attractively paved, wheeled trafhc discouraged from the narrow street roadbed, trees and flowers planted, and a piece of play sculpture is to go in. All these are splendid ideas so far as they go. However, there are no stores. The mothers from nearby blocks who bring small children here, and corne here to find some contact with others thernselves, perforce go into the houses of acquaintances along the street to warm up in winter, to make telephone calls, to take their children in emergencies to the bathroom. Their hostesses offer them coffee, for there is no other place to get coffee, and naturally considerable social life of this kind has arisen around the park. Much is shared. Mrs. Kostritsky, who lives in one of the conveniently located houses, and who has two small children, is in the thick of this narrow and accidental social life. 'I have lost the advantage of living in the city," she says, "without getting the advantges of living in the suburbs." Still more distressing, when mothers of diffcrent income or color or educational background br'ng their children to the street park, they and their children are rudely and pointedly ostracized. They fit awkwardly into the suburbanlike sharing of private lives that has grown in default of city sidewalk life. The park lacks benches purposely; the "togetherness" people ruled them out because they might be interpreted as an invitation to people who cannot fit in. "If only we had a couple of stores on the street,"Mrs. Kostritsky laments. "If only there were a grocery store or a drug store or a snack joint. Then the telephone calls and the warning up and the gathering could be done naturally in public, and then people would act more decent to each other because everybody would have a right to be here." Much the same thing that happens in this sidewalk park without a city public life happens sometimes in middle-class projects and colonies, such as Chatham Village in Pittsburgh for example, a famous model of Garden City planning. The houses here are grouped in colonies around shared interior lawns and play yards, and the whole development is equipped with other devices for close sharing, such as a residents' club which holds parties, dances, reunions, has ladies' activities like bridge and sewing parties, and holds dances and parties for the children. There is no public life here, in any city sense. There are differing.degrees of extended private life. Chatham Village's success as a "model" neighborhood where much is shared has required that the residents he similar to one another in their standards, interests and backgrounds. In the main they are middle-class professionals and their families.\* It has also required that residents set themselves distinctly apart from the diferent people in the surrounding city; these are in the main also middle class, but lower middle class, and this is too different for the degree of chumminess that neighborl'iness in Chatham Village entails. The inevimble insularity (and homogeneity) of Chatham Village has practical consequences. As one illustration. the junior high school serving the area has problems, as all schools do. Chatham Village is large enough to dominate the elementary schooì to which its children go, and therefore to work at helping solve this school's problems. To deal with the junior high, however, Chatham Village's people must cooperate with entirely different neighborhoods. Bit there- is no public acquaintanceship, no foundation of casual public trust, no cross-connections with the necessary people--and no practice or ease in applying the most ordinary techniques of city public life at lowly levels. Feeling helpless, as indeed they are, some Chatham Village families move away when their children reach junior high age; others contrive to send them to private high schools. Ironicaly. just such neighborhood islands as Chatham Village are encouraged in orthodox planning on the specihc grounds that cities need the talents and stabilizing infuence of the middle class. Presumably these qualities are to seep out by osmosis. People who do not ft happily into such colonies eventually get out, and in time managements become sophisticated in knowing who among applicants will fit in. Along with basic similarities of standards, values and backgrounds, the arrangement seemns to demand a forrmidable amount of forbearance and tact. Cityresidentialplanning that depends, for contact among neighbors, on personal sharing of this sort. and that cultivates it, often does work well socially, if rather narrowly. for self-selected upper-middle-class people. It solves easy problems for an easy kind of population. So far as I have been able to discover, it fails to work, however, even on its own terms, with any otber kind of population. The more common outcome in cities, where people are faced with the choice of sharing much or nothing, is noth'ing. In city areas that lack a natural and casual public life, it is common for residents to isolate themselves from each other to a fantastic degree. If mere contact with your neighbors threatens to entangle you in their private lives, or eatangle them,in yours, and if you cannot be so careful who your neighbors are as self-selected upper-middle-class people can be, the logical solution is absolutely to avoid friendliness or casual offers of help. Better to stay thoroughly distant. As a practical result, the ordinary public jobs like keeping children in hand--for which people must take a little personal initiative, or those for which they must band together in limited common purposes, go undone. The abysses this opers up can be almost unbelievable. For example, in one New York City project which is designed ---like all orthodox residential city planning—for sharing much or nothing, a remarkably outgoing woman prided herself that she had become acquainted, by making a deliberate effort, with the mothers of every one of the ninety families in her building. She called on them. She buttonholed them at the door or in the hall. She struck up conversations if she sat beside them on a bench. It so happened that her eight-year-old son, one day, got stuck in the elevator and was left there withoat help for more than two hours, although he screamed, cried and pounded. The next day the morher expressed her dismay to one of her ninety acquaintances. "Oh, was that your son?" said the other woman. "I didn't know whose boy he was. If I had realized he was your son I would have helped him." This woman, who had not belaved in any such insanely calloused fashion on her old public street—to which she constantly returned, by the way, for public life—was afraid of a possible entanglement that might not be kept easily on a public plane. ozens of illustrations of this defense can be found wherever the choice is shating much or nothing. A thorough and detailed report by Ellen Lurie, a social worker in East Harlem, on life in alow-income project there, has this to say: It is . . , extremely important to recognize that for considerably complicatedreasons, many adults either don't want to become involved in any friendship-relationships at all with their neighbors, or, if they do succumb to the need for some form of society,they strictly limit themselves to one or two friends, and no more. Over and over again, wivesrepeated their husband's waruing: "I'm not to get too friendly with anyone. My husband doesn't believe in it." ·"People are too gossipy and they could get us in a lot of trouble." "It's best to mind your own business." One woman, Mrs. Abraham, always goes out the back door of the buildi'ng because she doesn't want to interfere with the people sranding around in the front. Another man, Mr. Colan . . . won't let his wife make any friends in the project, because he doesn't trust the people here. They have four children, ranging from 8 years to i4 but they are not allowed downstairs alone, because the parents are afraid someone will hurt them.\* What happens then is that all sorts of barriers to insure self-protect'on are being constructed by many families. To protect their children from a neighborhood they aren't sure of, they keep them upstairs in the apartment: To protect themselves, they make few, if any, friends. Some are afraid that friends will become angry or envious and make up a story to report to management, causing them great trouble. If the husband gets a bonus (which he decides not to report) and the wife buys new curtains, the visitingfriends will see and might tell the 'nanagement, who, in turn, investigates and issues a rent increase.Suspicion and fear of trouble often outweigh any need for neighborly advice and help. For these families the sense of privacy has already been extensively violated. The deepest secrets, all the family skeletons, are well known not only to managementbut often to other public agencies, such as the Welfare Department. To preserve any last remnants of privacy, they choose to avoid close relationships with others.This same phenomenon may be found to a much lesser degree in non-planned slum housing, for there too it is often necessary for other reasons to build up these forns of self-protection. But, it is surely true that this withdrawing from the society of others is much more extensive in planned housing.Even in England, this suspicion of the neighbors and the ensuing aloofness was found in studies of planned towns. Perhapsthis pattern is nothing morethan an elab. orate group mechanism to protect andpreserve inner digniry in the face of so many outside pressures to conform. Along with nothingness, considerable "togetherness" can be found in such places, however. Mrs. Lurie reports on chis type of relationship: Often two womcn from wo different buildings will meet in the laundry room, recognize each other; although they may never have spoken a single word to each other back on 9gth Street, suddenly here they become "best friends." If one of these two already has a friend or two in her own building, the other is likely to be drawn into that circle and begins to make her friendships, not with women on her foor, but rathcr on her friend's floor. These friendships do not go into an ever-widening circle. There are certain defini'te well-traveled paths in the project, and after a while no new people are met. Mrs. Lurie, who works at community organization in East Harlem, with remarkable success, has looked into the history of many past attempts at project tenant organization. She has told me that "togetherness," itself, is one of the factors that make this kind of organization so d'iffcult. "These projects are not lacking in natural leaders," she says. "They contain people with real ability, wonderful people many of them, but the typical sequence is that in the course of organization leaders have found each other, gotten all involved in each others' social lives, and have ended up lking to nobody but each other. They lave not found their followers. Everything tends to degenerate into ineffective cliques, as a natural course. There is no normal public life. Just the mechanics of people learning what is going on is so difficult. It all makes the simplest social gain extra hard for these people." Residents of unplanned city residential areas that lack neighborhood commerce and sidewalk life seem sometimes to follow the same course as residents of public projects when faced with the choice of sharing much or nothing. Thus researchers hunting the secrets of the social structure in a dull gray-area district of Detroit came to the unexpecred conclusion there was no social struccure. The social structure of sidewalk life hangs partly on what can be called self-appointed public characters. A public claracter is anyone who is in frequent contact with a wide circle of people and who is suffciently interested to make himself a public character. A public character need have no special talents or wisdom to fulfli his functionalthough he often does. He just needs to be present, and there need to be enough of his counterparts. His main qualification is that he is public, that he talks to lots of different people. In this way, news travels that is of sidewalk interest. Most public sidewalk characrers are steadily stationed in public places. They are storekeepers or barkeepers or the like. These are the basic public characters. All other public characters of city sidewalks depend on the-if only ind'irectly because of the presence of sidewalk roures to such enterprises and their proprietors. Settlement-house workers and pastors, two more formalized kinds of public characters, typically depend on the street grapevine news systems that have their ganglia in the stores. The director of a settlement on New York's Lower East Side, as an example, makes a regular round of stores. He lears from the cleaner who does his saits about the presence of dope pushers in the neighborhood. He learns from the grocer that the Dragons are working up to something and need attention. He lears from the candy store that two girls are agitating the Sportsmen toward a rumble. One of his most important infornarion spots is an unused breadbox on Rivington Street. That is, it is not used for bread. It stands outside a grocery and is used for sitting on and lounging beside, between the settlement house, a candy store and a pool parlor. A message spoken there for any teen-ager within many blocks will reach his ears unerringly and surprisingly quickly, and the opposite flow along the grapevine similarly brings news quickly in to the breadbox. Blake Hobbs. the head of the Union Settlement music school in East Harlem, notes that when he gets a first student from one block of the old busy street neighborhoods, he rapidly gets at least three or four more and somet'mes almost every child on the block. But when he gets a child from the nearby projects perhaps through the public school or a playground conversation he has initiated--he almost never gets another as a direct sequence. Word does not move around where public characters and sidewalk life are lacking. Besides the anchored public characters of the sidewalk, and the well-recognized roving public characters, there are apt to be various more specialized public characrers on a city sidewalk. In a curious way, some of these help establish an identity not only for themselves but for others. Describing the everyday life of a rerired tenor at such sidewalk establishments as the restaurant and the bocce court, a San Francisco news story notes, "It is said of Meloni that because of his intensity, his draniatic manner and his lifelong interest in music, he tansmits a feeling of vicarious importance to his many friends." Precisely. One need not have either the artistry or the personality of such a man to become a special zed sidewalk character-—bur only a pertinent specialty of some sor. It is easy. I am a specialized public character of sorts along our street, owing of course to the fundamental presence of the basic, anchored public characters. The way I became one started with the fact that Greenwich V llage, where I live, was waging an interminable and horrendous battle to save its main park from being bisected by a highway. During the course of battle I undertook. at the behest of a committee organizer away over on the other side of Greenwich Vilage, to deposit in stores on a few blocks of our street supplies of perition cards protesting the proposed roadway. Customers would sign the cards while in the stores, and from time to time I would make my pickups.\* As a result of engaging in this messenger work, I have since become automarically the sidewalk public character on petition strategy. Before long, for instance, Mr. Fox at the liquor store was consulting me, as he wrapped up my bottle, on how we could get the cityr to remove a long abandoned and dangerous eyesore, a closed-up comfort starion near his corner. If I would undertake to compose the petitions and find the effective way of presenting them to City Ilall, he proposed, he and his partners would undertake to have them printed, circulated and picked up. Soon the stores round about had comfort station removal petitions. Our street by now has many public cxperts on petition tactics, including the children. Not only do public characters spread the news and learn the news at retail, so to speak. They connect with each other and thus spread word wholesale, in efect. A sidewalk lufe, so far as I can observe, arises out of no mysrerious qualities or talents for it in this or that type of population. It arises only when the concrete, tangible facilities it requiures are present. These happen to be the same facilities, in the same abundance and ubiquity, that are required for cultivating sidewalk safety. If they are absent, public sidewalk contacs are absent too. The well-off have many ways of assuaging needs for which poorer people may depend much on sidewalk life—from hearing of jobs to being recognized by the headwaiter. But nevertheless, many of the rich or near-rich in cities appear to appreciate sidewalk life as much as anybody. At any rate, they pay cnornous rents to move into areas with an exuberant and varied sidewalk life. They actually crowd out the middle class and the poor in lively areas like Yorkville or Greenwich Village in New York, or Telegraph Hill just off the North Beach streets of San Francisco. They capriciously desert, after only a few decades of fashion at most, the monotonous streets of "quiet residential areas" and leave them to the less fortunate. Talk to residents of Georgetown in the District of Columbia and by the second or third sentence at least you will begin to hear rhapsodies about the charning restaurants, "more good restaurants than in all the rest of the city put together."the uniqueness and friendliness of the stores, the pleasures of running into people when doing errands at the next corner--and nothing but pride over the fact that Georgetown has become a specialty shopping district for its whole metropolitan area. The city arca, rich or poor or in between, harmed by an interesting sidewalk life and plentiful sidewalk contacts has yet to be found. Efhciency of public sidewalk characters declines drastically if too much burden is put upon them. A store, for example, can reach a turnover in its conrac , or potential contacts, which is'so large and so superfcial that it is socially useless. An example of this can be seen at the candy and newspaper store owned by the housing cooperative of Corlears Hook on New York's Lower East Side. This planned project store replaces perhaps forty superficially similar stores which were wiped out (without compensation to their proprietors) on that project site and the adjoining sites. The place is a mill. Its clerks are so busy making change and screaming ineffectual imprecations at rowdies that they never hear anything except "I want that." This, or utter disinterest, is the usual atmosphere where shopping center planning or repressive zoning artificially contrives commercial monopolies for city neighborhoods. A store like this would fail economically if it had competition. Meantime, although monopoly insures the financial success planned for it, it fails the city socially. Sidewalk public conmct and sidewalk public safety, taken together, bear directy on our country's most serious social problem—segregation and racial discrimination. I do not mean to imply thar a city's planning and design, or its types of streets and street life, can automatically overcome segregation and discrimination. Too many other kinds of effort are also requ'ired to right these injustices. But I do mean to say that to build and to rebuild big cities whose sidewalks are unsafe and whose people must settle for sharing much or nothing, can make it much barder for American cities to overcome discrimination no matter how much effort is expended. Considering the amount of prejudice and fear that accompany discrimination and bolster it, overcoming residential discrinination is just that much harder if people feel unsafè on their sidewalks anyway. Overcoming residential discrimination comes hard where people have no means of keeping a civilized public life on a basically dignified public fooring, and their private lives on a private footing. To be sure, token model housing integration schemes here and there can be achieved in city areas handicapped by danger and by lack of public life—achieved by applying great effort and settling for abnormal (abnormal for cities) choosiness among new neighbors. This is an evasion of the size of the task and its urgency. The tolerance, the room for great differences among neighborsdifferences that often go far deeper than differences in color—which are possible and normal in intensely urban life, but which are so foreign to suburbs and pseudosuburbs, are possible and notnal only when streets of great cities have built-in equipment allowing strangers to dwell in peace together on civilized but essentially dignified and reserved terms. Lowly, unpurposeful and random as they may appear, sidewalk contacts are rhe small change from which a city's wealth of public life may grow. Los Angeles is an extreme example of a metropolis with little public life, depending mainly instead on contacts of a more private social nature. On one plane, for instance, an acquaintance there comments that although she has lived in the city for ten years and knows it conrains Mexicans, she has never laid eyes on a Mexican or an item of Mexican culture, much less ever exchanged any words with a Mexican. On another plane, Orson Welles has written that Hollywood is the only theatricai center in the world that has failed to develop a theatrical bistro. And on still another plane, one of Los Angeles' most powerful businessmen comes upon a blank in public relationships which would be inconceivable in other cities of this size. This businessman, volunteering that the city is "culturally behind,"as he put it, told me that he for one was at work to remedy this. He was heading a committee to raise funds for a first-rate art museum. Later in our conversation, after he had told me about the businessmen's club life of Los Angeles, a life with which he is involved as one of its leaders, I asked him how or where Hollywood people gathered in corresponding fashion. He was unable to answer this. He then added that he knew no one at ali connected with the fim industry, nor did he know anyone who did have such acquaintanceship. "I know that must sound strange," he refected. "We are glad to have the film industry here, but those connected with it are just not people one would know socially." Here again is "togetherness" or nothing. Consider this man's handicap in his attempts to get a metropolitan art museum established. He has no way of reaching with any ease, practice or trust some of his committee's potentially best prospécts. In its upper economu'c, political and cultural echelons, Los Angeles operates according to the same provincial premises of social insularity as the street with the sidewalk park in Balrimore or as Chatham Village in Pirsburgh. Such a metropolis lacks means for bringing together necessary ideas, necessary enthusiasms, necessary money. Los Angeles is embarked on a strange experiment: trying to run not just projects, not just gray areas, but a whole metropolis, by dint of "togetherness" or nothing. I think this is an inevitable outcome for great cities whose people lack ciry public life in ordinary living and working. 4

## The uses of sidewalks assimilating children Among the superstitions of planning and housing is a fantasy about the transformation of children. It goes like this: A population of children is condemned to play on the city streets. These pale and rickety children, in their sinister moral environment, are telling each other canards about sx, sniggering evilly and learning new forms of corruption as efficiently as if they were in reform school. This situation is called "the moral and physical toll taken of our youth by the streets," sometimes it is called simply "the gutter." If only these deprived children can be gotten off the streea into parks and playgrounds with equipment on which to exercise, space in which to run, grass to lift their souls! Clean and happy places, filled with the laughter of children responding to a wholesome environment. So much for the fancasy. Let us consider a story from real life, as discovered by Charles Guggenheim, a documentary-film maker in St. Louis. Guggenheim was working on a film depicting the activities of a St. Louis children's day-care center. He noticed that at the end of the aftemoon roughly half the children left with the greatest reluctance. Guggenheim became sufficiently curious to investigate. Without exception, the children who left unwillingly came from a nearby housing project. And without exception again, those who left willingly came from the old "slum" streets nearby. The mystery, Guggenheim found, was simplicity itself. The children returning to the project, with irs generous playgrounds and lawns, ran a gauntlet of bullies who made them turn out their pockets or submit to a beating, sometimes both. These snall children could not get home each day without enduring an ordeal that they dreaded. The children going back to the old streets were safe from extortion, Guggenheim found. They. had inany streets to select from, and they astutely chose the safest. "If anybody picked on them, there was always a storekeeper they could run to or somebody to come to their aid," says Guggenheim. "They also had any number of ways of cscaping along different routes if anybody was laying for them. These little kids felt safe and cocky and they enjoyed their trip home too." Guggenheim made the related observation of how boring the project's landscaped grounds and playgrounds were, how deserted they seemed, and in contrast how rich in interest, variety and material for both the camera and the imagination wcre the older streets nearby. Consider another story from real life, an adolescent gang battle in the summer of 1959 in New York, which culminated in the death of a ffteen-year-old girl who had no connection with the battle, but happened to be standing at the grounds of the project where she lives. The events leading to the day's final tragedy, and their locales, were reported by the New Ýork Post during the subsequent trial, as follows: The frst fracas occurred about noon when the Sportsinen stepped into the Forsyth St. Boys' turf in Sara Delano Roosevelt Park\* . . . During the afternoon the decision was made by the Forsyth St. Boys to use their ultimate weapon, the rife, and gasoline bombs . . . In the course of the affray, also in Sara Delano Roosevelt Park . . . a 14-year-old Forsyth St. boy was fatally stabbed and two other boys, one 1 years old, were seriously wounded . . . At about 9 P.M. [seven or eight Forsyth St. boys] suddenly descended on the Sportsmen's hangout near the Lillian Wald housing project and, from the no-man's land of Avenue D [the project grounds' boundary} lobbed their gasoline bombs into the group while Cruz crouchedand triggered the rife. Where did these three battles occur? In a park and at the parklike grounds of the project. After outbreaks of this kind, one of the remnedies invariably called for is more parks and playgrounds We are bemused by the sound of symbols. "Street gangs""do their "street fighting" predom inately in parks and playgrounds. When the New York Times in September 959 summed up the worst adolescent gang outbreaks of the past decade in the city, each and every one was designated as having occurred in a park. Moreover, more and more frequently, not only in New York hut in other cities too, children engaged in such horrors rurn out to be from super-block projects, where their everyday play has successfully been removed from the streets (the streets themselves have largely been removed). The highest delinquency belt in New York's Lower East Side, where the gang war described above occurred, is precisely the parklike belt of public housing projects. The two most formidable gangs in Brooklyn are rooted in two of the oldet projects. Ralph Whelan, director of the New York City Youth Board, reports, according to the New York Times, an "invariable rise in delinquency rates" wherever a new housing project is built. The worst girls gang in Philadelphia has grown up on the grounds of that city's second-oldest housing pròject, and the highest delinquency belr of that city corresponds with its major belt of projects. In. St. Louis the project where Guggenheim found the extortion going on is considered relatively safe compared with the city's largest project, fifty-seven acres of mostly grass, dotted with playgrounds and devoid of city streets, a prime breeding ground of delinquency in that city.\* Such projects are examples, among other things, of an intent to take children off the streets. They are designed as they are partly for just this purpose. The disappointing results are hardly strange. The same rules of city safety and city public life that apply to adults apply to children too, except that children are even more vulnerable to danger and barbarism than adults. In real life, what significant change does occur if children are transferred from a lively city street to rhe usual park or to the usual public or project playground? In most cases (not alí, fortunately), rhe most significant change is this: The children have moved from under the eyes of a high numerical ratio of adults, into a place where the ratio of adułts is low or even nil. To think dhis represents an improvement in city child rearing is pure daydreaming. City children themselves know this; they have known it for generations. When we wanted to do anything antisocial, we'always made for Lindy Park because none of the grownups would see us there,"says Jesse Reichek, au artist who grew up in Brooklyn. "Nlostly we played on the streets where we couldn't get away with anything much." Life is the same today. My son, reporting how he escaped four -boys who set upon him, says, 'I was scared they would catch me when I had to pass the playground. If they caught me there I'd be sunk!" A few days after the murder of two sixteen-year-old boys in a playground on the midtown West Side of Manhattan, I paid a morbid visit to the area. The nearby streets were evidently back to normal. Hundreds of children, directly under the eyes\_of innumerable adults using the sidewalks themselves and looking from windows, were engaged in a vast variety of sidewalk games and whooping pursuits. The sidewalks were dirty, they were too narrow for the demands put upon them, aud they needed shade from the sun. But here was no scene of arson, mayhem or the Aourishing of dangerous weapons. In the playground where the nighttiine murder had occurred, things were apparently back to normal too. Three small boys were setting a fire under a wooden bench. Another was having his head beaten against the concrete. The custodian was absorbed in solemnly and slowly hauling down the American flag. On my return home, as I passed the relatively genteel playground near where I live, I noted that its only inhabitants in the late afternoon, with the mothers and the custodian gone, were two small boys threatening to bash a little girl with their skates, and an alcoholic who had roused himself to shake his head and mumble that they shouldn't do that. Farther down the street, on a blnck with many Puerto Rican immigrants, was another scene of contrast. Twenty-eight children of all ages were playing on the sidewalk without mayhem, arson, or any event more serious than a squabble over a bag of candy. They were under the casual surveillance of adults primarily visiting in public with each other. The surveillance was only seemingly casual, as was proved when the candy squabble broke out and peace and justice were re-established. The identities of the adults kept changing because different ones kept putting their heads out the windows, and different ones kept coming in and going out on errands, or passing by and lingering a litrle. But the numbers of adults stayed fairly constant—berween eight and eleven--during the hour I watched. Arriving home, I noticed that at our end of our block, in front of the tenement, the tailor's, our hose, the laundry, the pizza place and the fruit man's, twelve children were playing on the sidewalk in sight of fourteen adults. To be sure, all city sidewalks are not under surveillance in this fashion, and this is one of the troubles of the city that planning ought properly to help correct. Underused sidewalks are not under suitable surveillance for child rearing. Nor are sidewalks apt to be safe, even with eyes upon them, if they are bordered by a population which is constantly and rapidly tarning over in residenc-another urgent planning problem. But the playgrounds and parks near such streets are even less wholesome. Nor are all playgrounds and parks unsafe or under poor surveillance, as we shall see in the next chapter. But those that are wholesome are typically in neighborhoods where streets are lively and safe and where a strong tone of civilized public sidewalk life prevails. Whatever differentials exist in safety and wholesomeness between playgrounds and sidewalks in any given area are invariably, so far as I can fnd, in the favor of the much maligned streets. People with actual, not theoretical, responsibility for bringing up children in cities often know this well. "You can go out," y city mothers, "but stay on the sidewalk." l say it to my own children. And by this we mean more than "Don't go into the street where the cars are." Describing the miraculous rescue of a nine-ycar-old boy who was pushed down a sewer by an unidentified assailant—in a park, of course—the New York Times reported, "The mother had told the boys earlier in the day not to play in High Bridge Park . . . Finally she said all right." The boy's frightened companions intelligently raced our of the park and back to the evil streets where they enlisted help quickly. Frank Havey. the settlement-house director in Boston's North End, says that parents come to him time and again with this problem: "I tell my children to play on the sidewalk after'supper. But I hear children shouldn't play on the street. Am I doing wrong?" Havey tells them they are doing right. He attributes much of thes North End's low delinquency rate to the excellent communiry surveillance of children at play where the community is at its strongest—on the sidewalks. Garden Ctry planners, with their hatred of the street. thought the solution to keeping children off the streets and under wholesome surveillance was to build interior enclaves for them in the centers of super-blocks. This policy has been inherited by the designers of Rad'iant Garden City. Today many large renewal areas are being replanned on the principle of enclosed park enclaves within blocks. The trouble with this scheme, as can be seen in such already existing examples as Chatham Village in Pirtsburgh and Baldwin Hills Village in Los Angeles, and smaller courtyard colonies in New York and Baltimore, is that no child of enterprise or spirit will willingly stay in such a boring place after he reaches the age of six. Most want out earlier. These sheltered, "togetherness" worlds are suitable, and in real life are used, for about three or four years of a small child's life, in many ways the easiest four years to manage. Nor do the adult residents of these places even want the play of older children in their sheltered courts. In Chatham Village and Baldwin Hills Village it is expressly forbidden. Little tots are decorative and relatively docile, but older children are noisy and energetic, and they act on their environment instead of just letting it act on them. Since the environment is already "perfect" this will not do. Furthermore, as can also be seen both in examples already existing and in plans for construction, this type of planning requires that buildings be oriented toward the interior enclave. Otherwise the enclave's prettiness goes unexploited and it is left without easy surveillance and access. The relatively dead backs of the buildings or, worse still, blank end walls, thus face on the streets. The safety of the unspecialized sidewalks is thus exchanged for a specialized form of safety for a specialized part of the populat'on for a few years of its l'ife. When the children venture forth, as they must and will, they ate ill served, along with everyone else. I have been dwelling on a negative aspect of child rearing in cities: the factor of protection—protection of children from their own idiocies, from adults bent on ill, and from each other. I have dwelt on it because it has been my purpose to show, by means of the most easily understood problem, how nonsensical is the fanrasy that playgrounds and parks are automarically O.K. places for children, and streets are autonatically not O.K. places for children. But lively sidewalks have positive aspects for city children's play too, and these are at least as important as safety and protection. Children in cities need a variety of places in which ro play and to learn. They need, among other things, opportunities for all knds of sports and exercise and physical skillsmore opportunities, more easily obtained, than they now enjoy in most cases. However, at the same time, they need an unspecialized outdoor home base from which to play, to hang around in, and to help form their notions of the world. It is this form of unspecialized play that the sidewalks serve and thar lively city sidewalks can serve splendidly. When this home-base play is transferred to playgrounds and parks it is not only provided for unsafely, but paid personnel, equipment and space are frittered away that could be devoted instead to more ice-skating rinks, swimming pools, boat ponds and other various and specific outdoor uses. Poor, generalized play use eats up substance that could instead be used for good specialized play. To waste the normal presence of adults on lively sidewalks and to bank instead (however idealisticaly) on hiring substitutes for them, is frivolous in the extreme. It is frivolous not only socially but also economically, because cities have desperate shortages of money and of personnel for more interesting uses of the outdoors than playgrounds--and of money and personnel for other aspects of children's lives. For example, city school systemns today typically have between thirty and forty children in their classes—sometimes more—and these include children with al manner of problems too, from ignorance of English to bad emotional upsets. City schools need something approaching a 5o-percent increase in teachers to handle severe problems and also reduce normal class sizes to a figure pernitting better education. New York's city-run hospitals in 1959 had 58 percent of their professional nursing positions unfled, and in many another city the shortage of nurses has become alarming. Libraries, and often museums, curtail their hours, and notably the hours of their children's sections. Funds are lacking for the increased numbers of settlement houses drastically needed in the new slums and new projects of cities. Even the existing settlement houses lack funds for needed expansions and changes in their programns, in short for more staff. Requirements like these should have high priority on public and philanthropic funds—not only on funds at the present dismally inadequate levels, but on funds greatly increased. The people of cities who have other jobs and duties, and who lack, too, the training needed, cannot volunteer as teachers or registered nurses or librarians or museum guards or social workers. But at least they can, and on lively diversified sidewalls they do, supervise the incidental play of children and assimilate the children into city society. They do it in the course of carrying on their other pursuits. Planners do not seem to realize how high a ratio of adults is needed to rear children at incidental play. Nor do they seem to understand that spaces and equipment do not rear children. These can be useful adjuncts, but only people rear children and assimilate them into civilized society. It is folly to build cities in a way that wastes this normal, casual manpower for child rearing and either leaves this essential job too much undone—with terrible consequences—or makes it necessary to hire substitutes. The myth that playgrounds and grass and hired guards or supervisorsare innately wholesome for children and that city streets, filled with ordinary people, are innately evil for children, boils down to a deep contempt for ordinary people. In real life, only from the ordinary adults of the city sidewalks do children learn—if they learn it at all—the first fundamental of successful city life: People must take a modicum of public responsibility for each other even if they have no ties to each other. This is a lesson nobody learns by being told. It is learned from the experience of having other people without ties of kinship or close friendship or formal responsibility to you take a modicum of public responsibility for you. When Mr. Lacey. the locksmith, bawls out ore of my sons forrunning into the street, and then later reports the transgresion to my husband as he passes the locksmith shop, my son ges more than an overt lesson in safety and obedience. He also gets, indirectly, the lesson that Mr. Lacey, with whom we have no ties other than stroet propinquity, feels responsible for him to a degree. The boy who went unrescued in the elevator in the "togetherness"-or-nothing project learns opposite lessons from his experiences. So do the project children who squist water into house windows and on passers-by, and go unrebuked because they are anonymous children in anonymous grounds. The lesson that city dwellers have to take responsibility for what goes on in city streets is tanght again and again to children on sidewalks which enjoy a local public life. They can absorb it astonishingly early. They show they have absorbed it by king it for granted that they, too, are part of the managemenr. They volunteer (before they are asked) directions to people who are lost; they tell a man he wil get a ticket if he parks where he thinks he is going to park; they ofer unsolicited advice to the building superintendent to use rock salt instead of a chopper to attack the ice. The presence or absence of this kind of str'eet bossines in city children is a fairly good tip-off to the presence or absence of responsible adult behavior toward the sidewalk and the children who use it. The children are imitating adult attitudes. This has nothing ro do with income. Some of the poorest pars of cities do the best by their children in this respect. And some do the worst. This is instruction in city living that people hired to look after children cannot teach, because the essence of this responsibility is that you do it without being hired. It is a leson that parents, by thernselves, are powerless to teach. If parents rake minor public responsibility for strangers or neighbors in a society where nobody else does, this simply means that the parenrs are embarrassingly different and meddlesome, not that this is the proper way to behave. Such instruction must come from society itself, and in cities, if it comes, it comes almost entirely during the tine children spend at incidental play on the sidewalks. Play on lively, diversified sidewalks difers from virtually all other daily incidental play ofered American children today: It is play not conducted in a matriarchy. Most ciry architectural designers and planners are men. Curiously, they design and plan to exclude men as part of nornal, daytime life wherever people live. In planning residential life, they aim at filling the presumed daily needs of impossibly vaçuous housewives and preschool tots. They plan, in short, strictly for matriarchal societies. The ideal of a ınatriarchy inevitably accompanies all planning in which residences are isolated from other parts of life. It accompanies all planning for children in which their incidental play is set apart in its own preserves. Whatever adult society does accompany the daily life of children affected by such planning has to be a matriarchy. Chatham Village, that Pitsburgh model of Garden City life, is as thoroughly matriarchal in conception and in operation as the newest dormuitory suburb. All housing projects are. Placing work and commerce near residences, but buffering it off, in the tradition set by Garden City theory, is fully as matriarchal an arrangement as if the residences were miles away from work and from men. Men are not an abstraction. They are either around, in person, or they are not Working places and commerce must be mingled right in with residences if men, like the men who work on or near Hudson Street, for example, are to be around city children in daily life—men who are part of nornal daily life, as opposed to men who put in an occasional playground appearance while they substitute for women or imitate the occupations of women. The opportunity (in-modern life it has becomne a privilege) of playing and growing up in a daily world composed of both men and women is possible and usual for children who play on lively, diversified city sidewalks. I cannot understand why this arrangement should be discouraged by planning and by zoning. lt ought, instead, to be abetted by examining the conditions that stimulate minglings and mixtures of work and commerce with residences, a subject taken up later in this book. The fascination of strcet life for city children has long been noted by recreation experts, usually with disapproval. Back in 198, the Regional Plan Asociation of New York, in a report which remains to this day the most exhaustive American study of big-city recreation, had this to say: Careful checking within a radius of ½ mile of playgrounds under a wide range of conditions in many cites shows that about ½ of the child population from 5 to 1s years of age may be found on these grounds . . . The lure of the srreet is a strong competitor . . . It must be a well administered playground to compete successfuly with the city streets, teeming with life and adventure. T'he ability to make the playground activity so compellingly attractive as to draw the children from the streets and hold their interest from day to day is a rare faculty in play leadership, combining personality and technical skill of a high order. T'he same report then deplores the stubbor tendency of children to "fool around" instead of playing "recognized games." (Recognized by whom?) This yearning for the Organization Chid on the part of those who would incarcerate incidental play, and children's stubborn preference for fooling around on city streets, teeming with life and adventure, are both as characteristic today as they were in i9z8. "I know Greenwich Village like my hand," brags my younger son, king me to see a "secret passage"he has discovered under a street, down one subway stair and up another, and a secret hiding place some nine inches wide between two buildings, where he secretes treasures that people have put out for the sanitation truck collections along his morning route to school and that he can thus save and retrieve on his return from school. (1 had such a hiding place, for the same purpose, at his age, but mine was a crack in a cliff on my way to school instead of a crack between two buildings, and he fnds stranger and richer teasures.) Why do children so frequently find that roaming the lively city sidewalks is more interesting than back yards or playgrounds? Because the sidewalks are more interesting. lt is just as sensible to ask: Why do adults find lively streets more interesting than playgrounds? The wonderful convenience of city sidewalks is an important asset to children too. Children are at the mercy of convenience more than anyone else, except the aged. A great part of children's outdoor play, especially after they srt school, and after they also find a certain number of organized activities (sports, arts, handcrafts or whatever else their interests and the local opportunities provide), occurs at incidental times and must be sandwiched in. A lot of outdoor life for children adds up from bits. It happens in a small leftover interval after lunch. It happens after school while children may be pondering what to do and wondering who will trn up. It happens whilc they are waiting to. be called for their suppers. It happens in brief intervals between supper and homework, or homework and bed. During such times children have, and use, all manner of ways to exercise and amuse themseives. They slop in puddles, write with chalk, jump rope, roller skate, shoot marbles, trot out their possessions, converse, trade cards, play stoop ball, walk stilts, decorate soap-box scooters, dismember old baby carriages, climb on railings, run up and down. It is not in the nature of things to make a big deal out of such activities. It is not in the nature of .things to go somewhere forinally to do them by plan, ofhcially. Part of their charm is the accompanying sense of freedom to roam up and down the sidewall, a different matter from being boxed into a preserve. If it is impossible to do such things both incidentally and conveniently, they are seldom done. As children get older, this incidental outdoor activity—say, while waiting to be called to eat—becontes less bumptious physically and entails more loitering with others, sizing people up, flirting, talking, pushing, shoving and horseplay. Adolescents are always being criticized for this kind of loitering, but they can hardly grow up without it. The trouble comes when it is done not within society, but as a form of outlaw life. The requisite for any of these varieties of incidental play is not pretentious equipment of any sort, but rather space at an immediately convenient and interesting place. The play gets crowded out if sidewalks are too narrow relative to the total demands put on them. It is especially crowded out if the sidewalks also lack minor irregularities in building line. An immense amount of both loitering and play goes on in shallow sidewalk niches out of the line of moving pedestrian feet. There is no point in planning for play on sidewalks unless the sidewalks are used for a wide variety of other purposes and by a wide variety of other people too. These uses need each other, for proper surveillance, for a public life of some vitality, and for general interest. If sidewalks on a lively street are sufficiently widc, play fourishes mightily right along with other uses. If the sidewalks are skimped, rope jumping is the árst play casualry. Roller skating, tricycle andbicycle ridingare the next casualties, The.narrower the sidewalks. the more sedentary incidental play becomes. The more frequent too become sporadic forays by children into the vehicular roadways. Sidewalks thirty or thirty-five feet wide can accommodate virtually any demand of incidental play put upon them--along with trees to shade the activities, a d sufficient space for pede trian circulation and adult public sidewalk life and loitering. Few sidewalks of this luxurious width can be found. Sidewalk width is invariably sacrifced for vehicular width, pardy because city sidewalks are conventionally considered to be purely space for pedestrian travel and access to buildings, and go unrecognized and unrespected as the uniquely vital and irreplaceable organs of city safety,publicfe and child rearing that they are, Twenty-foot sidewalks, which usually preclude rope jumping but can feasibly permit roller skating and the use of other wheeled toys, can still be found, although the street wideners erode them year by year (often in the belief that shunned malls and "promenades" are a constructive substitute). The livelier and more popular a sidewalk, and the greater the number and variety of its users, the greater the tol width needed for it to serve its purposes pleasantly. But even when proper space islacking,convenience of location and the interest of the streets are both so important to children and good surveillance so important to their parents thar children will and do adapt to skimpy sidewalk space. This does not meanwe do right in taking unscrupulous advantage of their adaptability. In fact, we wrong both them and cities. Some city sidewalks are undoubtedlyevil places for rearing children. 'Ihey are evil for anybody. In such neighborhoods we need to foster the qualiries and facilities hat make for safety. vitality and stability in city streets. This is a complex problem; it is a central problem of planning for cities. In defective city neighborhoods, shooing the children into parks and playgrounds is worse than useless, either as a solution to the streets' problems or as a solution for the children. The whole idea of doing away with city sπreets, insofar as ## 88} THE DEATH AND LIFE OF CREAT AMERICAN CITIES that is possible, and downgrading and miinimiz'ing their social and their economic part in city life is the most mischievous and de structive idea in orthodox city planning. That it is so often done in the name of vaporous fantasies about city child care is as bitter as irony can get. ## 5 The uses of neighborhood parks Conventionally, neighborhood parbs or parklike open spaces are considered boons conferred on the deprived populations of cities. Let us rurn this thought around, and consider city parks de prived places that need dhe boon of life and appreciation conferred on them. This is more nearly in accord with reality, for people do confer use on parbs and make them successesor else withhold use and doom parks to rejection and failure. Parks are volatile places. They tend to run to extremes of popularity and unpopularity. Their behavior is far from simple. They can be delightful fearures of city districts, and economic assets to their surroundings as well, but pitifully few are. They can grow more beloved and valuable with the years, but pirifully few show this staying power. For every Rittenhouse Square in Philadelphia, or Rockefeller Plaza or Washington Square in New York, or Boston Common, or their loved equivalents in other cities, there are dozens of dispirited city vacuurns called parks, eaten aronnd with decay, little used, unloved. As a woman in Indiana said when asked if she liked the town square, "Nobody there bur dirty old men who spit tobacco juice and try to look up your skirt." In orthodox city planning, neighborhood open spaces are venerated in an amazingly uncritical fashion, much as savages venerate magical fetishes. Ask a houser how his planned neighborhood improves on the old city and he will cite, as a self-evident virrue, More Open Space. Ask a zoner about the improvements in progressive codes and he will cire, again as a self-evident virrue, their incentives toward leaving More Open Space. Walk with a planner through a dispirited neighborhood and though it be already scabby with deserted parks and tired landscapingfestooned with old Kleenex, he will envision a furure of More Open Space. More Open Space for what? For muggings? For bleak vacuums between buildings? Or for ordunary people to use and enjoy? But people do not use city open space just because it is there and because city planners or designers wish they would. In certain specifics of its behavior, every city park is a case ento itself and defies generalizations. Moreover, large parks such as Fairmount Park in Philadelphia, Central Park and Bronx Park and Prospect Park in New York, Forest Park in St. Louis, Golden Gate Park in San Francisco, Grant Park in Chicago— and even smaller Boston Common--differ much within themselves from part to part, and they aiso receive differing influences from the different parts of their cities which they touch. Sorme of the factors in the behavior of large metropolitan parks are too complex to deal with in the first part of thus book; they wil be discussed later, in Chapter Fourteen, The Curse of Border Vacuums. Nevertheless, even though it is misleading to consider any two city parks actual or potential duplicates of one another, or to believe that generalizations can thoroughly explain all the peculiarities of any single park, it is possible to generalize about a few basic principles that deeply affect virtually all neighborhood parks. Moreover, understanding these principles helps somewhat in undersranding infuences working on city parks of all kinds-from little outdoor lobbies which serve as enlargements of the street, to large parks with major metropolitan attractions like zoos, lakes, woods, museums. The reason neighborhood parks reveal certain general principles about park behavior more clearly than specialized parks do is precisely that neighborhood parks are the most generalized form of city park that we possess. They are typically intended for general bread-and-butter use as local public yards—whether the locality is predominately a working place, predominately a residential place, or a thoroughgoing mixture. Most city squares fall into this category of generaliz.ed public-yard use; so does most project land; and so docs much city parkland that kes advantage of natural features like river banks or hilltops. The frst necessity in understanding how cities and their parks infuence each other is to jettison confusion between real uses and mythical uses—for example, the science-fiction nonsense that parks are "the lungs of the city." lt takes about three acres of woods to absorb as much carbon dioxide as four people exude in breathing, cooking and heating. The oceans of air circulating about us, not parks, keep cities from suffocating.\* Nor is more air let into the city by a given acreage of greenery than by'an equivalent acreage of streets. Subtracting streets and adding their square footage to parks or project malls is irrelevant to the quantities of fresh air a city receives. Air knows nothing of grass fetishes and fails to pick and choose for itself in accordance with them. It is necessary too, in understanding park behavior, to junk the false reassurance that parks are real estate stabilizers or community anchors. Parks are not automatically anything, and least of all are these volatile elements stabilizers of values or of their neighborhoods and districts. Philadelphia affords almost a cootrolled exper'unent on this point. When Penn laid out the city, he placed at its center the square now occupied by City Hall, and at equal distances from this center he placed four residential squates. What has become of these four, all the same age, the same size, the same original use, and as nearly the same in presumed advantages of location as they could be made? Their fates are wildly different. The best known of Penn's four squares is Rittenhouse Square, a beloved, successful, mnuch-used park, one of Philadelphia's greatest assets today, the center of a fashionable neighborhood—indeed, the only old neighborhood in Philadelphia which is spontaneously rehabilitating its edges and extending its real estate values. The second of Penn's little parks is Franklin Square, the city's Skid Row park where the homeless, the unemployed and the people of indigent leisure gather amid the adjacent lophouses, cheap hotels, missions, second-hand ciothing stores, reading and writing lobbies, pawnshops, employment agencies, tattoo parlors, burlesque houses and eateries. This park and its users are both seedy, but it is not a dangerous or crime park. Nevertheless, it has hardly worked as an anchor to real estate values or to social stability. Its neighborhood is scheduled for large-scale clearance. The third is Washington Square, the center of an area that was at one time the heart of downtown, but is now specialized as a massive ofice center—insurance companies, publishing, advertising. Several decades ago Washington Square becarme Philadelphia's pervert park, to the point where it was shunned by office lunchers and was an unnanageable vice and crime problem to park workers and police. In the mid-r9so's it was torn up, closed for more than a year, and redesigned. In the process its users were dispersed, which was the intent. Today it gets brief and desultory use, lying mostly empty except at lunchtime on fine days. Washington Square's district, like Franklin Square's, has failed at spontaneously maincaining its values, let alone raising them. Beyond the rim of offices, it is today designated for large-scale urban renewal. The fourth of Penn's squares has been whittled to a small traffic island, Logan Circle, in Benjamin Franklin Boulevard, an example of City Beautiful planning. The circle is adorned with a great soaring fountain and beautifully maintained planting. Although it is discowraging to reach on foot, and is mainly an elegant amenity for those speeding by, it gets a trickle of population on hne days. The district immediately adjoining the monumental cultural center of which it is a part decayed terribly and has already been slum-cleared and converted to Radiant City. The varying fates of these squares-especially the three that remain squares-illustfate the volatile behavior that is characteristic of city parks. These squares also happen to illustrate much about basic principles of park behavior, and I shall return to them and their lessons soon. The fickle behavior of parks and their neighborhoods can be extreme. One of the most charning and individual small parks to be found in any American ciry, the Plaza in Los Angeles, ringed with immense magnolia trees, a lovely place of shade and history is today incongruously encircled on three sides with abandoned ghost buildings and with squalor so miserable the srink of it rolls over the sidewalks. (Off the fourth side is a Mexican tourist bazaar, doing fine.) Madison Park in Boston, the residential grassy square of a row-house neighborhood, a park precisely of the kind that is popping into many of today's sophisticared redevelopment plans, is the center of a neighborhood that appears to have been bombed. The houses around it—inherenty no different from those in high demand at outer reaches of Philadelphia's Rittenhouse Square neighborhood--are crumbling from lack of value, with consequent neglect. As one house in a row cracks, it is demolished and the family in the next house is moved for safety; a few months later that one goes and the house beyond is emptied. No plan is involved in this, merely purposeless, gaping holes, rubble and abandonment, with the little ghost park, theoretically a good residential anchorage, at the center of the havoc. Federal Hill in Raltimore is a most beautiful and serene park and affords the fnest view in Baltimore of the city and the bay. Its neighborhood, although decent, is moribund like the park itself. For generations it has failed to attract newcomers by choice. One of the birterest disappointments in housing project history is the failure of the parks and open grounds in these establishments to increase adjacent values or to stabilize, let alone improve, their neighborhoods. Notice the rim of any city park, civic plaza or project parkland: how rare is the ciryr open space with a rim that consistcntly refects the supposed magnetism or stabil'izing influence residing in parks. And consider also the parks that go to waste most of the time, just as Baltimore's beautiful Federal Hill does. In Cinicinnari's two hnest parks, overlooking the river, I was able to find on a splendid, hot September afternoon a grand total of five uscrs (three teen-age girls and one young couple); meanwhile, strcet after street in Cincinnati was swatming with people ar leisure who acked the slightest amenity for enjoying the city or the least kindness of shade, On a similar afternoon, with the'temperature above ninety degrees, I was able to find in Corlears Hook park, a landscaped hreezy river-front oasis in Manhattan's heavily populated Lower East Side, just eighteen people, most of them lone, apparently indigent, men.\* 'The children were not there; no mother in her right mind would send a child in there alone, and the mothers of the Lower East Side are not out of their minds. A boat trip around Manhattan conveys the erroneous impression that here is a city composed largely of parkland—and almost devoid of inhabitants. Why are there so often no people where the parks are and no parks where the people are? Unpopular parks are troubling not only because of the waste and missed opportunities they imply, but also because of their frequent negative effects. They have the same problems as streets without eyes, and their dangers spill over into the areas surrounding, so that streets along such parks become known as danger places too and are avoided. Moreover, undenused parbs and their equipment suffer from vandalism, which is quite a different matter from wear. This fact was obliquely recognized by Sruart Constable, Executive Oficėr, at the time, of New York City's park departınent, when he was asked by the press wliat he thought of a London proposal to install television in parks. After explaining that he did not think television a suitable park use, Constable added, "I don't think [the sets] would last half an hour before they disappeared." + Every fine summer night, television sets can be seen outdoors, used publicly, on the busy old sidewalks of East Harlem. Each machine, its extension cord run along the sidewalk from some store's electric outlet, is the informnal headquarters spot of a dozen or so men who divide their attention among the machine, the children they are in charge of, their cans of beer, each others' commens and the greetings of passers-by. Strangers stop, as they wish, to join the viewing. Nobody is concerned about peril to the machi'nes. Yet Constable's skepticism about their safety in the Parks Department's territories was amply justified. There speaks a man of experience who has presided over many, many unpopular, dangerous and ill-used parks, along with a few good ones. Too much is expected of city parks. Far from transfornuing any essential quality in their surroundings, far from automatically uplifting their neighborhoods, neighborhood parks themselves are directly and drasticaly affected by the way the neighborhood acts upon them. Cities are thoroughly physical places.In seekingunderstanding of their behavior, we get useful information by observing what occurs tangibly and physically, instead of sailing off on metaphysical fancies. Penn's three squares in Philadelphia are three ordinary, bread-and-butter ypes of city parks. Let us see what they tell us about their ordinary physical interactions with their neighborhoods. Rittenhouse Square, the success, possesses a diverse rim and diverse neighborhood hinrerland. Immediarely on its edges it has in sequence, as this is written, an art club with restaurant and galleries, a music school, an Ariny office building, an apartment house, a club, an old apothecary shop, a Navy office building which used to be a hotel, apartments, a church, a parochial school, apartments, a public-library branch, apartnents, a vacant site where town houses have been torn down for prospective apartments, a cultural society, aparments, a vacant site where a town house is planned, another town house, apartmenrs. Immediately beyond the rim, in the srreers leading off at right angles and in the next streets parallel to the park sides, is an abundance of shops and services of all sorts with old houses or newer apartments above, mingled with a variety of offices. Does anything about this physical arrangement of the neighborhood affect rhe park physically? Yes. This mixture of uses of buildings directly produces for the park a mixture of users who enter and leave the park at different times. They use the park at different times from one another because their daily schedules differ, The park thus possesses an inrricate sequence of uses and users. Joseph Guess, a Philadelphia newspaperman who lives at Rittenhouse Square and has anused himself by watching its ballet, says it has this sequence: "First, a few early-bird walkers who live beside the park take brisk strolls. They are shortly joined, and followed, by residents who cross the park on their way to work out of the district. Next come people from outside the district, crossing the park on their way to work within the neighborhood. Soon after these people have left the square the errand-goers start to come througb, many of them lingering, and in mid-morning mothers and sall children come in, along with an increasing number of shoppers. Before noon the mothers and children leave, but the square's population continues to grow because of employees on their lunch hour and also because of people coming from elsewhere to lunch at the art club and the other restaurants around. In the afternoon mothers and children tu up again, the shoppers and errand-goers linger longer, and school children eventually add themselves iņ. In the later afternoon the mothers have left but the homeward-bound workers come through—frst those leaving the neighborhood, and then those returning to it. Some of these linger. From then on into the evening the square gets many young people on dates, some who are dining out nearby, some who live nearby, some who seem to come just because of the nice combination of liveliness and leisure. All through the day, there is a sprinkling of old people with time on their hands, some people who are indigent, and various unidenrified idlers." In short, Rittenhouse Square is busy fairly continuously for the same basic reasons that a lively sidewalk is used continuously: because of functional physical diversity among adjacent uses, and hence diversity among users and their schedules. Philadelphia's Washington Square—the one that became a pervert park—affords an extreme contrast in this respect. Its rim is dominated by huge office buildings, and both this rim and its immediate hinterland lack any equivalent to the diversity of'RittenhouseSquare—services, restaurants, cultural facilities. The neighborhood hinterland possesses a low density of dwellings. Washington Square thus has had in recent decades only one significant reservoir of potential local users: the office workers. Does anything about this fact affect the park physically? Yes. This principal reservoir of users all operate on much the same daily time schedule. They all enter the district ar once. They are then incarcerated al morning until lunch, and incarcerated again after lunch. They are absent after working hours. Therefore, Washington Square, of necessity, is a vacuum most of the day and evening. Into it came what usually flls city vacuums--a forın of blight. Here it is neceary to ke issue with a common belief about cities--the belief that uses of low stanis drive out uses of high status. This is not how cities behave, and the belief that it is (Fight Blight!) renders futile much energy aimed at artacking symptoms and ignoring causes. People or uses with more money at their command, or greater respectability (in a credit society the two ofren go together), can fairly easily supplant those less prosperous or of less status, and commonly do so in city neighborhoods that achieve popularity. The reverse seldom happens. People or uses with less money at their command, less choice or less open respectability move into already weakened areas of ciues, neighborhoods that are no longer coveted by people with the luxury of choice, or neighborhoods that can draw for financing only upon hot money, exploittive money and loan-shark money. The newcomers thereupon must try to nake do with something which, for one reason or another, or more typically for a complexity of reasons, has already failed to sustain popularity. Overcrowding, deterioration, crime, and other forms of blight are surface symptoms of prior and deeper economic and functional failure of the district. The perverts who completely rook over Philadelphia's Washington Square for several decades were a manifesmtion of this city behavior, in microcosm. They did not kill off a vital and åppreciated park. They did not drive out respectable users. They moved into an abandoned place and entrenched themselves. As this is written, the unwelcome users have successfully been chased away to find other vacuurns, but this act has still not supplied the park with a sufficient sequence of welcome users. Far in the past, Washington Square did have a good population of users. But although it is still the "same" park, its use and essence changed completely when its surroundings changed. Like allneighborhood parks, it is the creature of its surroundings and of the way its sustoundings generate mutual support from diverse uses, orfail togenerate such support. It need not have been office work that depopulated this park. Any single, overwhelmingly dominant use imposing a limited šchedule of users would have had a similar effect. The same basic situation occurs in parks where residence is the overwhelmingly dominan neighborhood use. In this case, the single big daily potential reservoir of adult users is mothers. City parks or playgrounds cannot be continuously populated by mothers alone, any more than by ofice workers alone. Mothers, using a park in their own relatively simple sequences, can populate it significantly for about a maximum of hve hours, roughly two hours in the mora-'ing and three in the afternoon, and that only if they comprise a mixture of classes.\* Mothers' daily tenure of parks is not only relatively brief butis circumscribed in choice of time by meals, housework, children's naps and, very sensitively, by weather. A generalized neighborhood park that is stuck with functional monotony of surroundings in any form is inexorably a vacuum for a significant parr of the day. And here a vicious circle takes over. Even if the vacuum is protected against various forms of blight, it exerts little attaction for its limited potential reservoir of users. It comes to bore them dreadfully, for moribundity is. boring. In cities, liveliness and variety attract more liveliness; deadness and monotony repel life. And this is a principle vital not only to the ways cities behave socially, but also to the ways they behave economically. There is, however, one important exceprion to the rule that it takes a wide functional mixture of users to populate and enliven a neighborhood park through the day.There is one group in cities which, all by itself, can enjoy and populate a park long and well--although it seldom draws other types of users. This is the group of people with total leisure, the people who lack even the responsibilities of home, and in Philadelphia these are the people of Penn's third park, Franklin Square, the Skid Row park. There is much distaste for Skid Row parks, which is natural because human failure in such undiluted doses is hard to swallow. Customarily, too, little distinction is drawn between these and criminal parks, although they are quite different. (With time, of course, one may become the other, just as in the case of Franklin Square, an originally residential park that evennially turned into a Skid Row park after the park and its neighborhood had lost their appeal to people with choice,) A good Skid Row park like Franklin Square has something to be said for it. Supply and demand have come together for once, and the accident is clearly appreciated among those who have been disinherited by themselves or circumstance. In Franklin Square, if the weather permits, a day-long outdoor reception holds sway. The benches at the center of the recept'on are flled, with a voluble standing overflow milling about. Convetsational groups continually form and dissolve into one another. The guests behave respectfully to one another and are courteous to interlopers too. Almost imperceptibly, like the hand of a clock, this raggle-taggle reception creeps around the circular pool at the center of the square. And indeed, ir is the hand of a clock, for it is following the sun, staying in the watmth. When the sun goes down the clock stops; the reception is over until tomorrow.\* Not all cities have well-developed Skid Row parks. New York lacks one, for example, although it has nany sal park fragments and playgrounds used primarily by bums, and the vicious Sara Delano Roosevelt park gets a lot of bums. Possibly America's biggest Skid Row park—its population vast compared with Franklin Square—is the main downtown park of Los Angeles, Pershing Square. This tells us something interesting about its surroundings too. So spattered and decentralized are the central functions of Los Angeles that the only element of its downtown that has full metropolitan dimensions and intensity is that of the leisured indigent. Pershing Square is more l'ike a forum than a reception, a forum composed of scores of panel discussions, each with its leading monologist or moderator. The confabs extend all around the periphery of the square, where the benches and walls are, and rise to crescendos at the corners. Some benches are stenciled "Reserved for Ladies" and this nicety is observed. Los Angeles is fortunate that the vacuum of a disintegrated downtown has not been appropriated by predators but has been relatively respectably populated by a flourishing Skid Row. But we can hardly count on polite Skid Rows to save all the unpopular parks of our cities. A generalized neighborhood park that is not headquarters for the leisured indigent can become populated naturally and casually only by being situated very close indeed to where active and different currents of I fe and function come to a focus. If downtown, it must get shoppers, visitors and strollers as well as downtown workers. If not downtown, it must still be where life swirls—where there iswork,cultural, residential and commercial activity—as much as possible of everything different that cities can offer. The main problem of neighborhood park planning boils down to the problem of nurturing diversified neighborhoods capable of using and supporting parks. However, many city districts do already possess precisely such ignored focalpoints of life which cry out forclose-by neighborhood parks or pubi c squares. It is easy to identify such centers of district life and acrivity, because they are where people with leaflets to hand out choose to work (if pernitted by the police). But there is no point in bringing parks to where the people are, if in the process the reasons that the people are there are wiped out and the park substituted for them. This is one of the basic errors in housing-project and civic- and culturai-center design. Neighborhood parks fail to substitute in any way for plen-. tiful city diversity Those that are successful never serve as harriers or as interruptions to the intricate functioning of the city around them. Rather, they help to knit together diverse surrounding functions by giving them a pleasant joint facility; in the process they add another appreciated element to the diversity and give somcthing back ro their surroundings. as Rittenhouse Square or any other good park gives back. You can neither lie to a neighborhood park, nor reason with it. "Artist's conceptions" and persuasive renderings can put pictures of life into proposed neighborhood parks or park naals, and verbal rationalizat ons can conjure up users who ought to appreciate them, but in real life only diverse surroundings have the practical power of inducing a natural. continuing Alow of l fe anduse. Superficial architectural variety may look likediversity, but only a genuine content of economic and social diversity, resultingin people with different schedules.hasmeaning to the park and the power to confer the boon of life upon it. Given good location, a bread-and-butter neighborhood park can make much of its asse, but it can also fritter them away. It is obvious that a place that looks like a jail yard will neither attract users nor reciprocate with its surroundings in the same fashion ás a place that looks like an oasis. But there are all kinds of oases too, and some of their salient characteristics for success are not so obvious, - Outstandingly successful neighborhood parks seldom have much competition from other open spaces. This is understandable, because people in cities, with all heir other interests and duries, can hardly enliven unlimited amounts of local, generalized park. City people would have to devote themselves to park use as if it were a business (or as the leisured indigent do) to justify, for example, the plethora of malls, promenades, playgrounds, parks and indeterinate land oozes afforded in typical Radiant Garden City schemes, and enforced in official urban rebuilding by s'ingent requ irements that high percentages of land be left open. We can already see that city districts with relatively large amounts of generalized park, like Morningside Heighs or Harlem in New York, seldom develop intense community focus on a park and ntense love for it, such as the people of Boston's North End have for their little Prado or the people of Greenwich Village have for Washington Square, or the people of the Rittenhouse Square district have for their park. Greatly loved neighborhood parks benefit fromn a certein rarity value. The ability of a neighborhood park to stimnulate passionate attachment or, conversely, only apathy, seens to have little or nothing.to do with the incomes or occupations of a population in a district. This is an inference which can be drawn from the widely differing income, occupational and cultural groups who are simultaneously deeply attached to a park like New York's Washington Square. The relationship of duffer'ung income classes to given parks can also sometimes be observed in sequence over rime, either positively or negatively. Over the years, the economic condition of people in Boston's North End has risen appreciably. Both in time of poverty and in time of prosperity, the Prado, a minute but central park, has been the heart of the neighborhood. Harlem in New York affords an ilustration of consistent reverse behavior. Over the course of yeats Harlem has changed from a fashionable upper-middle-class residential district, to a lower-middle-class district, to a district predominantly of the poor and the discriminated against. During all this sequence of different populations, Harlem, with a wealth of local parks as compared to Greenwich Village, for example, has never seen a period in which one of its parks was a vital focus of community life and identiry. The same sad observation can be made of Morningside Heights. And it is also true typically of project grounds, even including those carefully designed. 7 This inability of a neighborhood or district to attach itself with affectionand with the immense resulting power of symbolism —to a neighborhood park is due, I think, to a combination of negative factors: frst, parks that are possible candidates are handicapped because of insufficient diversity in their immediate surroundings, and consequent dullness; and second, what diversity and life are available are dispersed and dissipated among too many different parks, too similar in purpose to each other. Certain qualities in design can apparently make a difference too. For if the object of a generalized bread-and-butter neighborhood park is to attract as many different kinds of people, with as many different schedules, interests, and purposes as possible, it is clear that the desigo of the park should abet this generalization ofpatronage rather than work atcross-purposes to it. Parks intensely used in generalized public-yard fashion tend to have four elements in their design which I shall call intricacy, centering, sun and enclosure. Intricacy is related to the variety of reasons for which people come to neighborhood parks Even the same person comes for different reasons at different times; sometimesto sit tiredlysometimes so play or to watcha game, sometimes to read or work, sometimes to show off,sometimes o fall in love sometimes to keep an appointment, sometimesto savor the hustle of the city from arecrear, sometimesin the hope of finding acquaintances, sometimes to get closer to abit of nature. sometimes to keep à child occupied, sometimes simply see what offers, and almost always to be entertained by the sight of other people. If the whole thing can be absorbed in a glance, like a good poster, and if every place looks like every other place in the park and also feels like every other place when you try it, the park affords little stimulation to all these differing uses and moods. Nor is there much reason to return to it again and again. An intelligent and able woman who lives beside Rittenhouse Square remarks, "I've used it almost every day for ffteen years, but the other night 1 tried to draw a plan of it from memory and couldn't. It was too complicated for me." The same phenomenon is true of Washington Square in New York. In the course of a community battle to protect it from a highway, the strategists freguently tried to sketch the park roughly during meetings, to illustrate a point. Very difficult. Yet neither of these parhs is so complex in plan as all that. Intricacy that counts is mainly intricacy at eye level, change in the rise of ground, groupings of trees, openings leading to various focal points-in short, subtle expressions-of difference. The subtle differences in setting are then exaggerated by the differences in use that grow up among them. Successful parks always look much more intricate in use than when they are empty. Even very small squares that are successful often get ingenious variation into the stage sets they provide for their users. Rockefeller Center does it by makingdrama out of four changes in level. Union Square in downtown San Francisco has a plan that looks deadly dull on paper or from a high building; but it is bent onto such changes in ground level, like Dali's painting of the wet watches, that it appears remarkably various. (This is, of course, exactly the transformation that happens, on a larger scale, to San Francisco's straight, regular gridiron street patterns as they tumble up and down the hills.) Paper plans of squares and parks are deceptive—sometimes they are crammed full of apparent differences that mean almost nothing because they are all below eye level, or are discounted by the eye because they are too often repeated. Probably the most important element in intricacy is centering. Good small parks typieally have a place somewhere within them commonly understood to be the center—at the very least a main crossroads and pausing point, a climax. Some small parks or squares are virtually all center, and get their intricacy from minor differences at their peripheries. Peopłe ty hard to create centers and climaxes to a park, even against odds. Sometimes it is impossible. Long strip parks, like the dismally unsuccessful Sara Delano Roosevelt park in New York and many riverside parks, are frequently designed as if they were rolled out from a die stamper. Sara Delano Roosevelt park has four identical brick "recreation" barracks stamped along it at intervals. What can users make of this? The more they move back and forth, the more they are in the same place. It is like a trudge on a treadmill. This roo is a common failing in project design, and almost unavoidable there, because most projects are essentially die-stamped design for die-stamped functions. People can be inventive in their use of park centers. The fountain basin in New York's Washington Square is used inventively and exuberantly. Once, beyond memory, the basin possessed an oramental iron centerpiece with a fountain. What remains is the sunken concrete circular basin, dry most of the year, bordered with four steps ascending to a stone coping that forms an outer rim a few feet above ground level. In effect, this is a. ciurcular arena, a theater in the round, and that is how it is used, with complete confusion as to who are spectators and who are the show, Everybody is both, although some are more so: guitar players, singers, crowds of darting children, imprompni dancers, sunbathers, conversers, show-offs, photographers, tourists, and mixed in with them al} a bewildering sprinkling of absorbed readers—not there for lack of choice, because quiet benches to the east are half-deserted, The city officials regularly concoct improvement schemes by which this center within the park would be sown to grass and flowers and surrounded by a fence. The invariable phrase used to describe this is, "restoring the land to park use." That is a different form of park use, legitimate in places. But for neighborhood parks, the finest centers are stage settings for people. Sun is part of a park's setting for people, shaded, to be sure, in summer. A high building effectively cutting the sun angle across the south side of a park can kill off a lot of it. Rittenhouse Square, for all its virtues, has this misfortne. On a good October afternoon, for example, almost a third of the square lies completely empty; the great build'ıng shadow across it from a new apartment house is a great eraser of human beings within its pall. Although buildings should not cut sun from a park—if the object is to encourage full use—the presence of buildings around a park is important in design. They enclose it. They make a defàite shape out of the space, so that it appears as an important event in the city scene, a positive feature, rather than a no-account leftover. Far from being attracted by indefinite leftovers of land oozing around buildings, people behave as if repeiled by them. They even cross streets as they meet up with them, a phenomenon that can be watched wherever a housing project, for example, breaks into a busy street. Richard Nelson, a Chicago real estate analyst who watches the behavior of people in cities as a clue to economi'c values, reports, "On a warm September afternoon, Mellon Square in downtown Pittsburgh contained too miany users to count. But that same afternoon, during a period of two hours, only three peopleone ld lady knitting, one bum, one unidentifiable character asleep with a newspaper over his face—used the park of the downtown Gateway Center." 2 Gateway Center is a Radiant City office and hotel project with the buildings set here and there in empty land. It lacks the degree of diversity of Mellon Square's surroundings, but its diversity is not low enough to account for only four users (counting Nelson himself) during the heart of a good afternoon. City park users simply do not seek settings for buildings; they seek settings for themselves. To them, parks are foreground, buildings background, rather than the reverse. Cities are full of generalized parls that can hardly be expected to justify themselves, even if their districts are successfully enlivened. This is because some parks are basically unfitted, whether by location, size or shape, to serve successfully in the publicyard fashion I have been discussing. Nor are they fitted by size or inherent variety of scene to become major metropolitan parl. What can be done with them? Some of these, if suficiently small, can do another job well: simply pleasing the eye. San Francisco is good at this. A tiny triangular street intetsection leftover, which in most cities would either be Aattened into asphalt or else have a hedge, a few benches and be a dusty nonentity, in San Francisco is a fenced miniature world of its own, a deep, cool world of water and exotic forest, populated by the birds that have been attracted. You cannot go in yourself. You do not need to, because your eyes go in and take you farther into tlis world than feet could ever go.San Francisco gives an impression of much yerdure and relief from city stoniness. Yet San Francisco is a crowded city and little ground is used to convey this impressión. The effect arises mainly from small bits of intensive cultivation, and it is multiplied because so much of San Francisco's greenery is vertical—window boxes, trees, vines, thick ground cover on little patches of "waste" slopes. Gramercy Park in New York overcomes an awkward situation by pleasing the eye. This park happens to be a fenced private yardin a public place; the property goes with the residential buildings across the surrounding streets. It must be entered with a key. Since it is blessed with splendid trees, excellent maintenance and an air of glamor, it successfully provides for the passing public a place to please the eye, and so far as the public is concermed this is its justihcation. But parks prirnarily to please the eye, uncombined with other uses, are by defnition where eyes will see them; and again by definition they are best small because to do their job well they must do it beautifully and intensi'vely. not perfunctorily. The worst problem parks are located prccisely where people do not pass by and likely never will. A city park in this fix, aficted (for in such cases it is an affliction) with a good-sized terrain, is figuratively in the same position as a large store in a bad economic location. If such a store can be rescued and justified, it will be by dint of heavy concentration on what merchants call "demand goods" instead of reliance on "impulse sales." If the demand goods do bring enough customers, a certain gravy from impulse sales may follow. From the standpoint of a park, what is demand goods? We can get some hints by looking at a few such problem parks. Jefferson Park in East Harlem is an example. It consists of à number of parts, the ostensibly principal one intended for general neighborhood useequivalent to impulse sales in merchandising vocabulary. But everything about it thwarts this purpose. Its location is at the far edge of its community, bounded on one side by the river. It is further isolated by a wide, heavy traffic street. Its internal planning runs largely to long, isolated walks without effective centers. To an outsider it looks weirdly deserted; to insiders, it is a focus of neighborhood conflict, violence and fear. Since a brunal evening murder of a visitor by teen-agers in 1958, it has been more than ever shunned and avoided. However, among Jefferson Park's several separate sections, one does redeem irself handsomely. This is a big outdoor swimming pool, obviously not big enough. Sometimes it contains more people than water. Consider Corlears Hook, the portion of the East River parklands where I could fnd only eighteen people amid the lawns and benches on a good day. Corlears Hook possesses, off to a side, a ball feld, nothing special, and yet on that same day most of the park's life, such as it was, was in the ball field. Corlears Hook also contains, among its meaningless acres of lawns, a band shell. Six times a year, on summer evenings, thousands of people from the Lower Éat Side pour into the park to hear a concert series. For a totl of some eighteen hours in the year, Corlears Hook park comes alive and is vastly enjoyed. Here we see demand goods operating, although obviously too limited in quantity and too desultory in time. It is clear, however, that people do come to these parks for certain special demand goods, although they simply do not come for generalizedor impulsepark use. In short, if a generalized city park cannot be supported by uses arising from natural, nearby intense diversity, it must convert from a generalized park to a specialized park. Effective diversity of use, drawing deliberately a sequence of diversified users, must be deliberately introduced into the park itself. Only experience and trial and error can indicate what diverse combinations of activities can operate effectively as demand goods for any specific problem park But we can make someuseful generalized guesses about components. First, a negative generalization: Magnificent views and handsome landscaping fail to operate as demand goods; maybe these “should," but demonstrably they do not. They can work as adjuncts only. Ón the other hand, swimming operates as deinand goods. So does fishing, especialy if there is bait buying and boaa'ng along with it. Sports felds do. So do carnivals, or carnival-like activities.\* Music (including recorded music) and plays also serve as demand goods. It is curious that relatively little is done with these in parès, because the casual introduction of cultural life is part of the historic mission of cities. It is a mission that can still operate full force, as the New Yorker indicated in this comment on the free Shakespeare season of 1958 in Central Park: The ambiance, the weather, the color and lights, and simple curiosity btought them out; sore had never seen any sort of play in the lesh. Hundreds came back again and again; a fellow we know says he met a group of Negro children who told him they had been to Romeo and fuliet five times. The lives of a lot of these converts have been enlarged and enriched; so has the audience for the American theater of the future. But spectators like them, new to the theater, are the very ones who won't show up, a dolar or two dollars in hand, to pay for an experience that they do not even know to be pleasant. This suggests, for one thing, that universities with drama departments (and, so often, with dead, problem parks in their vicinities) might ty putting two and rwo together, rather than cultivating hostile policies of defended Turf. Columbia University in New York is taking a constructive step by planning sports facilities—for both the university and the neighborhood—in Morningside Park, which has been shunned and feared for decade . Adding a few other activities too, lilkc music or shows, could convert a dreadful neighborhood liability into an outstanding neighborhood asset. Čities lack minor park activitie that could serve as minor "demand goods." Some are discoverable by observation of what people ry co do if they can get away with it. For instance, the mnanager of a shopping center near Montreal found his ornamental pool mysteriously filthy every morning. Spying afrer closing hours he found that children were sneaking in and washing and polishing their bikcs there. PLaces to wash bikes (where people have bikes), places to hire and to ride bikes, places to dig in the ground, places to build ramshackle wigwams and huts out of old Jumber, are activitiesusually crowded out of cities. The Puerto Ricans who come to ourcities today have no place to roast pigs outdoors unless they can hnd a privare yard for the purpose, but outdoor pig roasts and the paries that follow can be as much fun as the Italian street festivals many city dwellers have learned to love. Kite flyingis a minor activity but there are those who love it, and it uggests kite-flying places where naterials for making kites are sold too, and where there are terraces on which to work at them.Iceskatingused to be enjoyed on many ponds within northern cities untilit was crowded out. Fifth Avenue in Ncw York u ed to have five fashionable skating pond between Thirty-first and Ninety-eighth streets, one only four blocks from the present rink at Rockefcller Plaza. Artificial rinks have permitted the rediscovery of city ice skating in our time, and in cities at the latitudes of New York, Cleveland, Detroit and Chicago artificial rinks extend the skat'ing season to include almost half the year. Every city district could probably enjoy and use an outdoor park ice rink if it had one, and ptovide a population of entranced watchers too. Indeed, relatively smnall rinks placed at more numerous locations are much more civilized and pleasant than huge centralized rinks, All this takes money. But American cities today, under the ił- lusions that open land is an automatic good and that quantity is equivalent to quality, are in tcad frittering away money on park , playgrounds and project land-oozes too large, too frequent, too perfunctory, too ill-located, and hence too dull or too inconvenient to be used. City parhs are not abstractions, or automatic repositories of virtue or uplift, any more than sidewalks are abstractions. They mean nothing divorced from their practical, tangible uses, and hence they mean nothing divorced from the tangible effects on them—for good or for ill-—of the city districts and uses touching chem. Generalized parks can and do add great artraction to neighborhoods that people find attractive for a great variety of other uses. They further depress neighborhoods that people find unattractive for a wide variety of other uses, for they exaggerate the dullness, the danger, the emptiness. The more successfully a city mingles everyday diversiry of uses and users in its everyday streets, the more successfully, casually (and economically) its people thereby enliven and support well located parks that can thus give back grace and delight to their neighborhoods instead of vacuity.