# The need for mixed primary uses conoirloN 1: The district, and indeed as many of its internal parts as possible, maist serve more than one primary function; preferably more than two. These must insure the presence of people wbo go outdoors on different schedules and are in the place for different purposes, but wbo are able to use many facilities in conmon. On successful city streets, people must appear at different times. This is time considered on a small scale, hour by hour through the day. I have already explained this necessity in social terıns while discussing street safety and also neighborhood parks. Now I shall point our its economic effects. Neighborhood parks, you will recall, need people who are in the immediate vicinity for different pucposes from one another, or else the parks will be used only sporadically. Most consumer enterprises are just as dependent as parls on people going to and fro throughout the day, but with this d'ifference: If parks lie idle, it is bad for them and their neighborhoods but they do not disappear as a consequence. If consumer enterprises lie idle for much of the day they may disappear. Or, to be more accurate, in most such cases they never appear in the first place. Stores, like parls, need users. For a humble example of the economic effects of people spread through tiņe of day, I will ask you to think back to a city sidewalk scene: the balet of Hudson Street. The continuity of this movement (which gives the street its safety) depends on an economic foundation of basic mixed uses. The workers from the laboratories, meat-packing plants, warehouses, plus those from a bewildering varicry of small manufacturers, printers and other little industries and offices, give all the eating places and much of the other commerce support at midday. Ve residents on the street and on its more purely residential tributaries could and would support a modicum of commerce by ourselves, but relatively little. We possess more convenience, liveliness, variety and choice than we "deserve" in our own right. The people who work in the neighborhood also posses, on account of us residents, more variety than they "deserve"in their own right. We support these ings together by unconsciously cooperating economically. If the neighborhood were to lose the industries, it would be a disaster for us residents. Many enterprises, unable to exist on residential trade by itself, would disappear. Or if the industries were to lose us residents, enterprises unable to exist on the working people by themselves would disappear.\* As it is, workers and residents together are able to produce more than the sum of our two parts. The enterprises we are capable of supporting, mutually, draw out onto the sidewalk by evening many more residents than would emerge if the place were moribund. And, in a modest way, they also attract still another crowd in addition to the local residents or local workers. They arract people who want a change froin their neighborhoods, just ## [S4] THE DEATH AND LIFE OF CREAT AMERICAN CITIES as we frequently want a change from ours. This attraction exposes our commerce to a still larger and more diverse population, and this in tuirn ·has pernitted a still further growth and range of commerce living on all\`tbree kinds of population in varying proportions: a shop down the street selling prints, a store that rents diving equipment, a dispensary of first-rate pizza, a pleasant coffee house. Sheer numbers of people using city streets, and the way those people are spread through the hours of the day, are two diff'erent mattçrs. I shall deal with sheer numbers in another chapter; at this 'stage it is important to understand that numbers, in hemselves, are not an equivalent for people distributed through time of day. The signifcance of time spread can be seen especially clearly at the downtown tip of Manharran, because this is a district suffering from extreme time unbalance among its users. Some 4oo,ooo per sons are employed here, in a district embracing Wall Street, the adjoining law and insurance complexes, the city's municipal offices, some federal and state offices, groups of docks and shipping offices, and a number of other work complexes. An undetermined but considerable additional number of people visit the district during working hours, mostly on office or government business. This is an immense number of useis for a teritory sufficiently compact so that any part of it is readily accessible on foot from almost any other part. Among them, these users represent a tremendous daily demand for meals and other goods, to say nothing of cultural services. Yet the district is miserable at providing services and amenities proportionate to the need. Its eating places and clothing shops are pitifully inadequate in number and variety for the demands on them. The district used to have one of the best hardware stores in New York, but a few years ago it could no longer make ends meet, and closed. It had one of the finest, largest and longest esrablished food specialty stores in the city; it too has recently closed down. Once upon a time it had a few movies but they became sleeping places for the leisured indigent and eventually disappeared. The district's cultural opportunities are nil. All these lacks, which may seem on the surface to be frivolous, are a handicap. Firm after fir has left for mixed-use midtown Manhattan (which has become the city's main downtown). As one real estate broker put it, otherwise their personnel departments can't get or keep people who can spell "molybdenum." These losses, in tun, have badly undermined the districr's once supreme convenience for face-to-face business contacts, so that now law frms and banks are moving our, to be closer to clients who have already moved. The district has become second-rate in its very function—providing managerial headquarters—which is the foundation of its prestige and usefulness and its reason for being. Meantime, ouwside of the big offhces that form the breathtaking skyline of lower Manhattan is a ring of sragnation, decay, vacancies and vestigial industries. Consider this paradox: Here are plenty of people, and people moreover who want and value city diversity badly enough so it is dificult or sometimes impossible to keep them from scooting away elsewhere to get it. And here, cheek-by-jowl with the demand, are plenty of convenient and even empty places for diversity to grow in. What can be wrong? To see what is wrong, it is only necessary to drop in at any ordinary shop and observe the contrast between the mob scene at lunch and the dullness at other times. It is only necessary to observe the deathlike stillness that settles on the district after fvethirty and all day Saturday and Sunday. "They come in like a tide," the New York Times quoted a saleswoman in a clothing store. "I always know when it's a few minutes after noon." "The first group floods the store from noon to just before i p.M.," the Times reporter went on to explain. "Then there is a short breathing spell. A few minutes after I p.M. a second group spills in." And then, although the paper did not say so, a few minutes before 2 P.M. the store goes dead. The business done by consumers' enterprises here must be mainly crammed into some two or three hours a day, some ren or fifteen hours a week. This degree of underuse is a miserable inefficiency for any plant. A cerain number of enterprises can cover their overhead and make a proft by exploiting the midday mob operation to the hilt. But there must be few enough so that each reaps a capacity mob at that time. Restaurans too can live on lunch and coffee breals, instead of lunch and dinner, if there are relatively so few that they do a quick-turnover business in their too few bonanza hours. How does this add up to general convenience and amenity for those 400,00o workers? Badly. It is no accident that the New York Public Library gets inore anguished telephone calls from this district than from any other at lunchtime, of course--asking, "Where is the library branch down here? I can't find it." There is none, typically enough. If there were, it could hardly be built big enough for the queues at lunchtime and perhaps at fve o'clock and hardly small enough for the trade at other rimes. Aside from the mob-scene enterprises, other retail services can and do matage by keeping their overhead abnornally low. This is how most of the interestring and civilized and unusual places which have not yet gone out of business maoage to exist, and the reason why they are in singularly decrepit and decaying lodgings. The business and financial inrerests represented in lower Manhattan have for several years, in cooperation with the city, been working hard at preparing plans and starting work to regenerate this area. They have proceeded according to orthodox planning beliefs and principles. The first step in their reasoning is good. They face the fact of trouble, and also face its general nature. The planning brochure prepared by the Downtown-Lower Manhattan Association says: "To ignore the factors that threaten the economic health of lower Manhattan is to accept a continuing exodus of long-esmblished businesses and activities to areas in which they can find better working conditions and a more agreeable and convenient environment for their employees." The brochure indicates, moreover, a glimmer of understanding about the need to spread people through rime of day, for it states, "A residential population would stimulate the development of shopping facilties, restaurants, places of entertainment and garage facilities which would prove highly desirable for use by the daytime working population as well." But it is only a poor glimmerof understanding and the plans themselves are an exercise in cures irrelevant to the disease. A residential population is, to be sure, introduced in the proposed plans. It will take up a lot of territory, in the formn of ptoject buildings, parking lots and empty land, but in people—as the brochure itself statesit will amount to only about percent of the number of persons in the daytime population. What Herculean economic power that little band is to exert! What amazing feats of hedonism must it accomplish to support "the development of shopping facilities, restaurants, places of entertainment . . highly desirable for use by the daytime working population as well!" The new residential population is to be, of coutse, only part of the plan. The other parts will intensify the present trouble. They will do so in two ways. First, they are aimed at bringing in still more daytime work uses-manufacturing, international trade of fices and a huge new federal office building, among others. Second, the land clearance planned for these additional working places and for the housing projects and the associated highways will clear out—along with empty buildings and decayed work usesmuch of the low-overhead service and commerce that does still exist to serve the working population. Facilities already too meager in range (and number) for the working population will be further subtracted, as a by-product to adding more working population and an utterly meaningless number of residents. Conditions already inconvenient will become intolerable. The plans, morcover, will foreclose the chance of reasonably adequate services ever being developed, because no room, at economical rents for the incubation of new enrerprise, will exist for them. Lower Manhattan is in really serious trouble, and the routine reasoning and remedies of orthodox planning merely compound the trouble. What could be done to ameliorate effectively the district's extreme time unbalance of users, which is the root of its trouble? Residence, no matter how introduced, cannot help effectively. The daytime use of the district is so intensive that residents, even at the highest densities'possible, would always be ineffecruaily small in their proportionate numbers, and would preempt territories of a size utterly disproportionate to the economic contribution they could render here. The frst step in planning the infusion of new potential uses is to have a pracrical idea of what the infusion must accomplish if it is to overcome the district's root trouble. The infusion would obviouslyhave to result in the presence of maximum numbers of persons at the times when the district needs them most for time balance: midafternoons (between two and five o'clock), evenings, Saturdays and Sundays. The only possible concentrations large enough to make any difference would consist of grear numbers of visitors at those times, and this in rurn has to mean tourists together with many people of the city itself, coming back over andover againin their leisure cime. Whatever it is that attracts this infusion of new people must also be attractive to people who work in the district. At least its presence cannot bore or repel them. This new putative use (or uses) cannot, furthermore, replace wholesale the very buildings and territories in which new, spontaneous enterprises and facilities, stimulated by the new time spread of people, can grow with the freedom and flexibility of accommodations thcy will need. And finally,this new use (or uses) ought to be in accord with the district's character, certainly not at cross-purposes to it. It is the character of lower Manhattan to be intensive, to be exciting, to be dramatic, and this is one of its greatest assets. What is more dramatic, even romantic, than the tumbled towers of lower Manhatman, rising suddenly to the clouds like a magic castle girdled by water? Its very touch of jumbled jaggedness, its towering-sided canyons, are its magnifcence. What vandalism it would represent (whar vandalism the present project plans represent!) to dilute this magnificent city presence with the humdrum and the regimented. What does exist here to draw visitors at leisure hours, for instance on week ends? Over the years, unfortunately, almost every uique appeal to visitors that could possibly be rooted out of this district by plan has been rooted out. The aquarium, which used to sit in Battety Park at the tip of the island and was the main attracrion of that park, has been removed and rebuilt in Coney Island, the last place it was needed. A strange and vital üittle Armnenian neighborhood (there was residence that counted because of its uniqueness as a tourist and visitor attraction) was rooted out lock, stock and barrel for a tunnel approach, and now the guidebooks and the women's pages of the newspapers send visitors over to Brooklyn to find its transplanted remnants and extraordinary shops. The excursion boats, the trip to the Statue of Liberty, have been surrounded by less glamor than the checkout line in a supermarket. The Parks Deparment snack bar at the Battery is about as appealing as a school cafeteria. Battery Park itself, in the most stirring location of the city, riding into the harbor like a prow, has been made to resemble the grounds of an old people's home. Everything thus far inficted on thi's district by plan (and everything more which has been proposed by plan) says in the plainest terms to human beings, "Go away! Leave me alone!"Nothing says, "Come on!" So much could be done. The waterfront itself is the first wasted asset capable of drawing people at leisure. Part of the district's waterfront should become a great marine museum—the permanent anchorage of specimen and curiosity ships, the best collection to be seen and boarded anywhere. This would bring into the district tourists in the afternoon, tourists and people of the city, both, on week ends and holidays, and in summertime it should be a great thing for the evening. Other features of the shoreline should be the embarkation points for pleasure voyages in the harbor and around the island; these embarkation points should be as glamorous and salty as ar can make them. If new sea-food restaurants and much else would not start up nearby, I will eat my lobster shell. There should be related attractions, set not at the shoreline itself but inland a little, within the matrix of streets, deliberately to carry visitors farther in easy steps. A new aquarium should be built, for example, and it ought to be admission-free, unlike the one at Coney. A city of almost eight million can support two aquariums and can afford to show off its fish free. That publiclibrary branch which is needed so badly should be built, and it should be not only the usual circulating branch, but also the specialized library center for all marine and financial lore. Special events based on all these attractions should be concenrated in evenings and week ends; inexpensive theater and opera ought to be added. Jason Epstein, a publisher and student of cities, who has thoughtfully considered the expetiments of European cities for clues helpful to lower Manhattan, suggests a perinanent one-ring circus, like the one in Paris. This, if it were done weil, would be far more effective as sheer economic support to the long-rerın business value of this district than the dreary additions of more manufacturing plants, taking up the room, contributing nothing the district needs to maintain its strength (and depriving of their presence other parts of the city that really need manufacturing plants). As the district livened up during evenings and week ends, we could expect some new residential usc to appear spontaneously. Lower Manhattan does contain numerous old houses, run down but fundamentally attractive, of just the kind that have been rehabilitated elsewhere when life broke our. People in search of what is both unique and alive would ferret them out. However, residence in such an area as this musr necessarily be a manifestntion of district vitality, rather than a cause of it. Do my suggestions for additional uses based on leisure-time attraction seem frivolous and expensive? Consider, then, the expected cost of the plans prepared by the Downtown-Lower Manhattan Association and the city for more working places still, for the housing projects and parking lots, and for the highways to take the project people out of the district on week ends. These things are to cost, their planners estimate, one billion dollars of public and private money! The extreme condition of currently unbalanced spread of people through time of day in lower Manhattan illustrates a number of sobering principles that apply equally to other city disuricrs: No neighborhood or district, no matter how well established, prestigious or well heeled, and no matter how intensely populated for one purpose, can fout the necessity for spreading people through time of day without frustrating its potenrial for generating diversity. Furthermore, a neighborhood or district perfectly calculated, it seems, to fll one function, whether work or any other, and with everything ostensibly necessary to that function, cannot actually provide what is necessary if it is confined to that one function. Unless a plan for a district which lacks spread of people through time of day gets at the cause of the trouble, the best that can be done is to replace old stagnation with new. It may look cleaner for a while, but that is not much to buy with a lot of money. It should be clear by now that I am discussing two different kindsof diversiry The first, primary uses, are those which, in themselves. bring people to a specific place because they are anchorages. Offices and factories are primary uses. So are dwellings. Certainplaces of enterrainment education and recreation are primary uses. Toa degree (that is, for an appreciable proportion of their users), so are many museums, libraries and galleries, but not all. Primary uses can be unusual sometimes. In Louisville, since the war a great sample shoe market, for bargain, odd-lot shoes, has gradually grown up in about thirty stores concentrated on four blocks of one street. Grady Clay, real cstate editor of the Louisville Courier-Journal, and a leading city desiga and planning critic, reports that the group has about a lalf-million pairs of shoes on display and in warehouses. "Thuis is in the inner gray area,"Mr. Clay w ites me, "but as soon as the word got around, customers began flocking in from all over, so that you see Indianapolis, Nashville, Cincinnati shoppers, plus a good Cadillac trade. I have been thinking a bit about ir. Nobody could have planned tbis growth. Nobody has encouraged it. The biggest threat, in fact, is the expressway which will cut diagonally across. Nobody at City Hall seems at all concerned about it. I hope to stir up some interest . . ." As this suggests, you cannot tell from outward impressiveness or other signs of putative importance how effective a p imary use is, as an attcactor of people. Some of the most impressive looking ate ineffectual in performance. For instance, the main building of Philadelphia's public library, stuck in a monumental culrural center, draws fewer users than three of the library's branches, including an attractive buc unostentatious establishment inserted among the downtown shops of Chestnut Street. Like many cultural enterprises, libraries are a combination of primary use and convenience use, and work best as either when they combine these attributes. In size and appearance then, and in its stock of books, the main library build'ung is more significant; but in its role as an element of city use, the small branch is more significant, belying appearances. It is always necessary to think of performance in terms of users when ry'ing to understand how primary mixtures work. Any primary use whatever, by itsclf is relatively ineffectual as a creator of city diversity. If it is combined with another primary use that brings people in and out and puts them on the street at the same time, nothing has been accomplished. In practical terins, we cannot even call these differing primary uses. However, when a primary use is combined, effecrively, with another that puts people on the street at different times. then the effect can be economically stimulating: a fertile environment for secondary diversity Secondary diversity is a name for the enterprises that grow in response to the presence of primary uses, to serve the people the primary uses draw. If this secondary diversity serves single primary uses, no matter what the rype of use, it is innately inefficient.\* Serving mixed primary uses, it can be innately efficient and if the other three conditions for generating diversity are favorable alsoit can be exuberant. If this spread of street usc spreads a variety of consumer needs or tastes through time of day, all sorts of uniquely urban and specialized services and shops can make out, and this is a process that builds upon itself. The more intricately mixed, and therefore efficient, the pools of users are, the more services and shops there can be that need to sift their clienteles from all sorts of population, and in turn the more people are draw. So it is necessary here to make still another distincrion. If secondary diversity flourishes sufficiently and contains enough that is unusual or unique, it seeminglycan and does become, in its accumulation, a primary use itself. People come specifically for it. This is what happens in good shopping districts or even, to a humble extent, on Hudson Street. I do not wish'to minirize this occurrence; it is vital to the economic health of ciry streets and districts, and to cities as a whole. It is vital to city Auidity of use, to great choice, and to interesting and useful differences in character among streets and districts. Nevertheless, secondary diversity seldom becomes quite a primary use fully "in its own right." If it is to have staying power, and the vitality to grow and change, it must retain its basic foundation of mixed primary uses-people spread through time of day because of fxed reasons. This is true even of downtown shopping. which is there, basically, because of other mixed primary uses, and which withers (even if slowly) when these become seriously unbalanced. I have mentioned several times in passing that pr'mmary use mixtures must be effective if they are to generate diversity. What makes them effective? They must, of course, be combined with the other three conditions that stimulate diversity. But in addition, the primary mixture has to perform effectively itself. Effectiveness means, first, that the people using the streets at different times must actually use the same streets. Iftheir paths are separated from one another's,or buffered from one another's, there is no mixture in reality. In terms of city-street economics, murual support among differences is then a fiction, or something to be seen merely as an abstraction of adjoining different uses, with no meaning except on a map. Effectiveness means. second, that the peopleusing the same streets at differing times must include, among them, people who will use some of the same facilities.All kinds of people can be present, but those who turn up for one reason at one time must not be sorted out in some totlly incompatible fashion from those who turn up for another reason. As an extreme example, where the new home of the Metropolitan Opera in New York is to share a street with a low-income public housing project across the way, the juncture ismeaningless-evenif there were a place here for mutually supported diversity to grow. This type. of hopeless econonnic contretemps seldom turns up naturally in a city, but it is frequently introduced by plan. Andfinally, effectiveness means that tf e mixture of people on a street at one rime of day must bear some reasonably proportionate relationship to people there at other times of day. I have already made this pomt in discussing the plans for the lower tip of Manhattan. It has ofren been observed that lively downtowns are apt to have dwellings fingering into them and close beside them, and night uses these residents enjoy and help support. This is an accurate observat‘on so far as it goes, and on the strength of it many cities are expecti'ng miracles from residential projects downtown, in the fashion of the lower Manhattan plan. But in real l'ife, where such combinations have vitality the residents are part of a very complex pool of downtown day, night and week-end uses in reasonable balance. Sinuilarly, a few thousand workers dribbled in among tens or hundreds of thousands of residents make no appreciable balance either in sum or at any particular spot of any significance. Or a lone office building amid a large grouping of tbeaters amounts to little or nothing in practical terms. In short, with primary mixtures, it is everyday, ordinary performance in mixing people, as pools of economic mutual support, that counts. This is the point, and it is a tangible, concrete economic matter, not a vaguely "atmospheric"effect. I have been dwelling upon downtowns. This is not because mixtures of primary uses are unneeded elsewhere in cities. On the contrary they are needed, and the success of mixtures downtown (or in the most intensive portions of cities, whatever they are called) is related to the mixure possible in other pars of cities. I have been dwelling on downtowns for two reasons in particular. First, insufficient primary mixture is typically the principal fault in our downtowns, and often the only disastrous basic fault. Most big-city downtowns fulfill—or in the past did fulfill---all four of the necessary conditions for generating diversity. That is why they were able to become downtowns. Today, typically, they still do fulfill three of the conditions. But they have become (for reasons that will be discussed in Chapter Thirteen) too predominarely devoted to work and contain too few people after working hours. This condition has been more or less fornalized in planning jargon, which no longer speaks of "dowutowns" but instead of "CBD's"—sranding for Central Business Districts. A Central Business District that lives up to its name and is truly described by it, is a dud. Few downtowns have reached (yet) the degree of unbalance to be found at the lower tip of Manhatnn. Most have, in addition to their working people, a good many dayrime shoppers during working hours and on Sarurdays. But most are on their way toward this unbalance, and have fewer potential assets than lower Manhattan has for retrieving themselves. The second reason for emphasizing primary muxtures downtown is the direct effect on other parts of cities. Probably everyone is aware of certain general dependencies by a city on its heart. When a city heart stagnates or disintegrares, a city as a social neighborhood of the whole begins to suffer: People who ought to get together, by means of central activities that are failing, fail to get together. Ideas and money that ought to meet, and do so often only by happenstance in a place of central vitality, fail to meet. The networks of city public life develop gaps they cannot afford. Without a strong and inclusive central heart, a city tends to become a collection of interests isolated from one another. It falters at producing something greater, socially, culturally and economically, than the sum of its separated parts. All these considerations are important, but I have in mind here a more specific economic effect exerted by a strong city heart upon other districts. The pecul'iar benefis that cities afford to incubation operate, as I have pointed out, most eficiently and surely where the most complex pools of use forn. From such incubators of enterprise spring economic youngsters that may—and in real life do—later transfer their power to other parts of a city. This movement has been well described by Richard Ratclif, professor of land economics at the University of Wisconsin. "Decentralization is a symptom of degeneration and decay," says Ratcliff, "only if it leaves a vacuum behind. Where decentralization is the product of centripetal forces, it is healthy. Much of the outward movement of certain urban functions occurs as they are pushed out of the center, rather than as they respond to a pull towarl outlying locations." In a healthy city, notes Professor Ratcliff, there is a constant replacement of less intensive uses by more intensive uses.• "Artif.- cially induced dispersion is another question. It holds the danger of loss in total efficiency and productivity." In New York, as Raymond Vernon has noted in Anatomy of a Metropolis, the intensive developments of parts of Manhatmn Island for white-collar work have been pushing manufacturers out into the other boroughs. (When city manufacturers get big and self-sufficient enough they may go to suburbs or little towns, which depend economically too on the powerful incubating effects of those wonderfully productive places, intensive big cities.) Uses crowded out from incubators of diversity and enterprise are of two kinds, like other city diversity. If they are crowdedout secondary diversity, serving people drawn by mixtures of primary uses, they must fnd other places in which secondary diversity can fourish—other places with mixtures of primary uses, among other factorsor else languish and probably die. Their movement, if they are able to fnd congenial places, can represent opportunity for a city. They help heighten and speed the formation of further complex city, This is one of the inAuences, for example, from outside Hudson Street that has been affect'ng us. This is where the skin-diver equipment people come from, and the print and framing people, and the sculptor who took over an empty store. They are enterprises bubbling over from more intensive generators of diversity. Although this movement is valuable (if it is not lost for lack of sufficient economically fertile ground), it is less significant and basic than the movement of primary diversity crowded out from intensive centers. For when primary uses, such as manufacturing, for instance, boil over and outward from pools of use that can no longer contain everything they generate, these can become ingredients of primary mixture in places where the pr'imnary use of work is desperately needed. Their presence can help create new pools of pr'imary mixed use. One land-use economist, Larry Smith, has aptly called office buildings chess pieces. "You have used up those chess pieces already," he is said to have told a planner who was trying to revitalize an unrealistic number of spots with dreamy plans for new office buildings. All primary uses, whether offices, dwellings or concert halls, are a city's chessmen. Those that move differently from one another must be employed in concert to accomplish much. And as in chess, a pawn can be converted to a queen. But city building has this difference from chess: The number of pieces is not fixed by the rules. If well deployed, the pieces multiply. In city downtowns, public policy cannot inject directly the en tirely private enterprises that serve people after work and enliven and help invigorate the place. Nor can public policy, by any sort of fiat, hold these uses in a downtown. But ind'irectly, public policy can encourage their growth by using its own chcssmen, and those susceptible to public pressure, in the right places as primers. Carnegie Hall, on WVest Fifty-seventh Street in New York, is a striking example of such a primer. It has worked remarkably well for its street in spite of the serious handicap of too-long blocks. The presence of Carnegie Hal. which brings intensive use to the street by night, generated in time the presence of another use that needs night businesswo motion-picture theaters. And because Carnegie Hall is a music cenrer, it generated the presence of many small music, dance and drama studios and recital rooms. All this is mixed and woven with residenceswo hotels and many apartments close by, which have al kinds of tenants, but notably a great many who are musicians and teachers of music. The street. works by day because of small office buildings, and large office buildings to east and west, and hnaliy because the doublc-shift use is able to support secondary diversity that has, in time, become an attraction too, The time spread of usets is of course stimulating to restaurants, and here is a whole gamut: a fine Italian restaufant, a glamorous Russian restaurant, a sea-food restaurant, an espresso house, several hars, an Automat, a couple of soda fountains, a hamburger house. Between and among the restaurants you can buy rare coins, old jewelry, old or new books, very nice shoes, art supplies, remarkably elaborate hats, flowers, gournet foods, health foods, imported chocolates. You can buy or sell thrice-worn Dior dresses and last year's m'inks, or rent an English sports car. In this case, Carnegie Hall is a vital chessman, working in concert with other chessmen. The most ruinous plan that could be devised for this enrire neighborhood would be to destroy Carnegie Hall and replace it with another office building. This was precisely what was about to happen, as an accompaniment to New York's decision to take al its most impressive, or potentially impressive, cultural chessmen out of play and segregate them in a planning island called the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts. Carnegie Hall was saved by a hair, owing to stubborn citizen pressure politics, although it will no longer be the home of the New York Philharmonic, which is going to decontaminate itself from the ord'inary city. Now this is a pitiful kind of planning, which would blindly destroy a city's existing pools of usc and autormatically foster new problems of stagnation, as a thoughtless by-product to pushing through new drearms. Chessmen—and in downtowns night-use chessmenthat can be located by public policy or public pressure —should be placed to fortify and extend exisring vitality, and also to help balance up, in strategic places, existing time unbalances. New York's midtown has many places with intensive daytime use that go ominously dead at night, that need precisely the chessmen being taken out of play at Lincoln Center. The stretch of new office building centering on Park Avenue between Grand Central Station and Fifty-ninth Street is such a territory. The area just south of Grand Central is another. The shopping district center-'ing on Thirty-fourth Street is another. Many a once vital district, having lost in the past a mixture of primary uses which brought attraction, popularity and high econormic value, has declined sadly. This is why projects such as cultural or civic centers, besides being woefully unbalanced themselves as a rule, are tragic in their effects on their cities. They isolate uses—and too often intensive night uses too--from the parts of cities that must have them or sicken. Boston was the first American city to plan for itself a decontaminated cultural district. In 1859, a Committee of Institutes called for a "Cultural Conservation," setting aside a tract to be devoted "solely to institutions of an educarional, scientific and artistic character,"a move that coincided with the beginning of Boston's long, slow decline as a live cultural leader among American cities. Whether the deliberate segregation and decontamination of numerous cultural institutions from the ordinary city and ordinary life was part of the cause of Boston's cultural decline, or whether it was simply a symptom and seal of a decadence already inevitable from other causes, I do not know, One thiing is sure: Boston's downtown has suffered miserably from lack of good mixtures in its primary uses, particularlygood mixing in of night uses and of live (not museum-piece and once-upon-a-time) cultural uses. It is said, by those who have the problem of raising money for large cultural enterprises, that rich people will contribute much more readily and heavily for large, decontaminated islands of monuments than for single cultural buildings set in a city's matrix. This was one of the rationalizations which resulted in the plans for New York's Lincoln Center for the Performing Ars. Whether this is true about fund raising I do not know; it would not be surprising, however, since the well-off who are also enlightened have been informed by experts for years that project building is the only worthwhile city building. Among downtown planners and the businessmen's groups who work with them, there is a myth (or alibi) that Americans all stay home at night watching TV or else attend the P-TA. meeting. This is what they tell you in Cincinnati when you ask about their downtown, which is dead by evening and consequently half-alive. by·day. Yet Cincinnatians pay somne half-million visits a year to the generaly expensive night life across the river in Covington, Kentucky, which has its own kind of morbid unbalance. “"People don't go out," is one of the alibis also used in Pirtsburgh to explain its dead downtown.\* Downtown, the Pittsburgh Parking Authority's garages are operating at only between 1o and 2o percent of capacity by eight o'clock in the evening, except for the central Mellon Šquare garage which may reach so percent if something is doing at the ho" tels. (Like parks and consumer shops, parking and traffic facilities are innately inefficient and wasteful without time spread of users.) Meantime, the parking problem three miles from downtown in a section called Oakland is something fierce. "No sooner does one crowd move out of that place than another moves in," explains an Authority official. "It's a headache." It is also easy to understand. Oakland conwins the Pittsburgh symphony, the civic light opera, the little-theater group, the most fashionable restaurant, the Pittsburgh Athleric Association, two other major clubs, the main Capegie library, museum and art galleries, the Historical Society, the Shriners'Mosque, the Mellon Institute, a favorite hotel for parties, the Y.M.H.A.., headquarters of the Board of Education, and all the major hospitals. Because Oakland contains a high disproportion of leisure-time, after-work uses, it is unbalanced roo, and Pittsburgh has no good place, either in Oakland or in the working downtown, for generating intensively its principal metropolitan secondary diversity. The standard stores and the lowbrow diversity, such as it is, are downtown. What higher-brow commercial diversity does eist has mostly chosen Oakland as apparently the better bet of the two places; but it is bloodless and marginal because Oakland is far from the effective pool of use that a metropolitan heart should be. Pittsburgh's instrument for getting into this twofold unbalance was a real estate operator, the late Frank Nicola, who fifty years ago, in the City Beautiful era, began promoting a cultural center on the pristine eadows of a dairy farm. He had a good start because the Carnegie library and aft center had already accepted a gift site from the Schenley land holdings. Downtown Pittsburgh in those days was not, in any case, an attractive place for such establishments because it was unrelievedly grim, smoky and sooty. Now, however, downtown Pittsburgh is potentially attractive for leisure use, thanks to the massive cleaning up led by the businessmen's Allegheny Conference..And theoretically, the downtown's one-shift unbalance should soon be partly remedi'ed by a civic auditorium and the later addition of a symphony hall and apartnents, all immediately adjoining downtown. But the spirit of the dairy farm and of culture decontaminated from the city still reigns. Every device--arterial highways, belts of park, parking lots--severs these projects from the working downtown, insures that their junctuùre will remain an abstraction on maps instead of a living economic reality of people appearing at different times on the same streets. American downtowns are not declining nysteriously, because they are anachronisms, nor because their users have been drained away by automobiles. They are being witlessly murdered; in good part by deliberate policies of sorting out leisure uses from work uses, under the misapprehension that this is orderly city planning. Primary-use chcssmen cannot be strewn hither and yon in a city, of course, taking into account only the need of spreading people through time of day, and ignoring the particular needs of the uses themselves—what will be good locationsfor them. However, such arbitrariness is unnecessary. I have spoken admiringly from time to time about the intricate, underlying order of cities. It is part of the beauty of this order that success for the mixture in itself, and success for the peculiar and specific elements of the mixture, are apt to be in harinony rather than contradiction. I have given some examples of this identity (or correspondence) of interest already in this chapter, and have touched on others by implication: e.g., the new work uses planned for lower Manhattan will not only increase that district's fundamental trouble, but at the same time will burden the new employees and officials with an economically dull and an inconvenient ciry environment. Now I shall give an illustrative example of the quite complex ill effects that can arise when this innate order of city vitality is fouted. We might call this the case of the cours and the opera. Fortyfve years ago, San Francisco began building a civic center, which has given trouble ever since. This particular center, placed near the downtown and intended to pull the downtown toward it, has of course repelled vitality and gathered around itself instead the blight that typically surrounds these dead and artificial places. The center includes, among the other arbitrary objects in its parks, the opera house, the city hall, the public library and various municipal offices. Now, considering the opera house and the library as chessmen, how could they have best helped the city? Each would have been usod, separately, in close conjunction' with high-intensity downtown offices and shops. This, and the secondary diversity they would help anchor, would also have been a more congenial environment for either of these two buildings themselves. The op era, as it is, stands related to nothing, enjoying the irrelevant convenience of its nearest neighboring facility, the Civil Service Employment waiting room at the back of City Hall. And the library, as it is, is the learing wall of Skid Row. Untortunately, in affairs of this kind, one mistake leads on and on. In t958, a location had to be picked for a criminal courts building. The logical spot, it was well recognize, would be some place near the other municipal offices, for the convenience of lawyers and of the services that attach to lawyers'neighborhoods. But it was also recognized that the courts building would be bound to catalyze, somewhere in its vicinity, a secondary divetsity of bail-bond houses and un-chic bars. What to do? Put the courts close to the civic center or in it, so they would be near some of the buildings with which they need to work? But the environment of the criminal courts is nothing to encourage near the opera! The nondescript rattiness nearby is already unsuitable enough. Every alternative solution to such a ludicrous dilemma must be poor. The solation chosen was to place the courts at an inconvenient distance, but the opera was saved from further contamination by life other than "civic," whatever that may mean. This tiresome muddle arises not in the least from contradictions between demands by the city as an organism and demands by various specihc uses, nor do most planning muddles arise from any such contradictions. They arise chiefy from theories which are in arbittary contrađiction with both the order of cities and the needs of individual uses. This point of unsuitable theory—in this case esthetic theory—is so important and so consistently frustrating in one forn and another to proper city primaty mixtures, that I shall pursue the implications of this case a little further here. Elbert Peets, an architect who for many years was a consistently dissenting member of the Washington, D. C., Fine Arts Commission, has stated the confict well, and although he is speaking of Washington his remarks apply to this trouble in San Francisco and to troubles in many other places too: It is my feeling that wrong principles motivate important aspects [of current Washington town planning]. These principles have developed historically and have acquired so much support of habit and vested interest that the busy people guiding Washington's architectural growth doubtless accept them without questionwhich, however, we must not do. Briefly, what is happening is this: the government capital is rurning away from the city; the government buildings are being concentrated together and separated from the buildings of the city. This was not L'Enfant's idea, On the contrary, he made every effort to analgamate the two, to make them serve each other. He distributed government buildings, markets, seats of national societies, academies, and State memorials at points of architecturaladvantage throughout the city, as if with the definite purpose of putting the impress of the national capital on every part. This was sound sentiment and sound architectural judgment. From the Chicago Fair of 893 came the architectural ideology that sees a city as a monumental court of honor sharply set off from a profane and jumbled area of "concessions." . . . There is no evidence, in this procedure, of feeling for the city as an organism, a matrix that is worthy of its monuments and'friendly with them . . . T'he loss is social, as well as esthetic . . Here, one might say offhand, are two opposed esthetic visions, a matter of taste, and who can quarrel with taste? But chis goes deeper than taste. One of these visionsthe sorted-out "cours of honor"—contradicts the functional and economic needs of cities and of their specific uses too. The other visionthe mingled city with individual architectural focal points intimately surrounded by the everyday matrix—is in harınony with the economic and other funcrional behavior of cities.\* Every city primary use, whether it comes in monumental and special guise or not, needs its intimate matrix of "profane" city to work to best advantage. The courts building in San Francisco needs one kind of matrix with its secondary diversity. The opera needs another kind of matrix with its secondary diversity. And the matrices of the city need these uses themsclves, for the infuence of their presence helps form a city's' matrices. Furthermore, a city mattix needs its own less spectacular internal minglings ("jumbles"to the simple-minded). Else it is not a matrix but, like housing projects, it is profane" monotony, working no more sensibly than the "sacred"monotony of civic centers like San Francisco's, To be sure, any principle can be applied arbitrarily and destructively by people who fail to undetstand irs workings. L'Enfant's esthetic theory of focal points interdependent with the everyday city matrix surrounding them could be applied by trying to strew primaryuses-especially those capable of monumental appearance—without regard for the economic or other working relationships that they require. But L'Enfant's theory is admirable, not as an abstract visual good in isolation from function, but rather because it is capable of being applied and adapted in harinony with the needs of real establishments in real cities. If these functional needs are considered and respected, esthetic theories that glorify sorted-out and isolated uses, either "sacred" or "profane," are impossible to apply. In city districts that are predominately or heavily residential, the more complexity and vatiety of primary uses that can be cultivated, the better, just as in downtowns. But the chief chessman that is needed in these districts is the primary use of work. As we have seen in the examples of the park at Rittenhouse Square, or Hudson Street, these two pr'imary uses can dovetail nicely with one another, the streets livening up with workers at midday when they go dead from the dwell'ıngs, livening up from the dwellings in the evening when they go dead from the work. The desirability of segregating dwellings from work has been so dinned into us that it takes an effort to look at real life and observe that residential districts lacking mixture with work do not fare well in cities. In an aiticle on Negro ghettos by Harry S. Ashmore in the New York Herald Tribune, a Harlem political leader was quoted as saying, "The whites are likely to ease back in here, and take Harlem away from us. After all, (Harlem is] the most attractive piece of real estate in the whole area. We've got hills and views of both rivers, and transportation is good, and it's the only close-in area that doesn't have any industr'y.' Only in planning theory does this make Harlem an "attractive piece of real estate."From the time of its white middle- and up per-class beginnings, Harlem never was a workable, economically vigorous residential district of a city, and it probably never will be, no matter who lives there, until it gets, among other physical improvements, a good, healthy mixture of work stirred alongside and among its stretches of dwellings. Primary work uses in residential districts cannot be produced by wishing for them, any more than secondary diversity can be. Public policy can do relatively little that is positive to get working uses woven in where they are absent and needed in cities, other than to permit and indirectly encourage them. But attempts at positive lures are not the most pressing frst need in any case, nor the most fruirful way to spend efforts in gray areas that need vitality. .The first problem is to make the most of any work and other primary-use chessmen where they already do exist in failing residential districts. The sample-shoe market in Louisville, although it is a strange example, cries out for such opportunism. Aiuch of the borough of Brooklyn does, and some of the Bronx, and indeed, inner gray areas in almost all big cities. How do you use the existing presence of working places opporπunistically, and build from this? How do you weld them in to ## 176] THE DBATH AND LIFE OF GREAT AMERICAN CITIES help form, with dwellings, effective pools of street use? Here we must make a distinction between the typical downtown and the usual residential district in trouble. In downtowns, lack of suffcient primary mixture is usually the most serious basic handicap. In most residential districts, and especially most gray areas, lack of primary mixture is usually only one handicap, and sometimes not the most severe. Indeed, it is easy to fnd instances in which work is mixed with dwelings, yet to litdle avail in helping generate diversity or vigor. This is because most city residential districts also lave blochs that are too large, or they were built up all at once and have never overcome this original handicap even as their buildings have aged, or very commonly they lack sufficient population in sheer numbers. In short, they are deficient in several of the four conditions for generating diversity. Instead of worrying about where enough work is to come from, the frst problem is to identify where, in residential districts, it does exist and is being wasted as an element of primary use. In cities you have to build from existing assets, to make more assets. To think how to make the most of work and dwelling mixtures, where they exist or give promise of existing, it is necessary to understand the parts played by the three other generators of diversity too. However, I shalì anticipate the.discussion in the next threc cliapters to say this: Of the four generators of diversity, two represent easy problemns to deal with in curing the troubles of gray areasaged buildings are usually already present to do their potential share; and additional streets where they are needed are not innately difficult to acquire. (They are a minor problem comparcd with the large-scale land clearance we have been taught ro waste our money on.) The two other necexary conditions, however---m'ixtures of primary diversity and sufficient concentration of dwellingsre more difficult to create if they are lacking. The sensible thing is to begin where at least one of these two conditions already exists or can be fostered relatively easily. The hardest city districts to deal with will be residential gray areas that lack infusions of work to build upon, and that also lack high densiries of dwellings. Failing or failed city areas are in trouble not so much because of what they have (which can always be regarded as a base to build upon), but because of what they lack. Gray areas with the most severe and the most dificultto-supply lacks can hardly be helped toward vigor unless other gray-area disticts that do have at least a staπ toward primary mixnure are nurtured, and unless downtowns are reinvigorated with better spread of people through time of day. The more successfully a city generates diversity and vitality in any of its parts, of course, the better become its chances for building success, ultimately, in still other parts—including, eventually, those most discouraging to begin with. It should go without saying that streets or districts whjch do have good primary mixtures and are successful at generating city diversity should be treasured, rather than despised for their mixture and destroyed by attempts to sort out their components from one another. But unfortunately, conventional planners seem to see in just such popular and attracrive places only an irresistible invitation to employ the destuctive and simple-minded purposes of orthodox city planning. Given enough federal funds and enough power, planners can easily destroy city primary mixtures faster than these can grow in unplanned districes, so that there is a net loss of basic primary mixnure. Indeed, this is happening today.