# 12 Some myths about diversity "Mixed uses look ugly. They cause traffic congestion. They invite ruinous uses." These are some of the bugbears that cause cities to combat diversity. These beliefs help shape city zoning regularions. They have helped rationalize city rebuilding into the sterile, regimented, empty thing it is. They sand in the way of planning that could deliberately encourage spontaneous diversity by providing the conditions necessary to its growth. Intricate minglings of different uses in cities are not a form of chaos. On the contrary, they represent a complex and highly developed form of order. Everything in this book so far has been directed toward showing how chis complex order of mingled usesworks. Nevertheless, even though intricare oixrures of buildings, uses and scenesare necessary for successful city districts, does diversiry carry, too, the disedvantages of ugliness, warring uses and congesion that are conventionally attributed to it by planning lore and literature? These supposed disadvantages arc based on images of unsuccessful districts which have not too much, but too little diversity. They call up visions of dull, down-at-heel residential areas, pocked with a few shabby, shoestring enterprises. They call up visions of low-value land uses, like junk yards or used-car lots. They call up visions of garish, sprawling, unremitting commerce. None of these condirions, however, represents flourishing city diversity. On the contrary, these represent precisely the senility that befalls city neighborhoods in which exuberant diversity has either failed to grow or has died off with time. They represent what happens to semisuburbs which are engulfed by their cities but fail, themselves, to grow up and behave economically like successful city districts. Flourishing city diversity, of the kind that is catalyzed by the combination of mixed prinary uses, frequent streets, mixture of building ages and overheads, and dense concentration of users, does not carry with it the disadvantages of diversity conventionally assumed by planning pseudoscience. I now intend to show why it does not carry them, and why these disadvantages are fantasies which, like all fantasies that are taken too seriously, interfere with handling reality. L.et us consider, first, the belief that diversiry lools ugly. Anything looks ugly, to be sure, if it is done badly. But this belief implies something else.'Ît implies that city diversity of uses is inherently messy in appearance; and it also implies that places stamped with homogeneity of uses look better, or at any rate are more amenable to pleasant or orderly esthetic trcatinent. But homogeneity or close similarity anong uses, in real life, poses very puzzling esthetic problems. If the sameness of use is shown candidly for what it is--sameness—it looks monotonous. Superficially, this monotony might be thought of as a sort of order, however dull. But esthetically, it nnfortunately also carries with it a deep disorder: the disorder of conveying no direction. In places stamped with the monotony and repetition of sameness you move, but in moving you seem to have gotten nowhere. North is the same as south, or east as west. Sometimes north, south, east and west are all alike, as they are when you stand within the grounds of a large project. lt takes differencesmany differences-cropping up in different direcrions to keep us oriented. Scenes of thoroughgoing samenes lack these narur'al announcements of direction and movement, or are scantly furnished with them, and so they are deeply confust'ng. This is a kind of chaos. Monotony of this sort is generally considered too oppressive to pursue as an ideal by everybody but some project planners or the most routine-minded real estate developers. Instead, where uses are in actual fact homogeneous, we often hnd that deliberate distinctions and differences are contrived among the buildings. But these contrived diferences give rise to esthetic difficulties too. Because inherent differences--tlose that come from genuinely differing usesare lacking among the buildings and their sett'ings, the contrivances represent the desire merely to appear different. Some of the more blatant manifestations of this phenomenon were well described, back in ı952, by Douglas Haskell, editor of Architecrural Forum, under the tern"googie architecture." Googie architecture could then be seen in its finest Aowering among the essentially homogeneous and standardized enterprises of roadside commercial strips: hot-dog stands in the shape of hot dogs, ice-cream stands in the shape of ice-cream cones. These are obvious examples of virtual sameness trying, by dint of exhibitionisn, to appear unique and different from thei similar commercial neighbors. Mr. Haskell pointed out that the same impulses to look special (in spite of not being special) were at work also in more sophisticated construction: weird roofs, weird stairs, weird colors, weird signs, weird anything. Recently Mr. Haskell has observed that similar signs of exhibitionism have been appearing in supposedly dignihed establishments. Indeed they have: in office buildings, shopping centers, civic centers, airline terninals. Eugene Raskin, professor of architecture at Columbia University, commented on this same phenomenon in an essay, "On the Nature of Variety," in the Summer 196o issue of the Columbia University Forren. Genuine architectural variety, Raskin pointed out, does not consist in using different colors or textures. Can it be in using contasing forns? [he asked]. A visit to one of the larger shopping centers (the Cross County Shopping Center in New York's Westchesrer County comes to mind, but pick your own) will make the pont: though slabs, towers, circles and Aying stairs bound and abound all over the lot, the result has the appallingsameness of the tortures of hell. They may poke you with different iustruments, but it's ali pain . . . When we build, say, a business area in which all (or practically all) are engaged in eaming their livings, or a residential area in which everyone is deep in the demands of domesticity, or a shopping area dedicated to the exchange of cash and commodities—in short, where the pattern of human activity contains only one element, it is impossible for the architecture to achieve a convincing variety--convincing of the known facts of human variation. The designer may vary color, texture and forn until his drawing instruments buckle under the strain, proving once more that aπ is the one medium in which one cannot lie successfuliy. The more homogeneity of use in a street or a neighborhood, the greater is the temptation to be different in the only way left to be different. Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles is an example of one grand exercise after another in superficially contrived disrinction, for several miles of innately monoronous office buildings. But Los Angeles is not unique in presenting us with such vistas. San Francisco, for all its scorn of this kind of thing in Los Angeles, looks much the same at its new outskirts of sorted-out shopping centers and housing devclopments, and for the samne basic reasons. Euclid Avenue in Cleveland, which used to be considered by many critics one of the most beautiful of American avenues (it was, in those days, essentially a suburban avenue of large, fne houses wirh large, fine grounds), has now been excoriated, with justice, by critic Richard A. Miller in Architectural Forrn, as one of the ugliest and most disorganized of city streets. In converting to outright urban use, Euclid Avenue has converted to homogeneity: office buildings again, and again a chaos of shouted, but superhcial, differences. Homogeneity of uses poses an unavoidable esthetic dilemma: Shall the homogeneity look as homogeneous as it is, and be frankly monotonous? Or shall it try not to look as homogeneous as it is and go in for eye-catching, but meaningless and chaotic differences? This, in city guise, is the old, familiar esthetic zoning problem of homogeneous suburbs: Shall they zone to require conformity in appearance, or shall they zone to prohibit sameness? If to proluhit sameness, where must the line be drawn against what is too nonconforining in design? Wherever a city area is functionally homogeneous in its uses, this also becomes an esthetic dilemma for the city, and in more intensive form than in the suburbs, because buildings are so much more dominant in the general scene of cities. It is a ridiculous dilemma for cities, and it has no decent answer. Diversity of uses, on the other hand, while it is too ofren handled poorly, does offer the decent possibility of displaying genuine differences of content. Therefore these can become interesting and stimulating differences to the eye, without phoniness, exhibitionism or belabored novelty. Fifth Avenue in New York between Fortrieth Street and Fiftyninth Street is tremendously diverse in its large and small shops, bank buildings, office buildings, churches, institutions. Its architecture expresses these differences in use, and differences accrue from the varying ages of the buildings, differences in technology and historical taste. But Fifth Avenue does not look disorganized, fragmented or exploded.\* Fifth Avenue's architectual contrasts and differences arise mainly out of differences in content. They are sensible and natural contrasts and differences. The whole hangs together remarkably well, without being monotonous either. The new office stretch of New York's Park Avenue is far more standardized in content than Fifth Avenue. Park Avenue has the advantage of conta ining among its new office buildings several which, in themselves. are masterpieces of modern design.• But does homogeneity of use or homogeneity of age help Park Avenue esthetically? On the contrary, the office blocks of Park Avenue are wretchedly disorganized in appearance, and far more given tan Fifth Avenue to a total effect of chaotic architectural willfulness, overlaid on boredom. There are many instances of city diversity that include the use of residences and come off well. The Rittenhouse Square area in Philadelphia, Telegraph Hill in San Francisco, parts of the North End in Boston, afford examples. Small groups of residential buildings can be similar or even ¿dentical to each other without imposing a pall of monotony, so long as the grouping takes in no more than a short street block, and is not thereupon immediately repeated. In such a case, we look at the groupirg as a unit, and see it as differing, in content and appearance, from whatever the next use or residential type may be. Sometimes diversity of uses, combined with diversity of age, can even take the curse of monotony off blocls that are far too long—and again without the need for exhibitionism because dif. ferences of real substance exist. An example of this kind of diversity is Eleventh Street between Fifth and Sixth Avenues in New York, a street admired as both dignifed and interesring to walk on. Along its south side it contains, going west, a fourteen-story apartnent house, a church, seven three-story houses, a five-story house, thirteen four-story houses, a nine-story aparment, five four-story houses with a restaurant and bar at the street level, a five-story apartment, a little graveyard, and a six-story apartment house with a restaurant at street level; on the north side, again going west, it contains a church, a four-story house with a nutsery school in it, a nine-story apartment house, three fvestory houses, a six-story aparonent house, an eight-story apartment house, five four-story houses, a six-story residence club, two five-story apartment houses, another fve-story apattment house of very different vintage, a nine-story aparnnent house, a new • Lever House, Sesgram, Pepsi-Cola, Union Carbide. addirion to the New School for Social Rescarch with a library at street level and a public view to the interior courtyard, a fourstory house, a five-story apartment house writh a resmurant at street level, a mean- and cheap-lookıng one-story laundry and cleaner, a three-story apartment house with a candy and newspaper store at street level. While these are nearly all residential buildings. they are broken into by instances of ten orher uses. Even the purcly residential buildings themselves embrace many different periods of technology and taste, many different modes and costs of living. They have an almost fantastic array of matterof-fact, modestly stated differences: different heights at first-floor levels, differing arrangements for entrances and sidewalk access. These arise directly out of the fact that the buildings acrually are different in kind and age. The effect is both serene and unselfconscious. Still more interesting visual effects, and again without any need for exhibitionism or other phoniness, can and do arise in cities from mixtures in building types far more radical than those of Eleventh Streer—more radical because they are based on more radical inherent differences. Most landmarks and focal points in citiesof which we need more, not fewer--come from the contrast of a use radically different from its surroundings, and therefore inherently special-looking, happily located to make some dranua and contrast of the inherent difference. This, of couise, was what Peers was talking about (see Chapter Eight) when he advocated that monumenal or noble buildings be set within the matrix of the city, instead of being sorted out and withdrawn into "courts of honor" with other inherently similar neighbors there. Nor are the innate radical differences of humbler elements in city mixtures to be scorned esthecically. They too can convey the pleasures of contrast, movement and direction, without forced superfcialities: the workshops that turn up mingled with residences, the manufacturing buildings, the art gallery next to the fsh market that delights me every time I go to buy fish, the hoity-toity gournet shop in anotber part of town that peacefully contrases and coexists with a robust bar of the kind where new lrish immigrants come to hear about jobs. Genuine differences in the city architectural scene express, as Raskin says so excellently, . . . the interweaving of buman patterns. They are full of people doing different things, with different reasons and different ends in view, and the architecture refects and expresses this difference which is one of content rather than form alone. Being human, human beings are what interest us most. In architecture as in literature and the drama, it is the richness of human variation that gives virality and color to the human setting . . . Considerimg the hazard of monotony . . . the most serious fault in our zoning laws lies in the fact that they pernrit an entire area to be devoted to a single use. In seeking visual order, cities are able to choose among three broad alternatives, two of which are hopeless and one of which is hopeful. They can aim for areas of homogeneity which look homogeneous, and get results depressing and disorienting. They can aim for areas of homogeneity which try not to look homogeneous, and get results of vulgarity and dishonesty, Or they can aim for areas of great diversity and, because real differences are thereby expressed, can get results which, at worst, are merely interesting, and at best can be delightful. How to accommodate city diversity well in visual terms, how to respect irs freedom while showing visually that it is a forn of order, is the central esthetic problem of cities. I shal deal w-ith it in Chapter Nineteen of this book. For the moment, the point is this: City diversity is not innately ugly. That is a misconception, and a most simple-minded one. But lack of city diversity is innately cither depressing on the one hand, or vuìgarly chaotic'on the other. Is it truc that diversity causes traffc congestion? Traffic congestion is caused by vehicles, not by people in themselves. Wherever people are thinly settled, rather than densely concentrated, or wherever diverse uses occur infrequently, any specific attraction does cause traffic congestion. Such places as clinics, shopping centers or movies bring with therm a concentration of trafhic—and what is more, bring traffic heavily along the routes to and from them. A person who needs or wants to use them can do so only by car. Even a grade school can mean traffic congestion in such à milieu, because children must be carried to school. Lack of wide ranges of concentrated diversity can put people into automobiles for almost all their needs. The spaces required for roads and for parking spread everything out still farther, and lead to still greater uses of vehicles. This is tolerable where the population is thinly spread. It becomes an intolerable condition, destructive of all other values and all other aspects of convenience, where populations are heavy or continuous. In dense, diversified city areas, people still walk, an activity that is impractical in suburbs and in most gray areas. The more intensely various and close-grained the diversity in an area, the more walking. Even people who come into a lively, diverse area from outside, whether by car or by public transportation, walk when they get there. Is it true that city diversity invites ruinous uses?Is permissiveness for all (or almost all) kinds of uses in an area destructive? To consider this, we need to consider several different kinds of uses-some of which actually are harmful, and some of which are conventionally considered to be harmful but are not. One destructive category of uses, of which junk yards are an example, contributes nothing to a district's general convenience, attraction, or concentration of people. In return for nothing, these uses make exorbitant demands upon the land—and upon esthetic tolerance. Used-car lors are in this category. So are buildings which have been abandoned or badly underused. Probably everyone (except possibly the owners of such objects) is agreed that this category of uses is blighting. But it does not follow that junk yards and their l'ike are therefore threats which accompany city diversity. Successful city districts are never dotted with junk yards, but that is not why these districts are successful. It is the other way around. They lack junk yards because they are successful. Deadening and space-taking low economic uses like junk yards and used-car lors grow like pigweed in spots which are already uncultivated and unsuccessful. They sprout in places that have low concentrations of foot traffic, too little surrounding magnetism, and no high-value competition for rhe space. Their natural homes are gray areas and the dwindled-off edges of downtowns where the fires of diversity and vitality burn low. If all controls were lifted from housing-project malls, and these dead, underused places found their natural economic level, junk yards and used-car lots are exactly what would sprout in many of them. The trouble represented by junk yards goes deeper than the Blight Fighters can plumb. It achieves nothing to cry "Take them away! They shouldn't be there!" The problem is to cultivate an economic environment in the district which makes more vitl uses of the land profitable and logical. If this is not done, the land might as well be used for junk yards, which after all have sone use. Little else is apt to be successful, and this includes public uses, like parks or school yards, which fail catastrophically precisely where the economic environment is too poor for other uses that depend on magnerism and surrounding vitality. The kind of problem symbolized by junk yards, in short, is not solved by fearing diversity, or by suppression, but rather by catalyzing and cultivating a fertile economic environment for diversity. A second category of uses is conventionally considered, by planners and zoners, to be harmful, especially if these uses are mingled inro residential areas. This category includes bars, theaters, clinics, businesses and manufacturing. It is a category which is not hartnful; the arguments that these uses are to be tightly controlled derive from their effects in suburbs and in dull,-inherenrly dangerous gray areas, not from their effects in lively city districts. Thin smatterings of nonresidential uses do little good in gray areas, and can do haren, because gray areas are unequipped to handle srrangersor to protect them either, for that matter. But again, this is a problem that arises from too feeble a diversity in the prevailing dullness and darkness. In lively city districts, where abundant diversity has been catlyzed, these uses do not do harm. They are positively necessary, either for their direct contributions to safety, public contact and cross-use, or because they help support other diversity which has these direct effects. Work uses suggest another bugaboo: reeking smokestacks and fying ash. Of course reeking smokestacks and Aying ash are harmful, but it does not follow that intensive city manufacturing (most of which produces no such nasty by-products) or other work uses must be segregated from dwellings. Indeed, the notion that reek or fumes are to be combated by zoning and land-sorting classifications at all is ridiculous. The air doesn't know about zoning boundaries. Regulations specifically ainned at the smoke or the reek itself are to the point. Among planners and zoners, the great shibboleth in land use was fortnerly the.glue factory. "Would you want a glue factory in your neighborhood?"was the clincher. Why a glue factory I 'do not know, except possibly that glue then meant dead horses and old fish, and the reference could be counted upon to make nice people shudder and stop thinking. There used to be a glue factory near us. It was in a small, attractive brick building and was one of the cleanest-looking places on its block. Nowadays, the glue factory has been replaced by a different bogy, the 'mortuary," which is trotted out as a crownuing example of the horrors that insinuate their way into neighborhoods which lack tight controls on uses. Yet morruaries, or funeral parlors as we call them in the city, seem to do no harm. Perhaps in vital, diversified city neighborhoods, in the midst of life, the reminder of death is not the pall it may be on waning suburban streets. Curiously, the proponents of rigid use conrrols, who objeet so firmly to death in the city, seem to object equally firmly to life breaking our in the city. One of the blocks of Greenwich Village which happens to be spontaneously upgrading itself in attractiveness, interest and economic value, happens also to have a funeral parlor on it as this is written, and has had for years. Is this objectionable? Obviously it has been no dererrent to the families who have put money into the rehabilitation of town houses on the street, nor to the businessmen who have been investing money in opening or refurbishing quarters there, nor to the builder erecting a new high-rent apartment.\* The strange idea that death should be an unnoticeable or unmentionable part of city life was apparently debated in Boston a century ago, when city improvers advocated the removal of the small old graveyards of Boston's downtown churches. One Bostonian, Thomas Bridgman, whose views prevailed, had this to say, "The burial place of the dead, so far as it has any influence, is on the side of virtue and religion . . . Its voice is one of perpetual rebuke to folly and sin." The only clue I can find to the presumed harm wrought by. funeral parlors in cities is contained in The Selection of Retail Locations, by Richard Nelson. Nelson proves statistically that people visiting funeral parlors do not customarily combine this call with shopping errands. Therefore, it is of no extra retail advantage to locate next to a funeral parlor. In low-income neighborhoods of big ciries, such as New York's East Harlem, funeral parlors can, and oftcn do, operate as positive and constructive forces. This is because a funeral parlor presupposes an undertaker, Undertakers, like druggists, lawyers, dentist s and clergymen, are representatives, in these neighborhoods, of such qualities as dignity, ambition and knowledgeability. They are typically well-known public characters, active in local civic life. Quite often, they eventually go into politics too. Like so much of orthodox planning, the presumed harm done by this use and that use has been somehow accepted without anyone's asking the questions, "Why is it harmful? Just how does it do harm, and what is this harn?" I doubt that there is any legal economic use (and few illegal ones) which can harm a city district as much as lack of abundant diversity harms it. No special form of city blight is nearly so devastating as the Great Blight of Dullness. Having said this, I shall bring up a final category of uses which, unles.s their location is controlled, ase harmful in abundantly diversified city districts. They can be numbered on one hand: parking lots, large or heavy trucking depots, gas stations, gigantic outdoor advertising\* and enterprises which are harinful not because of their nature, exactly, but because in certain streets their scale is wrong. All five of these problem uses are apt to be profitable enough (unlike junk yards) to afford, and to seek, space in vital, diversified areas. But at the same time they usually act as street desolators. Visually, they are disorganizing to streets, and are so dominating that it is hard—sometimes impossible—for any countering sense of order in either street use or strect appearance to make much impression. The visual effects of the fitst four of rhese problem uses are easily seen and often thought about. The uses themselves are the problem because of the kinds of uses they ate. However, the fifth problem use I have mentioned is different, because in this case the problem is size of use rather than kind of .use. On cerrain streets, any disproportionately large occupant of street frontage is visually a street disintegrator and desolator, although exactly the s:me kinds of uses, at sall scale, do no harm and are indeed an asset. For example, many city "residential" streets shelter, along with their dwellings, all kinds of commercial and working uses, and these can and do fir in well so long as the street frontage which each one occupies is no grcarcr, say, than that taken up by the typical residence. Literally, as well as figuratively, the uses fit in. The street has a visual character which is consistent and basically orderly as well as various. But on just such a street, a use thar abruptly takes streer frontage on a large scale can appear to explode the street—make it Ay apart in fragments. • Usually, but not alwayr. What would Times Square be without its huge outdoor advertising? This problem has nothing to do with use, in the usual zoning sense of usc. A restaurant or snack place, a grocery, a cabinetmaker, a printer's shop, for instance, can fit well into such a street. But exactly the same kind of use--say, a big cafeteria, a supermarket, a large woodworking factory or a printing plant can wreak visual havoc (and somet'umes auditory havoc) because it is on a different scale. Such streets need controls to defend them from the ruin that completely perrnissive diversity might indeed bring them. But the controls needed are not controls on k'inds of uses. The controls needed are controls on the scale of street frontage permitted to a use. This is so obvious and so ubiquitous a city problem that one would think its solution must be among the concerns of zoning theory. Yet the very existence of the problem is not even recognized in zoning theory. As this is written, the New York City Planning Commission has been holding hearings on a new, progressive, up-to-the-minute comprehensive zoning resolution. Interested organizations and individuals in the city have been invited to study, among other things, the proposed zoning categories into which streets fall and to make recommendations for shifts from one category to another if that seeins desirable. There are several dozen use categories, each differentiated most carcfully and thoughtfully—and all of them are irrelevant to the real-life problems of use in diverse city districts. What can you recommend, when the very theory behind such a zoning resolution—not merely its detail—needs drastic overhaul and rethinking? This sad circumstance has given rise to many, a ludicrous strategy session, for instance, in the civic organizations of Greenwich Village. Many well-loved and popular residentiał side streets contain mixtures and sprinklings of small establishments. These are generally present by exemption from existing residential zoning, or are in violation of the zoning. Everybody likes their presence, and no arguments arise over their desirability. The arguments, rather, revolve around the question of what kind of categories in the new zoning will be least at odds with the needs of real life. The drawbacks of each offered category are fornidable. The argument against a commercial category for such streets is that, although it will permit the small-scale uses that are an asset, it will also permit uses purely as uses, without regard to scale; for instance, large supernarkets will be permitted and these are greatly feared by residents as explosive to such streets and destructive to residential street character—as they are. Ask for residential categories, this argument continues, and then small estublishments can infiltrate in violation of the zoning as they have in the past. The argument against a residential category is that somebody might actually take it seriously and the zoning against "nonconforming" small-scale uses might be enforced! Upright citizens, with the civic interests of their neighborhoods genuinely at heart, sit soberly plotting as to what regulation will off'er the most constructive circumvention of itself. The dilemma posed is urgent and real. One Greenwich Village street, for example, recently came up against a version of precisely this problem because of a case in the Board of Standards and Appeals. A bakery on this street, at one time mainly retail and small, has grown vigorously into a substantial wholesaler, and was applying for a zoning exemption to expand considerably farther (tahing over the quarters of a foriner wholesale laundry next door). The street, which has long been zoned "residential," has been upgrading itself recently, and many of its property owners and renting residents, in their growing pride and concern with their street, decided to fight the exemption request. They lost. It is no wonder they lost, for their case was blurry. Some of the leaders of the fight, who owned property or lived in property with small-scale nonresidential uses on the ground floors, were themselves in confict, actial or sympathetic, with the "residential' zoning—just as surely as the relatively big bakery was. However, precisely the many small-scale nonresidential uses on the street, which have been increasing, are responsible for much of the increased attractiveness and value of the street for residence. They are acquisitions, and the people on the street know it, for they make the street interesting and safe. They include a real estate office, a small publishing company, a bookshop, a restaurant, a picture framer, a cabinetnaker, a shop that sells old posters and prints, a candy store, a coffee house, a laundry, two groceries, and a small experimental theater. I asked a leader of the fight against the bakery exemption, a man who is also the principal owner of rehabilitated residential property on the street, which alternative in his opinion would do greater harm to his residential property values: the gradual elimination of ali "nonresidential" uses on the street, or the expansion of the bakery. The first altemative would be more destructive, he answered, but added, "Isa't an implied choice of that kind absurd?" It is absurd. A street like this is a puzzle and an anomaly under conventional use-zoning theory. It is a puzzle even as a commercial zoning problem, As city commercial zoning has become more "progressive"(i.e., imitative of suburban conditions) it has begun to emphasize distinctions berween "local convenience shops," "district shopping," and the like. The up-to-the-minute New York resolution has all this too. But how do you classify such a street as this one with the bakery? It combines the most purely localized conveniences (like the laundry and the candy store) with district-wide attractions (like the cabinetnaker, the picture framer, the coffee house) and with ciry-wide attractions (like the theater, the art galleries. the poster shop). Its mixture is unique, but the pattern of unclassifiable diversity which it represents is not in the least unique. All lively, diversified city areas, full of vitality and surprises, exist in another world from that of suburban commerce. By no means all city streets need zoning for scale of street frontage. Many streets, particularly where large or wide build'nigs predominate, whether for residential or for other uses or both, can contain cnterprises of large street frontages, and mix them with smalì ones too, without appearing to explode and disintegrate, and without being functionally overwhelmed by one use. Fifth Avenue has such mixtures of large and small scale. But those city streets that do need scale zoning need it badly, not just for their own sake but because the presence of streets with consisrent character adds diversiry to the city scene itself. Raskin, in his essay on variety, suggested thar the greatest flaw in city zoning is that it permits monotony. I think this is correct. Perhaps the nexr greatest flaw is that it ignores scale of use, where this is an importanr consideration, or confuses it with kind of use, and this leads, on the one hand, to visual (and sometimes functional) disintegration of streets, or on the other hand to indiscriminate attempts to sort out and segregate kinds of uses no matter what their size or emp'iric effect. Diversity itself is thus unnecessarily suppressed, rather than one limited manifestation of it, unfortunate in certain places. To be sure, city areas with flourishing diversity sprout strange and unpredictable uses and peculiar scenes. But this is not a drawback of diversity. This is the point, or part of it. That this should happen is in keeping with one of the missions of cities. Paul J. Tillich, professor of theology at Harvard, observes: By its nature, the metropolis provides what otherwise could be given only by taveling; namely, the strange. Since the strange leads to questi ons and underınines familiar tradition, it serves to elevate reason to ultimate signifcance . . . There is io better proof of this fact than the attempts of all totalitarian authorities to keep the strange from their subjects . . . The bigcityis sliced into pieces, each of which is observed, purged and equalized. The mystery of the strange and the critical rationality of men are both removed from the city. This is an idea famil iar to those who apprec iate and enjoy cities, although it is usually expressed more lightly. Kate Simon, author of New York Places and Pleastures, is saying much the same thing when she suggests, "Take the children to Grant's [restaurant] . . . they may bump into people whose like they may never see elsewhere and may possibly never forget." . The very existence of popular city guidebooks, with their emphases on the discovery, tbe curious, the different, are an illustration of Professor Tillich's point. Cities have the capability of providing something for everybody, only because, and only when, they are created by everybody. Part Three FORCES OF DECLINE AND REGENERATION ## 13 The self-destruction of diversity My observations and conclusioos thus far sum up to this: In our American cities, we need all kinds of diversity, intricately mingled in mutual support. We need this so city life can work decently and constructively, and so the people of cities can sustain (and further develop) their society and civilization. Public and quasipublic bodies are responsible for some of the enterprises that help make up city diversity—for insnce, parks, museums, schools, most auditoriums, hospimls, some offices, some dwellings. However, most city diversity is the creation of incredible numbers of different people and diferent private organizations, with vastly differing ideas and purpose, planning and contriving outside the formal framework of public action. The main responsibility of city planning and design should be to develop—insofar as public policy and action can do socities that are congenial places for this great range of unofficial plans, ideas and opportunities to fourish, along with the Aourishing of the public enterprises. City districts will be economically and socially congenial places for diversity to generate itself and reach irs best potential if the districts possess good mixtures of primary uses, frequent streets, a closegrained mingling of different ages in their buildings, and a high concentration of people. In this group of chapters on decline and regeneration, I intend to dwell on several powerful forces that can infuence, for good or for ill, the growth of diversity and vioality in cities, once an area is not crippled by lack of one or more of the four conditions necessary for generating diversity. These forces, in the forn that they work for iÜl, are: the tendency for outstandingly successful diversity in cities to destroy itself; the tendency for massive single elements in cities (many of which are necessary and otherwise desirable) to cast a deadening influence; the tendency for population instability to counter the growth of diversity; and the tendency for both public and private money either to glut or to starve development and change. These forces arc interrelated, to be sure; all factors in city changes are interrelated with all other factors. Nevertheless, it is possible and useful to look at each of these forces in its own right. The purpose of recognizing and understanding them is to try to combat them or—better yet—convert them into constructive forces. Besides infuencing the growth of diversity itself, these forces also sometimes afect the ease or difficulty with which the basic conditions for generating diversity can be introduced. Leaving them out of account, even the best planning for vitality would fall a step back for every two steps forward. The first of these powerful forces is the tendency for outstanding success in cities to destroy itself—purely as a result of being successful. In this chapter I shall discuss the self-destruction of diversity, a force which, among its other effects, causes our downtowns continually to shift their centers and move. This is a force that creates has-been districts, and is responsible for much inner-city stagnation and decay. The self-destruction of diversity can happen in streets, at small nodes of vitality, in groupings of strees, or in whole disticts. The last case is the most serious. Whichever tornn the self-destruction kes, this, in broad strokes, is what happens: A diversified mixture of uses at some place in the city becomes outstandingly popular and successful as a whole. Because of the location's success, which is invariably based on flourishing and magnetic diversity, ardent competition for space in this locality develops. It is taken up in what amounts to the economic equivalent of a fad. The winners in the competition for space will represent only a narrow segment of the many uses that together created success. Whichever one or few uses have emerged as the most prohtable in the locality will be repeated and repeated, crowding out and overwhelming less proftable forins of use. If tremendous numbers of people. attracted by convenience and interest, or charined by vigor and excitement, choose to live or work in the area, again the winners of the competition will form a narrow segment of population of users. Since so many want to get in, those who get in or stay in will be self-sorted by the expense. Competition based on retail proftability is most apt to afect streets. Competition based on working- or living-space attraction is most apt to affect whole groupings of streets, or even whole districts, Thus, from this process, one or few dominating uses finally emerge ttiumphant. But the triumph is hollow. A most intricate and successful organism of economic mutual support and social mutual support has been destroyed by the process. From this point on, the locality wrill gradually be deserted by people using it for purposes other than those that emerged triumphant from the competition—because the other purposes are no longer there. Both visually and functionally, the place becomes more monntonous. All the economic disadvantages of people being spread insufficiently through time of day are likely to follow. The locality's suitability even for its predominant use will gradually decline, as the suirability of downtown Manhattan for managerial ofices has declined because of this reason. In time, a place that was once so successful and once the object of such ardent competition, wanes and becomes marginal. Many streets which have already gone through this process and are at rest in their moribundity can be seen in our cities. Others, caught in the process now, can be watched in action. Among those in the neighborhood where I live is Eighth Street, the principal commercial street of Greenwich Vitlage. Thirty-hve years ago, this was a nondescript street. Then one of its principal propetty owners, Charles Abrams (who happens also to be an exceptionally enlightened planning and housing expert), built on the street a small night club and a motion-picture theater unusual for its time. (The narrow auditorium for good screen viewing, the coffee lounge and the intimate atnosphere have since been widely copied.) These enterprises proved popular. They brought more people into the street during evening hours and week ends, to supplement the day people passing through, and thus helped stimulate the growth of convenience and special shops. These, in their own right, began to bring still more people, day and evening. As I have mentioned previously, a two-shift street like this is an economically sound place for restaurants. The history of Eighth Street began to bear his out. It acquired an interesting growth and range of restaurants. Among all the enterprises of Eighth Street, it happened that restaurants became the largest money-earners per square foot of space, Naturally it followed that Eighth Street went more and more to restaurants. Meantime, at its Fifth Avenue corner, a diversity of clubs, galleries and some small offices were crowded out by blank, monolithic, very high-rent apartments. The only unusual factor in this history is Abrams himself. Unlike most property owners, who might not have pondered the implications of what was occurring, or have seen reason for worry in the face of success, Abrams watched, with dismay, bookstores, galleries, clubs, craftsmen and one-of-a-kind shops being pushed out. He warched new ideas starting up in other streets, and fewer new ideas coming to Eighth Streer. He could see that some of this movement was helping to enliven and diversify other streets, bur he could also see that Eighth Street was slowly but steadily startug to undiversify itself. He realized that if the process ran its full and logical course, Eighth Street would eventually be left beached, in the wake of popularity that had moved away. For much of his own property, in a strategic stretch of the street, Abrams has thus deliberately searched out tenants who will add something other than resraurants to the mixture. But sometimes he has to search hard for them because they must reasonably approach the current high earuing power of restaurants. This narrows down the possibilitieseven purely commercial possibilities. Eighth Street's worst potential threat to its diversity and its long-tern success is, in short, the force let loose by outstanding success. Another nearby street, Third Street, is far advanced in a similar trouble, because of another kind of sorting. This street, for a stretch of several blocks, has become imensely popular with touriss, drawn first by the local bohemian life of coffee houses and neighborhood bars, withat first—a light sprinkling of night clubs, all mingled with the interesting neighborhood shops and residential life of a stable old Italian and artists' district. In their proportions of ffteen years ago, the evening visitors were a constructive part of the area's mixture. The general liveliness they helped create was part of the residential appeal, as well as an appeal to visitors. Night spots are today overvhelming the street, and are also overwhelming the vety life of the area. Into a district excellent at handling and protect'ing strangers they have concentrated too many strangers, all in too irresponsible a mood, for any conceivable city society to handle naturally. The duplicaton of the most profitable use is underinining the base of its own attracion, as disproportionate duplication and exaggeration of some single use always does in cities. We are accustomed to thinking of streers, or neighborhoods of streets, as divided into functional usesentertainment, offices, residence, shopping or the like. And so they are, but only to a degree if they maintain their success, For example, streets which become so profitable for such secondary diversity as clothing shoppnig that clothing shopping becomes almost their exctusive use, decline as they are progressively deserted and ignored by people with other secondary purposes in mind. If such a strect has long blocks, which further degenerate it as a pool of intricate cross-use, the sorting out of its users, and the resulting stagnation, is emphasized. And if such a street belongs in a district which, in general, is sorting into one primary use—such as work—here is seldom hope for any spontaneous turn for the better. The self-destruction of diversity can be seen at outsundingly successful little nodes of activity, as well as along street stretches. The process is the same. As an example, corsider the crossing of Chestnut and Broad Streets in Philadelphia, a spot which a few years ago was a climax of Chestiut Street's varied shopping and other activities. The corners of this crossing were what real estate men call a "too percent location." It was an enviable place to be. One of the corner occupants was a bank. Three other banks bought themselves into the three other corners, apparently to be at the 1oo percent location too. From that moment, it was no longer the too percent location. The crossing is today a dead barrier along Chestnut Street, and the tumble of diversity and activity has been pushed beyond. These banks were making the same mistake as a family I know who bought an acre in the county on whi ch to build a house. For many years, while they lacked the money to build, they visited the site regularly and picnicked on a knoll, the site's most attractive feature. They liked so much to visualize themselves as always there, that when they finally built they put the housc on the knoll. But then the knoll was gone. Somehow they had not realiz.ed they would destroy it and lose it by supplanting it with themselves. Streets (especially if their blocks are short) sometimes can weather much duplication of successful uses, or else can regenerate themselves spontaneously after declining and stagnating for a tinie. These escapes are possible if the surrounding district sustains a strong and vigorous mixture of diversity—especially a srrong, underlying base of primary diversity. However, when whole neighborhoods of streets, and entire districts, embark on excessive duplication of the most profitable or prestigious uses, the problem is far more serious. Striking evidences of this disastrous sorting-out can be seen in many city downtowns. The successive historical cenrers of Boston's downtown, like so many archeological layers, are fossilized as stratum after stratum of sorted-out uses, each stratum lacking primary mixture, each stratum stagnated. The Boston Planning Board, analyzing downtown uses, mapped them by color--one color to designate managerial and financial offices, another for goverment, another for shopping, another for enterwinment, and so on. The stagnant areas all show on the map as a series of virtually solid swatches of a single color each. On the other hand, at one end of the downtown, where the Back Bay meets a corner of the-Public Gardens, is a swatch of mapmarked with a different kind of legend, designated in red and yellow stripes. This swatch was too complex to map according to specific uses, so it was given an appropriate representational legend, stand'ung for "mixed." This is the only part of Boston's downtown that is at present spontnoously changing, growing, acting like a live city. Such successions of sorted-out downtown neighborhoods as those in Boston are generally thought of, vaguely, as the residue left by a moving downtown center. They are regarded as a result of the center's movement elsewhere. But they are not. These clumps of excessive duplicarion are the cause of the center's movement. Diversiry is crowded out by the duplication of succes. Unless they are handsomely hnanced to start with, or instantly successful (which is seldom the case), new ideas tumble into second-best locations; thereby second-best becomes frst-rate, fourishes for a time, and eventually it too is destroyed by the duplication of irs own greatest successes. In New York, the sorting-out of downtown was already being memorialized back in the 88o's, in a jingle of the tirne: From Eighth Street down, the men are earning it. From Eighth Street up, the women are spendung 't. That is the manner of this great town, From Eighth Street up and Eighth Street down. Willa Cather, writing in My Mortal Enemy of Madison Square as its turn arrived to become an intense center of diversity, described it thus: "Madison Square was then at the parting of the ways; had a double personality, half commercial, half social, with shops to the south and residences on the north." Miss Cather put her finger on the characteristic of mixture and "double personality"that always marks an outstandingly successful center as it approaches its crest and poises there. But the mixture hardly represents a "parting of the ways." It is a coming together and mingling of the ways. Madison Square, now a glum, has-been district of massive office buildings and a commerce very marginal in comparison to that it once enjoyed, was remarkable at its crest for possessing the old Madison Šquare Garden (now supplanted by an office building). Never since has New York had such an urbane, glamorous and magnetic assembly hall, because never since has New York had a major assembly hall at the magnetic, expensive cenrer of a good mixture. The eventual sorting out and long decline of Madison Square was not, of course, an isolated event. It was parr of a larger movement, made up of many accumulations of economic pressure upon successful mixrures of uses. On a larger scale than Madison Square, these pressures of competition for space were continually unsort'ung diversity throughout the entire middle of downtown, and timbling diversity out at the upper end of downtown; downtown itself was moving as a result, leaving its beached districts behind. A moving downtown usually leaves, along with its clumps of excessive duplication, pockers of nothing much at all, places which the most intensive new comnbinations of diversity have bypassed or over which they have leapfrogged. These pockets or side strips are apt to remain nothing much at all thenceforth, because the sorted-out clumps adjoining them provide so poor a spread of people through time of day. There is space here, but nothu ng to catalyze uses for it. Apparently the self-destruction of district diversity by excessive duplication occurs in London too, because of the same forces that move American downtowns. An article on the planning problems of Central London, in the January 1959 Îournol of the Town Planning Institute, a British periodical, has this to say: For many years now variety has gone from the City [the bank and financial' office center]. There the teeming daytime population contasts with a 5,ooo nightpopulation. What has happened in the City is happening to the West End. The claim of many who have offces in the West End is that for their clients and customers they have the amenities of the hotels, the clubs, the restaurants and for the'trstaff the shops and the parks. If the process goes on, these very advantages will be gobbled up and the West End will become one dreary sea of office blocks. We have pitifully few outstandingly successful residential districts in our American cities; most city residential districts have never possessed the four fundamental condirions for generating exuberant diversity in the first place. Therefore, examples of the self-destruction that follows outstanding success are more usual in downtowns. But the relatively few city residential districts that do become outstandingly magnetic and successful at generaring diversity and virality are subjected ultimately to the same forces of self-destruction as downtowns. In this case, so many people want to live in the locality that it becomes proftable to build, in excessive and devastating quantity, for those who can pay the most. These are usually childless people, and today they are not simply people who can pay the most in general, but people who can or will pay the most for the smallest space. Accommodations for this narrow, profitable segment of population multiply, at the expense of all other tissue and all other popularion. Families are crowded out, variety of scene is crowded out, enterprises unable to support their share of the new construction costs are crowded out. This process is now occutring, very rapidly, in much of Greenwich Village, Yorkville and the midtown East Side of Manhattan. The uses duplicated excessively are different from those duplicated excessively at centers of downtowns, bur the process is the same, the reason why it occurs is the same, and the ultimate efects are the same. The admired and magnetic knoli is destroyed by its own new occupants, by the act of occupation. The process I have described occurs only in small areas at a time, because it is a sequel only to outstanding success. Nevertheless, the destructive power of this process is larger and more serious than its geographical scope at any one rime suggests. The very fact that the process does occur in localities of outstanding success makes it difficult for our cities to build further upon outsranding success. It too often slips into decline, Furthermore, the very means by which outstanding success declines make the process doubly destructive to cities. At the same time niew construction and narrow multiplications of uses are destroying mutual support in one locality, they are, in effect, depriving other localities of their presence, localities where they would add to diversity and strengthen mutual support, rather than subtract these qualities. For some reason, banks, insurance companies and prestige offces are consistently the most voracious double-destroyers in this way. Look to see where banks or insurance companies are clusrered, and you will too often see where a center of diversity has been supplanted, a knoll of vitwlity leveled: You will see a place that is already a has-been or is becoming so. I suspect that this curious circumstance is owing to two facts. Such organizations are conservative. Conservatism. applied to the choice of city locations, means investing where success is already a well-established fact. To see that investnent may destroy success requires looking too far ahead for those who value most what is already achieved—and are perhaps mystified by localities with a potential for success, or are insecure about them, because of not understanding why some places in cities should be successful, and others not. In the second place, such organizations have money, and thus are able to supplant most rivals for the space they want. The wish and the ability to settle on the knoll are thus combined most effectively in banks and insurance companies, and in prestige offices which borrow readily from banks and insurance companies. To a certain extent, the convenience of being very close to one another is important, as it is in many other ciry activities. But this hardly accoun for the accuraey and degree with which such powerful organizations supplant successful combinations of diversity. Once a locality has been stagnated by their excessive duplication of work uses (at the expense of other tissue), the more prosperous among them readily leave the nest of convenience which is no longer so appealing. However, it would be misleading to fix upon particular culprits among differing city uses, even outstanding culprits. Too many other uses exert the same economic pressures and end with the same hollow triumphs. It is more fruitful, I think, to approach this as a problem of malfunction in cities themselves. First, we must understand that self-destruction of divetsity is caused by success, not by failure. Second, we must understand that the process is a continuation of the same economic processes that led to the success itself, and were indispensable to it. Divetsity grows in a city area because of economi'c opportunity and economic attraction. During the process of diversity growth, rival users of space are crowded out. All city diversity grows, in part at least, at the expense of some other tissue. Dur'ing this growth period even some unique uses may be crowded out because they give such low economic return for the land they occupy. Thi's we think of as salutary if the unique uses are junk yards, used-car lots or abandoned buildings; and it is salutary. During the growth period, much of the new diversity occurs not merely at the expense of uniquely low-value tissue, but also at the expense of already existing duplications of use. Sameness is being subtracted at the same tirne diversiry is being added. This result of economic competition for space is net increase in diversity. At some point the diversity growth has proceeded so far that the addition of new diversity is mainly in competition with already existing diversity. Relatively little sameness is being subtracted, perhaps none. This is the case when a center of activity and diversity' has reached a peak. If the addition is really something different (as the first bank on the comer in Philadelphia was), there is still no net loss in diversity. Here is a process, then, that operates for a time as a healthy and salutary function, but by failing to modify itself at a critical point becomes a malfunction. The analogy that comes to mind is faulty feedback. The conception of electronic feedback has become familiar with the development of computers and automated machinery, where one of the end products of an act or series of acts by the machine is a signal which modifies and guides the next act. A similar feedback process, regulated chemically rather than electronically, is now believed to modify some of the behavior of cells. A report in the New York Times explains it thus: The presence of an end product in the milieu of a cell causes che machinery thar produces the end product to slow down or to stop. This form of cell behavior Dr. [Van R.] Potter {of the University of Wisconsin Medical School] characterized as "intelligent."In contast, a cell that has changed or mutated behaves like an idiot" in that it continues without feedback regulation to produce even materials that it does not require. I think that last sentence is a fair description of the behavior of city localities where the successof diversity destroys itself. Suppose we think of successful city areas, for all their extraordinary and intricate economic and social order, as faulty in this fashion. in crating city success, we human beings have created marvels, but we left out feedback. What can we do with cities to make up for this omission? I doubt that we can provide for cities anything equivalent to a ue feedback system, working automatically and with perfection. But I think we can accomplish much with imperfect substitutes. The problem is to hamper excess duplications at one place, and divert them instead to other places in which they will not be excess duplicarions, but healthy additions. The orher places may be at some distance, or very close by indeed. But in any case they cannot be fixed on arbitrarily. They u be places where the use concerned will have an excellent opportunity for susined success-abetter opportunity, in fact, than in a locality that is doomed to destroy itself. I think this diversion can be encouraged by a combination of three means, which I shalì call: zoning for diversity; staunchness of public buildings; and competitive diversion. I shall touch on each of these briefly. Zoning for diversity must be thought of differently from the usual zoning for confornuity, bur like all zoning it is suppressive. One form of zoning for diversity is already familiar in certain city districts: controls against demolition of historicaly valuable buildings. Already different from their surroundings, these are zoned to y diferent from them. A slightly advanced development of this concept was proposed by Greenwich Village civic groups for their area, and adoped by the ciry, in r9s9. On certain srects, the height limitations for buildings were drastically reduced. Most of the streets affected already contain numerous buildings in excess of the new height linuitations. This is not evidence of illogic, but is precisely why the new limitations were asked: so that the lower buildings remaining could not be further replaced by excessive duplication of the more valuable high buildings. Again sameness was being zoned outor in effect, differences zoned in-even though in a most limited fashion and on relatively few streets. The purpose of zoning for deliberate diversity should not be to freeze conditions and uses as they stand. That would be death. Rather, the point is to insure that changes or replacements, as they do occur, cannot be overwhelmingly of one kind. This means, often, constraints on too rapid a replacement of too many buildings. I think the specific schemne of diversity zoning, or the spocifc combination of schemes, that an outstandingly successful city locality requires is likely to differ with the locality and with the particular forın of self-destruction that threatens it. However, in principle, zoning aimed directly at building ages and building sizes is a logical tool, because variety in types of accommodations is refected, usually, in variety of uses and populations. A park being surrounded by intensive duplicau'ons of call offices or apartments might well be zoned for lower buildings along its south side in particular, thus accomplishing two useful purposes at one stroke: protecting the park's supply of winter sun, and protecting indirectly, to some extent at least, its diversity of surrounding uses. All such zoning for diversity--since the deliberate intent is to prevent excessive duplication of the most profitable usesneods to be accompanied by tax adjustnents. Land hampered from conversion to its most immediately prohtable potental usc needs to have this fact reflected in its taxes. It is unrealisric to put a ceiling on a property's development (whether the tool is control of height, bulk, historical or esthetic value, or some other device) and then let the asesment on such a property refect the irrelevant values of more profitably developed properties nearby. Indeed, raising the assessments on city property because of increased proftability of the neighbors, is a powerful means today of forcing excess duplications. This pressure would continue to force them, even in the face of controls overtly intended to hamper duplications. The way to raise the tax base of a city is not at all to exploit to the limit the short-renn tax potenpal of every site. This undernnines the long-term tax poteatial of whole neighborhoods. The way to raise a city's tax base is to expand the city's territorial quantity of successful areas. A strong city tax base is a byproduct of srrong city magnetism, and one of its necessaty ingredientsonce the object is to sus in success--is a certain amount of close-grained, deliberate, calculated variation in localized tax yields to anchor diversity and forestall its self-destruction. The second potential tool for hampering unbridle duplication of uses is what I call staunchness of public buildings. By this I mean that public and quasi-public bodies should adopt, for their properties, a policy somewhat like Charles Abrams' private policy for his property on Eighth Street. Abrams combats the excessive duplication of restaurants on his property by seeking orher kinds of uses. Public and quasi-public bodies should estblish rheir buildings and facilities at points where these will add effectively to diversity in the first place (rather than duplicate their neighbors). Then, in their role as uses, these should stand staunch, no matter how valuable the property becomes because of surtounding success (which they have helped create if they located well), and no marter how large the offers from those who would supplant them to duplicate surrounding successful uses. This is a pennyfoolish but pound-wise policy for municipalities and fot bodies having an enlightened stake in municipal success-analogous to penny-foolish but pound-wise taxation policy for enforcing diversity zoning devices. The New York Public Library, on an immensely valuable site, contributes more of value to the locality than any possi'ble proftable duplication of nearby uses bccause it is so different, visually and functionally. When pressure from citizens persuaded New York's ciry government to lend funds to a quasi-public body, so it could buy Carnegie Hall from its private owner who was going to sell it for duplication of nearby uses, and Carnegie Hal was thus retained as a concert hall and auditorium, a continuing effective mixture of primary uses in the neighborhood was thereby anchored. In short, puhlic and publicspirited bodies can do much to anchor diversity by stand'ing staunch in the midst of different surrounding uses, while money rolls around them and begs to roll over them. Both of these tools, zoning for diversity and staunchness of public uses, are defensive actions against self-desrruction of diversity. They are windbreaks, so to speak, which can stand against the gusts of economic pressures, but can hardly be expected to stand fast against sustained gales. Any forns of zoning, any forms of public building policy, any formns of tax assessment policy, no matter how enlightened, give eventually under suficiently powerful economic pressure. They usually have, and probably they usually will. Along with defensive tools must therefore go another: competitive diversion. There is a widespread belief that Americans hate cities. I think it is probable that Àmericans hate city failure, but, from the evidence, we certainly do not hate successful and vital city areas. On the contrary, so many people want to make use of such places, so many people wanr to work in them or live in them or visit in them, that municipal self-destruction ensues. In killing successful diversity combinations with money, we are employing perhaps our nearest equivalent to killing with kindness. In short, the demand for lively and diversified city areas is too great forthe supply. If ourstandingly successful city localities are to withstand the forces of self-destructionand if the nuisance value of defense. against self-destruction is to be an effecrive nu'isance value--the sheer supply of diversihed, lively, econonuically viable city localities must be increased. And with this, we are back to the basic need to supply more city streets and districts with the four conditions economically necessary to city diversity. To be sure, there will always be some districts, at any particular moment in time, which are most exuberantly diversfied, most popular and most tempting for destruction by momentarily most profitable duplications. If other localities are not far behind in opportunities and interest, however, and still others are coming along, these can offer competitive diversion from the most popular. Their pull would be reinforced by the obstacles to duplications introduced in the most popular districts, which are a necessary adjunct to competitive diversion. But the competitive pull would have to be there, even though it could be a lesser pull. If and when competing localities, in their turn, should become sufficiently successful to necd city substitutes for feedback signals, they should ask and get defenses against excessive duplication. The time at which a city locality starts to act like an "idiot" cell is not hard to discover. Anyone intimate with an outsrandingly successful city district knows when this qualitative turn is in process of occurting. Those who use the facilities that are starting to disappcar, or view them with pleasure, know full well when the diversiry and interest of the locality to which they are attached are on the downgrade. They know full well when segments of rhe popularion are being crowded out, and diversity of population is narrowingspecially if they are being crowded out themselves. They even know many of these results in advance of their fulfillment, by projecting proposed or imminent physical changes into changes in everyday life and the everyday scene. The people in a district talk about it, they register both the fact and effect of diversity's self-destruction long before slowpoke maps and statistics tell, too late, the misfortune of what happened. At bottom, this problem of the self-destruction of outstanding success is the problem of getting the supply of vital, diversifed city streets and districts into a saner relarionship with demand.