# 14 The curse of border vacuums Massive single uses in cities lave a quality in comon with each other. They forn borders, and borders in cities usually make destructive neighbors. A border—the perimeter of a single massive or stretched-out use of territory—forns the edge of an area of "ordinary" city. Often borders are thought of as passive objects, or niatter-offactly just as edges. However, a border exers an active inßuence. Railroad tracks are the classic examples of borders, so much so that they came to stand, long ago, for social borders too-"the other side of the tracks"—a connotation, incidenrally, associated with small towns rather than with big cities. Here we shall be concemed not with the social connocations of areas demnarared by borders, but rather with the physical and functional effects of borders on their immediate city surroundings. In the case of a railroad track, the district lying to one side may do better or worse than the district lying to the other side. But the places that do worst of all, physically, are typically the zones directly beside the track, on borh sides. Whatever lively and diverse growth occurs to either side, whatever replacement of the old or worn-out occurs, is l'ikely to happen beyond these zones, inward, away from the tracks. The zones of low value and de. cay which we are apt to find beside the tracks in our cities appear to afict everything within the zones except the buildings that make direct, practical use of the rrack irself or its sidings. This is curious, because we can often see, looking at the ingredients in the decl'ine and decay, that at one time some people did see fit to put new buildings, even ambirious buildings, in this zone of decline. The blight-proneness of zones along the tracks has usually been explained as a result of the noise, the soot of steam locomotive days, and the general undesirability of railroad tracks as an environment. However, I think these disadvantages are only part of the cause, and perhaps a minor part. Why did they not discourage development there in the first place? Furthermore, we can see that the same sort of blight typically occurs along city waterfronts. Usually it is worse and there is more of it along the waterfronts than along the tracks. Y et waterfronts are not inherently noisy, dirty or disagreeable environments. It is curious, coo, how frequently the immediate neighborhoods surrounding big-city university campuses, Ciry Beautiful civic centers, large hospital grounds, and even large parks, are extraordinarily blight-prone, and how frequendy, even when they are not smitten by physical decay, they are apt to be stagnant-- condition that precedes decay. Yet if convenwional planning and land-use theory were ttue, and if quiet and cleanliness had as much positive effect as they are supposed to, exactly these disappointing zones should be outstandingly successful economically, and vital socially. Different as railroad tracks, waterfronts, campuses, expressways, large parking areas and large parks are from each other in most ways, they also have much in common with each otler--so .far as their tendency to exist amid moribund or declining surroundings is concerned. And if we look ar the parts of ciries most literally attractivc—i.e., those that literally artract poople, in the feshwe find that these fortunate localities are seldom in the zones immcdiately adjoining massive single uses. The root trouble with borders, as city neighbors, is that they are apt to form dead ends for most users of city streets. They represent, for most people, most of the tume, barriers. Consequently, the street that adjoins a border is a terminus of generalized use. If this street, which is the end of the line for people in the area of "ordinary" city, also gets little or no use from people inside the single-use border-forining territory, it is bound to be a deadened place, with scant users. This deadness can have further repercussions. Because few people use the immediate border street, the side streets (and in some cases the paralel street) adjoining it are also less used as a result. They fail to ger a by-the-way circulation of people going beyond them in the direction of the border, because few are gong to that Beyond. If those adjoining streets, therefore, become too empty and therefore in turn are shunned, their adjoining streets may also be less used. And so it goes, until the forces of heavy use from an area of strong attracrion come into counterplay. Borders can thus tend to form vacuums of use adjoining them. Or to put it another way, by oversimplif ying the use of the city at one place, on a large scale, rhey tend to simplify the usc which people give to the adjoining territory too, and this simplification of use—meaning fewer users, with fewer different purposes and destinations at hand—feeds upon itself. The more infertile the simplified territory becomes for economic enterprises, the still fewer the uscrs, and the still more infertile the territory. A kind of unbuilding, or running-down process is set in motion. This is serious, because literal and conrinuous mingling of people, present because of different purposes, is the only device that keeps streets safe. It is the only device that cultivates secondary diversity. It is the only device that encourages districts to form in place of fragmented, self-isolated neighborhoods or backwaters. · Abstract or more indirect support among differing city uses (helpful though this may be on another plane) does not serve such purposes. Sometimes visible evidence of the running-down process is almost as graphic as a diagram. This is the case in some parts of the Lower East Side of New York; it is especially striking at night. At the borders of the dark and empty grounds of the massive, lowincome housing projects, the stroets are dark and empty of people too. Stores, except for a few sustained by the project dwellers themselves, have gone out of business, and many quarters stand unused and empcy. Street by street, as you move away from the project borders, a little more life is to be found, progressively a little more brightness, but it takes many streets before the gradual increase of economic activity and movement of people become strong. And each year the vacuum seems to eat a little farther in. Neighborhoods or streets caught berween two such borders close together can be utterly deadened, border to border. Sometirnes a newspaper account describes some vivid incident of the running-down process-for example, chis account of an event in February 196o from the New Y'ork Post: The slaying in Cohen's butcher shop at 164 E. (74th St. Monday night was no isolated incident, but the culmination of a series of burglaries and holdups along the street . . . Ever since work started on the Cross-Bronx Expressway across the street some wo years ago, a grocer said, trouble has plagued the area . . . Stores which once stayed open to 9 or 1o o'clock are shutting down at 7 P.M. Few shoppers dare venture out after dark, so storekeepers feel the little business they lose hardly jusrifies the risk in rema'ining open late . . . The slaying had the greatest impact on the owner of a nearby drug store, which remains open to ro P.M. "We're scared to death." he commented. "We're the only store that stays open that late." Sometimes we can infer the formation of such vacuums, as when a newspaper advertisement lists an amazing bargain--a tenroom brick house, recently rehabilitated, with new copper plumbing, to be sold for \$12,oooand the address pins down its location: between the borders of a huge project and an expressway. Šometimes the main effect is the gradual, progressive spread, from street to street, of simple sidewalk insecurity. Morningside Heights in New York contains a long, narrow strip of neighborhood edged on one side by a campus and on the other side by a long waterfront park. This strip is further interrupted by the barriers of intervening institutions. Every place you go in this strip brings you quickly to a border. The most shunned of these borders by evening, for decades, has been that of the park. But gradually and almost impercept'bly, the common consent that nusecurity exists has affected more and more of the territory, until today there is only one side of one street that carries more than soliwry footfalls at night. This one-sided street, a stretch of Broadway, is across from the deadened perimeter of the big campus; and even it dies off through much of the strip, where it becomes preempted by another border. Bur in most cases, there is nothing dramaric in any way about a border vacuu.m. Rather, vitality just appears absent and the condition is apt to be taken for granted. Here is a good characterization of a vacuum, in The Wapshot Chronicle, a novel by John Cheever: "North of the park you come into a neighborhood that seems blighted—not persecuted, but only unpopular, as if it suffered acne or bad breath, and it has a bad complexion—colorless and seamed and missing a feature here and there." The exact reasons for scantness of use at a border vary. Some borders damp down uxe by making travel across. them a one-way affair. Housing projects are examples of this. The project people cross back and forth across the border (usually, in any appreciable numbers, at only one side of the project or at most two sides). The adjoining people, for the most part, stay strictly over on their side of the border and treat the line as a dead end of use. Some borders halt cross-use from both sides. Open railraad tracks or expressways or water barriers are common examples. Some borders have cross-use from both directions, but it is limited, in appreciable amounts, to daylight or it falls off drasically at certain times of year. Large parks are common examples. Still other borders have scant use along them because the massive single elements that form them possos such a low intensity of land use, relative to the great perimeters they posess. Civic centers with large grounds are common examples. The New York City Planning Commission is trying, as this is written, to institute an industrial park in Brooklyn, and has announced that this will consist of roo acres, and will accomodate firms employing about 3,ooo workers. Thirty workers to an acre is so low-intensity a use of city land, and ioo acres affords such an immense perimeter, that this enterprise will create scant use all along its borders. From whichever cause the effect is produced, the pertinent effect is scant use (few users, there in the fesh) along a largescale or stretched-out perimeter. The phenomenon of border vacuums is baffling to city designers, especially ro those who sincerely valte urban livelines.s and variety and dislike both deadness and nondescript sprawl. Borders, they sometimes reason, are a feasible means of heightening intensity, and of giving a city a sharp, clear forn, as medieval town walls apparently did with medieval towns. This is a plausible idea, because some borders undoubtedly do serve to concentrate, and thereby intensify, city areas. The water barriers of San Francisco and of Manhattan have both had this effect. And yet, even when a major border has concentrated city intensity, as in those cases, the zone along the border itself seldom reflects that intensity, or garners a fair share of it. It helps to undersand this "perverse" behavior if, in our minds, we divide all of the land of a city into two types. The first 'type, which can be called general land, is used for general public circulation by people on foot. It is land over which people move freely, and by choice, on their way from here to yonder, and from yonder back again. It includes the streets, many of the smaller parks, and sometimes it includes the lobbies of buildings when they are used freely as streets. The second type of land, which can be called. special land, is not commonly used as public thoroughfare by people on foot. It can be built on or not; it can be publicly owned or not; it can be physically accessible to people or not. This is beside the point. The point is that people walk around it, or alongside it, but not through it. Let us consider this special land, for the moment, as something that is in the way, so far as the general public on foot is concerned. It is a geographic obstacle, either because it is barred to them or because it contains so little of concern to them. Looked at in this way, all the special land of a city is an interference with the use of the general land, But looked at in another way, this special land contributes greatly to the use of the general land. It contributes people. Special land provides wharever people there are to circulate. It provides them either by housing them at home or at work, or by attracting them to it for other purposes. If you have no city buildings, you have no use for city streets. Both kinds of land thus contribute to circulation. But there is always a certain tension in their relationship. There is always a pull and acounrerpull between the special land's two roles: as a contributor to the use of general land on the one hand, and an interference with its use on the other. This is a principle long and well undersrood by downtown, merchants, and as a principle it is easiest to explain in their termns: Wherever a significant "dead place" appears on a downtown street, it causes a drop in the intensity of foot circulation there, and in the use of the city at that point. Sometimes the drop is sò serious economucally that business declines to one side or the other of the dead place. Such a dead place may be an actual vacancy, or it may be a little-used monument of som'e sort, or it may be a parking lot, or it may simply be a group of banks that go dead after three o'clock in the afternoon. Whatever it may be specifically, the role of the dead place as a geographic obstacle to the general land has overcome its role as a contributor of users to the general land. Tl:e tension has gone slack. The general land can absorb and elide most of the effects of special-land dead spots, especially when these are physically small in scale. Variations in intensity of the special land's give-and-ake with the general land are needed, because small quiet spots and crescendos of busy spors are necessary results and aspects of street and district diversity. However, the tension between the two kinds of land can go completely slack, and cannot nortnally be elided or compensated, if the special land becomes an immense obstacle. How much does ## 2Ó4) THE DEATH AND LIFE OF GEEAT ARIERICAN CITIEB it take away from the general land as a physical obstacle (or as a block to use by choice)? How much does it give back to the general land in concentration of users? A poor answer to this equation usually means a vacuum in the general land. The question is not why intensity of use should be so perverse that it fails to come up to the nice sharp border. The question, rather, is why we should expect it to be so perverse as to do so, Besides tending to produce these vacuums in the nearby general land (and hence abnormally poor places for diversity or social vitality to grow), borders divde up cities into pieces. They set asunder the neighborhoods of "ordinary"city lying to either side of them. In this respect, they behave in a fashion opposire from smnall parks. Small parks, if they are popular, knit together their neighborhoods from different sides, and mingle the. people from them. Borders also behave in a fashion opposite from city streets, for these too ordinarily knit together territory and uses lying to either side, and mingle users. Borders behave in a fashion opposite from many impressive but smaller-scale uses which otherwise have something in common with borders. For instance, a railroad station interacts with its surroundings differently from a railroad track; a single government building interacts differently with its neighborhood from the way a large civic center interacts with its neighborhoods. This sundering, or city-carving, effect of borders is not in itself always detrimental. If each of the localities separated from one another by a border is large enough to form a strong city district, with a sufficiently large and diverse pool of uses and users, the separarion effect is apt to be harless. Indeed, it can be positively useful, as a means by which people help orient themselves, help carry a map of the city in their minds, and understand a district asa place. The trouble arises when districts (as described back in Chapter Six) are bisectod or fragmented by borders so that the neighborhoods sundered are weak fragments and a district of subcity size cannot functionally exist. Frequent borders, whether forned by arterial highways, institutions, projects, campuses, industrial parks, or any other massive uses of special land, can in this way tear a city to tatters. Understanding the drawbacks of borders should help rescue us from producing unnecessary borders, as we do today, under the misapprehension that gratuitous border building represents an advanced form of order in ciries. However, it does not follow that all institutions or other facilities that cleave cities with borders and tend to rng themselves with vacuums are to be considered enemies of city life. On the conttary, many of them are obviously desirable and most important to cities. A big city needs universities, large medical centers, large parks containng metropolitan attractions. A city needs railroads; it can use waterfronts for economic advantage and for amenity; it needs some expressways (especially for trucking). The point is hardly to disdain such facilities as these, or to minimize their value. Rather, the point is to recognize that they are mixed blessings. If we can counter their destructive effects, these facilities will themselves be better served. It is no blessing to most of them, or to those who use them, to be surrounded by dullness or vacuity, let alone decay, The simplest cases to correct, I think, are borders that could logically encourage much greater use of their perimeters. Consider, for example, Central Park in New York City. Along the east side, it has several examples of intensive use (mostly daytime use) at its perimeter or close inside--the zoo, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the model boat pond. On the west side there is a curious penetration of the perimeter, especialiy notable because it operates at night and because it has been creared by users themselves. This is a particular cross walk into the park which, by common consent, has become the path for evening and night walking of dogs, hence for other stroliers, hence for anyone who wishes to go into the park and sril feel safe. However, the park's perimeter—especially on its west side contains great vacuous stretches, and it exerts a bad vacuum effect along a lot of border. Meantime, the park is full of objects, deep inside, that can be used only duting daylight hours, not because of their narure but because of their location. They arc also hard to reach for many of their putative users. The chess house (which looks like a dreary garage) is an example. The carousel is anorher. The guards shepherd people away from these places, for their own safety, as early as four-thirry on midwinter afterooons. Moreover, these facilities, aside from their heavy and ugly archieccrure, are fornidably out of spirit in their deep, interior park locations. It is quite an achievement to make a splendid carousel seem lost and gloomy, but this has been achieved in Central Park, Park uses like these should be brought right up to the borders of big parks, and designed as Linls between the park and its bordering street. They can belong to the world of the street and, on their other side, to the world of the park, and be charning in their double life. They should be calculated, not as rims shutting off a park (that would be terrible) but as spots of incense and magnetic border activity. Their use by night should be encouraged. They need not be huge. Three or four chess and checker pavilions, each with its own architectural character and setting, disposed at perimeter points around a very large park count, for this purpose, far more than one chess and checker house four times as large. It is up to the other side of the street alsothe city side—to combat park vacuums. We are always hearing suggestions for injecting dubious uses into large city parks. There is always pressure .for commercialization. Some of these suggestions are puzzling, such as the question of the gift of a new café for Central Park, which has aroused much controversy in New York. This is figuratively a border-line case, and it is also literally a border-line case. Many such semicommercial or commercial uses belong on the city side of a park border, placed deliberatcly to dramatize and intensify cross-use (and cross-surveillance) to and fro. They ought generally to work in partnership with order uses on the park side: an example would be a park skating rink brought immediately up to a park border, and across the street, on the city side, a café where the skaters could get refreshments and where watchers could observe the skating across the way from enclosed or open raised rerraces. Again there is no reason why both rink and café could not be used all evening and into the night. Bicycle riding is fine in a large park; but bicycle renting could be over on the city side of the line. The point, in short, would be to seek out border-line cases and invent new ones too, keeping the city as city and the park as park, but malking the partnership connections between them explicit, lively and sufficiently frequent. The principle here has been brilliantly stated, in another connecrion, by Kevin Lynch, associate professor of planning at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the author of The Image of the City. "An edge may be more than simply a dominant barrier," writes Lynch, "if sorme visual or motion penetration is allowed through it—if it is, as it were, structured to some depth with the regions on either side. It then becomes a seam rather than a barrier, a line of exchange along which two areas are sewn together." Lynch was speaking of visual and esthetic problems concerning borders, and the same principle, exactly, applies to many functional problems caused by borders. Universities could make portions, at least, of their campuses more like seams and less like barriers if they placed their uses intended for the public at strategic points on their perimeters, and if they also put at their perimeters, and opened up as scenes, their element congenial to public view and interesr—instead of hiding them, On a very small scale, because it is a relatively small institution, the New School for Social Research in New York has done this with a new building conwining a library. The library is a link between the street and the school's little "campus," an attractive interior courtyard. Both the library and the view are visually opened up and dramatized and they are a delight and an enlivener on their street. Big universities in cities, so far as I can see, have given no thought or imagination to the unique establishments they are. Typically they either pretend to be cloistered or countrifed places, nostalgically denying their transplantation, or else they pretend to be office buildi'ngs. (Of course they are neither.) Waterfronts, too, can be made to act much more like seams than they ordinarily do today. The usual form of rescue for a decayed waterfront vacuum is to replace it with a park, which in turn becomes a border element—usually appallingly underused, as might be expected—and this moves the vacuum effect inland. It is more to the point to grasp the problem where it originates, at the shoreline, and aim at making the shore a seam. Waterfront work uses, which are often interesting, should not be blocked off from ordinary view for interminable stretches, and the water itself thereby blocked off from city view too at ground level. Such stretches should be penetrated by small, and even casual, public openings calculated for glimpsing or watching work and water trafhc. Near where I live is an old open dock, the only one for miles, next to a huge Departinent of Sanitation incinerator and scow anchorage. The dock is used for eel fishing, sunbathing, kite Aying, car tinkering, picnicking, bicycle riding, ice-cream and hot-dog vending, waving at passing boats, and general kibitzing. (Since it does not belong to the Parks Departinent nobody is forbidden anything.) You could not fnd a happier place on a hot summer evening or a lazy summer Sunday. From time to time, a great slushing and clanking fills the air as a sanitation truck dumps its load into a waiting garbage scow. This is not pretty-pretty, but it is an event greatly enjoyed on the dock. It fascinates everybody. Penetrations into working waterfronts need to be right where the work (loading, unload'ing, docking) goes on to either side, rather than segregated where there is nothing much to see. Boating, boat visiting, hshing, and swimming where it is practicable, all help make a seam, instead of a barrier, of that troublesome border between land and water. It is hopeless to try to convert some borders into seams. Expressways and their ramps are examples. Moreover, even in the case of large parks, campuses or waterfronts, the barrier effects can likely be overcome wel only along portions of perimeters. The only way, I think, to combat vacuums in these cases is to rely on extraordinatily strong counterforces close by. This means that population concentration ought to be made deliberately high (and divetse) near borders, that blocks close to borders should be especially short and potential street use extremely Auid, ard that mixrures of pr'umary uses should be abundant; so should mixtures in age of buildings. This may not bring much intensity of use right up to the very borders themselves, but it can help confne the vacuum to a small zone. Near New York's Central Park, much of Madison Avenue to the east operates thus as a counterforce to the park's border vacuum. On the west, there is no such close counterforce. On the south side, the counterforce operates as far as the sidewalk opposite the park. In Greenwich Village, the counterforce has the waterfront vacuum in gradual retteat, partly because the blocks are so very short-16o feet in some cases-that it is easy for liveliness to take another little jump. To employ counterforce agaunst necessary city borders means this: as many city elements as possible must be used to build lively, mixed territory, and as few as possible must be used to compose borders unnecessarily. Dwelings, whether subsidized or unsubsidized, major halls, auditoriums, governmnent buildings, most schools, most city industy, all city commerce, work congenially in mingled sertings, as part and parcel of the intricate mixed city fabric itself. When such elements are withdrawn from the mixture and segregated in the forın of massive single uses, they not only resuit in gratuitous borders but, by being subtracted from other elements of city mixtures, they leave less material for creating counterforces. Planned pedestrian street schemes, if they throw formidable borders for moving and parked cars around inherently weak and fragimenmry preserves, can introduce more problen than they solte. Yet this is a fashionable planning idea for downtown shopping strects and for the "town centers" of renewal areas. One of the dangers of devising city traffic schemes and arterial systems without understanding, frst, how cities themselves work, is just this: The schemes, with the best intents belind them, can inject no end of border vacuums and discontinuities of use, and in places where these may do the greatest and most gratuitous barm. ## 15 Unslumming and slumming Slums and their populations are the victims (and the perpetuators) of seemngly endless troubles that reinforce each other. Slums operate as vicious circles. In time, these vicious c'ircles enmesh the whole operations of cities. Spreading slums require ever greater amounts of public money--and not simply more money for publicly financed improvement or to stay even, but more money to cope with ever widening retreat and regrtssion. As needs grow greater, the wherewithal growsless. Our present urban renewal laws are an attempt to break this particular linkage in the vicious circles by forthrightly wiping away slums and their populatioas, and replacing them with projocts intended to produce higher tax yields, or to lure back easier populations with less expensive public requirements. The ethod fails. At best, it merely shifts slums from here to there, adding its own tincture of extra hardship and disruption. At worst, it desroys neighborhoods where consttuctive and improving communities exist and where the situation calls for encouragement rather than destruction. Like Fight Blight and Conservation campaigas in neighborhoods declining into slums, slum shifting fails because it tries to overcome causes of trouble by diddling with symptoms. Sometimes even the very symptoms that preoccupy the slum shfters are, in the main, vestiges of forrner troubles rather than significant indications of current or future ills. Conventional planning approaches to slums and slum dwellers are thoroughly paternalistic. The trouble with paternalists is that they want to make impossibly profound changes, and they choose impossibly superficial means for doing so. To overcome slums, we must regard slum dwellers as people capable of understanding and acting upon their own self-interests, which they ccrtainly are. We need to discera, respect and build upon the forces for regeneration that exist in slums themselves, and that demonstrably work in real cities. This is far from trying to patronize people into a better life, and it is far from what is done today. Vicious circles, to be sure, are hard to follow. Cause and effect become eonfused precisely because they do link and relink with one another in such complicated ways. Yet there is one particular link that is crucial. If it is broken (and to break it is no simple matter of supplying better housing), a slum spontaneously unslums. The key link in a perpetual slum is that too many people move out of it too fast—and in the meanti'me dream of getting out: This is the link that has to be broken if any other effores at overcoming slums or slum life are to be of the least avail. This is the link that actually was broken and has stayed broken in places like the North End, or the Back-of-the-Yards in Chicago, or North Beach in San Francisco, or the unslummed former slum in which I live. If only a handful of American city slumns had ever managed to break this link, we might regard it skeptically as grounds for hope. These places might be freaks. More significant are the great number of slum neighborhoods in which unslumming starts, goes unrecognized, and too often is discouraged or destroyed. The portions of Eat Harlem in New York which had proceeded far along in unslumnming were hrst discouraged by unavailability of necessary money; then where this slowed the unslumming process but still did not bring regression to slum conditions, most of these neighborhoods were destroyed outright to be replaced by projects which became almost pathological displays of slum troubles. Many areas in the Lower East Side which had started unslumming have been destroyed. My own neighborhood, as recently as the early t9so's, was saved from disastrous amputation only because its citizens were able to fight city hall --and even at that, only because the officials were confronted with embarrassing evidence chat the area was drawing in newcomers with money, although this symptom of its unslummed status was possibly the least signifhcant of the constructive changes that had occurred unnoticed.\* Herbert Gans, a sociologist at the University of Pennsylvania, has given, in the February 1959 journal of the American Institute of Planners, a sober but poignant portrait of an unrecognized unslumming slum, rhe West End of Boston, on the eve of irs destruction. The West End, he points out, although regarded officially as a "slum," would have been more accurately described as "a stable, low-rent area." If, writes Gans, a slum is defined as an area which "because of the nature of its social environment can be proved to create problems and pathologies," then the West End was not a slum. He speaks of the intense attachment of residents to the, district, of its highly developed informal social control, of the fact that many residents had modernized or improved the interiors of their apartnenw--all rypical characteristics of an unslumming slum. Unslumming hinges, paradoxically, on the retention of a very considerable part of a slum population within a slum. It hinges on whether a considerable number of the residents and businessmen of a slum find it both desirable and practical to make and carry out their own plans right there, ot ·whether they must virtually all move elsewhere. I shall use the designation "perpetual slums" to describe slums which show no signs of social or economic improvement with time, or which regress after a little improvement. However, if the conditions for generating city diversity can be introduced into a neighborhood while it is a slum, and if any indications of unslumming are encouraged rather than thwarted, I believe there is no reason that any slum need be perpetual. The inability of a perpetual slum to hold enough of its population for unslumming is a characteristic that sarts before the slum itself sars. There is a fiction that slums, in forning, malignantly supplant healthy tissue. Nothing could be farther from the truth. The first sign of an incipient slum, long before visible blight can be sen, is stagnation and dullness. Dull neighborhoods are inevitably deserted by their more energetic, ambitious or affluent citizens, and also by their young people who can get away. They inevitably fail to draw newcomers by choice. Furthermore, aside from these selective desertions and the selective lack of vigorous new blood, such neighborhoods eventuaily are apt to undergo rather sudden wholesale desertions by their nonslum populations. The reasons why this is so have already been stated; there is no need to reiterate the sheer impracticality of the Grear Blight of Dullness for city life. Nowadays, the wholesale desertions by nonslum populations which give a slum its initial opportunity to form, are sometimes blamed on the proximity of another slum (especially if it is a Negro slum) or on the presence of a few Negro families, much as in the past slum fornation was sometimes blamed on the presence or proximity of Italian or Jewish or Irish families. Sometimes the desertion is blamed on the age and obsolescence of dwellings, or on vague, general disadvantages such as lack of playgrounds or proximity of factories. However, all such factors are immaterial. In Chicago, you can see neighborhoods only a block and two blocks in from the lakefront parkland, far from the settlements of minority groups, well endowed with greenery, quiet enough to make one's fesh creep, and composed of substantial, even pretentious, buildings. On these neighborhoods are the literal signs of desertion: "For Rent," To Let,""Vacancy," "Rooms for Pernanent and Transient Guests," "Guests Welcome,""Sleeping Rooms,""Furnished Rooms," "Unfurnished Rooms,""Apartments Available."These buildings have trouble drawing occupants in a city where the col\~ ored citizens are cruelly overcrowded in their shelter and cruelly overcharged for it. The buildings are going begging because they are being rented or sold only to whites---and whites, who have so much more choice, do nor care to live here. The benefciaries of this particular impasse, at least for the moment, turn out to be the immigrating hillbillies, whose economic choice is small and whose familiarity ith city life is still smaller. It is a dubious benefit they receive: inheritance of dull and dangerous neighborhoods whose unfitness for city life fnally repelled residents more sophisticated and competent than they. Sometincs, to be sure. a deliberate conspiracy to turn over the population of a neighborhood does exist—on the parr of real estate operators who make a racket of buying houses cheaply from panicked white people and selling them at exorbitant prices to the chronically housing-starved and pushed-around colored population. But even this racket works only in already stagnated and low-vitality neighborhoods. (Sometimes the racket perversely inproves a neighborhood's upkeep, when it brings in colored citizens more competent in general and more econonically able than the whites they replaced; but the exploitative economics sometimes tesults instead in replacement of an uncrowded, apatheric neighborhood with an overcrowded neighborhood in considerable turmoil.) If there were no slum dwellers or poor immigrants to inherit city failures, the problem of low-vitality neighborhoods abandoned by those with choice would still remain and perhaps would be even more troubling. This condition can be found in parts of Philadelphia where "decent, sfe and saninry" dwellings go empty in stagnated neighborhoods, while their foriner populations move ourward into new neighborhoods which are little different, intrinsically, from the old except that they are not yet embedded by the city., It is easy to see where new slums are spontaneously forning today, and how dull, dark and undiverse are the streets in which they typically form, because the process is happening now. What is harder to realize, because it lies in the past, is the fact that lack of lively urbanity has usually been an original characteristic of slums. The classic reform literature about slums does not tell us this. Such literature—Lincoln Steffens' Autobiograpby is a good example—focused on slums that had already overcome their dull beginnings (but had acquired other troubles in the meantime). A teeming, bustling slum was pinpointed at a moment in time, with the deeply erroneous implication that as a slum is, so it was and as it is, so it shall be, unless it is wiped away root and branch. The unslummed forner slum in which I live was just such a teeming place by the early decades of this century, and its gang, the Hudson Dusters, was notorious throughout tlhie city, but its career as a slum did not begin in any such bustle. The history of the Episcopal chapel a few blocks down the street tells the rale of the slum's fortnation, almost a century ago in this case. The neighborhood had been a place of fartns, village streets and summer homes which evolved into a semisubutb that became embedded in the rapidly growing city. Colored people and imi-. grants from Europe were surrounding it; neither physically nor socially was the neighborhood equipped to handle their presence —no more, apparently, than a semisuburb is so equipped today. Out of this quiet residential area—a charming place, from the evidence of old picturesthere were at first many random desertions by congregation families; those of the congregation who remained eventually panicked and departed en masse. The church building was abandoned to Trinity parish, which took it over as a mission chapel to minister to the influx of the poor who inlierited the semisuburb. The forner congregation re-established the church far uptown, and colonized in its neighborhood a new quiet residential area of unbelievable dullness; it is now a part of Harlem. The records do not tell where the next preslum was built by these wanderers. The reasons for slum formarion, and the processes by which it happens, have changed surprisingly little over the decades. What is new is that unft neighborhoods can be deserted more swiftly, and slums can and do spread thinner and farther, than was the case in the days before automobiles and governmentguaranteed mortgages for suburban developments, when it was less practical for families with choice to flee neighborhoods that were displaying some of the normal and inevitable conditions that accompany city life (such as presence of strangers), but none of the natural means for converting these conditions into assets. At the time a slum first forns, its population may rise spectacularly. This is not a sign of populariry, however. On the contrary, it means the dwellings are becoming overcrowded; this is happening because people with the least choice, forced by poverty or discrimination to overcrowd, are coning into an unpopular area. The density of the dwelling units themselves may or may not increase. In old slums, they customarily did increase because of the construction of tenements. But the rise in dwelling density typically did not cut down the overcrowd'ıng. Total population increased greatly instead, with overcrowding superimposed on the high dwelling densities. Once a slum has forined, the pattern of emigration that made it is apr to continue. Just as in the case of the preslum emigration, rwo kinds of movement occur. Successful people, including those who achieve very modest gains indeed, keep moving out. But therc are also apt to be periodic wholesale migrations, as a whole population begins to achieve modest gains. Both movements are destructive, the second apparently more so than the first. Overcrowding, which is one symptom of the population instabil'ty, continues. It continues, not because the overcrowded people remain, but because they leave. Too many of those who overcome the economic necessity to overcrowd get out, instead of improving their lot withi'n the neighborhood. They are quickly replaced by others who currently have little economic choice. The buildings, naturally, wear out with disproportionate swiftness under these conditions, ·Residents of a perpetual slum constantly change in this fashion. Sometimes the change is considered noteworthy because the econonic emigrations and immigrations entail an ethnic change. Bur the movement occurs in all perpetual slums, even those that remain ethnically constant. For instance, a Negro slum in a big city, such as central Harlem in New York, may remain a Negro slum for a long period, but undergo huge, selective turnovers in population, The constant departures leave, of course, more han housing vacancies to be flled. They leave a community in a perpetually embryonic stage, or perpetually regressing to helpless infancy. The age of buildings is no index to the age of a community, which is formed by a continuity of people. In this sense, a perpetual slum is always going backward instead of forward, a circumstance that reinforces most of its other troubles. In some drastic cases of wholesale rurnover, it seems that what is getting a start again is hardly a community but a jungle. This happens when the new people flooding in have little in common to begin with, and those who are most ruthiess and bitter begin to set what tone there is. Anyone who does not like that junglewhich is evidently nearly everyone, for turnover is tremendous in such places either gets out as fast as he can or dreams of getting out. Even in such seemingly irreparable milieus, however, if the population can be held, a slow improvement starts. I know one such street in New York where this is true, but it is terribly hard to get sufficient people anchored. The perpetual slum's progress backward occurs in planned slums, just as it does in unplanned slums. The main difference is that perpetual overcrowding is nor one of the symptomns in planned slums, because the number of occupants in dwellings is regulated. Harrison Salisbury, in his series of asticles on delinquency in the New Y'ork Times, has described the crucial link of the vicious circle as it operates, in this case, in low-income projects: . . . In only too many instances . . . the slums have been shut up within new brick and steel. The horror and deprivation has been immured behind those cold new walls. In a well-intended effort to solve one social ill, the community succeeded in intensifying other evils and in creating new ones. Admission to low-rent housing projects basically is controlled- by income levels . . Segregation is imposed not by religion or color but by the sharp knsfe of income or lack of income. What this does to the social fabric of the community must be witnessed to be appreciated. The ablc, rising families are consrantly driven out . . . At the intake end the economic and social levels tend to drop lower and lower . . . A human catch-pool is formed that breeds social ills and requ'ires endless outside assisnce. It is the constant hope of the builders of these planned slums that they will surely improve as "a community has time to form." But rine here, as in an unplanned perpetual slum, is an eternal disrupter instead of a builder. As might be expected, therefore, the worst examples of the immured slums, such as Salisbury was describing, are almost invariably the oldest low-income projects, where the perpetual sliding backward of the perpetual slum has had longest to operate. However, an ominous modifcation in this patrern has started to appear. With the increase in planned slum shifting, and the rising proportions of “relocated" people in new projects, these new projects are sometimes starting off today with the sullenness and discouragement typical of old projecs or of old perpetual unplanned slumsas if they had already, in their youth, been subjected to the vicissitudes of many disruptions and disintegra tions. This is probably because so many of their residents have already lived with such experiences, and of course take them along as emotional baggage. Mrs. Ellen Lurie, of Union Settlement, describing conditions in a new project, comments: One observation can easily be made as a result of all the visits with site tenants [families placed in public housing because their old homes were taken for city rebuilding]. As difhcult a job as management has in running a large project, a bulk of initially unhappy people, angry at the Housing Authority for forcibly uprooting them, not fully understanding all the ceasons for the move, lonely and insecure in a strange new environment--such fanilies must make project management all the more overwhelming a task. Neither slum shifting nor slum immuring breaks that key link in the perpetuation of slumshe tendency (or necessity) for too many people to leave too fast. Both these devices merely aggravate and intensify the processes of perpctual movement backward. Only unslumming overcomes American city slums, or ever has overcome them. If unslumming did not exist, we would have to invent it. However, since it does exist, and does work, the point is to help it happen faster and in more places. The foundation for unslurnming is a slum lively enough to be able to enjoy city public life and sidewalk safety. The worst foundation is the dull kind of place thar makes slums, instead, of unmaking them. Why slum dwellers should stay in a slum by choice, after it is no longer economically necessary, has to do with the most personal contenr of their lives, in realms which planners and city designers can never directly reach and manipulate—nor should want to manipulate. The choice has much to do with the slum dwellers' personal attachments to other people, with the regard in which they believe they are held in the neighborhood, and with their sense of values as to what is of greater and what is of lesser importance in their lives. İndirectly, however, the wish to stay is obviously influenced by physical factors in the neighborhood. The treasured "security" of the home base is, in part, a literal security from physical fear. Slums where the streers are empty and frightening. and one is unsafe, simply do not spontaneously unslum. And beyond this, people who do stay in an unslumming slum, and improve their lot withun the neighborhood, often profess an intense attachment to their street neighborhood. It is a big part of their life. They seem to think that their neighborhood is unique and irreplaceable in all the world, and remarkably valuable in spite of its shortcomings. In this they are correct, for the mulritude of relationships and public characters rhat make up an animated city street neighborhood are always unique, intricate and have the value of the unreproducible original. Unslummed or unslumming neighborhoods are complex places, very different from the simpler, physically stereotyped places in which slums typically form. I do not mean to imply, however, that every slum which gets itself enough diversity and a sufficiently intetesting and convenient life automatically unslums. Some do not--or what is more usual, they do start to unslum for a time, the process proves impractical because there are too many obstacles (mostly fnancial) in the way of the needed changes, and the place regresses, or is perhaps destroyed. In any case, where attachment to a slum becomes strong enough to stimulate unslumming, that attachment beg'uns before the unslumming. If people are going to stay by choice when they have choice, they must have become attached before that time. Later is too late. One of the early symptoms that people are staying by choice is apt to be a drop in population, accompanied neither by an increase in dwelling vacancies nor by a decrease in dwelling densities. In short, a given number of dwellings is being occupied by fewer people. Paradoxically, this is a signal of popularity. It means that formerly overcrowded inhabitants who have become economically able to uncrowd are doing so in their old neighborhood instead of abandoring it to a new wave of the overcrowded. To be sure, the population drop also represents people who have deserted, and this is important roo, as we shall see. But the signihcant factor to note at tlis point is that the places of those leaving are, to a notable degree, being preempted by people who are staying by choice. In the neighborhood where I live, which happens to have been an Irish slum, unslumming was obviously well started as early as 192o, when the population in our census tract was down to 5,000 from 6,500 in 19ro (the population peak). In the Depression. population rose a litle as families recrowded, but by 1940 it was down to 2,goo and stayed at about that in 195o. During this period there were few demolitions in this census tract, but some rehabilitation; there werc few apartment vacancies at any time; and in the main the population was cormposed of those who had been there in the old 1g1o days, and of their children and grandchildren. The drop to less than half of the peak slum population was, in the main, a measure of the degree of uncrowding that occurred in a neighborhood with a high dwelling unit density on the residential land. Indirectly, it also represented an increase in income and choice characterizing the people who remained. Similar,popuiation drops ccurred in all the unslumming neighborhoods of Greenwich Village. In the once unbelievably overpacked tenements of rhe South Village, which was an Iralian slum, population ropped in an illustrative ceasus tract from almost 19,000 in 19to to about 12,000 in 192o, rose again to almost t5,ooo in the Depression, and then with prosperity dropped and stayed at about 9,soo. As in my neighborhood, this unslumming drop did not represent a replacement of the old slum population by a new and diffierent middle-class population. It represented much of the old population moving into the middle class. In both these illustrative tracts, which I have chosen as examples of the degree of uncrowding because the number of dwelling units themselves remained very stable, child population dropped slightly less, proportionarely, than total population; these were, in the main, families that were staying.\* The uncrowding that has occurred in the North End of Boston is fully comparable to that which occurred in the unslumming of Greenwich Village. To know whether uncrowding has occurred, or is occurring. and whether a drop in population is a sign of the popularity of the neighborhood with those who know it best, one must know whether or not the drop is accompanied by appreciable dwelling vacancies. For instance, in some parts of the Lower East Side(by no means all), population drops during the 193o's were only in part from uncrowding. They represented also large numbers of vacancies. When these vacancies lled up again, they lled with an overcrowded population, as might be expected. They had been abandoned by those with choice. When sufficient people begin to stay in a slum by choice, several other important things also begin to happen. The community itself gains comperence and strength, partly from practice and growth of cust, and fnally (this takes much • In those Greenwich Village census tracts which were always middle-class or high-income, never having becoine slums, populations did not drop during these same years, because there was no overcrowded figure for it to drop from. Typically, in these census tracts, population has riscn, in some cases mightily, owing to increases in dwelling units themselves—mainly apartment houses. In these tracts, however, child popularion, aiways low, failed to rise proportionately. longer) from becoming less provincial. These matters were gone into in Chapter Six, the discussion of neighborhoods. At this point I would like to emphasize a third change that occursand thar is implied in the eventual decrease of provincialism. This change is a gradual self-diversification within the population itself. The degree of fnancial and educational advancement among those who remain in an unslumming slum varies. The majority make modest gains, some make considerable gains, and some make virtually no gains at all. The different skills, interests, activities and acquaintanceships outside the neighborhood vary and diverge with time. Čity officials today prate about "bringing back the middle class," as if nobody were in the middle class until he had left the city and acquired a ranch house and a barbecue and thereby become precious. To be sure, cities are losing their middle class populations. However, cities need not "bring back"a middle class, and carefully protect it like an artihcial growth. Cities grow the middle class. But to keep it as it grows, to keep it as a stbilizing force in the form of a self-diversifed population, means considering the city's people valuable and worth retaining, right where they are, before they become middle class. Even those who remain poorest in an unslumming slum are gainers from the process of unslumming—and therefore they make the city a gainer too. In our neighborhood, these most unlucky or least ambitious of the original slum popularion, who might otherwise be perinanent slum dwellers, have happily escaped that face. Furthermore, although these people at the bottom are hardly successes by most standards, in their street neighborhoods most of them are successes. They make up a vital part of the web of casual public life. The amount of time they devote to street watching and street management makes some of the rest of us parasites upon them. Into an unslumming or unslummed slum customarily come new increments of poor or ignorant immigrants from time to time, The Boston banker whom I quoted in the introduction to this book derided the North End because "it is still getting some irrunigrants." So is our neighborhood. This too is one of the great services of unslumming. People are accommodated and assimilated, not in undigestible loods, but as gradual additions, in neighborhoods capable of accepting and handling strangers in a civilized fashion. The immigrantsours happen to be mostly Puerto Ricans and they are going to make a fine middle class which the city cannot afford to lose—do not escape\_most of the problems of being immigrants, but at least they do escape the ordeal and demoralization of the perpetual slum. They quickly assimilate into the public street life, and are lively and competent at hold'ing up their end. These very same people could hardly act as they do within the community, nor would they be likely to stay put as long. were they part of a tumultuous replacement throng in a perpetual slum. Other gainers from unslumming are newcomers who have choice. They can find in the city a place to live which is fit for city l'ife. Both kinds of newcomers add to the population diversibcation of an unslumming or unslummed neighborhood. But the indispensable foundation for chis added population diversity is the selfdiversification and stability of the former slum population itself. At the beginning of the process of unslumming. few if any of the slum's most outstandingly successful residentsor their most successful and ambitious children—are apt to stay. Unslumming begins with those who make modesr gains, and with those to whom personal attachments overshadow their individual achievement. Later, with improvement, the threshold of success or ambition among those who stay may rise appreciably. The losses of the most successful or most daring are, in a peculiar fashion, also necessary to the unslumming, I think, For some of those who leave are overcoming one of the terrible problems of most slum populations—the onus of discriminarion. The discrimination which operates most drastically today is, of course, discrimination against Negroes. But it is an injustioe with which all our major slum populations have had to contend to some degree. A ghetto. by the very fact that it is a ghetto, is a place in which most people of spirit, especially the young who have not leamned resignation, will not stay entirely willingly. This is true no matter how objectively good their physical accommodations and social surroundings may otherwise be. They may have to stay. They may diversify witbin the ghetto considerably. But this is far from the same as acceptance and glad attachment. It is fornmnate, in my opinion, that so many of our ghetto dwellers do not feel resigned or defeatist; we would have fat more to worry about as a society if we could easily get away with our tendencies toward master-race psychology. But be that as it may, the fact is that in our ghertos live people of spirit, and they don't like ghettos. When discrimination is appreciably broken down outside a ghetto by its more successful progeny, then the old neighborhood has a great burden lifted from it. Then it is no longer, necessarily, a mark of inferiority to stay there. It can be a mark of genuine choice. In the North End, as an example of what I mean, a young butcher explained carefully to me that it no longer "downgraded" a person to live there. To illustrate his point, he took me to the door of his shop, pointed out a threc-story row house down the block, told me that the family who lived there just spent \$zo,ooo moderniz'ing it (out of saved earnings!}, and added, "That man could live anywhere. Today, he could move into a high-class suburb if he wanted to. He wants to stay here. People who stay here don't have to, you know. They like it." The effective breaking down of residential discrimination outside a slum, and the less dramatic self-diversication within an unslumming slum, proceed concurrently. If America has now, in the case of Negroes, reached an effective halt in this process and in general entered a stage of arrested development—a thought I find both highly improbable and quite intolerable—then it may be thar Negro slums cannot effectively unslum in the fashion demonstrated by slums formed by other ethnic populations and population mixtures. In this case, the damage to our cities might be the least of our worries; unslumming is a by-product of other kinds of vigor and other forrns of econonu'c and social change. When an area has unslummed, it is easy to forget how bad it once was and how helpless both the area and its population were thought to be. This supposed utter worthlessness of the neighborhood was once the case of the area where I live. I see no reason to believe that Negro slums cannot unslum too, and more swiftly than the old slums at that, if the processes at work are understood and helped. As in the case of other slums, overcoming of discrimination outside the slum, and unslumming within the slum, must proceed concurrently. Neither can wait for the accomplishment of the other. Every relaxation of discrimination outside can help unslumming within. Progress in unslumnuing within helps outside. The two go together. The inherent resources necessary for unslumming--advancement and self-diversification in a population-—demonstrably exist among colored people, including the colored people who are in slums or who have passed through slums, as strikingly as these resources exist among white people. In a way the proved and obvious possession of these resources is more striking among the colored, because they emerge in spite of disproportionate obstacles against their emergence. Indeed, because of the very facts that colored populations advance, self-diversify and have too much spirit to like ghettos, our inner cities have already lost far more of the Negro middle class than they can afford to lose. I think inner cities will go on losing too much of the Negro middle class almost as fast as it forms until, in actual fact, the choice of remaining there no longer means, for a colored person, an implied acceptance of ghetto citizenship and status. In shott, unslumming is at the very least directly--as well as indirecty inhibited by discrimination. Here I want to remind readers, without repeating it, of a point made near the beginning of this book, on pages 7t and 72, drawing a connection berween an urban quality of street use and street life, and the feasibility of overcoming residential discrimination. . Although we Americans talk much about the rapidity with which we accept change, this does not apply to rapidity of intellectual change, I am afraid. Generation after generat'on, nonslum dwellers stick to the same foolish ideas about slums and slum dwellers. The pessimists always seem to feel that there is something inferior about the currcnt crops of slum dwellers themselves, and can point out supposedly dire differences that distinguish them from prcvious immigrants. The optimists always seen to feel that there is nothing wrong with slums that could not be fixed by housing and land-use reform and enough social workers. It is hard to say which oversimplification is the sillier. Self-diversification of a population is reflected in diversification of commercial and cultural enterprises. Diversifcation of income alone makes a diffe'rence in the range of possible commercial diversification, often in the humblest ways. Consider, asan illustrative example, the case of a New York cobbler who hung on while most of the adjoining neighborhood was cleared of its population and a new low-income project constructed. After his long and hopeful wait for his new customets, he is going out of business at this location. As he explains it, "I used to get good strong working boots to do, good shoes wotth working on. But those new people, even the working men, are all so poor. Their shoes are so cheap and fumsy they fall to pieces. They bring them in—look. Shoes like this can't be repaired. What can I do to them —remake them? Even so, they can't pay for the work. There's no use for me here." The old neighborhood would have heen characterized as predominately poor too, but it had people who had made modest gains. It was not a sorting of all the poorest. In unslumming slums where great population drops have occurred with uncrowding, this event has been accompanied by a directly related increase in diversity of incomesand sometimes by a considerable increase in visitors and cross-use from other neighborhoods and other districts. Under these conditions, tremendous drops in population (which of course occurred gradually rather than as a cataclysn) have not resulted in commercial decimation. On the contrary, the range and prosperity of enterprises typically increasts in unslumming slums. With the uniformly very poor, it takes very concentrated densitics to produce a genuine exuberance and interesting range of diversity, as some of our old slums did by dint of fantastic overcrowding superimposed on top of very high dwelling densities combined, of course, with the orlser three basic conditions for generating diversity. Succe ssful unslumming means that enough people must have an attachment to the slum that they wish to stay, and it also means that it must be practical for them to stay. Impracticality is the rock on which many an unslumming slum is wrecked. Impracticality has mostly to do with unavailability of money for improvements, for new buildings, and for commercial enterprises at a time when these needs become urgent and their discouragement crucial. Impracticality has to do with the difficulty of making, with time, many changes in detail in the unslumming slum. I shall deal with this problem in the course of the next two chapters. Aside from these more subtle (but powerful) discouragements, unslumming today is froquently halted by the ultimate discouragement--destruction. The vcry fact that a slum has uncrowded itself makes it an extremely tempting site for whole or partial urban "renewal" clearance: The relocation problem looks so simple in comparison with that of horrendously overcrowded perpetual slums. Also the area's comparative social health makes it tempting to clear for a higher-incomc population. It seems a feasible place for "bringing back the middle class." Unlike a perpetual slum, it is "ripe for redevelopment," as if some mysterious virtue of civilization resided in the very ground here and would be transferred. Describing the destruction of the lively, stable, low-rent West End in Boston, Gans made an observation which applies also to other big cities engaged in redevelopment: "Meanwhile, other areas which have older, more deteriorated and even harmful housing have a lower priority for renewal, because of the lack of interest among potential developers or other powerful interests." Nothing in the training of planners, architects or government oficials contradicts these temptations to destroy unslumming słuns. On the contrary, everything that makes these men experts reinforces the temptation; for a slum which has been successfully unslumming displays—inevirably—features of layout, use, ground coverage, mixture and activities that are diametrically opposed to the ideals of Radiant Garden City. Otherwise it would never have been able to unslum. An unslumming slum is peculiarly vulnerable in stil another respect. Nobody is making a fortune our of it. The two great moneymakers in cities are, on the one hand, unsuccessful, perpetual slums and, on the other hand, high-rent or high-cost areas. An unsluinming neighborhood is no longer paying off excessively, as it may once have paid, to exploiting slum landlords who do best with greenhorns, nor is it so lush or concentrated a field for policy, drug, vice or protection rackets as is a perperual slum. On the other hand, neither is it render ing the premium land and building prices associated with the self-desttruction of diversiry. It is just providing a decent, animated place to live for people who are predominately of modest circumstances, and providing an unspectacular livelihood to the owners of many small enterprises. Thus the only people who object to destruction of an unslumming neighborhood—especially if it has not yet begun drawing newcomers with choice—are those who have businesses there or who live there. If they try to explain to the uncomprehending experts that this is a good place and growing better, nobody pays attetion. In every city, such protests are discounted as the howls of peopìe of narrow vision stand'ing in the way of progress and higher tax receipts. The processes that occur in unslumming depend on the fact that a metropolitan economy, if it is working well, is constantly transforming many poor people into middlc-class people, many illiterates into skilled (or even educated) people, many greenhorns into competent citizens. In Boston, the improvement of the North End was explained to me by several people outside the district as a peculiar, a freakish thing, based on the circuinstance that "North Enders are Sicilians." When I was a girl, people from Sicily and their descendants were slum dwellers, so it was believed, because they were Sicilians. The unslumming and self-diversification within the North End has nothing to do with Sicily. It has to do with the vigor of metropolitan economies, and wiuth the choices and opportunities (some good, some bad) that these energetic economies produce. This energy and its effectsso different from inmemorial peasant lifeare so obvious in great cities, and so much taken for granted, that it is curious that our planning fails to incorporate them as a major and salient reality. It is curious that city planning neither respects spontaneous self-diversification among city populations nor contrives to provide for it. lt is curious that city designers seem neither to recognize this force of self-di'versification nor to be attracted by the esthetic problems of expressing it. These odd intellectual omissions go back, 1 think, to the Garden City nonsense, as so many of the unspoken presuppositions of city planning and city design do. Ebenezer Howard's vision of the Garden City would seem almost feudal to us. He seems to have thought that members of the industrial working classes would stay neatly in their class, and even at the same job within their class; that agricultural workers would stay in agriculture; that businessmen (rhe enemy) would hardly exist as a signifcant force in his Utopia; and that planners could go about their good and lofty work, unhampered by rude nay-saying from the untrained. It was the very Auidity of the new nineteeth-century industial and metropolitan society, with its profound shiftings of power, people and money, that agitated Howard so deeply---and his more dedicated followers (like the American Decentrists and Regional Planners) after him. Howard wanted to freeze power, people, and thc uses and increments of money into an easily manageable and static pattern. Indeed, he happened to want a pattern that was already obsolete. "How to stem the drift from the country is one of the main problems of the day," said he. "The laborer may perhaps be resrored to the land, but how will the country industries be restored to rural England?" Howard aimed at outfoxing the bewildering new city merchants and other entrepreneurs who seemed to spring up inexhaustibly from nowhere. How to leave them no scope in which to pursue their oper·ations, except under the tight directives of a monopolistic corporate plan—this was one of Howard's chief preoccupations in devising his Garden Cities. Howard feared and rejected the energetic forces inherent in urbanization combined with industrialization. He permitted them no part in overcoming slum life. The restoration of a stat'c society, ruled—in everything that matteredby a new aristocracy of alaruistic planning experts, may seem a vision remote from modern American slum clearing, slum shifting and slum immuring. But the planning derivod from these semifeudal objectives has never been reasessed. It has been employed to deal wich real, twentieth-century cities. And this is one reason why, when American city sluns do unslum, they do so in spite of planning and counter to the ideals of city planning. . For the sake of its own internal consistency, conventional planning embodies a fantasy about the bewildering presence of people in "slums" whose incomes do not conforn to slum dweilers incomes. Such people are characterized as victims of inertia, who need a push. (The comments of those who are unctuously given this information about themselves are unprintable.) Clearance.. even though they protest it, does them a favor, according to this fantasy, by forcing them to better themselves. Bettering themselves means finding their squadron of price-tagged population and marching with it. Unslumming and its accompanying self-diversibcation—possibly' the greatest regenerative forces inherent in energeric American metropolitan economies—thus appear, in the murky light of conventional planning and rebuilding wisdom, to represent mere social untidiness and economic confusion, and they are so treated. ## 16 Gradual money and cataclysmic money Thus far, I have beeo writing almost entirely about the qualities chat work for inberent succes in cities. To make an analogy, it is as if I had been discusing farming almost entirely in terms of soil, water, machinery, seed and fertilizer requirements for good crops, but said notluing about the financial means of getting those things. To understand why the financial means and methods used for buying the agriculural necessities mattered greatly, we would frst have to understand why the crop-growing requirements themselves mattered greatly, and something about their own nature. Without that understanding, we might ignore the problem of how to fnance a reliable water supply and enthusiastically tie ourselves up instead with methods to fnance ever more elaborate fencing. Or, knowing that water was somehow important, but understanding little about its posible sources for our purpos we might spend our substance on rain dances and have no fnancial arrangements to buy pipes. Money has its limitations. It cannot buy inherent success for cities where the conditions for inherent success are lacking and where the use of the money fails to supply them. Furthermore, money can only do ultimate harm where it destroys the conditions needed for inherent success. On the other hand, by helping to supply the requirements needed, money can help build inherent succc.ss in cities. Indeed, it is indispensable, For these reasons, money is a powerful force both for city decline and for cityr regeneration. But it must be understood that it is not the mere availability of money, but how it is available, and for what, that is all important. Three principal kinds of money finance and shape most of the changes that occur in residential and business properties in cities. Because this money is so powerful an instrumentas it goes, so go our cities. The first, and most important, of the three kinds of money is the credi't extended by conventional, nongovernmental lending institutions. In order of size of their mortgage holdings, the most imporrant of these institutions are: savings and loan associations, life insuance companies, commercial banks and mutual savings banks. Added to these are various categories of minor mortgage lenderssome of them growing rapidly, such as pension funds. By far the lion's share of building, remodeling, rehabilitaton, replacement and expansion that occurs in cities (as well as in the suburbs beyond cities) is hnanced by this kind of money. The second kind of money is that provided by government, either out of tax receipts or through governmental borrowing power. Aside from the city building which is traditionally governmental (schools, highways, etc.), residential and business properties are also áinanced in some cases by this money, Still more are shaped and influenced by the fact that it can be drawn on for parial financing, or for insurance of other loans. Land-clearance subsidies from the federal and city governments to make privately financed redevelopment and renewal projects financially feasible, are among the uses of this money; so are housing projects underwritten by federal, state or city governments. In addition, the federal government will guarantee as much as go percent of the value of residential mortgages financed by conventional lenders —and will even buy up guaranteed mortgages from lenders— —provided that the developments whose mortgages have thus been guaranteed conforın to standards of planning approved by the Federal Housing Administration. The third kind of money comes from a shadow world of investment, an underworld of cash and credit, so to speak. Where this money comes from ultimately, and by what avenues it finds its way, is concealed and devious. This money is lent at interest rates starting at about 2o percent and ranging as high as the market will bear, apparently in some cases up to 8o percent in combinations of interest rates and arrangers fees and cuts. It does many jobsa few of which are actually constructive and useful —but it is most notable for financing exploitative conversions of humdrum buildings to slum buildings at exorbitant profits. This money is to the mortgage market what loan-shark money is to personal finance. All three of these kinds of money behave differently in important respects. Each does its part in financing city property changes. With full awareness of their differences—and especially the moral difference between the shadow-world money and the legitimate private and governmental money—l plan to point out that the behavior of these three kinds of money is similar in one re spect. In sum, this money shapes cataclysmic changes in cities. Relatively little of it shapes gradual change. Cataclysmic money pours into an area in concentrated form, producing drastic changes. As an obverse of this behavior, cataclysmic money sends relatively few trickles into localities not treated to cataclysm. Putting it figuratively, insofar as their efects on most city streets and districts are concerned, these three kinds of money behave not like irrigation systems, bringing life-giving streams to feed steady, continual growth. Instead, they behave like manifestions of malevolent climates beyond the control of man—afording either searing droughts or torrential, eroding floods. This is, of course, no constructive way to nurture ciries. City building that has a solid footing produces continual and gradual change, building complex diversifcations. Growth of diversity itself is created by means of changes dependent upon each other to build increasingly effective combinations of uses. Unslumming--much as it should be speeded up from the glacial pace at which it now proceeds—is a process of steady but gradual change. All city building that retains staying power after its novelty has gone, and that preserves the freedom of the streets and upholds citizens' self-management, requires that its locality be able to adapt, keep up to date, keep interesting, keep convenient, and this in rurn requires a myr'iad of gradual, constant, close-grained changes. To bring city streets and districts up to good operating condition (which means, mainly, supplying the conditions to generate diversity), and to keep them there, is a job that cannot be begun too soon. But on the other hand, it is also a job that is never over and done with, and never will be, in any given place. The kiınd of money necessary for capiralizing upon, building upon and supplementing what exists is gradual money. But this indispensable instrument is lacking. This is far from an inevitable situation. On the contrary, it has taken considerable well-intended ingenuity (along with a certain amount of drifting) to bring us to this pass. The "inevitable," as Holmes said, comes about only through great effort; this is so with respect to the cataclysmic use of money in cities. As one obvious indication of this, if all the pep talks and brochures urging investinent in sweeping renewal cataclysmns were bound together, they would make a volume at least fifty times the size of this book. And yet, notwithstanding all this promotion, and the immense data-collecting and legislative work behind it, so cumbersome is this form of city investment that it serves better, in many instances, to paralyze and to penalize the use of money rather than to stimulate and to reward it. Ever greater incentives must constantly be contrived to give investment in this type of cataclysm another shot and another shove. As Arthur H. Motley, president of the U. S. Chamber of Commerce, commented at a renewal conference late in rgóo, "Some cities using federal funds have acquired so much land without rebulding that the Federal Housing and Home Finance Agency has become the largest grower of ragweed." Motley's bleak realism was not in the spirit of such conferences, which run mainly to platitudes about the "challenge," and "the businessman's stake in healthy and beautiful cities," and to such sage remarks as "Tbe key to future invesnnenr in this field is the profit factor." Behind the use of mortgage and building money is, to be sure, concern about the proft factor—in most cases legitimate concern about legitimate profts. But in addition, behind the use of this money stand more abstract ideas about cities themselves, and these ideas are mighty determinants of what is done with money in cities. No more than park designers or zoners do mortgage lenders operate in an ideological or legislative vacuum. Let us begin with the existence and the effects of money droughts, for droughts of mortgage money are the cause of much otherwise unnecessary city decline. "If the power to tax is the power to destroy . . . then the credit authority is not only the power to destroy but the power to create and the power to divert," says Professor Charles M. Haar of the Harvard Law School in an analysis of federal incentives for home-building investment. The power to destroy which is possessed by authority over credit or by management of credit is negative: it is the power\`to withhold credit. To understand the effects of this action on city neighborhoods we can best begin by looking into a couple of miracles—for the purpose of understanding that it does take miracles to overcome this force for decline. The North End of Boston represents escape by miracle. Following the Great Depression and then the war, pertods in which virtially no building was done in any case, the North End was blacklisted by conventional lending institutions as a locality for mortgage loans. This meant that the North End was cut off from building, expansion or rehabilitation credit from the American lending systems almost as effectively as if it were a community in Tasmania. For thity years, beginning wirh the Depression and moving on inro the period of Blacklist, the largest conventional mortgage loans made in this district were for \$3,ooo, and these have been rare: The most affuent suburb, one would surnisc, could hardly have held up over such a period under such terms. Material improvemenr would be miraculous. Owing to 3 peculiarly fortunate circumstance, the North End did manage such a miracle. Among its residents and businessmen and cheir relatives and friends, it happens that there are many persons engaged in the building trades: masons, electricians, carpenters, contractors. These people have contributed their services in some cases and bartered them in others to modernize and rehabilitate North End build'urgs. Costs have been mainly costs of materials, and it has been possible to finance these pay-asyou-go, out of savings. In the North End, a businessman or landlord has to have the money first, to finance improvements which he anticipates will justify the expenditure by returning it. In short, the North Énd reverted to primitive methods of barter and hoard that worked before there were banking systemns. To do so was a given condition for continued unslumming and for community survival. These methods, however, cannot be stretched to cover the fnancing of the new construction which should be introduced into the North End, as into any living city neighborhood, gradually. The North End, as things stand, can ger new construction only by submitting to a cataclysm of renewal and redevelopment a cataclysm which would destroy its complexity, disperse its people and wipe out its busincssmen.\* It would also cost an immense amount of money in comparison with the North End's needs for money to finance steady, continual improvement and replacement of what wears out. The Back-of-the-Yards in Chicago survived and improved after its death warrant had seemiingly been sealed; it did so with a different kind of extraordinary resource. So far as I know, the Back-of-the-Yards is the only city district which has met the common problem of credit blacklisting head on and overcome it by direct means. To understand how it was able to do so, it is necessary to understand a little of the history of this district. The Back-of-the-Yards used to be a notorious slum. When the great muckraker and crusader, Upron Sinclair, wanted to describe the dregs of city life and human exploitation in his book, The Jungle, it was the Back-of-the-Yards and its associated stockyards he chose to portray. People from there who sought jobs outside the district gave false addresses, as late as the 193o's, to avoid the discrimination that then attached to residence there. Physicaly, as recently as 1953, the district, a hodgepodge of weather-beaten buildings, was a classie example of the sort of locality which it is conventionally believed must be bulldozed away entire. In the 193o's the breadwinners of the district worked principally in the stockyards, and during that decade the district and its people becarne deeply involved in unionizing the packing planrs. Building upon the new militancy, and resolving to seize the opportunity it offered for submerging old nationality antagonisms that had previously set the district asunder, a number of very able men started an experiment in local organization.\* Called the Back-of-the-Yards Council, the organization adopted the brave slogan, "We, the people, will work out our own destiny." The Council has come to operate much as a government does. It possesses a more inclusive and formal oiganization than the usual citizens' association, and much greater power, both for carrying out public services of its own and for exerting its will on the municipal government. Policies are set by a kind of kegis lature of two hundred elected representatives from smaller organizations and street neighborhoods. The district's power to get from city hall the municipal services, facilities, regulations, and exceptions to regulations it needs is regarded with considerable awe throughout Chicago. In short, the Back-of-the-Yards is no portion of the body politic to ke on lightly or untinkingly in a fight, which is a point of major significance to this story. In the interval between the formnation of the Council and the early 19so's, the people of the district and their children made other kinds of advancement. Many graduated into skilled industrial, white-collar or professional jobs. The "inevitable" next move at this stage should have been a mass emigration to incomesorting suburbs, with a new wave of people possessing lirtle choice sweeping into the abandoned district. Backward, the perpetual slum. Like people generally in unslumming city neighborhoods, however, the people of this district wanted to stay. (That is why they had already been uncrowding and unslumming within their neighborhoods.) The existing institutions, epecially the churches, wanted them to stay. At the same time, however, thousands of residents also wanted to improve their dwellings beyond the uncrowding and the small amount of refurbishing or refurnishing already accomplished. They were no longer slum dwellers and they did not wish to live as if they were. The two desires--to stay and to improvwere incompatible because nobody could get a loan for an improvement. Like the North End, the Back-of-the-Yards was blacklisted for mortgage credit. But in this case an organization capable of dealing with the problem existed. A survey by the Council turned up the inforination that businesses, residents and institutions within the district had deposits in some thirty of Chicago's savings and loan associations and savings banks. Within the district, it was agreed that these depositors-institutions and businesses as well as individuals —would be prepared to withdraw their deposits if lending institutions continued to blacklist the district. On July 2, 1953, representatives of the banks and the savings and loan associations turned up by the Council's survey were invited to a meeting. The mortgage problem of the district was presented and discussed amiably. Comments were dropped by Council spokesmen, politely, about the numbers of depositors in the district . . . the extent of their deposits . . . the difficulty of understanding why investment of savings by city dwellers seemed so little available for use in cites . . . the solid concern about the problem within the district . . . the value of public understanding. Before the meeting was over, several of the lenders pledged their help—that is, favorable consideration of requests for loans. The same day, the Council began negotiating for a site for forrynine new dwellings. Soon afterward, the most squalid row of slum apartments was equipped with indoor plumbing and otherwise modernized, by means of a 9o,ooo loan. Within three years, some five thousand houses had been rehabilitated by their owners, and the number rehabilitated since has been so great it has not been kept track of. In 19s9, construction of several small apartment houses was begun. The Council, and people within the district, refer to the banks' interest and cooperation in their improvement with gratitude. And the banks, in their turn, speak admiringly of the area as a locarion for sound investment. Nobody was thrown out of the district and "relocated."No businesses were destroyed. Unslumming, in short, has proceeded, even though the process reached a point—as it eventually does everywhere—when the need for credit becomes crucial. Credit blacklisting of city localities is impersonal. It operates not against the residents or businessnen, as persons, but against the'ir neighborhoods. For example, a merchanr with whom I am acquainted in the blacklisted district of East Harlem in New York, unable to get a \$5,ooo loan for expanding and moderizing his successful business there, had no difficulty raising \$3o,o0o to build a house on Long Island. Similarly, a person in the North End, purely by being alive and by holding a job as a bricklayer or a bookkeeper or a boltmaker, can easily borrow thirty years' worth of money, at the going rate, for the purpose of buying a house in a suburban development. But artached to the North End, neither he, nor his neighbors, nor their landlords, are worth a penny's credit. This is outrageous and destructive, but before becoming outraged, it is well to pause and consider that the banks and other conventional lenders who blacklist city localities have done no more than take seriously the conventional lessons of city planning. They are not villainous. Credit-blacklist maps are identical, both in conceprion and in most results, with municipal slumclearance maps. And municipal slum-clearance maps are regarded as responsible devices, used for responsiblepurposes-amongtheir purposes is, in fact, that of warning lenders not to invest here. Somerimes the planners anticipate the lenders; sometimes the lenders anticipare the planners; both of them know what they are doing because they have borh learned so much about Radiant Garden City Beautiful planning. The two devices--blacklist maps and slum-clearance mapscame into common use at about the same time, in the early 194o's. With the }enders, they frst srarted as maps of areas in which there hat been large numbers of foreclosures during the Great Depression, and which hence were presumably poor risks for future loans. This criterion, however, receded into the background. (lt was confusing. The Grand Central office area in New York had one of the worst foreclosure records in the country; did this mean it was a poor risk for future investnent?) The modern criterion is the lenders' decision that such-and-such a place is already a slum, or else is destined to become a slum. Its future, insofar as it is considered, is thus conceived in termns of orthodox city planning remedies: eventual erasure, and in the meantime, decline. In choosing to use the power of credit to destroy, lenders operate on the premise, therefore, that their actions register an inevitability and, in the light of that inevitability, no more than prudence. They are making prophecies. 十 Usually their prophecies are borne out, too. Consider, for example, the case of a New England city (not Boston this time) with an extensive and well-publicized redevelopment program. As a foundation for its work, the redevelopment staff prepared a map that showed where decay had proceeded so far thar clearance was deemed necessary. After the map was made, the planners discovered that it coincided, exactly, with the maps prepared by the city's bankers many years previously, designating localities into which no loans would be made. The bankers had prophesied these places would become hopeless slums, and their prognoses were accurate. Only one minor discrepancy showed berween the two maps. T'his was a case in which the planners' map prescribed not complete clearance, but instead spot clearance. In this one ins nce, a blacklisted locality, including parts of its small business district, had not seemed too far gone for limited conservation. T'his locality alone had its independent source of credit: a small, family-run bank, a vestige of earlier days, an oddity that did make loans within its blacklisted area. Such business expansion and refurbishing, such upkeep as the locality had, was financed by it. This, for instance, was the source of credit that had enabled the neighborhood's outstanding commercial establishment--a restaurant drawing customers from all over the city—to acquire good equipment and to expand and refurbish as needed. Credit-blacklisting maps, like slum-clearance maps, are accurate prophecies because they are self-fulfilling prophecies. In the cases of the North End and the Back-of-the-Yards, the .blacklist maps were inaccurate prophecies. But no one would ever know they had been inaccurate estimates of the porentiality, were it not for the miraculous ability of these places to evade their sentences. Other ciry neighborhoods of vitality often show resistance to the death sentence. My own neighborhood did for twelve years (this was a case in which the planners led. the way with a slumclearance map and the lenders followed). A few streets of East Harlem have stood up under blacklisring since r942. by means of loans made back and forth among families and relatives.\* There is no tell'ıng how many city districts have been destroyed by blacklisting. The Lower East Šide of New York, an area of great potential—at least as great a potential as Greenwich Village—was doomed by blacklisting. The Society Hill district in Philadelphia, on which great sums of public renewal money are now to be spent to "bring back the middle class" ofcially, was chosen by many middle-income people on their own initiat've in years past-—only to be unchosen when they could not get loans to buy or to rehabilitate there. Unless a neighborhood does possess extraordinary vitality, along with some formn of extraordinary resource, a drought of conventional money inexorably enforces deterioration. The worst cases are neighborhoods that are already stagnant,, with much that is inherently wrong. These localities, which are losing their former residents anyway, often undergo a special form of investment cataclysm. Within a short interval after they are blacklisted for conventonal credit, there may come into the vacuum money from the shadow world of investment. It pours in, buying up property for which there are no other purchasers now, and presumably will not be, and to which their current owners or users have no great, efective attachment. Quick conversions of buildings to the most exploitative slurns follow. Shadow-world cataclysmic money is filling in the gap left by conventional money. This sequence occurs in most great cities, and seerms to be taken for granted, although few studies have been made of it. One of these few was a research repoit on a cataclysmically deteriorated area of New York's West Side, by Dr. Chester A. Rapkin, an economist and planner. Rapkin's report described the imiposition of a money drought from conventional sources, the appearance of high-interest and unscrupulous money in its stead, the inability of property owners to make changes except for the sale of their property to exploitative purchasers. The New York Timnes, quoting James Felt, Chairman of the City Planning Commission, for which the report was prepared, summed it up both neatly and dispassionately: aged to get bank loans for the propery owners concemed, with which they could repay the łoans he had made them for tnaterials. He said that it disclosed the almost complete terinination of new construction in the twenty-block area. He said it also showed a halt in the flow of bank and other instirutional mortgage loans on realproperty, a turnover of property to a new typeof investor, a growth ofabsentee ownership and the transfornation of much of the housing occupancy in the area irto furnished-room occupancy. All three kınds of cataclysmic money have been involvod in this debacle, as they often are in city decay. First the withdrawąl of all conventional money; then ruination fnanced by shadowworld money; then selection of the area by the Planning Commission as a candidate for cataclysmic use of government money to áinance renewal clearance. This last stage makes possible cataclysmic re-entry of conventional money for financing renewal-project construction and rehabilitation. So well do these three different kinds of money prepare the way for each other's cataclysms that one would be imnpelled to admire the process, as a highly developed forın of order in its own right, were it not so destructive to every other form of city order. It does not represent a "conspiracy."It is a logical outcome of logical men guided by nonsensical but conventional city planring beliefs. The remarkable fact, however--and a great testimony to the strength and magnetistn of many city neighborhoods in adversity is the degree to which they resist their financial death decrees. This was discovered in New York City during the 195o's, after new laws required central heating in tenement buildngs. Landlords were to be recompensed for the improvements by rent increases or tax abatements. The arrangement ran into unexpected obstacles, and precisely in places where no particular obstacles would have been anticipated: ınsocially stable areas, holding up well, where the tenants could have absorbed the increases. Money to do the work (at rates under 2o percent interest) was generally unobtainable. The difficulties of one landlord, haled into court for violarion of the law, were reported in the newspapers in December t959. because he happened to be a Congressman, Representative AIfred E. Santangelo, and was therefore newsworthy. Sancangelo reported that the central heating had been installed since inspection, and went on to recount that it hd cost \$15,ooo for each of six buildings his family owned, or a total of \$9o,ooo. "Of this," he said, "we could get only \$23,ooo from banks--by extending a mortgage for five years, and by getting a personal bank loan. We had to do the rest with personal family monies." Sanrangelo did very well with the banks, considering the usual treatment of requests for loans into blacklisted localities. From time to time, the New York newspapers print letters about the problem. One such, from a lawyer of a landlords' association early in 19s9, said: It is common knowledge that banks and insurance companies have refrained from making loans or mortgages to owners of tenement houses. especially those located in what have been marked as undesirable areas in the city.Mortgages upon expiration are not renewed and owners are frequently compelled to resort to moneylenders who exact interest as high as zo% [Note: this is conservative] for short-tern loans . . . There are owners who desire to do more than just install central heating. They would modernize apartments by enlarging rooms, placing new equipment in kitchens, installing adequate wiring . . . With doors to financing closed to them, owners have appealed to the city for aid and none has been forthcoming . . . No agency exists to help with the problem. The type of building involved, whether it is a tenement or a historically valuable old town house or a purely commercial property, makes little difference, actually, in a blacklisred area. Just as it is not persons who are blacklisted, as such, neither are buildings, as such, bur rather the locality, as such, Durtng 1959, New York embarked on a small experimental program for conserving neighborhoods in Manhattan that on the one hand were getting no new building, but on the other hand were judged to be far from hopeless physically and much worth wving socially. Unfortunately, lenders had already judged just these neighborhoods to be hopeless. Merely so that building violations could be corrected, the city found it necessary to obtain state legislation setting up a \$15,ooo,ooo public loan fund for property owners in such neighborhoods to draw upon. Money for gradual change is so hard to get that a new loan authority has had to be created to supply even a pittance for the most rockbottom purposes. The legislation was drawn up so ineptly that the fund, as this is wricten, is almost unusable; and it is so small it cannot, in any case, make much difference to the city. As already indicated, blacklisted localities can get money from conventional lenders again if the money comes in the forn of a cataclysm, and if it is thus employed to sort out incomes and uses in some approximation of Radiant Garden City. Dedicating a privately fnanced Radiant City project in Harlem the Borough President of A1anhattan hailed the occasion as most significant because "in getting private fnancing the project sponsors have broken the barrier that banks have long maintained against substantial investment in new housing for Harlem." The barrier, however, has been broken for no other type of invesnnent in Harlem than investment in project cataclysms. Conventional credit will reappear too in a blacklisted district if the federal govermment will guarantee mortgages as generously as it does for suburban development and for new Radiant Garden City projects. But the federal government does not guarantee mortgages in sufficient amount to stimulate spot building or rehabilitation except in ceribed renewal areas with an approved plan. An approved plansmeans that even existing buildings must help shape the area into the nearest possible approximation of Radiant Garden City. Usually thesę renewal plans disperse-- even from low-density areas—between one-half and two-thirds of the original population. Again the money is used to finance catclysms. And it is not used to build city diversity but to erase it. When I asked an official involved in arrangements for a "spotclearance" renewal district why dispersed commerce was to be rooted out (instead of more of it stimulated), and why business was to be confined to a monopolistic shopping center, imitating suburban Life, he said, frs, that that represented good planning. He then added, "T'he question is academic anyhow. We couldn't get FHA approval on loans with mixed uses like hat." He is right. There is no" appreciable money available today for nurturing city districts fit for city life, and this is a situarion encouraged and often enforced by government. We have, therefore, no one to blame for this but ourselves. Still another form of respectable money is available to blacklisted districts: public housing project money. Although there is much prating about "vest-pocket projects," the vest in question seems to be Paul Bunyan's. This too is money that comes, almost invariably, in cataclysmic form, and always in the form of sorting out and price-tagging populations, East Harlem—like the Lower East Sidohas received floods of such money. Back in 1942, East Harlem would have looked at least as good a possibility for unslumming as the North End. Only five years before, in 937, a sober study of the area, sponsored by the city, saw so much of hope and improvement occurring that it projected East Harlem as the logical center in New York of Italian-infuenced culture. The district possessed thousands of businessmen, handling businesses so stable and successful that in many cases the second or third generation was now running them. It had hundreds of cultural and social organizations. It was an area of much worn-out and poor housing (along with some good housi'ng and considerable unslumming housing), but also of immense vitality and with a great hold on many of its people. The district also possessed the city's main Puerto Rican community, which was miserably housed, but which contained many first-comers of the Puerto Rican immigration who were already emerging as leaders, and it contained an immense array of Puerto Rican cultural, social and business establishments. After East Harlcm was written off by lenders in 194:, it too had little miracles. One area, near the foot of the Triborough Bridge, continued unslumming and rehabilitating in spite of every obstacle. The Housing Authority's own site managers, when they had to drive the people out so that a huge immured slum, Wagner Houses, could be built there instead, were amazed and myscifed that improvements so substantial and plentiful should be wiped away. No miracle sufficiently sensational turned up to save Fast Harlem. To carry out their plans (even where these were not directly overridden by the city's plans), too many people eventually had to leave. Those who stayed in spite of the discouragement to improvement, and in spite of the havoc of the shadow-world money which poured into every cranny it could find, hung on by extraordinary measures and tenacity. For it was as if East Harlerm, in effect, had been decreed a backward and deprived country, financially apart from our normal national life. Even the branch banks were closed down throughout an area of more than ioo,ooo people and thousands of businesses; merchants had to go out of the area simply to deposit their day's receipts. Even the system of school savings accounts was removed from the district's schools. Eventually, much as the generosity of a rich nation might well extend massive aid to a deprived and backward country, into this district poured massive "foreign" aid, according to decisions by absentee experts from the remote continent inhabited by housers and planners. The aid poured in for rehousing people some three hundred million dollars'worth. The more that poured in, the worse became the turmoils and troubles of East Harlem, and still more did it become like a deprived, backward country. More than t,3oo businesses which had the misfortune to occupy sites marked for housing were wiped away, and an estimated four-fifths of their proprietors ruined. More than soo noncommercial “store-front" establishments were also wiped away. Virtually all the unslummed population which had hung on was rooted out and dispersed to "better ixelf." Lack of money has hardly been the trouble in East Harlem. After the drought came fantastic floods. The money poured into East Harlem alone from the public housing treasuries is about as much as was lost on the Edsel. ln the case of a mistake like the Edsel, a point is reached when the expenditure is reappraised and halted. But in East Harlem, citizens today have to fight off still more money for repetitions of mistakes that go unappraised by those who control the money floodgates. I hope we disburse foreign aid abroad more intelligently than we disburse it at home. Lack of gradual money wastes city districts already inherently fit for city life, and therefore with a great potential for rapid improvement. lt also means there is no hope for districts that lack one or more of the conditions for generating diversity, and need help in acquiring rhese supplements, as well as money for nornal changes and for worn-out structures. Where is the money from conventional sources, which might be going into gradual change? Where does it go instead? Some of it goes into planned cataclysms of redevelopment and renewal; more is going into the self-destruction of divcrsity, to the ruination of outstanding city success. Much is not going into cities at all, but instead into the outskirts of cities. As Haar said, the credi't authority is not only the power to destroy but the power to create and the power to divert. He was writing specifcally of the goverament's credit authority, and the use of that authority to encourage suburb building rather than city building. The immense new suburban sprawls of American cities have not come about by accident—and still less by the myth of free choice between cities and suburbs. Endless suburban sprawl was made practical (and for many families was made actually mandatory) through the creation of something the United States lacked until the mid-193o's: a national mortgage market specifcally calculated to encourage suburban home building. Because of the certitude offered by government mortgage guarantecs, a bank in New Haven could, would and does buy up mortgages on suburban housing in Southern California. A bank in Chicago buys up mortgages on suburban housing in lndianapolis one week, whilc an lnd'ianapolis bank, the next week, buys them up for suburban housing outside Atlanta or Buffalo. Nor, nowadays, must these mortgages necessarly be government guaranteed. They can be a repetition, without the guarantees, of the kind of planning and building that is made rourine and accepted by the guarantees. A national mortgage market has obvious advantages in bringing the demand for money together with a distant supply of money quickly and sensitively. But, particularly when it is diverted so heavily into one kind of growth, it has its disadvanges 100. As the people of the Back-of-the-Yards found out, there is apt to be no relat ionship between city-created and city-needed saviogs, and city building investment. So remote is the relationship that in 1959 when one of the savings banks in Brooklyn announced that 7o percent of its loans had been made close to home, the New York Times considered the fact sufhciently newsworthy to give it a big play on the business pages. Close to home is a definition with some elasticity. The 7o percent, it turned out, had been used in Nassau County, a huge mess of new suburban sprawl on Long Island, out beyond Brooklyn. Meantme, much of Brooklyn lies under the sentence of the blacklisr. City people finance the building of suburbs. To be sure, one of the historic missions of cities, those marvelously productive and efficient places, is to finance colonization. But you can run anything into the ground. Obviously there have been changes in the sources of money for ciry building during the past thirty years. Money lending and spending have become more inst.tutionalized than in the past. The counterparts of individuals who might have been lending money in the 192o's, for example, are today apt to be putting it into income tax and life insurance, and insofar as it is spent or lent for city building, it is spent or lent by the government or the life insurance company. Small local banks, like the New England oddity that lent money within its otherwise blacklisted neighborhood, disappeared in the Depression and in mergers after that rime. Does this mean, however, that our more institutionalized money nowadays can be used only cataclysmically? Are the great bureaucracies of money such big fish that they can operate only in cities of big fsh, huge borrowers, immense and abrupt changes? Is a system which is able in one of its manifestations to retail credit, gently, for the purchase of encyclopedias and vacation trips, able in other manifestations only to distribute credit violently in wholesale lots? This city building money operates as it does not because of its own internal necessities and forces. Ir operates cataclysrmically because we, as a society, have asked for jusr this. We thought it would be good for us, and we got it. Now we accept it as if it were ordained by God or the system. Let us look, from the point of view of what we have asked for and what we have explicitly permitted, at the three kinds of money which shape our citiesbeginning with the most important, the conventional, nongovernmental sources of credit. The idea of diverting huge sums of money to thin suburban growth at the expense of starving city districts was no invention of the morgage lenders (although they, as well as suburban huilders, have now acquired a vested interest in this routine). Neither the ideal nor the method of accomplishing it originated logically within our credit system itself. It originated with highminded social thinkers. By the 193o's, when the FHA methods for stimulating suburban growth were worked out, virtually every wise man of government—from right to left—was in favor of the objectives, although they night differ with one another on methods. A few years previously, Herbert Hoover had opened the first White House Conference on Housing with a polemic againsr the moral inferiority of cities and a panegyric on the moral virtues of simple cottages, small rowns and grass. At an opposite political pole, Rexford G. Tugwell, the federal administrator responsible for the New Deal's Green Belt demonstration suburbs, explained, "My idea is to go just outside centers of population, pick up cheap land, build a whole community and entice people into it. Then go back into the cities and tear down whole slums and.make parks of them." The cataclysmic use of money for suburban sprawl, and the concomitant starvation of all those parts of cities that planning orthodoxy stamped as slums, was what our wise men wanted for us; they put in a lot of effort, one way and another, to get it. We got it. The deliberate social sponsorship of cataclysmic private credit for redevelopment and renewal projects is even more obvious. In the first place, society puts its ovn land clearance subsidy funds into these cataclysnuc changes, purely to make financially possible the subsequent cataclysmic private investnent. Society also oversees that the private investrnent is used specifically to create forms of pseudo-city and to combat urban diversity. So ciety goes still further, with its incentive of renewal mortgage guarantees, but insists that the creation thus guaranteed be as satic as man can make it throughout the life of invesunent. Gradual change is outlawed for the future. Social sponsorship of these cataclysms is aken for granted. This is the public's contribution to city rebuilding. The public understands less well that in sponsoring these cataclysmic uses of private investnent in cities, it has also made and enforced choices among various differing forns of private investment. To understand this, we must understand that public subsidies for land clearance or spot clearance are far from the only subsidies. Involuntary subsidies, immense in the aggregate, go into these enterprises too. When land is acquired for redevelopment or renewal, it is acquired through the power of eminent domain, a power which belongs only to governments. In addition, threat of acquisition under eminent domain is used to enforce compliance to renewal schemes in parcels of property not actually acquired. The power of eminent domain, long familiar and useful as a means of acquiring property needed for public use, is extended, under redevelopment law, to acquisition of property intended for private use and private proft. This distinction was the point on which the constitutionality of redevelopment and renewal law hung. The Supreme Court declared that society did have the right--through the medium of its legislaturesto make that kind of choice between private entrepreneurs and owners; it could ake the properry of the one to beneát the other, as a means of achieving objects which, in the legislature's judgment, were for the public good. This use of the power of eminent domain does more than make physically possible the assembly of projecr tracts. It also makes them financially possible, owing to the involunrary subsidy encailed. This point of the involuntary subsidy was well explained by Anthony J. Panuch, a management expert, in a 1góo report on New York City's housing and redevelopment snarl, prepared for the Mayor: The direct consequence of the exercise of the power of eminent domain on the coirimercial tenant is drastic and often ruinous. When the govemment condemns property it is required to pay only for what it acguires for itself and not for what it takes from the owner. The government is not in condemnation acquiring a business but only the premises. It need only pay for the premises. The proprietor gets nothing for the loss of his business or goodwill, nor even for his unexpired lease because leases universally provide that upon condemnation the owner's lease contract with the tenant is automatically term inated with nocompensationto the tenant. Although his entire propertyand his full investnent is taken from hiun, he receives substantially nothing. The repoit goes on to give an illustrarive case: A druggist purchased a drug store for more than \$4o,ooo. A few years later, the building in which his store was located was taken in condemnation. The toml sum which he eventually received was an award of \$3,ooo for hxtures and that sum had to be paid over to the chattel moitgagee, Thus his total investmrent was complerely wiped out. This is'a sad and common story on housing or renewal sites, and is one reason these schemes are fought so des perately by site businessmen. Theyare subsidizing these schemes, not with a fraction of their tax money, but with their livelihoods, with their childten's college money, with years of their past put into hopes for the fururewith nearly eveiything they have. The Panuch report goes on to suggest what innumerable letters to editors, cirzens at public hearings. and newspaper editorials have already, in their own words, suggested: "The community as a whole should bear the expense of community progress and that cost should not be imposed upon the unfortunate victim of community progress." The community as a whole has nor yet seen fit to bear that whole expense, and it is never going to. Redevelopment officials and housing experts blanch when it is suggested. The expense of bearing the whole cost would nake public subsidy costs for redevelopment and for housing projecs too heavy. At present, redevelopment for private proht is ideologically and iscally justifed on he grounds that the public subsidy investmnent will be returmned over a reasonable period in the form of increased taxes from the improvement. Were the involuntary subsidies which make these schemes possible included as public costs, the enlarged public costs would bear no conceivable relationship to anticipated tax returns. Public housing on its part is held to a current cost. of \$17,ooo per dwelling unit. Were the involuntary subsidies absorbed as public cost, the expense of these dwellings would soar to politically unrealistic levels. Both of these operations, "renewal"projects and public housing projects, with their wholesale destruction, are inherently wasteful ways of rehuilding cities, and in comparison with their full costs make pathetic contributions to city values. At present, society is protected from these facts of life because so high a proportion of the costs is visited upon involuntary victims and is nor offcially added in. But the cost is there. Project building as a forn of city transfornacon makes no more sense financially than it does socially. When a life insurance company or a union pension fund pours cataclysmic amounts of money into a regimented project or renewal scheme for a price-tagged population, it is not indulging in behavior somehow necessary to twentieth-century invesonent funds. It is doing, rather, what society has specifically asked for, and has made possible only by employing quite extraordinary and ruthless social powers. In the case of the catclysmic use of conventional credit for the self-destruction of diversity, the situation is different. The cataclysmic effects in such cases arise, not from vast wholesaling of credit at all, but from the aggregate of many individual transactions which happen to be heavily concentrated in one locality in one period of time. Socicty has produced no deliberate stimulants to this destruction of outstanding city success. But neither has society done anything to hamper or to divert this form of citydestroying money flood. Private invesrinent shapes cities, but social ideas (and laws) shape private invcstment.: First comes the image of what we want, then the machinery is adapted to turn out that image. The financial machinery has been adjusted to create anti-city images because, and only because, we as a society thought this would be good for us. If and when we think that lively, diversifed ciry, capable of continual, close-grained improvement and change, is desirable, then we will adjust the financial machinery to get that. As for the cataclysmic use of public funds for city rebuilding, there is even less reason than in the case of private credit to suppose that this just happens because it happens. Public housing money is employed cataclysmically instead of for gradual, steady street and district improvement, because we thought eataclysms would be good for our slum dwellers--and a demonstration to the rest of us of the good city life. There is no inherent reason why tax funds and public credit cannot be used to speed unslumming instead of slum shifting and slum immuring. Methods entirely different from those now employed are possible for subsidizing housng. I shall discuss this question in the next chapter. Nor is there any inherent reason why public buildings must be sorted out and assembled into civic and cultural cataclysms. They can be built and located as ingredients of gradual change, to supplement and enliven their matrix of living city. We only do it the other way because we think it is right. The shadow-world money is hard to control socially, but we could do much to hamper at least its cataclysmic effects. Blacklisting of localities opens wonderful opportunties to the cataclysmic use of exploitative money. To this degree, the problem is hardly the exploitative money itself, but the (socially encouraged) withholding of conventional investment. Cataclysmic use of governmental money also affords, as a byproduct, wonderful opportunities for the money from the shadow world. To undetstand why this is so, we must undersnd that slum landlords, unlike the drug-store proprietor in the Panuch report, benefit handsomely from blanket use of the powers of eminent domain. When a building is bought under the powets of eminent domain, three factors are customarily taken into account in setting the award (sale price), These are the assessed value of the property, the replacement value of the building, and the current earning power of the brilding (as distinguished from the earning power of a business which may be conducted within it). The more exploited a building, the higher its earning power, and the more the owner is given. So profitmble are such condemnation sales for slum landlords that sorme of them make a business of buying up buildings in areas already condemnned, overcrowding them, and raising rents, less for the profits to be made in the interim than for the profits to be made by the building's sale to the public. To combat this particular racket, some cities have passed "quick-take"{aws technically transferring to public ownership the title of properties on a condemned site the day condemnation is approved—leaving negotiations on sale prices and appraisals to be worked outlater.\* Wherever exploited buildings exist, their owners are enriched from slum clearance. They can, and apparently often do, use their condemnation awards to buy more property than they formerly had, in new localities which they propose to convert to slums, If the new slum is later condemned, so much the betrer for such an investor's mulriplying fortunes and holdings. In New York, some investors of this kind take not only their money with themn to a new location, but also their former tenants, thereby helping the city solve the "relocation" problem. Slum shifting has its own efficiencies. It is self-financing. Again, the cataclysmic use of shadow-world money to create new slums is hardly a problem entailing only the shadow-world money itself. To a degree, it is a problem that arises from (socially encouraged) slum shifting. Finally, the cataclysmic use of shadow-world money could be better controlled through xation, as explained in the Panuch report: No amount of code enforcement or rax abated housing rehabilitation by the New York City Housing Authority will be able to keep pace with slum formation, until and uniess the profit is taken out of sherns by taxation. [Taxation on the basis of profits is necessary] to overcome the effect of the Federal Income Tax strucrure, the depreciation andcapitalgains provisions of which make slum ownership a highlyprofitable speculation for slumlords. . . A slum owner in a congested area, where need for shelter is desperate and where the rents are what the traffic will bear, need not maintain the property. He pockets his annual depreciation allowance year after year, and after he has written down the book value of his slum property to zero, he then sells it at a price that capitalizes his high rent roll. Having made the sale, he pays a 25% capitalgains tax on the difference between the book value and the sales price. He then acquires another slum property and goes through the same process again. [Saturation inspection by the Bureau of Internal Revenue of the income returns of owners of slum properties would] determine the amount of back taxes and penalties due as a result of their pocketing any improperly claimed depreciation allowance. Cynicsor at least the cynics 1 talk to--think that pickings are made so easy nowadays for exploitative money in cities because the investnent shadow world represents powerful interests, with a big say somewhere behind the legislative and administrative scenes. I have no way of knowing whether this is true. However, I should think that apathy on the patt of the rest of us has something to do with the situation. Soine professional housers, roday, have a plausible rationalizaton for the profits the shadow world takes asa by-product of city rebuilding operations. "Society has created the slums," they say, "and it is only right that society should pay what is needed to wipe them out." Putting it in these terms, however, evades the question of who is being paid by society, and where the money goes next. The apathy is abetted, also, by the comfortable thought that the problem of slums is being overcome anyway by wiping out old slum buildings. Nothing could be less true. It is so easy to blame the decay of cities on traffic . . , or immigrants . . . or the whimsies of the middle class. The decay of cities goes deeper and is more complicated. It goes right down to what we chink we want, and to our ignorance about how cities work. The forns in which money is used for city buildingor withheld from useare powerful instruments of city decline today. The forms in which money is used must be converted ro instruments of regenerationfrom instruments buying violent cataclyss to instruments buying continual, gradual, complex and gentler change. Part Four DIFFERENT TACTICS