New Ecologies for the Twenty-First Century Series Edltors: Arturo Escobar, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill Dianne Rocheleau, Clark University THIS SERIES ADDRESSES TWO TRENDS: critical conversations in academic fields about nature, sustainability, globalization, and culture, including constructive engagements between the natural, social, and human sciences; and intellectual and political conversations among social movements and other non-academic knowledge producers about alternative practices and socio-natural worlds. Its objective is to establish a synergybetween these theoretical and political developments in both academic and non-academic arenas. This synergy is a sine qua non for new thinking about the real promise of emergent ecologies. The series includes works that envision more lasting and just ways of being-in-place and being-in-networks with a diversity of humans and other living and non-living beings. NEW ECOLOGIES FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY aimS to promote a dialogue between those who are transforming the understanding of the relationship between nature and culture. The series revisits existing fields such as environmental history, historicalecology, environmental anthropology, ecological economics, and cultural and political ecology. It addresses emerging tendencies, such as the use of complexity theory to rethinka range ofquestions on the nature-culture axis. It also deals with epistemological and ontological concerns, building bridges between the various forms of knowing and ways of being embedded in the multiplicity of practices of social actors worldwide. This series hopes to foster convergences among differently located actors and to provide a forum for authors and readers to widen the fields of theoretical inquiry, professional practice, and social struggles that characterize the current environmental arena. # Designs for the Pluriverse Radical Interdependence, Autonomy, and the Making of Worlds Arturo Escobar DUKE UNIVERSITY PRESS Durham and London 2018 © 2017 Duke University Press All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper ∞ Designed by Matthew Tauch Typeset in Arno Pro by Westchester Publishing Services Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available from the Library of Congress. ISBN 978-0-8223-7090-1 (hardcover : alk. paper) ISBN 978-0-8223-7105-2 (pbk. : alk. paper) ISBN 978-0-8223-7181-6 (ebook) Cover art; Gabriel Orozco, Piñanona 1, 2o13. Tempera and burnished gold leaf on linen canvas on wood. 40 × 40 × 4 cm, © Gabriel Orozco/kurimanzutto, Mexico City. Image courtesy of the artist and kurimanzutto, Mexico City. Photo by Studio Michel Zabé, 2013. To Bob Marley, a prophet of our times To the Zapatistas of Chiapas, for their pluriversal imagination To the indigenous, Afrodescendant, and peasant communities of the Norte del Cauca region of Colombia, for their steadfast determination to defend the tejido de la vida (the relational weave of life) against rampant destruction by modern worlds. ## Contents PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ix Introduction 1 Design for the Real World But Which "World"? What "Design"? What "Real"? 1 Out of the Studio and into the Flow of Socionatural Life 25 2 Elements for a Cultural Studies of Design 49 II The Ontological Reorientation of Design 3 In the Background of Our Culture: Rationalism, Ontological Dualism, and Relationality 79 4 An Outline of Ontological Design 10s Designs for the Pluriverse 5 Design for Transitions 137 6 Autonomous Design and the Politics of Relationality and the Communal 165 Conclusion 202 NOTES 229 REFERENCES 259 INDEX 281