## Notes ## Prologue: Three Teapots 3 "If you want a golden rule" (Morris, 1882. Quotation is from Chapter 3, "The Beauty of Life," originally delivered before the Birmingham Society of Arts and School of Design, February 19,1880.) 67 "no new vehicle in recent memory has provoked more smiles" (Swan, 2002) 7 "It starts out with slight annoyance" (Hughes-Morgan, 2002) 12 "The neuroscientist Antonio Damasio studied people" (Damasio, 1994) 13 Parts of this chapter were published in Interactions, a publication of The Association for Computing Machines (Norman, 2002b) ## Chapter One: Attractive Things Work Better 17 "two Japanese researchers, Masaaki Kurosu and Kaori Kashimura" (Kurosu & Kashimura, 1995) 17-18 "Japanese culture is known for its aesthetic tradition" (Tractinsky, 1997) 18 "So Tractinsky redid the experiment" (Tractinsky, 1997; Tractinsky, Katz, & Ikar, 2000) 18 "It requires a somewhat mystical theory" (Read, 1953, p. 61) 19 "The psychologist Alice Isen and her colleagues" (Ashby, Isen, & Turken, 1999; Isen, 1993) 21 "My studies of emotion, conducted with my colleagues" (Ortony, Norman, & Revelle, 2004) 31 "two words in the mythical language Elvish." Tolkien's books are, of course, well known (Tolkien, 1954a, b, c, 1956). This particular experiment was done in my classroom by Dan Halstead and Gitte Waldman (in 2002). They described the sound symbolism of Tolkien and, in a class demonstration, showed that people who had never heard Elvish could still reliably determine the meaning of its words. 32 "a sound symbolism governs the development" (Hinton, Nichols, & Ohala, 1994) ## Chapter Two: The Multiple Faces of Emotion and Design 41 "almost 20,000 in the United States alone." Magazine Publishers of America, figures for the year 2001. http://www.magazine.org/consumer\_marketing/index.html 46 "kitsch." The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, Copyright © 1999, Columbia University Press. Licensed from Columbia University Press. All rights reserved. www.cc.columbia.edu/cu/cup/ 46 "Nobody goes there anymore. It's too crowded." (Berra & Horton, 1989) 47 The Meaning of Things (Csikszentmihalyi & Rochberg-Halton, 1981) 48 "They are the first two chairs me and my husband bought." (Csikszentmihalyi & Rochberg-Halton, 1981, p. 60) 48 "Household objects," (Csikszentmihalyi & Rochberg-Halton, 1981, p. 187) 49 "when I walked through the exhibits on display at the San Francisco Airport." The San Francisco Airport Museums: http://www.sfoarts.org/ 49 "The marvel of souvenir buildings" Text from the exhibit (Smookler, 2002) 52 "With every photo there is a story" (Cowen, 2002) 53 "Frohlich describes the possibilities this way" (Cowen, 2002) 54 "But put Asians in an individualistic situation" (Kitayama, 2002) 55 "the Heathkit Company." The company has stopped making kits, although it still makes electronic learning materials. See the history at http://www.heathkit-museum.com/history.shtml. 55 "As the market researchers Bonnie Goebert and Herma Rosenthal put it" (Goebert & Rosenthal, 2001. The quotations are from Chapter 1: Listening 101, the value of focus groups.) 57 "Pirsig's Zen and the Art ofMotorcycle Maintenance"(Pirsig, 1974) 57 "The American Heritage Dictionary definesfashion . . ." The American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition, Copyright © 2000 by Houghton Mifflin Company. 60 "Emotional branding is about building relationships." Sergio Zyman, Former Chief Marketing Office of Coca-Cola. In the foreword to Emotional Branding (Gobé,2001). 60 "Emotional branding is based on that unique trust that is established with an audience." (Gobé, 2001. From the preface, page ix.) Chapter Three: Three Levels of Design: Visceral, Behavioral, and Reflective 63 "I remember deciding to buy Apollinaris." Email from Hugues Belanger, in response to my query. May 6, 2002. To see the bottle, Belanger said: For a picture of the bottle, check out http://www.apollinaris.de/english/index.html (mouse over "Products" and click on "Apollinaris Classic"). 64 "Walk down a grocery aisle." From the web site of "The Bottled Water Web": http://www.bottledwaterweb.com/indus.html. 64 "Package designers and brand managers." From the "Prepared Foods.com" web site: http://www.preparedfoods.com/archives/1998/9810/9810packaging.htm. 64 "Almost everyone who enjoys TyNant." From the TyNant web site: http://www.tynant.com/clients.htm. 69-70 "The principles of good behavioral design are well known ... I laid them out in my earlier book, The Design of Everyday Things" (Norman, 2002a). Also see: (Cooper, 1999; Raskin, 2000). 74 "Understanding end-user unmet and unarticulated needs." From a Herbst LaZar Bell case study of the "Penguin" platform stepladder, sent to me mid-2002. 78 "Here, try this." The Tech Box is described in more detail in Tom Kelley's book about IDEO (Kelley & Littman, 2001, pages 142-146). 86 "Swatch Is Design" Student guide from the Swatch web site (Swatch Watch Corporation) 87 "In his important book about" (Coates, 2003, pp. 2.) 91 "The main goal in designing the Coaches Headset." Steve Remy, senior mechanical engineer and project manager for HLB, quoted in a press release for PTC's Pro/ENGINEER software that was used by HLB for the design. (July 23, 2001. Found at http://www.loispaul.com.) 92 "To the uninitiated" Copyright © 2002 by The New York Times Co. Reprinted with permission. (St. John, 2002) 93 "When you're wearing a thousand-dollar suit" (Rushkoff, 1999, p. 24) 95 "Paco Underbill's book" (Underhill, 1999) 96 "a wildly ambitious, hugely expensive science fiction allegory" and also, "symbolism ran such riot." From A. O. Scott's New York Times review of the restored movie (Scott, 2002). 98 "The brilliant conceptual artists Vitaly Komar and Alex Melamid" (Komar, Melamid, & Wypijewski, 1997) 98 "Perfectly 'user-centered design.'" Taken from Lieberman's essay "The Tyranny of Evaluation," available on his web site. I changed the phrase "user-centered interfaces" to "user-centered design" (with his permission) to make the point apply much more generally. (Lieberman, 2003) ## Chapter Four: Fun and Games 99 "Professor Hiroshi Ishii of the MIT Media Laboratory runs back and forth." Ishii's work is best seen at his web site: http://tangible.media.mit.edu/index.html. The bottles are described in (Ishii, Mazalek, & Lee, 2001; Mazalek, Wood, & Ishii, 2001). 99 "Imagine trying to play table tennis on a school of fish" (Ishii, Wisneski, Orbanes, Chun, & Paradiso, 1999) 100 "funology" (Blythe, Overbeeke, Monk, & Wright, 2003) 102 "the cook ... would naturally be disappointed" (Ekuan, 1998, p. 18) 103 "A sense of beauty that lauds lightness" (Ekuan, 1998, pp. 79-81) 103 "with articles and books on 'positive psychology' and 'well-being' becoming popular" (Kahneman, Diener, & Schwarz, 1999; Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000; Snyder & Lopez, 2001) 103 "positive emotions broaden people's thought-action repertoires" (Fredrickson & Joiner, 2002). This quotation ends by referring the reader to other works by Fredrickson, in particular (Fredrickson, 1998, 2000). 104-105 "The book Emotional Branding" (Gobé, 2001) 105 "Patrick Jordan builds on the work of Lionel Tiger" (Jordan, 2000; Tiger, 1992) 108 "He picked up the hammer and ate it." See Coulson, King, & Kutas, 1998, although the particular example I made up isn't in this study. 109 "Pattern 134: Zen View" (Alexander, Ishikawa, & Silverstein, 1977, pp. 641-3) 109 "the parable of a Buddhist monk." I thank Mike Stone (at www.yawp.com) for reminding me of the parable. The quoted description of the parable comes from his discussion group posting. 111 "The seductive power of the design" (Khaslavsky & Shedroff, 1999, p. 45) 113 "On the napkin." Text accompanying the "collector's edition" of the juicer (Alessi, 2000). 113 "Fortunately, Khaslavsky and Shedroff have done the analysis for me." The lengthy quotation is from Khaslavsky & Shedroff, 1999, their Figure 1, p. 47 © 1999, Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission. (I have reformatted the text, but the words are the same.) 115 "Music plays a special role." An excellent review of these issues—and the source for this paragraph—is Krumhansl, 2002, especially note p. 46. 117 "All cultures have evolved musical scales." This section draws heavily from Krumhansl (2002) and Meyer (1956, p. 67). 120 "The designers of the Segway." Descriptive material for the "Segway Human Transporter." Amazon.com site. December 2002. Also, personal conversation with Dean Kamen, the inventor of Segway, February 25, 2003. 123 "the passions aroused in film" (Boorstin, 1990, p. 110) 124 "The vicarious eye puts our heart in the actor's body" (Boorstin, 1990, p. 110) 125 "the social scientist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi" (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990) 126 "The word'voyeur'" (Boorstin, 1990, p. 12) 126 "The voyeur's eye demands." Boorstin (1990), pages 13, 61, and 67. 127 "It can ruin the most dramatic moment" (Boorstin, 1990, p. 13) 129-130 "Overslept, woke at 8:00." From an interview with Will Wright, game developer of the Sims, conducted by Amazon.com Computer Game Editor Mike Fehlauer: http://www.playcenter.com/PC\_Games/interviews/will\_wright\_the\_sims.htm. 131 "Video games were once thought" (Klinkenborg, 2002) 131 "In The Medium of the Video Game" (Wo\i, 2001). The list of categories was taken from the excerpt at: http://www.robinlionheart.com/gamedev/genres.xhtml. 132 "As Verlyn Klinkenborg says" (Klinkenborg, 2002) ## Chapter Five: People, Places, and Things 136 "Byron Reeves and Clifford Nass" (Reeves & Nass, 1996) 136 "B. J. Fogg shows how people think." The table is taken from his Table 5.1. (Fogg, 2002) 138 "It starts out with slight annoyance" (Hughes-Morgan, 2002) 139140 "Now we get into the complex emotions" The basic analysis presented here comes from the work of the psychologists Andrew Ortony, Gerald Clore, and Allan Collins (Ortony, Clore, & Collins, 1988), although I have modified their interpretation somewhat, to fit the special emphasis on design in this book. The modifications are also in line with the work that I have done with them, in particular with Andrew Ortony and William Revelle. (Ortony, Norman, & Revelle, 2004) 141 "My 10-inch Wusthof chef knife." Email received in response to my query on the CHI discussion group. May 2002. (CHI is the Computer-Human Interaction society.) 143 "It's human nature to trust our fellow man" (Mitnick & Simon, 2002, p. 32.) 144 "social psychologists Bibb Latané and John Darley" and "Bystander apathy" (Latané & Darley, 1970) 145 "Crew Resource Management" (Wiener, Kanki, & Helmreich, 1993) 146 "As I was writing this book" (Hennessy, Patterson, Lin, & National Research Council Committee on the Role of Information Technology in Responding to Terrorism, 2003) 148 "Everywhere is nowhere." Thanks to John King, Dean of the School of Information at University of Michigan for the quotation from Seneca. 150 "Instant messenger." Responses to my request to an on-line discussion group on design to tell me products they love or hate (Dec. 2002). The two paragraphs in this example were written by different people. 151 "Vernor Vinge, one of my favorite" (Vinge, 1993) 154 "Attention span . . . ten seconds." I believe it is in James's Principles of Psychology (James, 1890), but although I have relied on this quotation for more than thirty years, it is also more than thirty years since I read it. Try as I might, I have been unable to find it again in order to provide a proper bibliographic reference. 154 "We carve out our own private spaces." See William Whyte's book City: Rediscovering the Center(Whyte, 1988). 157 "Continually divided attention." Linda Stone, then a vice president of Microsoft. Personal communication, PopTech! Conference, Camden, ME, 2002. ## Chapter Six: Emotional Machines 161 "Dave, stop . . ." Excerpt from the movie 2001, from Bizoni (1994), p. 60. 163 Photograph of C3PO and R2D2. Star Wars: Episode IV—A New Hope © 1977 and 1997 Lucasfilm Ltd. & TM. All rights reserved. Used under authorization. Unauthorized duplication is a violation of applicable law. 165 "The psychologists Robert Sekuler and Randolph Blake" (Sekuler & Blake, 1998) 166 "as happens to some emotionally impaired people" (Damasio, 1994,1999) 169 "The 1980s was the decade of the PC." Toshitada Doi, president of Sony Digital Creatures Laboratory. (Nov. 2000) 170-171 "Neal Stephenson's science fiction novel" (Stephenson, 1995) 173 "Rodney Brooks, one of the world's leading roboticists" (Brooks, 2002). The quotation is from page 125. 175 "Masahiro Mori, a Japanese roboticist": The Buddha in the Robot (Mori, 1982). The argument that we are more bothered when the robot is too close to human appearance comes from an essay by Dave Bryant (Bryant, not dated). Bryant attributes the argument to Mori, but when I bought Mori's book and read it, although I enjoyed the book, I found not even a hint of this argument. Nonetheless, it is a great point. 176 "Philip K. Dick's" (Dick, 1968) 180 "I realized it would be a heck of a lot easier if we just gave them emotions." Picard's quote comes from Cavelos (1999, pp. 107—108), but she reaffirmed it to me during my visit to her laboratory in 2002. 183 "The extent to which emotional upsets can interfere with mental life" (Goleman, 1995). The quote was taken from (Kort, Reilly, & Picard, 2001). 184 "Professor Rosalind Picard" (Picard, 1997) 185 "Even the most controlled person." The basic research was done by Paul Ekman (Ekman, 1982,2003). An excellent popular description is in the New Yorker article by Malcolm Gladwell (Gladwell, 2002). 186 "National Research Council" (National Research Council Committee to Review the Scientific Evidence on the Polygraph, 2002) 188 "Perhaps the earliest such experience was with Eliza." The work on Eliza was done in the 1960s. It is reviewed in Weizenbaum's book (Weizenbaum, 1976). 190 "Do you think that I can use" Conversation between Danny Bobrow, Eliza, and the VP. A transcript of the conversation has been made available by Giiven Güzeldere and Stefano Franchi: I copied it from their website (Giizeldere & Franchi, 1995). I also confirmed the details through conversation and email with Bobrow (Dec. 27,2002). 191 "Computer Power and Human Reason "(Weizenbaum, 1976) 191 "Designing Sociable Robots" (Breazeal, 2002) 192 (Figure 6.6). The photograph of Kismet comes from http://www.ai.mit.edu/projects/sociable/ongoing-research.html (with permission). For more detailed description, see Cynthia Breazeal's book Designing Sociable Robots (Breazeal, 2002) 194 "These things push on our buttons." Quotations of Turkle taken from an interview with L. Kahney, in Wired.com (but I corrected the grammar). (Kahney, 2001). ## Chapter Seven: The Future of Robots 196 "most of the world governments banned robot use" (Asimov, 1950) 197 "Asimov's Four Laws of Robotics." Roger Clarke, in his writings and on his authoritative web site (Clarke, 1993, 1994), dates the origins of laws one, two, and three from Clarke's discussion with science fiction author and editor John Campbell in 1940 (Asimov, 1950, 1983). The zeroth law was added 45 years later, in 1985 (Asimov, 1985). 200 "Do what I mean, not what I say." Note that DWIM (Do What I Mean) is a very old concept: Warren Teitelman introduced it into the command interpretation system of the LISP computer programming system in 1972. When it works, it is very, very nice. 202 "Asimov's main failure" A good review of the work on emergent systems, that is, against central control, is in Johnson's book Emergence (Johnson, 2001). 203 "There already are some safety regulations that apply to robots" {Industrial Robots and Robot System Safety. Occupational Safety and Health Administration, US Department ofLabor, OSHA Technical Manual (TED 1-0.15A), 1999) ## Epilogue: We Are All Designers 215 "You may recall Victor Papanek's short book" (Papanek & Hennessey, 1977) 220 "Stuart Brand ... has shown" (Brand, 1994) 223 "John Seymour's wonderful description" (Seymour, 2001) 224 "Steve Harrison and Paul Dourish" (Harrison & Dourish, 1996) 226 "My own web site." Response to my query for people on an email discussion list abut design to tell me of products or websites they love, hate, or have a love-hate relationship with (Dec. 2002). 227 "If you want a golden rule" (Morris, 1882. Quotation is from chapter 3, "The Beauty of Life," originally delivered before the Birmingham Society of Arts and School of Design, February 19,1880.) This page intentionally left blank