To # INGRID and KARL-OLOV ERICSSON and to the memory of EDNA and ARTHUR SIMON who taught us not to be afraid to voice our thoughts. 1

## CONTENTS Foreword ix Chapter 1 Introduction and Summary 1.1 Using Verbal Reports: Some Issues 1 1.2 The Processing Model 10 1.3 Types of Verbalizing Procedures 15 1.4 Two Challenges to Verbal Reports 24 1.5 Verbal Reports of Cognitive States and 30 Structures 1.6 Verbal Reports in Assessment Studies 40 1.7 History of Verbal Reports and 48 Introspection 1.8 Summary and Prospect 61 Chapter 2 Effects of Verbalization 63 2.1 Verbalization and 'Thinking 63 2.2 Experimental Studies of Verbalizing 68 Without Recoding 2.3 Thinking-Λloud Processes 78 2.4 Review of Empirical Studies 83 2.5 Summary 106 Chapter 3 Completeness of Reports 109 3.1 Thrce Vicwpoints 109 3.2 Recognition Processes 120 3.3 Information About Cognitive States 130 3.4 What is Reported? 136 3.5 Lcarning Without Awareness 137 3.6 Retrospective Reports of Earlier 149 Cognitive Processes 3.7 Insight and Access to Solution Idcas 159 3.8 Conclusion 167 Chapter 4 Inferences From Verbal Data 169 4.1 Requirements for Using Verbal Data 169 4.2 Memory as Evidence for Hecding 182 4.3 Inferences from Verbal Reports 184 4.4 Gencralizations About Cognitive 196 Processes 4.5 Direct Assessment of Gencral Processes 204 4.6 Verbal Reports and Theories 216 4.7 Conclusion 220 Chapter 5 Model of Verbalization 221 5.1 General Model and Assumptions 221 5.2 Concurrent Verbalization 225 5.3 Incompletc Verbalization of Information 247 in STM 5.4 Implications for Protocol Analysis 258 Chapter 6 Methods for Protocol Analysis 261 6.1 Early Protocol Analysis 261 6.2 Introduction to 'Techniques of Protocol 263 Λnalysis 6.3 Methodological Issues 274 6.4 Reliability and Validity of Encoding 287 6.5 Effective Protocol Analysis Proccdures 309 Chapter 7 Techniques of Protocol Analysis 313 7.1 Informal Protocol Analysis 313 7.2 Using a 'Theory for Protocol Prediction 319 7.3 Charactcristics of Generated Information: 320 Representations 7.4 Sequences of Heeded Information 330 7.5 Processcs With Alternative Rcalizations 348 7.6 Reliability of Verbal Reports 356 7.7 Concluding Remarks and Future 372 Directions Appendix 375 Bibliography 381 Author Index 413 Subject Index 419 ## FOREWORD In 1980, the authors proposed in The Psychological Review a theory on verbal thinking-aloud protocols as data, and provided substantial empirical support for the theory. 'The response to this article was so lively, and the interest in protocols that it revcaled so widesprcad that we decided to enlarge our inquiry into a book. 'The book would make the thcory as explicit and rigorous as possible, would cxplore the cmpirical evidence more thoroughly than we could in a single journal article, and would discuss the techniques of protocol analysis. 'This is that book. The ideas set forth in this book have taken form over many years, beginning with a bricf mccting betwcen the authors in the Spring of 1975. Many people have spcnt countless hours discussing these issues with us in these years, and we would like especially to acknowledge William Chase, Gunnar Goudc, and Robcrt Neches. Λ number of colleagues and friends have been kind cnough to read drafts of the book and offer their suggestions for improving it. Λmong then are Micki Chi, Donald Fiske, Goran Hagert, Barbara Hayes-Roth, Walter Kintsch, Allen Newell, Stellan Ohlsson, Gary Olson, Richard Nisbctt, and Ed Smith. We wish to thank them warmly and at the same time absolve them from responsibility for infelicities of the product. We are also grateful to Betty and Henry Stanton of Bradford Books, who have greatly facilitated the transfornation of manuscript into a bound book, and who have bccn understanding when deadlines have not always been met. Finally, we owc spccial thanks to 'T'herese Groden, who has assumed responsibility for producing camera-ready copy from the raw manuscript, and in the course of doing so, has found her way through the thickets of word-proccssing systems and printers at Carnegie-Mellon University. Work on this book has becn aided by grants from the National Institute of Mental Health and thc Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. K. Anders Ericsson Herbert Λ. Simon Novcmber 28, 1983 Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2022 with funding from Kahle/Austin Foundation PROTOCOL ANALYSIS