# EFFECTS OF VERBALIZATION We must now consider verbalization in the context of our gencral model of memory. Information may reach, and be stored in, memory in a varicty of cncodings—visual, auditory, tactile. In first approximation, at lcast, the aural (afferent) encoding and the articulatory (cfferent) encoding of oral language can both bc represented as strings of phonemes. Without trying to decide whether the cncodings are identical or simply ncarly isomorphic, let us designate both as the oral encoding. Now our fundamental assumption is that, when thc CP attends to or activates a structure in mcmory that is orally cncoded, then this structure can at the same time be vocalized overtly without making additional demands on proccssing time or capacity. At any time when the contents of STM are words (i.e., arc orally encoded), we can spcak those words without interference frorn or with the ongoing processes. 'This is, of course, an cmpirical assumption, which we will necd to test against cxperimental data. ## VERBALIZATION AND THINKING In a varicty of situations, adults have been obscrved to speak aloud spontancously without intent to communicate. An interesting cxample of this is given by Sperling (1967), who found that his subjects vocalized during presentation of visual (verbal) stimuli and during a waiting pcriod until delayed recall, especially in the presence of external noisc. He proposed that in response to the visual presentation a corresponding articulatory code was activated and cxccuted, leaving an internal auditory trace which was stored in the normal auditory sensory store. When noise was present, the articulation was made overt, thus entering the auditory sensory store by thc external route as well. In the noise condition of a similar study by Hintzman (1965), the subjects did not report awareness of their overt verbalizations, suggesting that little or no additional processing was required for them, and possibly that the suppression of vocalization is monitored by feedback. Spontaneous vocalization or noticeable silent articulation have bcen observed in studies of rather different cognitive activities, for example, in routine work under exposure to noisc (Morgan, 1916), in reading difficult passages, espccially in foreign languages (Gibson & l.evin, 1975), and in memorizing (Bartlett, 1932). Even whcn the verbalization is not audible or the articulation directly obscrvable, thcrc is evidence for oral encoding of the stored information. Confusion errors in immediate recall of visually presented verbal stimuli are similar to thosc obtained from auditory prescntation of the same stimuli, which suggcsts that they are stored in a similar (i.e. oral) code (Conrad, 1967; Estcs, 1973; Hintzman, 1965). Although spontaneous vocalization provides evidence for a close relation between internal activation of orally coded information and the corresponding vocalization, we are skeptical of Watson's proposition (Watson, 1920), that thought is internalized speech. It is more likely that internal activation may occur without periphcral activation—which would mean that the overtly verbalized information is a subset of the internally activated oral information. In thc discussion of central versus peripheral thought, evidence from a number of studies makes the notion of a peripheral locus highly implausible. Thorson (1925) found no structural relation between tongue movemcnts during vocalization of a word and tongue movements observed in subjects instructed to think about the same word. However, Max (1934) attributed 'Thorson's results to lack of sensitivity and resolution of his recording techniques. More modern techniques for recording EMG activity of the speech-producing organs show a pattern of results consistent with measurements of covert speech processes (McGuigan, 1970; Sokolov, 1972). By feeding EMG activity back, Hardyck and Pctrinovich (1970) showed that subjects could learn to read without EMG activity in the speech organs, at least with simpler texts. (With more difficult texts comprehension was poorcr with suppression of EMG.) Cole and Young (1975) found with a similar training procedure that subjects can learn to suppress EMG activity during a memory task without change in the processes involved. According to thc hypothesis of a peripheral locus for thought, it should be possible to eliminate task-relevant thought by occupying the vocal system with reciting irrclevant phonemic patterns, like "la-la-la ..." or "hiya-hiya ..." Indced, in an early rcview Pintner (1913) noted in many studies a marked decrement in performance caused by such concurrent verbalization. However, Pintner (1913) showed in nis own experiments that, with practice, subjects could lcarn to count (i.c., recite 14, 15, 16, 17, 14, .….) while reading a passage without a dccrcment in recall for the content of the passage. However, morc recent work by Levy (1975, 1977) clearly shows that concurrent counting markedly affccts mcmory for the text rcad, even after extensive practice. In thcse studics the subjects were not only asked to recite digits ( in this case 1 through 10), but to do it as fast as they possibly could. In our view, this does not demonstratc the peripherality of thought. The processes required for the recitation occupy not only the vocal system but also the central systcm for activating oral information, and the time to activate internal information can plausibly be assumed to equal the time for overt production. Thc dcmonstration (Smith, Brown, Toman, & Goodman, 1947) that curare, which inhibits all skeletal muscles (including those in the vocal system), has no effect on higherlevel thought processęs is further evidence against peripheral activation. We will now examine our model more closely in terms of (1), the peripheral activity of the vocal systems and the receiving sensory systems and (2) the internal activation of orally coded information. ## Interference From Auditory Stimulation First, since our model assumes that the activated oral code resides in a portion of the auditory memory system, we would expect, at least under some conditions, interference from simultaneous auditory stimulation while retrieving such information during rchcarsal. Poulton (1977) suggested that effects of noise on performance in many studies may be due to a masking of inncr spccch. Thc obscrvations prescntcd carlier, that many subjects tend to vocalize noticably in noise to improve the signalto-noise ratio, support Poulton's hypothesis. In tasks involving only maintenance of items in STM, some studies have found no effects of white noise (Hintzman, 1965; Murray, 1965). Poulton showed that such results are consistcnt with intensified rchcarsal as a response to noise, and noted that in a study by Hamilton, Hockcy and Rejman (1977) the noise condition was advantagcous only for the most recently presented digits and disadvantageous for earlier presented digits. Colle and Welsh (1976) proposed that white noise doesn't have an effect because it is not phoncmically encoded, and demonstrated that short-term recall was impaired by having subjccts listen to phoncmically encodable noise (i.e., irrclevant German). From studies of selective attcntion to diffcrcnt spcakers (c.g., the cocktail-party phcnomcnon), we know that a listener can scparate spcakers on the basis of location and pitch. Introspcctive reports of subjects in a study by Webcr and Bach (1969) suggest that the internal rchcarsal is perccived to bc of high pitch and to be locatcd in the "middle of the head." Colle and Wclsh propose that discrimination for location and pitch could explain thc differences in interfercncc obtained by Crowder (1973) bctwecn consonants and vowels. Furthermore, thcse cucs may be uscd by subjects to differentiate covert and ovcrt rchearsal, when they arc not maskcd by external noise. ## Irrelevant Covert and Overt Articulations The second empirically testable implication of our information processing model has to do with interference between the covert and overt articulations. If there is a unitary mcchanism for activating orally coded information, it should be possible to occupy this mechanism with accessory tasks. A wide range of differcnt tasks requiring irrelevant concurrent verbalization have been used to study the effects on task-directed processes. As a complete review of all these studies is impossible here, we will simply make three points. First, most studies are not very explicit as to what type of information processing would actually be required to generate the prescribed concurrent verbalizations, and what role the internal activation of oral information has. ln some cases (e.g., Estes, 1973) the information to be vcrbalized concurrently is presented visually, and thus requires both attention and recoding in order to activate the oral code. When, as is usually the case, the information to bc verbalized is available in LTM, it becomes important whether the information forms a single chunk, or is part of a familiar list (e.g., the alphabct or the natural numbcrs), or a list of so many items that it constitutes scvcral chunks requiring successive retricval. 'The observed decrease with practice in interference from concurrcnt verbalizing might result from the sequence to be verbalized having been chunked. The rate of verbalization is also a crucial variable. Maximum interference would be expected when the rate of overt verbalization parallels thc rate of internal activation. Another important condition is a requircment to verbalize items at a regular pace, which would eliminate the possibility of internal activation of larger speech units and most likely require additional processing. Second, some important processes involving internal activation of oral codes are reduced or totally inhibited by certain concurrent verbalization tasks. Levy (1975) showcd that rapid concurrent recital of numbers decreased recoding of visually presented verbal information. Her data showed clear differences in memory for text betwcen groups of concurrently verbalizing subjccts given auditory and visual prescntations, respectively. Recoding of visually prcscnted digits into oral code was climinated when subjccts pronounced visually displayed numbers (Estes, 1973) and when they recited nonscnse words (I evy, 1971). Rehcarsal of orally coded information disappcared (Baddeley, 'Thomson, & Buchanan, 1975) when subjects concurrently counted from 1 to 8 at a regular rate of three digits per second. 'Third, overt verbalizatioı: of non-oral information is impeded by tasks rcquiring extensive rehearsal of orally codcd information. In a series of experiments Brooks (1968) dcmonstrated that when subjccts had to make word category judgments (e.g., "noun" or "article") for each word in a scntence, they took longer to make verbal responses (i.e. "yes" or "no") than to point to visually available response words. The fact that the subjects had to maintain the surface form of the relatively long (tenword) sentences in memory was crucial, for the effects disappeared when the sentcnces remained visually available during the ouput of the word category decisions. The verbal labels associated with the word category judgments had to use the same limited-capacity ST'M system as the rehcarsal of the words of the scntence and the information for keeping track of the next word to be categorized. ## Time Requirements for Vocalization A third implication of our model is that, in activating the oral code, articulation and vocalization follow without requiring additional time. If the code is oral, there is thus not any difference in time taken for overt and silent rehearsal or activation. 'There are some suggestions (Gibson & Levin. 1975) that, due to the redundancy of languagc and verbal structures, inncr spcech may not rcquirc complete articulation. In most available relevant studies, complete internal activation in the silent case is assurcd by using non-redundant oral code or by instructing the subject. ln a frequently citcd study, I.andaucr (1962) found that implicit recitation spced for well-lcarncd lists likc the alphabet, the sequence of natural numbers, and the pledgc of allegiancc was no different from overt recitation spced, espccially after practicc in overt vcrbalizing. Weber and Bach (1969) found no difference in spccd bctwcen rccitation of thc alphabct silently and aloud, and thcir study showcd no practice effects ovcr a scquencc of tcn trials. Chase (1977) found that overt rchearsal of letter combinations was about 15 percent slower than covert rchcarsal, rcquiring an additional 30 msec per lettcr, but suggested that further practice might climinate that differcnce. In a study of metered memory scarch, Webcr and Blagowsky (1970) found that instructing one group of subjects to verbalizc the intermcdiate stcps (i.c., the list items betwecn the stimulus item and the response) produccd no differences in performance and latencies, as compared with silent control subjects and subjects instructed to say the steps silently to themselves. ## EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF VERBALIZING WITHOUT RECODING The model we have described implics that verbalization will not interfere with ongoing processes if the information stored in STM is encoded orally, so that an articulatory code can readily be activated. The implications of the model can be tested in a wide variety of situations where the subject is explicitly called upon to verbalize. We will begin by examining studies where the tasks are fairly simple in structure and whcre evidence is available to suggest strongly a spontaneous oral encoding of the information. Such cvidcnce includes data on confusion errors in rctention and indications of spontaneous vcrbalization, as well as information about how the task was originally lcarned. For example, in the carly learning of many skills—like reading and arithmctic—performance of the task is accompanied by overt verbalization. After a discussion of these studies, wc will turn to thinkingaloud studies of more complcx tasks, where we have less knowledge about how the task information in S'I'M is cncoded. ## Simple Tasks With Oral Codes In the tasks considered in this section, the subject is instructed to retain information presented to him. Since the information is presented by the experimenter, we know that it can be heedcd, and we can make reasonable assumptions as to how it is encoded internally. Typically, the subject is presented with letters, digits, or words, which wc have assumed will be hcld in S'T'M in an oral encoding. Under these conditions, verbalization should be cffortless, and should not interferc with task performance. However, in most studies, thc instruction is not just to verbalize the stimulus information, but to produce specified verbalizations based on it (e.g., to read the stimuli aloud one by onc, to rchcarse the stimuli aloud when they arc presented, ctc.) Λs any changc in the sequence and frequency with which information is heedcd by thc subject will change the cognitive process, we must scrutinize the verbalization instructions as to their effects on attention. The requested verbalizations may be selective and result in selective attention to thc stimulus displays, especially when there are multiple stimuli. Instructions to verbalize sometimes spccify the units of information to be verbalized, thus biasing attention towards those units. For example, subjects instructed to verbalize individual digits in a stimulus sequence may pay less attention to patterns of digits than uninstructed subjects. Instructions sometimes prescribe a short time interval for producing the verbalization, which may not correspond to the time during which this information would otherwisc be heeded. The instructions sometimes prescribe the pace of verbalization, and thereby influence the duration of attention to each piece of information; this, in turn, may affect processes associated with fixating information in LTM. Furthermore, an instruction to kecp a fast pace may bias the subject to retricve information from STM as opposed to LTM because of the differcntial retrieval times for the two stores. In the following studies, unless the contrary is explicitly mentioned, the inter-stimulus intervals are identical between the verbalizing and the silent group. This means that the time available for subjects in the two groups is identical, so that pcrformance can be compared directly in terms of amount of information retained, and so forth. ## Vocalization at Presentation In the present section, we study memory-span tasks where stimuli are presented rapidly and recalled almost immediately. There is strong evidence that, in response to a visual prescntation of a verbal stimulus, an oral encoding is normally activatcd (c.g., Conrad, 1967; Estcs, 1973; Hintzman, 1965) and thus could be vocalized. When subjects vocalize visual stimuli, immediate rccall for the lastpresented items is improved over the silent condition (Conrad & Hull, 1968; Crowdcr, 1970; Murray, 1965; Routh, 1970). 'Thc samc cffect is found if the experimcnter, instcad of thc subject, verbalizes the stimulus, as well as under the condition of auditory presentation (Crowder, 1970; Penney, 1975). Since visual stimuli arc, by the assumptions of our model, also orally encodcd, this "modality effect" suggests that it is not the encoding of the stimulus, but hearing and storing an articulation of it, that enhances recall of the reccnt items. 'This interpretation is supported by studics by Murray (1965) and Tell (1971), which show that the magnitude of the effect depends on the degree of articulation (e.g., whispering versus pronunciation aloud). Murray did not find any difference between silent articulation (i.e., mouthing) and the non-articulating control group. Furthermore, Levy (1971) showed that mouthing did not produce as large an effect as auditory presentation. 'T’hus, the effect of vocalizing visual stimuli appears to be due primarily to the auditory feedback from vocalizing. Let us now look at this effect in more detail. The effect on immediate recall of vocalizing with visual presentation is largest with fast prescntation rates (Murray, 1965) and decreases when there is irrelevant interpolated verbal activity (Crowder, 1970; Tell, 197l). For normal presentation rates and vocalization of cach stimulus, the effect is limited to the last couple of stimulus items (Conrad & Hull, 1968; Crowder, 1970). A somewhat longer effective range has been observed for recognition tasks (McNabb & Massaro in Massaro, 1975). A more complete discussion of the range and character of the modality effect is presented in Penney (1975). Vocalizing stimuli at presentation can have at least two other effects. First, sometimes vocalizing produces worse performance than silence. When the visual stimuli are not presented individually, but simultaneously in groups, subjects in the silent condition perform better (Penney, 1975; Slak, 1969). In these expcrimcnts, the vocalizing subjects are instructed to pronounce the stimuli one by one (i.e., digit by digit), while the silent subjects can group the stimuli for their covert rehearsal. Thus the instruction forces the verbalizing subjects to use an inferior coding format. Second, some studies show a decrement in performance when subjects are instructed to vocalize auditory stimuli (Mackworth, 1964), and in particular, a decrement in retention of carly items (Crowder, 1970; Ellis, 1969). In the case where the stimuli are prescnted orally, immediately reactivating the just-presented item to generate the required vocalization does not scem efficicnt, and probably occurs at the expense of other processing, like rehcarsal of carlier items. ## Verbalizing Rehearsal Processes We turn now to experiments wherc the subject is instructed to rehearse aloud information held in memory. Such rchcarsal may take place under two quite different circumstances: when the information rehearsed is being held in STM, and when the information is rchcarsed as an aid to fixating it in LTM. The effects of these two kinds of rchearsal upon task performance may not be at all the same. We must also consider the possibility that the subject may change his strategy to take advantage of the improvement in short-term retention produced by vocalization, and may by that change affect his performance of thc task. 'This is especially likely to happen when the instructions emphasize the requirement of vocalization rather than retention of the stimulus material. In confronting our model with studies of the effects of verbalization, then, we must take careful account of the verbalization instructions given to the subject. Three dimensions of variation in the instructions may be noted: (1) In some studies the subject is asked to rchearse or pronounce words at a specified pace, while in other studies, he is instructed simply to vocalize covert rehearsal (i.e., "to say out loud any word on the list he was thinking about while hc was thinking about it") (Geisclman & Bellezza, 1977). (2) In several studies the subject is constraincd to rehearse only the items presented, or some subset of them. A more subtle and common restriction is to constrain the subject to vcrbalize individual stimulus items, instead of recoding them as higher-level chunks. Although in a few studies subjects were explicitly told that therc were no restrictions on their encodings of list items (Brodie, 1975; Brodie & Murdock, 1977), recoding would still imply a discrepancy between the verbalized information and the internal encoding. (3) Last, but not least important, subjects are generally required to rehearse or verbalize frequently (Horton, 1976), or instructcd to fill the presentation interval with thcir rehcarsals (Einstcin, Pellcgrino, Mondani, & Battig, 1974; Kellas, McCaulcy & McFarland, 1975; Rundus, 1971; Rundus & Atkinson, 1970). Even without such instructions, the observed rate of rchcarsal is rather high, around 1 rchcarscd item per second (Brodie & Murdock, 1977; Geiselman & Bellezza, 1977). Since retricval from long-tcrm memory is known to take considcrable time—of the order of scconds (Simon, 1974) —one might anticipate that a requirement of frequent rchcarsing would bias the subjcct toward retrieving items from SI'M. Wc might also anticipatc a bias toward maintaining information in STM, which is achicvablc by rchcarsing items serially. This would likely improve performance on short lists, but degrade performance on longer lists. Analyzing the results of Brodie and Murdock (1977), Kintsch and Polson (1979) noticed that subjccts sclccted items for continued rehearsal inefficiently and rehearsed some items much longer than would be necessary for the memory performance. It would be informative if studies recording rehearsals would analyze the temporal structure and selection of items, but such information is seldom reported. Other indices of the rchearsal process, like eye fixations, have been found to vary with instructions for overt rehearsal (Geiselman & Bcllezza, 1977). It has been suggested that, under additional instructions regulating their verbalizations, subjects will rchearse list items scrially more often than will control subjccts (Kellas et al., 1975). In support of this hypothesis, Kellas et al. found that differcnces in study time between verbalizing subjects and controls decrcascd substantially when recall conditions were changed from free to serial recall. They also found that, in free recall, verbalizing subjects followed the serial order of the stimuli more closely than controls did. Murray (1967) found that differences in performance were much smaller with forced serial recall than with semifree recall. Geiselman and Bellezza (1977), using simultaneously presented items, found their verbalizing subjects were better than controls at recalling the two leftmost items, a rcsult which they interpreted as evidence for more serial processing among the formcr. In an interesting developmental study, Kellas et al. (1975) found no differcnce between verbalizing and control subjccts for students bclow the 7th grade. They interpreted this finding as marking thc age at which childrcn first acquire the more sophisticated encoding strategies, which would give an advantage to the control subjects. The hypothesis, that the verbalizing subjects with a bias toward serial rehearsal would have an advantage in recall of short lists and a disadvantage in recall of longer lists, gets some support from the fact that Geiselman and Bellezza (1977) found superior recall with verbalization for a list of 8 simultaneously presented items; Horton (1976) and Roenker (1974) found no difference in immediate rccall for lists of 12 and 15 items; while Fischlcr, Rundus & Atkinson (1970) and Finstein et al. (1974) found a significant dccremcnt with verbalization in recall of lists of 20 and 24 items. It should bc notcd that in Roenkcr's study the words were prescnted auditorily, which might reduce the diffcrence in proccssing between vocalization and control conditions; in all the other studies, the words wcre presented visually. 'There is some evidence that how much information will be stored in L'TM, and how much will be retained in S'I'M, dcpcnds on the modality (visual or auditory) in which the stimuli are presented (Penney, 1975). Geiselman and Bellezza (1977) found that when subjects were informed that they would be asked to remcmber the stimulus items for delayed recall, their rates of verbalizing droppcd by 30 percent. This suggests that an intention to fixate information in lTM leads to slower rehearsal, and furthermore, that regulating the rate of verbalizing and rehearsing by instruction may produce significant processing differences. In a study comparing covert and overt rehearsal (Brclsford & Atkinson, 1968), recall of paired associates was invcstigated with a continuous presentation technique. Verbalizing subjects showed a clear advantage over controls for lags betwecn prescntation and recall of paired-associate items up to five or six items, that is, about up to the span of ST'M. This result is consistent with a strategy, among the verbalizers, of maintaining information primarily in STM to allow easier updating. There are several experiments where the instruction to verbalize was used to control rather than simply monitor rehcarsal processes. In a study on incidcntal learning, Mechanic (1964) showed that instructions to repeat the pronunciation of the stimuli aloud increased retention. Even more interesting, he showed that, using the same pronouncing procedure, instructions to memorize the words did not improve retention. Howcver, subjects not requircd to use thc pronunciation procedure retained the material better with an instruction to memorize than without it. In several studies (Einstcin et al., 1974; Fischler ct al., 1970; Glanzer & Meinzer, 1967), where subjects were instructed to vocalize frequently or to rehearse the just-presented item, their recall was always much poorer than that of controls. In two of these studies, the more intriguing comparison can be made betwcen overt rehearsal of any item and restricted overt rehearsal. In Fischler et al., the overall performance is about the same in both conditions. In Einstein et al., using a somewhat longer list, the recall is somewhat better under conditions of restricted verbalization. These results would again be expccted because of the difference between processing that is dirccted toward fixating information in LTM and processing that maintains information in ST'M. Undcr the restricted rehcarsal condition, we would cxpcct subjects to encodc in I TM the item being rchcarscd rcpcatedly, while with unrestrictcd rchcarsal, they would tend to maintain the items in STM. Such a difference in strategy would produce the observed relative advantage of the LT'M encoding strategy with longer lists of items. ## Verbalizing With Multiple Stimulus Displays Not all the studies discussed below usc verbalizations directly to monitor the cognitive activity. But since they specify rather clearly the verbalizations required of the subject, they will serve to illustrate some of the effects of such procedures. With one exccption (Geisclman & Bellezza, 1977), the studies discussed carlier have prescntcd one stimulus at a time, so that problems of competition of attention among different stimuli can be disrcgarded. The most direct example of multiple stimuli is discrimination learning with two stimuli. ln a study on discrimination learning with words, Wilder (1971) found that rcquiring subjects to utter the correct choice aloud led to faster learning of the list of discriminations. From our carlier discussion it would be reasonable to assume that hearing one's own voice and clicitcd associations may be a uscful mcmory cuc for recognizing thc correct response on subsequent trials. This was possible with a relatively small number of responses per list (l6) and a rclatively short interval between recurring discrimination items, for the prescntation of the list took about a minute. Ghatala, Lcvin and Subkoviak (1975) showed that the same increase in performance as found for subjects verbalizing the correct items could be obtained by instructing subjects to use imagery. A similar study was conducted by Carmcan and Weir (1967) with visually presented drawings as stimuli. An instruction to describe or name the visually portrayed objcct should require a verbally coded name to be generated for the object. One might arguc that stimuli like those used in this experiment automatically elicit a verbally coded name, but this cannot be taken for granted in the gencral casc. In this study subjects were instructed to vocalize the name of the visual stimulus according to five different instructions. 'l’he degree of correlation (either positive or ncgative) betwcen the correct response and the overtly named stimulus, which was regulated by the different instructions, was strongly related to the spced of learning in the discrimination task. In the immediate recall, a clear rclation was found bctwcen the stimuli vcrbalized and stimuli recalled, and an overall better rccall was found for thc verbalizing conditions as compared to the control condition. 'T’hese general results have been replicated by Weir and Hclgoe (1968). T'he rclation between verbalizing names of visually displaycd objects and long term retention (onc wcck) was investigatcd in a now classic study by Kurtz and Hovland (1953). 'The subjects were prescnted with a four-by-four matrix of objects, which were sclected so that subjects could label them without ambiguity. In the control condition the experimenter would point to one of the objccts and ask the subject to make a circle around that object on a photo of thc stimulus. Whcn the cxperimenter pointed to an object in the experimental condition, the subjccts were to find the name of the object in a four-by-four matrix of namcs arranged exactly like the matrix of objccts, encircle thc word and pronounce it overtly. When the subjects werc, a weck later, given a recognition test or a written test of recall, the experimental group showed superior retention on both tests. In evaluating the effective clemcnt in the above procedure, a study by Rosenbaum (1962) is heipful. It differed from the others mainly in that the control group cncirclcd words in the matrix and thus behaved just as the experimental group did, apart from the pronounciation of the word. Rosenbaum found subjects pronouncing the word to have superior retention on tests of recognition and recall, and furthcrmore, silent subjects exposed to somebody else's pronounciation to show a similar increase in retention. Even though it can be argued that thc structural isomorphism of objects and words could have made it possible to do the task without cognizing the word, the primary cause of thesc changes in retention is not likely to be the clicitation of a verbal intcrnal code, especially not with carcfully sclcctcd objects. From thcsc results, we infer that the causal agent in thcse studies is not the production or generation of the overt verbalization but rather the internal processes elicited in response to the instructions to verbalize. ## Verbalizing Associated With Mental Arithmetic In mental addition and multiplication, the subjects are presented either visually or orally with numbcrs and the mathematical operators and must generate the answer without recourse to external memory. There is convincing evidence from the way these skills are learned that the internal code of the numbers, operations and internally gencrated products is cither uscd or readily elicited. Our modcl predicts that it should be possible for the subiccts to verbalize the heeded information, especially as all new mental content is generated scqucntially. 'T’hc available studies on the effects of the instruction to verbalizc are sparse and will be dealt with individually. A study on mental arithmctic by Wegner (Merz, 1969) investigated the existence and possible nature of the effect of verbalizing. To separate the effects due to producing the vocalization from the effects due to hearing it, the subjects wore ear phoncs with a noise level that prevented them from hearing their own voices. In one of the verbalization groups their amplified voices were superimposed on the noise, in the other they were not, thus eliminating the feedback of the voice. It was found to be more difficult to instruct the subjects in the non-fecdback condition to refrain from verbalizing, which suggcsts that verbalizing is a normal behavior in such a noisy environment (Hintzman, 1965). Feedback of the voice was found to be the crucial factor, as thcre was no improvement without it. In the arithmetic task, three digits, which were available to the subject only one at time on a kind of memory drum, had to be subtracted from or added to each other. Temporary storage of the intermediate results appeared to be the major difficulty, with feedback of the voice proving to be exceptionally helpful in at least two respects. First, the subjects without feedback and the control subjects wcnt back more often to look at the digits presented earlier in the triple, which took additional time and led to completion of fewer problems. Second, the subjects without fecdback obtained more incorrect subtotals than thc subjects with feedback. In accord with the results presented earlier, hearing the overt verbalization seemed to be the important factor in improving short-term retention and performance. Fryer (1941) was primarily interested in the role of articulation in automatic mental work. In a number of experiments with a test involving writing down totals of very simple additions (the sums never exceeded nine), he found that instructing the subjects to refrain from articulation impeded performance markedly. Retrospectively, subjccts judged it to be almost impossible to avoid articulation. lnstructing subjects to vocalize the answers before writing them down, or to whisper them silently led to a consistent and reliablc decrement in speed of performance. However, since the average decrement was no more than about one percent, Fryer suggests that it may be attributed to the extra monitoring required to assure the articulation for each answer. In a study of mental multiplication, Danscreau and Grcgg (1966) asked a subject to verbalize each step during the solution process. Whenever the subject remained silent too long, the experimcnter would urge him to talk. On a wide range of problems varying in difficulty, no reliable differences in spced of performance were found between a silent control condition and the verbalizing condition. In spite of this finding, the subjects judged introspectively that verbalizing slowed down thc process but facilitated the necessary fixation and storage of intermediate results in memory. In a subsequent study, Dansereau (1969) reports that, with in creased practice, two of his bctter subjects gave overt verbalizations only of intermediate results and the initial problem, and they reported introspectively that complete verbalization interfered with retrieving information. Dansereau suggests that thesc subjects used overt verbalization as a retrieval cue for accessing important information. 'To what extent the subjects felt that verbalizing slowed thcm down is not reported, nor is a comparison provided with performance under a silent control condition. ## Some Conclusions In nearly all the studies reviewed in this section, performance time was the same in verbalization and control conditions, both when trials were paced by the experimenter and when the subject determined the pace. Our modcl, agrecing with thesc findings, prcdicts that overt verbalization under thinking-aloud instructions will not affect the speed of performance unless the verbalizations have to be qucued. With a few possible exceptions, the empirical studies do not provide any evidence that queuing occurs. We have identified few studies where subjects are simply instructed to verbalize the heeded information; in most studies, specific requirements are imposed on them with respect to the timing, frequency, and content of their verbalizations. There is evidence that when subjects try to comply with such requirements, the normal course of their internal processes is altered (e.g., rote serial rehearsal may incrcase and attention may be shifted). Apart from the effects of imposing specific rcquirements for verbalization, hcaring overt vcrbalizations generally facilitates memory retrieval and storage. 'I’he first componcnt of this effect is most likely the grcater durability of thc accoustical sensory storc, which only spans a couple of seconds and is furthermore subject to masking by subscquent verbalizations. 'The sccond, longer-term, componcnt is a facilitation in retrieval, due to the specific cucs supplicd accoustically by the overt verbalization. 'The strength of the sccond effect would depend on how selectivc the overt verbalizations wcre with respect to the retrieval task. Increascs in the verbalization of matcrial other than that which was to be remembered should decrease this effect. ## THINKING-ALOUD PROCESSES In the previous section we reviewcd experiments in which the subject was instructed to verbalizc or rchearse the actual stimuli. Only in the arithmetic tasks was the subject required to verbalize thoughts that he himself generated in the course of performing a task. We turn now to our main concern, thinking-aloud (TΛ) instructions, where the subject is specifically ask to vocalize those self-gencrated symbols while he performs his task. Again, we will be seeking evidence on the extent to which the 'l'A activity affccts the performance of the main task. Thinking-aloud activity is not entirely alien to evcryday life, and almost all subjects have probably had some experience of it before they come to the laboratory. Students at school occasionally have to explain their solutions of problems aloud to their fellow studcnts in order to show how the solutions were generated. In othcr situations, people explain or describe their solution attempts to others, so that the listener can tell them wherc their thinking is in error. Even more frequently, people just communicate their thinking to others. In many cases, at least, such verbalization requires considerable intermediatc processing prior to articulation, and is distinctly different from the verbalization of ongoing cognitive processes. In order to characterize the differences, we will dcscribe three differcnt levels at which a subject can verbalize his thought processes and their content. ## Levels of Verbalization 1. A first level of verbalization is simply the vocalization of covert articulatory or oral encodings, as required in the tasks we have presented in the previous sections. At this level, there are no intermcdiate processes, and the subject needs expend no special effort to communicate his thoughts. A distinction must still be made, howcver, between cases where the subject is directing his communications to himself, and those wherc he wishes to communicate with othcr people. 'T'hc self-dirccted verbalizations have been found to be more idiomatic and to use more idiosyncratic referents than communications dirccted to others (Werner & Kaplan, 1963). In which catcgory a particular example of vcrbalization falls may depend on the subject's intcrpretation of the instructions, as well as upon their actual content. 2. A second level of verbalization involves description, or rather explication of the thought content. We assign to this level verbalizations that do not bring new information into the focus of the subject's attention, but only explicate or label information that is held in a compressed internal format or in an encoding that is not isomorphic with language (e.g., information about odors). We will have to add to our model the requisite recoding processes. We will refer to verbalization requiring such recoding as Level 2 verbalization. Since explication or recoding requires processing time for the subject but does not replace other processing involved in the task performance, a subject who is verbalizing at this second level can be expected to take more time for the task than one who is not verbalizing. However, we would hypothesize that such recoding does not change the structure of the process for performing the main task. 3. A third level of verbalization rcquires the subject to explain his thought processes or thoughts. An explanation of thoughts, ideas, or hypotheses or their motives is not simply a rccoding of information already prescnt in STM, but requires linking this information to earlier thoughts and information attcnded to previously. Level 2 verbalization does not encompass such additional interprctative processes. If, in the normal course of task performance, a subject pays attention to the relational or gencrating processes that are bringing new information into his STM (and insofar as he can pay attention to them), the verbalization would fall within the compass of Level 2 verbalization. But if the subject does not attend to these processes, then he will have to make intermediate inferences, which may or may not represent correctly his actual motives or the actual causes linking his thoughts. Moreover, an instruction requiring a subject to explain his thoughts may direct his attention to his procedures, thus changing the structure of the thought process. ## Alternative Thinking-Aloud Instructions The subject's TA protocol and (specifically whether it will correspond mainly to Ievels 1, 2, or 3) may well be influenccd by the exact wording of the TA instructions. We will begin by examining the instructions given by the two psychologists, Duncker and Claparède, who are usually credited with introducing the method of thinking aloud. In describing their instructions, we will distinguish a main part from some complementary parts. The main part of the instruction to think aloud is usually very short, making reference to a procedure that is presumed to be already familiar to the subjects. "Try to think aloud. I guess you often do so when you are alonc and working on a problem." (Duncker, 1926; italics in original) "Think, reason in a loud voice, tell me everything that passes through your head during your work scarching for the solution to the problem." (Claparède, 1934.) Thus the subjects are asked just to vocalize their thoughts, which are apparently presumed to have the form of inner specch. If the presumption is correct, it is not surprising that such short instructions could elicit the desired behavior. Verbalizing, under this assumption, would be quite simple (Level 1), because of the oral code and sequential structure of the internal speech. In Claperède's instructions, however, the subject is asked to verbalize "everything that passes through [his] head," whether encoded orally or not. In order to comply with such an instruction, the subject would in many cases have to label and encode the content of STM, thus requiring the kinds of recoding processes that are postulated in Level 2 verbalization. TA instructions frequently contain other information or requirements, which we have already refered to as "complementary." One complementary instruction that is often included is a request for completeness. Here are two examples: "The chief thing is to talk aloud constantly from the minute I present the picturc, for I want to get everything you happen to think of, no matter how irrelevant it may seem.' (Patrick, 1935) "I am not primarily interested in your final solution, still less in your reaction timc, but in your thinking behavior, in all your attempts, in whatcver comes to your mind, no matter whether it is a good or a less good idca or a question. Be bold! I do not count your wrong attempts, therefore speak them all out." (Duncker, 1926; italics in original) 'l'here appear to be at least two ways in which this instruction could be implemented by a verbalization procedure: (a) A superordinate monitoring process could be incorporated in the proccdure to guarantee that every item would bc verbalized; (b) In quite an opposite direction, the effect of the instruction could be to eliminatc any censorship process intervening between awareness of S'l'M contents and thcir vocalization. Some 'TA instructions imply the presence of, and require the climination of, such censorship: "Don't plan what to say or speak after the thought, but rather let your thoughts speak, as though you were really thinking out loud." (Silveira, 1972) Another kind of complementary instruction is a request for explanation. In order to gct as full an understanding as possible of the subjects' processes, they are askcd to explain their thinking: "In order to follow your thoughts we ask you to think aloud, explaining each stcp as thoroughly as you can." (Smith, 1971) As follows from our earlier discussion, inducing the subject to explain his solution very likely changes the structure of his thought processes. In a school situation with mathematics tasks, where thc students were accustomcd to cxplaining their solutions aloud, Krutetskii (1976) took special pains to warn his subjects against confusing the instruction to think aloud with that of explaining the solution: "Do not try to explain anything to anyone else. Pretend there is no one here but yoursclf. Do not tell about the solution but solve it." (Krutetskii, 1976) Relatively frequently, complemcntary instructions are included to influence the content of the verbalizations. Investigators are sometimes specifically interested in certain types of mental content or mental processes, and ask their subjects to take spccial care to report instances of such content or processes (Johnson, 1964; Schecrer & Huling, 1960; Webb, 1975). Othcr investigators have askcd subjccts to verbalize what they are doing physically as well as what they arc thinking (Hafner, 1957; Mayzner, Tressclt, & Hclbock, 1964). Still other investigators have asked subjects to verbalizc what they arc pcrcciving visually (Farley, 1974; Hucsmann & Cheng, 1973). In many of thcsc studics, the cxact wording of the instructions is not reported, which makcs it difficult to discuss what verbalization proccdurcs are necessary to comply with them. In most cases, howcver, it would be nccessary to scan for spccific content and to cncodc it for vocalization whcn found. Such monitoring would be, in fact, self-observation at the third level we described earlier. One can only conjecture to what extent subjccts pay attention to, undcrstand, and comply with 'T'A instructions, espccially their complementary portions, and especially when thc instructions are only presented at the beginning of sessions that may bc an hour or more in length. 'There are many other conditions in a T∧ expcriment that may affect the verbalization procedures of subjects as much as or more than instructions do. We turn next to these additional factors. ## Effects of Training and Reminders In many TA cxperiments, the subject is given initial warm-up problems to acquaint him with the expcrimcntal situation and accustom him to the microphones and tape recorders. In some studies, more extensive warmup procedures are uscd cxplicitly to train the subjects to conform to the TA instructions. During warmup, the experimenter fecls free to interfere with and disrupt the subject, while during the experiment, he is very concerned not to interfere. An essential merit of T'A as comparcd with introspection, however, is that the former is a normal mode of processing that does not call for the extensive training needed for the latter. Hence, the training in 'T'A paradigms is negligible compared with that employed in classical introspection experiments. 'The experimenter is generally, though not always, present during TA cxperiments. In the earlier studics, thc experimcnter had to be present, since there was no other means for recording the subject's verbalizations. Although tape recorders are now uscd almost universally, the experimenter is still usually present, primarily to monitor the verbalizations by reminding the subject to speak when he lapses into silence. These reminders, given after 15 sec to 1 min pauses (the interval being different in different studies), are generally standardized, taking the form of "keep talking" or "what are you thinking about?" In some studies the experimenter also monitors the content of the verbalizations, and when neccssary, asks the subject to explain what he means by something, and/or asks him to explain his solution processes. One may conjecture that the mere presencc of the experimenter may induce some subjects to provide descriptions or explanations that they would omit in a non-social situation. Reminders to verbalize of the "keep talking" variety should have a very small, if any, effect on the subject's processing. However, a reminder of the type, "what are you thinking about?" is more likely to elicit a self-observation process or produce an other-oricnted description as a response. In cases where it is desired that the subject produce specific kinds of verbalizations (scc the previous section), the experimenter's prompts may elicit the desircd behavior, while the subject may be less likely to comply if only initial instructions are given. Some investigations use TA procedures where the experimenter is not present (Klinger, 1974). It is technically feasable by automatic means to detect pauses that exceed a given length, and to remind the subject by means of an (auditory) signal to resume verbalizing. ## REVIEW OF EMPIRICAL STUDIES In this review of empirical studies that employ TA procedures, we will be concerned primarily with studies that mect the criteria of Lcvel 2 verbalization, for most of the experiments in the literature dc-cmphasize speed and instruct the subject to "take your time and concern yourself with performance." This docs not mean that verbalizing cannot remain at Level 1, even for complex tasks, but in most cases the additional information obtainable whcn recoding is pcrmitted is judged to bc more important than strict invariance of performance. ## Studies of Level 2 Verbalization The criteria for Level 2 verbalization arc that only the information attended to (i.e., held in ST'M) should be verbalized, and that the recoding of this information for purposes of vocalization should not otherwise alter the processing involved in the task performance. It is often difficult to evaluate whether the criteria of Level 2 are satisficd in a given experiment, but in some cases the trace of the solution for a control condition of "silcnt" subjects provides sufficient information to permit a comparison of the structure and course of their solution process with that of vocalizing subjects. In only a few expcriments explicitly designed to study the effects of verbalizing, have expcrimental and control groups becn exposed to identical conditions. After describing thcsc studies wc will go on to others, where cxpcrimental and control conditions, while not identical, are closcly similar. Roth (1965) investigated the cffects of TΛ instructions upon performance in a scries of problems. In order to tcst some hypotheses about how much verbalization would be clicited under diffcrent conditions, he varied factorially: (1) warm-up or prctraining for vcrbalizing, and (2) the extent to which subjects were allowcd to manipulate objects while generating the solution. Here we will concern ourselvcs only with performance on the problem. Roth found no differcncc in time to solution that could be attributed to verbalizing. Since he did find significant differences due to problems, and to an interaction bctwcen problems and allowing manipulation of objects, his experimental measurements were not insensitive to manipulations of conditions. In a study of discrimination lcarning, Karpf (1972) compared 40 subjects who were instructed to think aloud with 20 control subjects. The subjects were divided into two matched groups on the basis of ten preliminary problems, and were thcn given 15 cxperimental problems where the experimental group was askcd to think aloud. Finally, five problems were given, where all subjects werc instructed to be silent, to detect after-effects of thinking aloud. No reliable differences in number of correctly solved problems werc found between the TΛ group and the control group, for either the experimental problem or the final problems. However, the TA group took about 50 percent more time than the control. Karpf gave some evidence suggcsting that the effect of verbalization may have differentially affected the subjects (i.e., helping some and impeding others). This kind of effect will be discussed later. Walker (1982) instructcd subjccts, under 'TA and standard recall conditions, to recall members of familiar categories (e.g., automobiles, soups, detergents). 'T’here were large differences among catcgories in the numbers of members recalled, but no differences between the TA and silent conditions. As would be expected from our theoretical analysis, the verbalizations of TA subjects consisted of retrieval cues and previously recalled names. When Carroll and Paync (1977) compared TA with control subjects in a study of parole decision-making, no reliable differences were found for speed of decision, type of decision, or information requested while making the decision. In another study, Smead, Wilcox, and Wilkes (1981) had subjects choosc between brands of coffee-makcrs, while confronted cither with the products or with vcrbal descriptions of their attributcs. Eye fixations were recorded, and subjects wcrc asked afterwards to rate the realism and difficulty of the judgments and their certainty in their final choiccs, and also to state what attributes were most important in their choices. No differences between 'T'A and control subjccts cven approached significance, though sevcral diffcrences were found betwcen subjects shown actual products or verbal dcscriptions, respectively. In another experiment (Johnson & Russo, 1978) the subjects were making choices among consurner items, some of the subjects with an additional instruction to think aloud. In a subsequent test for memory of the stimulus information, no differences attributable to thinking aloud could be found either in accuracy or latencies. Feldman (1959) studied a single subject's predictions in a binary choice situation with a TA instruction. 'Two large control groups of subjects were run in the same condition without instruction to think aloud. No differences in types of choices and number of correct predictions were observed. In a study on the effects of covert modeling of assertive behavior, Kazdin (1976) included a comparison between a silent condition and a condition whcrc subjects narrated aloud their ongoing imagery during the correct modelling. Due to insufficient specification of the instruction to vcrbalize, wc are not certain that it should be seen as a pure TA instruction. Still, it is informative that no differences due to the instruction to verbalize were found in an extensive analysis of the effects of the covert modeling. Several studies allow comparisons between a silcnt and a vocalizing group, for identical or similar tasks, and with only slightly different experimental conditions for the two conditions. In some instances, these studies measured success or speed in solving problems, in others, they also reported data on the solutions paths that were discovered. In scveral studies, evidence can be found that vcrbalizing had no effect on the basic pcrformance measurcs or thc gross structure of the thought process. The proportion of subjects solving Duncker's candle problem did not differ between a TA condition and a silent conditon in a study by Weisberg and Suls (1973). In a study of intransitive preferences, Montgomery (1977) replicated a study by Tversky (1969), but with the addition of a thinking-aloud instruction, and found approximately the same choice distributions. Studying anagrams at different levels of difficulty, Sargent (1940) was able to show, by correlational techniques, that difficulty levcl produccd changes in the types of processcs used in both silent and 'TΛ subjects. No more detailed comparisons were made. Morc detailed comparisons of the structures of the thought proccsses were made by Newell and Simon (1972) on problems in propositional logic, by Bulbrook (1932) on insight problems, by Ericsson (1975b) on a block puzzle, and by Flahcrty (1974) on algebra word problems. For subjects discovering proofs in propositional logic, Newell and Simon compared the number of solutions and the detailed solution paths of their seven TA subjects with the solutions (collcctcd by different investigators at Yale) to the same two problems by 64 subjects under silent conditions. With so few subjects in the T'A condition, it could not be cxpected that differences could be found between the two conditions in gross measures of performance, nor were they. More significant is the fact that when the detailed structures of the solutions (i.e., the specific proof steps) were examined and compared bctwcen the two groups, no differcnces were found. Both groups explorcd essentially the same parts of the problem space with about the same relative frequencies. For a large number of different insight problems, Bulbrook (1932) found close agreemcnt between the solution patterns reflccted in subjects' TA protocols, and answers by a large group of silent subjects to a retrospective questionnaire. In Ericsson's (1975b) study on problem solving with the Eight Puzzle, two separate experiments were conducted for the two conditions, but the same sequence of puzzles was presented to the subjects in both conditions. In one experiment, the subjects were instructed to think aloud and had to tell the experimenter what tiles to move; in the other experiment, the subjects, sitting alone, pressed keys on a teletype to make the computer change the puzzle configuration. lifferences in the structures of the solutions could be investigated through analysis of the sequences of moves, which were recordcd in both conditions (Ericsson, 1975a, 1975b). No differences were found in the subjects' attainmcnts of objectively defined subgoals and subrelations of the goal, nor in the structure of the search trees. However, the mean number of moves was significantly larger for the verbalizing subjects for the first couple of problems. Ericsson (1975b) attributed this difference to a change in the effort that subjects devoted to mental planning, induccd, in turn, by differences in the design of thc two experimental conditions. In the study with the TA instruction, the subjects had to tell the experimenter what moves he should make for them, while in the "silcnt" study, the subjects were alone and inputted their moves on a telctype. This differencc alone is enough to explain the obscrvcd difference bctween the numbers of moves in the two conditions. Flahcrty (1974) studicd thc effects of practicc and verbalizing in a factorial design with algebra word problems. Flaherty uscd an cxtensive coding schema of 17 variables to describe the 'T'A solutions; ten of these variables could also bc assessed from the written solutions of the silent subjccts. Analysis of variance showcd no cffects on problem solving performance of cither practice or verbalizing. 'The verbalizing subjects did not even take a longer timc to solve the problems. 'T-tests for the ten coded variables showed only one significant difference bctwcen verbalizing and silent subjects: the verbalizing subjects made more computational errors. Since, unfortunately, the silent subjccts solved their problems in groups and their written solutions constituted the data, while the TA subjects were tested individually by the experimenter and their written solution as well as the verbal protocol made up the data, it is difficult to know whether the observed difference in number of mistakes is due to verbalizing or to the other differences in experimental conditions or the data available for analysis. In several studies using verbalization, models have been constructed on the basis of the verbal data, and used to predict the subjects' behavior in subsequent silent situations. In a study on consumer choice, Bettman (1970) showed that his formalized decision-net models of two consumers, based on TA protocols obtained on earlicr shopping trips with these subjects, could predict 85% to 90% of the products selected by the subjects. Clarkson (1962) studicd and modeled a trust officer's selection of portfolios of sccurities on thc basis of several 'TA protocols. When, a year later, the trust officer selected four differcnt portfolios, the model predicted (without interaction with the subjcct) the companies whose sharcs he would buy with 80% to 85% accuracy. These results suggest that the information provided by the TA protocols for the model building does accurately reflect the normal course of the thought processes. Finally, we describe a couple of miscellaneous results that have implications for our problem. In a study by Marks (1951) where all subjects were thinking aloud, performance was significantly affected by asking subjects, "What are the clements of the problem?" This result suggests that thinking aloud does not by itself enforce an analytical approach, as has sometimes bcen alleged. Subjects have occasionally bccn asked to judge the effects of their vcrbalizing. No interferencc was rcported by subjects who were making dccisions (Svenson, 1974). 'The expcrimental setup, including the TA requirements, was judgcd representative by most artists and non-artists engagcd in writing poems (Patrick, 1935) and drawing pictures (Patrick, 1937). Some of Dominowski's (1974) subjccts rcportcd that verbalizing led thcm to more careful information processing. However, Dominowski's cxperimcnt may not have mct the criteria of level 2 verbalization, for he instructed his subjccts to describe the stimuli and to give reasons for their classification responses, even though guesses and other informal explorations werc explicitly said to be acceptable. ## Differential Effects of Thinking Aloud Scveral investigators (Claparède, 1934; deGroot, 1965) have observed markcd differcnces in the spontaneity and richness of TA protocols and suggcsted that these may be relatcd to the easc and skill with which subjccts transform non-orally coded information to external speech. Johnson (1964) noted individual differences in the pattern of verbalizing, some subjects giving fluent verbalizations and some adopting a "thinkthen-summarize" procedure. Some subjects may transform automatically, whereas others may require a conscious cffort for this transformation and verbal production. T’hese differences may be due to the compatibility of codes, some subjccts using visual images while others are more verbal. Although there are no studics of individual differences across tasks rcquiring different codcs, somc support for the transformation hypothesis can be found in an observation by Klinger (1971) that only highly verbal females could give good verbalizations in a reverie condition, which is known to cmploy mostly visual images. An instruction to verbalizc and think aloud could help some and impcde others. We know of only two studies that have found reliable differcntial cffects on subjects. Flahcrty (1973, 1974) scparated subjects who were sensitive to the fact that some problems werc physically impossible from subjects who were not sensitive (the latter presumably relying mainly on verbal cues for generating the solution). She found a reliable difference in performance between these two groups of subjects only in the think-aloud condition. She suggested that subjects who were verbally oriented problem solvers would be impeded by having to perform a second verbal task (i.e., thinking aloud). However, a reanalysis of Flaherty's (1973) data shows no reliable differencc (p > .15 two-tailed t-test) between verbally oriented problcm solvers in thc 'TA and the control conditions, which would be the proper test for her hypothesis. In the study by Karpf (1972) discusscd earlier, the subjects were asked after the experiment whcther thinking aloud helped, had no effect, or intcrfered. He found reliable diffcrences between the "no effect" group and the "interference" group for the experimental problems requiring them to think aloud, but also for thc final problems when no subject verbalized. One may have considerable doubt whether the subjects could assess that their worse performance was due to verbalizing, especially since their performance did not improve during the final "silent" trials. Unless the experimenter, by constant probing, tries to eliminate the differences in completeness of verbalizing between subjects, thus possibly changing their cognitive processes, there appears to be little reason to anticipate differential effects of verbalizing. All the studies reviewed above support the conclusion that the observable structure of cognitive processes is not affected significantly by the instruction to think aloud when the experimental conditions are consistent with the criteria for Level 1 or 2 verbalizations. These findings suggest that the internal structure of the thought processes also is not changcd as a result of the additional verbalizing activity. The few differences that were encountered in the published reports were not of major importance, and where differences appeared, they were very likely attributable to differences in the experimental conditions. In evaluating our conclusion, it is important to know that we have included all comparisons in studies complying with the conditions of Level l and 2 verbalization that we have discovered in the literature. ## Studies Not Conforming With Level 2 Conditions In the review of studies mecting the critcria of Levcl 2 verbalizing, we found no evidencc of changes in the course or structure of the cognitive processes induced by verbalizing. We would not expect this result to hold in studies where the subject is asked to verbalize information that would not be heeded in the normal course of processing, or that would not normally be encoded in an oral code. This distinction bears on the completeness of verbalizations. Our model assumes that only information in focal attention can be verbalized. In most theories of the structurc of the human information processing systcm a distinction is madc betwcen fast, automatic processes that are not necessarily conscious (and which arc often thought to proceed in parallel) and the slow serial proccsses that arc cxccutcd undcr cognitive control--a distinction, that is, betwcen pre-attcntivc and focally attcnded processes (Neisser, 1967), perceptual and cognitive proccsses (Simon, 1975), and automatic and cognitively controlled processcs (Shiffrin & Schneidcr, 1977). In our discussion, we will adopt this distinction. We will also assume that with incrcase in expericnce with a task, the same process may move from cognitively controlled to automatic status, so that what is available for verbalization to the novice may be unavailable to the expert. Several types of processes generally occur automatically, in this sensc, and rapidly (in a matter of tens or hundreds of milliseconds): perceptual-encoding processes (recognition), memory retrieval processes, and motor processes. There are many instances during thinking-aloud studies where a subject acquires hypothcses "instantaneously" and directly, without evidence of prior related or intermediate stages; for instance, interprctations of complex pictures (Claparède, 1934), and "insights" in geometry problems (Henry, 1934). Retrospective reports of sudden acquisition of hypotheses are common in cxperimental settings (Woodworth, 1938) and in more informal dcmonstrations (Miller, 1962). We have observed that there is no fixcd and stable boundary between automatic and focally attended processes. With extensive practice, cognitive processes will develop into fixed automatic processes; and there is suggestive evidence that practice leads to a successive fading from consciousness of information about the proccss. There is such evidence, for example, in retrospective reports after cach trial in experiments by Ach and Watt (Woodworth, 1938). The fact that processes can continue to occur after retrospective reports about them have disappcared is urged by Leeper (1951) as a principal argument against thc validity of verbal reports as data about processes. Even without rctrospcective reports, the Shiffrin and Schneider (1977) study makes it abundantly clcar that an automatic process is very different from its cognitively controlled antccedent in terms of modifiability, speed, and so on. The automatic processes can be seen as units or chunks, and Schneider and Shiffrin suggest that the growth of skill can be viewed as the dcvelopment of successively higher-level codes and organizations of lower-level processes. Hence, we should expect the verbalizations of highly skilled individuals to be less complete than those of less skilled ones. If information is available (the process not automatcd) but not held in an oral code, then verbalization will require recoding (l evel 2), and this recoding will have to share focal attention with other task-directed processcs. We hypothesize that, in the case of such competition, the task-oriented processes will have priority over the recoding and verbalization processes. 'There is supporting evidence for this hypothesis in three different types of situations: 1. Subjects tend to stop verbalizing in conditions whcre they are giving indications of being undcr a high cognitive load. Such indications may take the form of reorganizations of the problem representation or strategy (Durkin, 1937), or direct expressions of feeling difficulty (Johnson, 1964). 2. When subjects attend to information that leads to direct recognition of appropriate actions, this information tends not to be verbalized (Duncker, 1945). In Maier's rescarch on the pendulum problem (1931), subjccts were retrospectively questioned on solving a problem just after being given a hint. Subjects who describcd the solution as emerging in a single step did not report any memory of the hint; while subjects who mentioned several steps in the solution all reported the hint that had been administered. With the available data it is not possible to determine whether all were aware of the hint at the lime il was given. 3. In situations where the subject is judged not to have any competing task-directed proccsses, verbalization tends to be relatively complete. Ericsson (1975b) calculated how rcgularly an observable feature of the process (e.g., reversal of a pair of moves) was associated with a specific kind of verbalization, and found a very high corrclation (e.g., on each occurrence of a reversal, the subject verbalized a negative evaluation of the original moves). Thcre are broad areas of cognitive behavior, however, where investigators consistently cxpericnce difficultics in obtaining rich verbalizations from subjects. We will focus on two of the most important kinds of proccsscs where verbalization is poor: perceptual-motor processes, and visual encoding procecses. Thesc will be takcn up in the ncxt two scctions. A small numbcr of misccllancous studies rclating to other processes will be discussed in a third section. ## Verbalization of Perceptual-Motor Processes The problems of verbalizing perceptual-motor processes are most clearly visible in problem situations where the problem is represented physically (e.g., the disks and pegs of the Towcr of Hanoi puzzle), and performance involves manipulation of this physical representation Thomas (1974) found that TA protocols from a variant of the Missionaries and Cannibals puzzle provided insufficient information on the course of the solution to specify a definite model of the process. Other studies with different kinds of puzzles (Rugcr, 1910) and instructions to think aloud (Durkin, 1937) have shown that subjects havc difficulties in cxpressing their thoughts verbally in thesc situations, and are biased towards direct manipulation of objccts. Manipulation appears to lack a mediating symbolic representation that can readily be encoded into the verbal code. In the study by Durkin, many subjccts expressed the feeling that thinking and manipulation were distinctly different, alternative, activities, even when both were directed to the solution of the problem. From a study by Klinger (1974) using pure 'TΛ instructions, it ap: pears that the amount of verbalization that occurs is not significantly less in these kinds of tasks than in others, but that there is a significant difference in the verbalized mental content. In manipulative tasks there is a relatively high frequency of higher-level evaluations of unverbalized solution attempts (e.g., "Yep," "I)amnit," etc.), and of verbalizations denoting attention to control processes (e.g., "Let's sec," "Where was I?"). When engaged in perceptual-motor manipulation, the subject does not appear to be aware of, and does not verbalize, the lower-level content or structure of his thought processes. In order to increase verbalization of content, some experimenters using the TA method have changed the task by constraining the manipulations partially (Durkin, 1937) or wholly (Benjafield, 1971), thereby forcing the subjects to form an internal represcntation of the content that can be verbally encoded. When this is done, more of the content of the thought processes is, in fact, verbalized. From a behavioral point of view, constraining manipulation significantly changes the task, for the overt moves have now become covert and are no longer amenable to direct observation. The subjectively perceived polarity between thinking and manipulation, mentioned above, may very well correspond to this diffecrence between covert and overt trials. Duncan (1963) showed that giving subjects an explicit instruction to think resulted in significantly fewer overt trials in a switch-setting task, but an actual increase in solution timc. Hence, the covert processing, in the condition that induced more planning before manipulation, took longer than the corresponding overt trials. A similar tradeoff was noted by Shipstone (1960) in a concept-lcarning task, with an instruction to "slow down and use logical procedures." In a switch-setting task, Ray (1957) found that an instruction that required the subject to tell the experimentcr what he was going to do beforc he started to manipulate the switches significantly decreased the number of overt trials to solution. Ray does not report the corresponding solution times. Most of these results could be cxplaincd by the hypothesis that, in response to the instruction to "think" or verbalize, the subject did not change the structure of his processing, but simply substituted overt trials (the measured index of performance) for non-obscrvable covert trials. However, it is reasonable to assume that the internal representation generatcd for the covert processing improves memory and the organization of the processing. Our theoretical model predicts that an instruction to verbalize motives or reasons for one's thinking will likely change the course of processing. ln general, when the thinking-aloud instructions do not re quire such verbalizations, the protocols do not contain them. We now review three studies where subjects were specifically instructed to report motives or reasons for their actions. The study by Gagné and Smith (1962) with the Tower of Hanoi problem was aimed at investigating the effects of different verbalization instructions upon performance during some training tasks (two-disk to five-disk problems), and upon transfer to a similar but more complex task (six-disk problem). One of the two factorially combined manipulations during the training tasks requircd the subjects to state verbally a reason for each move. This requirement grcatly improved performance on the transfer task, both as to number of moves required and time taken to find a solution. As a second manipulation, the subjects in one pair of conditions were also instructed to search for a gencral principle behind the different versions of the problem. This instruction did not affect performance on the transfer task. In the training tasks, the verbalization group produced more efficient solutions (solutions having fewer moves), indicating that the instruction to verbalize the reasons induced more deliberatc planning, in addition to its effect on transfer. Although no formal rccord was kept of the time taken for each move, the expcrimentcrs judgcd this to be longer for the overt verbalization group, but they reported that this extra time was "filled with the articulation of the reasons for the moves." They suggested that the instruction to verbalize the reasons for the moves affected performance by "forcing the subjects to think.' In a follow-up study with the same basic design, Wildcr and Harvey (1971) investigated whether the overt verbalization was crucial, or if equivalent results could be obtained with a firm instruction to state the reasons covertly; in addition they checkcd the timc takcn to achieve solutions during the training tasks. 'The results showcd no difference between the two verbalizing conditions, but a clear reduction in the number of moves in both thosc conditions as compared with a control condition. 'The time to solution did not differ among the three conditions, during cither the training tasks or thc final task. This finding climinates the hypothesis that the advantage in transfer shown for the verbalization condition in this experiment was attributable to extra lcarning time during the training sessions. In another follow-up of Gagné and Smith, Davis et al. (1968) included the presence of the experimenter as an additional dimension in a factorial design. In this study the subjects were instructed to verbalize their reasons at the beginning of the experiment, but the instruction was not repeated; in the earlier experiments, the subjects were closely monitored during the entire session to make sure thcy followed the instructionș. In the Davis study, verbalization had no cffect on the training task (5-disk problem), but significantly reduced thc numbcr of moves required to solve the test problem (6-disk problem). 'l’he cxpcrimenter's presence increased verbalization on the training problcm, but not on the test problem. 'There was no interaction between amount of verbalization and presence or absence of the experimenter. Unfortunatcly, no information is given about the solution times. These three studies show that a requirement to verbalize reasons and motives has substantial effects on both immcdiate pcrformance and learning, and thus indicates that generating verbalizcd rcasons brings about changes, at least in manipulative tasks, in the normal course of the processes. Here, as in the studies discussed earlier, we do not know to what extent forcing subjects to give reasons for their actions simply causes them to substitute overt trials for non-observable covert trials and planning. The negative result of the Davis et al. expcriment is most rcadily interpreted as showing that, in a problem-solving situation with a heavy cognitive load, initial instructions may be disregardcd by subjects unless thcy arc monitorcd by thc cxperimcnter. An analysis of the content of thc verbalizations, not provided by the authors, would be required to test the plausibility of this explanation. Finally, we may conjecture that the presence of alternative solutions to the Tower of Hanoi problem probably increascs, in comparison with other tasks, the sensitivity of thought processes to instructions to verbalize reasons. ## Verbalization of Visual Encodings There is compelling evidence to support the distinction betwcen a visual representation or code and an oral or symbolic representation or code when subjects are presented with drawings or pictures. An instruction to describe a visual scene verbally should require an oral encoding of the picture, which will imply extensive processing. The task of viewing a novel visual scenc has becn studied to detect effects of imposing an additional verbalizing task, in this case to describe the scene verbally. A study by Freund (I oftus & Bell, 1975) showed that subsequent recognition of scenes was much improved by the verbalizing requirement as opposed to viewing without it. On the other hand, when an unrelated verbal task, like counting backwards by threes, is imposed, the subsequent recognition of scenes deteriorates as compared with normal viewing, but not to a chance level (Loftus, 1972; studies of Freund and Szewczuk described in Loftus & Bell, 1975). l oftus and Bell (1975) have studied the process of recognizing pictures viewed with the instruction to remember them for subsequent recognition. At the time of judging whether or not a picture had been presented before, the subjects were asked if their judgmcnt rested on a specific detail or on general familiarity with the picture. Performance was very much better when a dctail could bc named than when the subject simply cited general familiarity. From recordings of eye movements during the initial presentation of the pictures in an carlier study, Loftus (1972) found that the detail verbalized during the recognition trials was the dctail that had reccived most fixations at thc initial presentation. Loftus and Bell propose that all these results can be explained by the notion of two different codes. 'The nonverbal encoding is direct and independent of the verbalization instructions. The extent to which an oral encoding is also generated is influenced by the instruction to give a verbal description. Evidence supporting the distinctness of the two codes comes from an investigation by Schuck and Leahy (1966) on fragmenting visual images. They found that subjects reporting the disappearances verbally tended to report omissions of meaningful complete scgments, while control subjects who traced the disappearanccs on an outline of the image did so to a lesser degree. However, subjects in the two conditions were not treated identically. T'he verbalizing subjects gave reports continuously, while the othcrs were given time to trace images when they appeared. Schuck (1973, 1977) carried out some subscqucnt experiments that cquatcd the two conditions more carefully, and then found no statistically reliable differences between the two groups of subjects. It would appear that when sufficicnt time is allowcd them, and thc degree of detail that is wanted is specified, the verbal descriptions that subjects give of fragmented images are basically veridical. 'This is espccially interesting since the task obviously calls for recoding of the perccived stimulus. Studies on concept formation using thc Vigotsky tcst (Hanfmann, 1941; Hanfmann & Kasanin, 1937) havc identified intcrindividual differences in strategies which have a bcaring on the effects of instructions to describe stimuli verbally. The test employs a number of blocks varying in color, shape, and size. Each block has one of four names written on its reverse side, and the subject is to find the characteristic that serves as basis for the naming. Subjects classified as "conceptual" did not inspect the blocks visually very much, but spent most of their time in thinking, using a symbolic representation of the blocks in terms of their attributes. In this group, for example, the hypothesis that color might be one of the relevant characteristics is checked by counting the colors rather than moving the blocks. This group showcd a strong preference for shape as the relevant attribute, and were disappointed with the solution, which was based on color. The subjects classified as "perceptual" constantly manipulated the blocks, and appeared to get their ideas for organizing the blocks from looking at them. Typically, they first made groupings by manipulating the blocks, and then discovered or formulated a general principle. Retrospective reports from these subjects on how they found the solution were particularly scanty, and they often had no more to say than that it seemed natural to group the blocks as they had. These subjects seemed to favor color and size as the relevant characteristics, and were fully satisfied with the solution based on these characteristics. Consistently with this preference, the perceptual subjects were significantly better at the task than the conceptual subjects. A rcasonable hypothesis about the effect of requiring subjects to verbalize explanations in such a task would be that subjects with a preference for perceptual processing would alter their processing strategy, and hence their performance. In a study by Brunk et al. (1958), subjects were given an initial test of the Vigotsky type, and then a sccond, similar test. In one condition on the second test, each subject was "requested to tell why hc placed cach block where he did." In a control condition, no such explanation was requested. The correlation of subject scores betwcen initial and sccond test was significantly lower under the instruction to explain than under the control condition, as the hypothesis would predict. Using scveral highly perccptual tasks, like the Rorschach, the stencil test and a block test, Goldncr (1957) was able to identify in data from 'TΛ protocols consistent individual differences along the perceptualcognitive dimension (in his terminology, between proccssing wholes and parts of the stimulus information). For thc stencil test, Hafner (1957) found (though the differences only approached significance) that instructing subjects to verbalize what "they were thinking and doing" improved their test performances, but also required more time. His instruction to verbalize is poorly docu:nented, but the theoretical context of his study suggests that there were important differences from the assumptions of Ievel 2 verbalization. Hafner's results seem to reveal the same effect as Brunk et al.'s (1958) study. In a series of studies reported in Merz (1969), the effect of verbalization on performance in intelligence tests was investigated. In a study by Kesting using the Figure Reasoning test, the 13- to 17- year-old subjccts who always had to say aloud how the figures were alike or different were significantly better than the subjects who were asked to say the same thing to themselves silently; but they were also significantly slower. In this study, there were also two other conditions with additional vcrbal interference tasks; onc group of subjects had to say "eins, eins ..." rhythmically, while another group had to sing "la, la .." while solving the test items. These conditions have the same performance (in terms of number of correct solutions and time required) as the silent verbalizing condition; which suggests that the same processes, mainly nonverbal in character, were used in all three conditions. This oral-encoding interpretation is supported by Waszak (reported in Merz, 1969), who showed that hcaring one's own voice in a heavy noise condition does not eliminate the improvement associated with verbalizing. The crucial mechanism underlying these results appcars to be that the instruction to explain answcrs incrcases the tcndcncy to encode figures and thcir differences verbally. This intcrprctation is also supported by the observation of Merz that it is difficuit to induce subjects to verbalize in this kind of perceptual task. To test the hypothesis that thc instruction to verbalize made the subjects assume a more analytic problem-solving style, Hofgren (Merz, 1969) compared performancc on a parallel form of the Figure Reasoning test between a group that had previously verbalizcd on an initial form and a control group that had not. The vcrbalizing group performed significantly less well when not required to verbalizc, but still somewhat better than the control group, whose performancc hardly differed between the two occasions. Merz suggcsts that the loss of performance by the "verbalizers" on the second occasion was due to transfer of thought content, as the verbalizing subjects solvcd more test items on the first occasion, rather than to transfer of a more analytic style of thought. Supporting evidence is givcn in a study by Waschke (Merz, 1969): the verbalizing and control groups performed equally on the first occasion, when simple items wcrc uscd; and the pcrformance of both groups was the same on the second occasion, with rcspect to time and number of items correct. 'These investigations indicate that the instruction to verbalize forces subjects to encode the figures orally, and that this, in turn, induces verbal symbolic processing that is especially well adapted to discovery of the prescribed solutions in the Figure Reasoning test. In the above studies, performance was averaged over subjects and different tasks. We now consider evidence of diffcrcnccs between individuals, and of differential effects, on performancc with tasks of varying difficulty. Merz (1969) reports a smaller study showing that with simple test items, verbalization did not hclp the subject and amounted more or less to a retrospective description of the solution "seen" immediately. The verbalized description was only helpful with more difficult items that requircd some search for the right solution. Inner speech, measured by electrical activity in the speech apparatus with Raven's Progressive Matrices items and without verbalization shows a similar pattern, in that inner speech activity increased with difficulty of the items (Sokolov, 1972). Analyzing the protocols from verbal reconstructions of the problem-solving process, Sokolov showed that the simple items were solved in a prcdominatcly visual way, while with the more difficult problems, verbal designations of some features of the figures were used to aid solution. In outlining a scheme for the interplay of visual and verbal processes in solving such problems, Sokolov points to the influence of verbalization in attending to features that would have gone unnoticed in the purcly visual analysis. In this interpretation, the directed verbalization provides the subject with additional noticed featurcs, which in turn facilitate performance. There is little evidence as to whether directed verbalizing has a general or a differential effect on subjects. A general effect is suggested by the fact that the variance of the increased performance with verbalizing is equal to or less than the variance of performance under control conditions in the studies of Kesting and Waszak and Hofgren (Merz, 1969). 'I'he investigation by Sokolov indicates differences between subjects, leading Sokolov to proposc a differential reliance on verbal and visual processing; but this result is not incompatible with the idea that there may also be general effects upon all subjects. In this context we also want to discuss the well-known effect of providing verbal labels to visual stimuli, which was originally demonstrated by Carmichael, Hogan, and Walters (1932). We will rely hcavily on the relevant parts of Rilcy's (1962) excellent discussion of memory for form. Carmichael et al. showed clcarly that naming one of two possible labels for an ambiguous stimulus before its prescntation led subjects to draw the pictures more like the label in a subscqucnt memory test. A series of studies have shown that this effect is not a purely perceptual one, at least when the prescntation time is sufficiently long for complete perception (Bruner, Busick, & Minturn (1952) found cffects for presentations shorter than a tenth of second). Hanawalt and Demarest (1939) showed that verbal labcls presented at recall gave similar effects when the pictures had becn unlabeled at presentation. Prentice (1954) showed that presenting verbal labels with the pictures produced no bias in perception. Additional insight into the effects of labels is provided by a study by Herman, Lawless, and Marshall (1957), who included a control group that was simply shown the pictures. (The original study by Carmichael et al. had a very small control group.) Herman et al. (1957) found that the subjects in the control group showed as much tendency as the others to distortions of memory. However, in the control group the memories were distorted equally in the directions of the two labels, while in the expcrimental groups, they wcre distorted mainly toward the label that was presented. Yet even in the cxpcrimcntal groups a few subjects deviated toward the verbal label that was not presented. Hanawalt and Dcmarest (1939) found that subjects who were not given a verbal label at presention reported meaningful associations to the pictures, and a substantial number of these associations were similar or even identical to the labcls used originally by Carmichacl et al. Hcrman ct al. (1957) confirmed this by asking a new group of 29 subjects to givc free associations to the pictures. On the average, 63 % of the associations were identical to or very similar to the ones used by Carmichael et al. Furthermore, Herman et al. (1957) showed that the effects of the labels could be markedly reduced if subjects were told in advance that they would be asked to draw the pictures later. In sum, the original effect observed by Carmicheal et al. appcars to be caused by inducing subjects to use certain associations at the expense of others. Hence, it is entirely possible, even likely, that subjccts could casily pcrform this memory task with TA or retrospective report instructions without changes in performance. ## Other Verbalization Studies None of the studies that remain to bc discussed employ highly manipulative tasks or pictorial stimuli. In a study on clinical judgment (Baranowski, 1975), the subjects, who werc psychologists, made two successive series of judgmcnts. On the first occasion, all subjects performed the task under identical conditions. On the sccond occasion, the subjects were divided into: (a) a group working under the same instructions as on the first occasion, and (b) a group instructed to verbalize and monitored by the 'experimenter who asked the subjects questions whenever "a particular profile could use more explanation" (1975, p. 21). There was no difference between control and verbalizing conditions (measured by variancc accountcd for by lincar and non-lincar models). However, the cross-validated linear models over the two occasions accounted for significantly less variance for the verbalizing group than for the control, suggesting that the instruction to verbalize changcd the utilization or subjective weights of the cue-variables. ln a related study, Fidler (1979) had subjects choose for admission to graduate study between two students described in terms of several attributes. Subjects gave both concurrent and retrospective reports. (Unfortunately, the concurrent reporting instruction asked subjects to provide ccrtain specific information, likc the reasons for judgments, how they evaluated infornation, and so on.) Retrospective reports were elicitcd by asking subjects how thcy had reached their dccisions. Fidler compared the performance under different reporting instructions (including no verbal report at all). No reliable differences in choice were observed, nor were subjccts more consistent in making choices on repeatcd trials with verbal report instructions than without such instructions. When regressions were estimated to detcrmine cach subject's decision model for verbal-report trials and no-report trials, respectively, no reliable differences were found for 10 of the 13 subjects. The reliable differences in the rules for the three remaining subjects could be traced to stable changes in their decision rules that occurred in the transition between blocks of report and no-report trials. Whether thesc changes in decision rules were induccd by the reporting instructions or other factors is not certain. Fidler proposes that it may be due to the inexperience of the subjects. Since they were not cxperts at the judgment task, they were aware of their decision rules, hence could report them. 'Thc consistency between reported reasons and decision rules, on the one hand, and actual choices (even on no-report trials) lends further support to that interpretation. In a concept-learning study by Bower and King (1967), one group of the subjects was required to verbalize their hypothcses before classifying the stimuli, while a control group was not. In preparation for the experiment, the subjects dcscribed the stimuli, in order to ensure that subject and experimenter agreed in their descriptions. Under these circumstances, we would expect that no further oral encoding need occur in the verbalizing condition. The number of irrelevant dimensions of the stimuli was varied, although the instructions indicated which two features.were relevant to the solution in each case. The requirement to verbalize hypotheses improved performance significantly (i.e., number of responses to criterion), but only for the first problem. Bower and King found that variation in the number of irrelevant fcatures or dimensions was only effective on this initial problem, suggesting that the verbalizing of hypotheses helped the subjects initially to ignore the irrelevant attributes. It should be noted that no training trials were used in this study. Karpf and Levine (1971) found no effect on performance in a discrimination learning experiment from asking subjects to repeat their hypotheses verbally before each trial. In a cue-probability learning task, Brchmer (1974) required one group of subjects to describe the rule underlying their predictions just after each prediction was made, but before fecdback was reccived. The subjects' descriptions should be so explicit that another subject could understand and use it; if they did not meet this standard, the experimenter prompted for more information. Explanations like "I guessed," or "I remembered from the previous trial," were accepted as verbal descriptions. An analysis of variance showed no significant effect or interactions associated with verbalization. In a subscquent study (Brchmer, Kuylenstierna & Liljcgren, 1975) the subjects wrote down their current hypotheses in a booklet at the beginning of the test blocks, without any significant effect on performance. According to our model, requiring verbal explanations of behavior should not alter the normal processes unless the information required for the verbalizations would not otherwise be generated. Unfortunately, there is little evidence for the tasks uscd in the above studies about the contcnt of undirected verbalizations. In the cue-probability experiment of Brchmer (1974) with very simple stimuli (a straight line varying in length), thc numbcr required for cxplaining the rule was most likely consciously generated cven in the silent condition. That the effects of verbalization were limited to the first trial in the Bower and King (1967) experimcnt could be attributed to the fact that vcrbalizing helped the subjccts ignore irrelevant featurcs. Alternatively, onc might spcculate that vcrbalizing may havc specded up the gencration of an internal reprcsentation, thus making the subjecct more independent of his direct perccptions. In thc study of Baranowski (1975), unlike the other studies, the subjccts were highly skilled. In our model, verbal explanation of automated activities would be cumbcrsome and change the course of the processing from a largely perceptual (recognition) to a more cognitive one. In support of this hypothesis, the time taken by the clinical psychologists to perform the task with verbalization was two or'three times the time taken in the silent condition. ## Effects from Retrospective Verbalization We turn now to some experiments that are often cited to show that verbalizing information (even retrospectively) may change and deform it, and hence affect subsequent task bchavior. Hendrix (1947) showed that an instruction to describe a concept or principle verbally after learning reduced ability to use the concept in a transfer situation. The results were substantiated in subsequent work by Schwartz (1966) and by Phelan (1965). Carcful analysis shows that these studies do not address the question of verbalization, as such, but rather verbalization of explicit and logical concepts. There are two issues. 'The first is that if the subjects do not normally organize what they learn in these experiments in vcrbalizable concepts and genęral principles, then verbalization forces them to generate such concepts and principles from whatever information is currently available to them. 'The reformulation may not at all reflect the way in which the learning was actually encoded. For cxample, Phelan found that the verbal descriptions of certain pictorial stimuli tended to contain discriminative features different from those that defined the concept the subjects had learned. In Chapter 3 we return to the issue of what information should be reportable in such cases. The second issue relates to the detail and explicitness called for by the instruction to verbalize. Sowder (1974), cxamining the effects of various sorts of verbalizations of learned gerncralizations, found no differences as compared with a control condition. He also cited two studies that found no effects of producing written descriptions of learned generalizations. Sowder proposed that the important differences between his study and Hcndrix's was that Hendrix (1947) specified precisely the content of her subjects' verbalization (quantificrs, domain, and so on), while he did not. Rommetveit (1960, 1965) and Rommctveit and Kvale (1965a, 1965b) studied concept formation in a situation where 12- and 13-yearold subjects played on a wheel of fortune, different pictures being displayed when subjects were to win or lose, respcctively. 'They found that instructing the subjects that they were subsequently to describe differences between the "win" anc "lose" figures, as opposed to just playing on the wheel, influenced retrospective descriptions of the two figures. Other procedural variations—like demonstrating before the experiment how the figures differed (Rommetveit, 1965) tended to eliminate a (correct) tendency toward associating roundness with good figures. In these studies, therefore, the effective variablc is not verbalization per se, but directing the cognitive processes by instructions. Without such direction, verbalization appears to have no effect on the cognitive processes. The fact that encoding and reporting verbally takes time creates a procedural difference, which is important in some studies, between the reporting and control conditions. Time is known to be an important variable in LTM phenomena. Boersma, Conklin, and Carlson (1966) allowed their subjects in the verbal report condition an additional minute to specify their encodings of each stimulus. Retention scores were superior for the verbal report condition, but the cxperimental design confounds the effect of the additional time with effects of generating a written description of the stimulus. In sum, the empirical data from the modest number of systematic studies of the effects of verbalizing (c.g., Brehmer, 1974; Brehmer, Kuylensticrna & Liljegren, 1974, 1975; Karpf & Levine, 1971; Wilson & Spcllacy, 1972) support consistently our asscrtion that producing verbal reports of information dircctly available in propositional form does not change thc coursc and structure of the cognitive processcs. However, instructions that require the subjects to perform additional cognitive processes to generate or access the information to be reported may affect these processes. ## New Rescarch on Effects of Verbalization The renewed interest in psychology in using vcrbal reports as data has gencrated new rescarch activity aimced at casting further light on the effects of verbalization upon cognitive processes. 'T’his new work seeks to go beyond proving the presence or absence of effects of verbalization, and to measure the extent and naturc of thcse effccts under different experimental conditions. We will concludc our discussion by a summary of three important recent studies of this kind. In a dissertation, Karat (1983) analyzed the vcrbalizations of subjccts solving the Tower of Hanoi with TΛ instructions. He found that subjects verbalized plans and goals before making some, but by no means all, of their moves. If subjects were rcquired to give reasons for each move, as in the original study by Gagné and Smith (1962), they would have to gencrate these reasons through additional cognitive processing. Since Karat found no effects due to lA, the effects found by Gagné and Smith can very likely be attributed to their more specific and demanding verbalization instructions. The most ambitious attempt to explore and document effects of instructions to verbalize is an unpublished study by Russo, Johnson, and Stephens (in preparation). In their study, 24 subjccts performed 55 trials of 4 different tasks with 5 different instructions. The five instructions included a control condition, concurrent verbalization, retrospective reports with the problem still in view, retrospective reports without any stimulus information, and retrospective reports cued by the eyemovements recorded during the immediately preceding solution. In the following, we will only discuss the data for the control condition, and for concurrcnt and retrospcctive reports without stimulus information. The four tasks were: selection between gambles, items from Raven's progressive matrices, mental addition of three 3-digit numbers, and anagrams. For cach task 55 items were selectcd to yield an average percent correct of 75%. The eye movements of subjects were recordcd on every trial. In this thorough study, the only reliable over-all effect of verbalization was that solutions took longer with concurrent verbalizing than in the silent condition. Although the average solution times with verbalization were longer for all four tasks, a post-hoc analysis showed that the differences were statistically significant only for gambles and anagrams, and the differences were also small relative to the variability of the solution times. For gambles, the solutions with TA took 7.5 seconds longer than the average of solutions (44.6 seconds) under the silent condition, an increase of about 17 per cent. The analysis of accuracy of solution showed that with concurrent verbalization subjects performed the gambles task a little better than silent subjects (p < .01), while in the addition task concurrent verbalizers performed slightly more poorly than silent subjects $( \mathsf { p } \ = \ . 0 6 )$ Hence concurrent verbalizing leads subjects to take longer and perform better on the gambles task, and to take longcr but perform more poorly on the additions task. 'To help us pinpoint the sources of differences, E.S. Johnson (personal communication) reports results from a preliminary analysis of the data. "We did not find any differences betwecn conditions for the first ten practice trials, but control subjects subsequcntly increased their accuracy in the addition task more rapidly than subjects giving verbal reports. Both concurrent and retrospective subjects improved over trials in their selection of gambles, while control subjects gradually speeded up but maintained constant accuracy levels." While awaiting the complete analysis of the protocols, eyemovement scquences, and errors, we can only speculate about the reasons for the differences in final performance. A comparison of the verbalizations during practice trials and test trials should reveal the changes in processing that took placc in the gambling task. It is noteworthy that retrospectively reporting subjccts, who did not have to think aloud, improved in performance in that task just as concurrently reporting subjects did. The difference for mental additions is especially surprising in view of the fact that earlier studies showed no effects of verbalizing in mental multiplication. From a preliminary analysis of numbers of protocol statements (Russo et al., in preparation) it appears possible that concurrent subjects failed to speed up because they continued to verbalize simple operations that could be elicited by recognition. This "superfluous" verbalization could slow down performance and interfere with recall of intermediate stcps. Verbal reporting might not alter initial performance, but might slow down changes toward automaticity during continuing practice. In sum, Russo et al. (in prcparation) found rcliable effects of concurrent verbalization for gambles and additions, but the differences reported are small in relation to other variability in the performances. Since the effect was virtually the same for the concurrent and retrospective verbalization conditions, and since there was no effect of verbalization in the early trials, we are rather unccrtain as to the real causes for the differences that were observed. A recent disscrtation by Gerhard Deffncr (1983) provides additional extensive information about the effects of concurrent verbalization. Using anagrams, a geomctric puzzlc, and the N-term series problem (see Ohlsson (1980) for a description), and varying task difficulty and amount of perceptually availablc information, he found that thinking aloud increased solution timcs, but did not affect avcrage numbers of solutions, and did not interact with the othcr experimental variables. Deffner's analysis of his subjccts' strategies, and rate and content of their verbalizations will be discussed elscwhere in this monograph. ## SUMMARY The picture that emerges from our review of empirical studies of verbalization is quite clear and consistent. We have seen that the effects, or absence of effects, of verbalization depend upon characteristics of the tasks and of the verbalization instructions in ways that can be predicted from our model of the processing system. When the instructional proccdures conformed to our notion of level l or Level 2 verbalization, the studies gave no evidence that verbalization changes the course or structure of the thought processes. A small number of minor differences between verbalizing and silent subjects can most plausibly be attributed to procedural differences between the experiments conducted with the two groups. Studies that deviated in task, instructions, or experimental procedure, from the criteria of Level 2 verbalization were mainly experiments on perceptual-motor tasks and tasks requiring visual encoding processes, and cxperimcnts where specific verbal content was asked for by the instructions. Evidence was presented, for these kinds of experiments, that the information requested by the experimenter was not normally available to the subject in an oral encoding, and hence that producing the verbalization requircd intermediate processing that changed the course and structure of the thought process. From our review of the evidence, we conclude that the processes subjects use to verbalize while thinking are neither illusory nor elusive, but can be understood and modeled. The processes associated with verbalization should be treated as an integral part of any model of the cognitive processes for a given task whcnever the articulation takes the form of direct verbalization (i.e., vocalization of heeded information). The model should also include the processcs for storing information in LTM, to account for the phenomena of retrospective verbalization at the end of cxperimental trials. 'T’he gross model we have proposed is focused on the verbalization of ongoing cognitive processes, but the postulated close link between information attendcd to and information stored should make it a relatively straightforward matter to model retrospective verbalization. Finally, in thc review of studies comparing different instructions to verbalizc, we found substantial evidence that differences in pcrformance were induced by telling the subjcct how to verbalize. In order to verbalize the information called for by the instructions, instead of the information he would normally have attended to, he had to change his thought processes.