# COMPLETENESS OF REPORTS An important problem arises in using verbal reports as data: the processes underlying bchavior may be unconscious and thus not accessible for verbal reporting, or at least may be reportable only very incompletely. Closely related to the problem of incompleteness is the possibility that vcrbalizations, when present, may not bc closely related to underlying thought processes—may not be veridical reports of those processes or may bc epiphenomenal. In the course of the chapter, we will consider these issues of veridicality and cpiphenomenality also, but our central concern will be with the completeness of reports. Wc bcgin by vicwing thc issues in historical pcrspcctive. Then, we extend the model of the human information processing system proposed in previous chapters to encompass the processes associated with verbalization. Finally, we take up the evidcnce on completeness of reports under four different hcadings: 1. Λbility of subjects to report their own cognitive states; 2. Reports of recognition processes; 3. Retrospective reports of previous cognitive processes; 4. Insight. ## THREE VIEWPOINTS 'The completeness, veridicality, and epiphenomenality of verbal reports can be vicwcd from quite different perspcctives. On the one hand, behaviorism is gencrally skeptical about the accessibility of internal states. On thc othcr hand, a perspcctive that postulates that all human thinking is rational and logical finds it hard to account for verbalizations that appear not to have these qualities, and to account, also, for sudden leaps ## 110 Protocol Analysis of "intuition." Wc need to consider cach of these perspectives in turn, and to relate them to our own information processing perspective. ## The Behaviorist View 'The strongest behaviorist objection to trcating verbal protocols as veridical is the cpiphenomenality claim— the claim that the processes involved in generating a verbal report are totally independent of the process that gencrates the task behavior of the subject. Λ slightly weaker form of the objection is the argument that certain types of cognitive processes are not conscious, hence that these processes and their contents cannot be reported. In his famous Psychological Review article, Watson (1913) opposed extensive theorizing about cognitive structures and processes. The only acceptable facts and data were behavior and recordable events that could be observed by an independent observer, as opposed to introspection. Emphasis was placcd on collecting and analyzing such facts, and thcorizing was treated as a subordinate activity. [Bchaviorism] may never make a prctense of being a system. Indecd systcms in every scientific field are out of date. Wc collect our facts from observation. Now and thcn we select a group of facts and draw certain general conclusions about them. In a fcw ycars as ncw cxpcrimental data are gathered by better methods, even these tentative general conclusions have to be qualificd. (Watson, 1930, p. 18) Of particular interest is Watson's view of cognition. He opposed the structuralists' attempts to study cognitions dircctly and qucstioned the need for postulating cognitive structures and mechanismns beyond describing them in terms of stiimnulus-rcsponsc connections. Watson wanted very strongly to climinate the magic surrounding unobscrvable cognitive structures by showing that they could be undcrstood in terms of observable events or at least potentially observable cvents. Λs his account represents an extremc, yct important, viewpoint, we will dcscribe it briefly without critical comments. Watson proposed that memory can be accounted for adequately by establishcd S-R bonds, which could have been observed at the timc of their acquisition. He explicitly refutes the need for "memory" as a construct. 'The behaviorist never uses the term "memory." He believcs that it has no placc in an objcctive psychology. (Watson, 1925, p. 177) By "memory," then, wc mcan nothing exccpt that fact that when wc meet a stimulus again aftcr an abscnce, we do the old habitual thing (say the old words and show the old visceral-emotional behavior) that we learned to do when we were in the presence of that stimulus in the first place. (Watson, 1925, p. 190) Watson proposed that thinking can be seen as sequences of S-R connections that are primarily verbal. 'T’hese covert verbal responses can be observed cither by asking the subject to think aloud, or by sensitive registration of the muscular activity of the larynx and the speech organs. T'he bchaviorist advances the vicw that what the psychologists have hitherto called thought is in short nothing but talking to ourselves. (Watson, 1925, p. 191) Watson vicws verbalization as behavior, rather than as cxpression or description of a corresponding cognitive structure. In support of his argument, he notes that the verbalizations associated with many activitics, like playing golf, arc totally dctached from actual bchavior—hencc, it is possiblc to talk about golf-playing, and cven to describe verbally how one should do it, without being able to play. Verbal reports on behavior can therefore be gencrated without any relation to the actual bchavior. 'The behaviorist assumes that different types of bchavior are gencrated separately, rather than being different expressions of common cognitivc structures and proccsscs. It was cven proposed that verbal reports could bc conditioned independently of bchavior (Verplanck, 1962). Λ study by Hull (1920) is often cited as showing that a subject's ability to describe a conccpt is not related to his ability to behave according to the concept. Sincc bchaviorism had no model of the structure of the cognitive system, it made no attempt to spccify the locus and characteristics of awareness. Rcscarch, cxcmplificd by a frcqucntly citcd study by Grccnspoon (1955), has claimed to show that changes in behavior and learning can occur without awareness as assessed by verbal reports. Other rescarch has suggested that changes in attitudes may be unconscious, hence, unrcportable. Subjccts, when asked after an cxperiment how they did the task, sometimes give reports that are inconsistent with their recordcd behavior. All of these results were used by bchaviorists in support of their position that awareness is incomplete and cpiphenomenal. Thcy will be discussed at length in thc section of this chapter on lcarning without awareness. ## 112 Protocol Λnalysis ## Rationalism The rationalist position, almost at the opposite pole from behaviorism, secks to deseribe human thinking in terms of formal models from logic. Poincaré's (Ghiselin, 1952) discussion of mathematical creation is, for several reasons, a good example of the rationalistic point of view. First, Poincaré is a proponent of the necessity for assuming unconscious processes during crcative thinking. Second, he is very explicit in urging a rationalist explanation for thinking. A first fact should surprise us, or rather would surprise us if we were not so used to it. How does it happen there are people who do not understand mathematics? If mathematics invokes only the rules of logic, such as are accepted by all normal minds; if its evidence is based on principles comnon to all men, and that none could deny without being mad, how does it come about that so many persons are here refractory? (Ghisclin, 1952, pp. 22-23) In order to explain how people somctimes make logical mistakes, Poincarć evokes the fallability of memory. He argues that crrors do not occur in making inferences from premises but result from forgetting the carlier premises on which the later inferences rely, or remembering them only inexactly. 'Thus, we may have forgotten a step in a proof or may recall inaccurately an item in the multiplication table. Poincarć autributes the superior mathematical skill of mathematicians to their better memory for mathematical entities, making it casier for them to follow and generate mathematical proofs. He points to the existence of a higher-level representation as crucial for memory. Λ mathematical dcmonstration is not a simple juxtaposition of syllogisıns, it is syllogisms placed in a certain order, and the order in which these clemcnts are placcd is much more important than thc cleimnents themselves. (Poincaré, 1952, p. 24) He clearly makes the point that "better memory" and higher-level representation are intimately related to cach specifically developed skill—in this case in mathematics—-and do not imply better mcmory in general for other kinds of material. With his cxplanations of individual diffcrcnces in tcrms of representation or memory, Poincaré (Ghiselin, 1952) can retain his view that logical inference and rational conscious scarch for alternatives is the main vehicle for human problem solving. In accounting for discoverics of mathematical relations, however, he finds such reasoned activity insufficient, and suggests that we must assume unconscious processes. We will return later to a fuller discussion of his einpirical findings and his theories of unconscious processes. More recently Polanyi (1969) has argued that logical inference and explicit knowledge do not span all typcs of knowledgc available to people. Polanyi poirts to perception and recognition of objects as the primary examples of tacit knowledge (i.c., knowledge that is not cxplicitly specified or specifiable). Polanyi argues, primarily on the basis of psychological evidence, that recognition is not an explicit reportable operation because subjects are, in general, unable (1) to report what particular information they relied on to make the recognition, and (2) to state what the necessary perceptual attributes are for identifying instances of that category. Wc certainly recognize a humnan face at first sight and can say only from a subscquent analysis, and thcn rather inadcquatcly, by what particulars wc recognized it. (Polanyi, 1969, p. 169) 'The mcaning of a discasc is doubly unspccifiablc. (1) We cannot identify, let alone describe, a great number of the particulars which we are in fact noticing whcn we diagnose a case of the disease. (2) Though we can identify a case of the discase by its typical appcarancc, we cannot dcscribc it adequatcly, ... (Polanyi, 1969, p. 132) While the cvidcnce Polanyi adduces would crcatc difficulty for a theory that assumes all thought processes to be applications of the rules of logic, it is not in any way incompatible with the modcl of thinking we are proposing here. We have assumed that l'TM is indexed by a net of tests that can be applied to stimuli in order to discriminate among and recognizc them. Nothing in this assumption implies that the person making a recognition has conscious access to these tests, or can state what they are—and, indccd, the cmpirical cvidencc shows pretty clearly that there is no such access. As to the ability or inability of a person to describe an object or person he has just recognized, our model is silent. Such a description can be generated if (1) the descriptive characteristics have been noticed consciously at some time in the past and have been stored in lTM, and (2) thesc charactcristics have been indexed so that access can be gaincd to thcm at thc time the description is called for. Λ failure in ability to describe a recognizable stimulus can result from failure to attend to its characteristics (cven when learning to recognize it), and it can also result from an inability to retrieve these characteristics on request. Moreover, the characteristics that a person uses to recognize a stimulus may or may not bear a close relation to the characteristics he has stored in memory and can retricve if asked to providc a description. Anyone who has studicd the taxonomy of somne phylum or order of plants or animals knows that his mode of recognizing particular species on sight bears little relation to the characteristics of those species as recorded in formal taxonomic keys. In fact, the characteristics given in the keys often cannot be observed without the use of the microscope and scalpel, hence cannot possibly provide the basis for direct recognition. The unconscious processes postulated by Poincaré and the tacit knowledge hypothesized by Polanyi both have genuine support in empirical cvidence, but this cvidence can, as we have now sccn, bc interpreted in a way that is not inimical to thc information processing hypothesis. It does imply that verbal reports, howcver complete they may be in other respccts, will not cover the microstructure of recognition processes. 'They will not enable a subject to report how a recognition he has just achicved was accomplished. On the other hand, there does not seem to be any basis for Poincaré's expectation that the conscious and reportable component of the thought processes should bear any close reseımnblance to the laws of deductive thought laid down in formal logic. 'The laws of logic state conditions that a piece of deductive reasoning must meet in order to be valid. It says nothing about the processes used to discover or arrive at the valid conclusion. Discovering a logically valid conclusion, as distinct from testing its validity, once discovered, is an inductive and not a deductive process. It may be achieved by recognition, in which case the details of the recognition process will not generally be reportable. Or it may be achieved by heuristic, selective scarch; in which case intermnediate stages of the scarch process will usually be stored temporarily in STM, and hence will be accessible for verbal reports. ## The Information Processing View What can we say about the completeness of verbal reports from the vicwpoint of the information processing model we have adopted in this volume? In this model, we cmphasize the difference between the limited capacity of ST'M (the limits of attention) and the vast, essentially unlimited, storage capacity of I.TM. Information held in STM will be available directly to the subject, while information in I'T'M will not be unless it is accessed and brought into attention. 'T'he three to five unrelated information structures that can be held simultancously in STM are best thought of as labels or pointers to nodes in L'TM, where the actual information is stored. Hence, bringing such a pointer into STM is cquivalent to activating, in other models of memory, the corresponding node or nodes in LTM. Accessing Information in L/TM. Just as information stored in an encyclopedia can be found readily only if appropriate entries are consulted in the index, so information can be accessed from 1.T'M only if an appropriate accessing symbol is held in attention. Stating the conditions under which relevant information can be retrieved from 1.TM requires specifying the class of relevant information (index cntries) that will enable the system to identify this information and discriminate it from the rest. For pcople who have cxpcrtise in a particular domain of knowledge, access to relevant information appears to be almost instantancous. Λcquiring expcrtisc involves developing a very systematic way of indexing information, at the time of storage, by attending to appropriate, usually multiple, indexing characteristics. When some knowledge is required to solve a problem or answer a question, the available indexing terms will determine the desired information, so that it can be accessed directly or its absence identified. Access can be cither direct or indirect (that is, by association). If asked to report the third word of the national anthem, most persons would access "national anthem" directly, but would have to count down the first verse, associatively, until the third word was encountered. Unless cxactly the right stimulus (i.c., index cntry) is provided, rctricval froım I.l'M may require some problem solving to find an access path, and very often a stimulus may not define univocally what memory contents are wanted. Reports from ITM cannot, therefore, be "complete" in the sense of guarantecing that all relevant items have been retricved. Only that can be retrievcd which can be accessed through cues held in attention. Storing and Indexing in L'TM. It is even more obvious that information can bc retricved from IT'M only if has been stored there prcviously, and retained. The hypothesis about storagc (fixation) that scems to us most dcfensible in the light of the empirical evidence is that if and only if information is heeded in STM for a sufficient interval of time will it be stored (and indexed) in I'TM. Attention (in a sufficient amount) provides the necessary and sufficient condition for learning. This hypothesis implies that learning does not occur without awareness, and that the information available in LTM is a subset of the information that, at some carlier time or times, was held in ST'M. The gencral hypothesis that attention leads to fixation does not indicate how the stored information will be indexed, and what stimuli will be effective in eliciting it. Woodworth (1915) carried out a number of verbal learning experiments to deterımnine the conditions under which one item, attended to in temporal juxtaposition to another, would be likcly to serve as an cffective stimulus for evoking the other. 'Things become associated only when they are continguous in cxperience. But is it a sufficient condition? There is little in the experimental work on memory to indicate that it is sufficient, and much to indicate that it is not usually depended on to accomplish results. 'The things to bc connected must be together, in order to arouse the rcaction connecting them; but unless they arouse some such reaction, they do not bccome connectcd, except it be very weakly. (Woodworth, 1915) In a wcll-known cxpcrimnent, Woodworth read subjects a list of forty words with the instruction to learn them in pairs so that they could respond with the second member of a pair when the first member was provided as stimulus. They were then tested on their ability to respond with the first item of a pair when the sccond item of the previous pair was provided as stimulus. They succccded in only 7% of the trials. Thorndike (1932) subsequently replicated Woodworth's results and demonstrated thcir generality. In one cxperiment, two groups of 100 and 140 subjccts were read ten sentcnces in thc saie order 10 times with instructions to "listen to what I rcad with moderate attention, as you would listen to a lecturc" (Thorndike, 1932, p. 66). Afterwards, subjects were given one or more words from a scntencc and askcd what word followed. Subjects in thc two groups were 73% and 81% accurate, respectively, in reporting the word that followed a sentence's subject; but being probed for the first word in a sentence by being given the last word of the previous sentence, they were correct in only 2.3% and 2.8% of the cases, respectively, a level attributable to gucssing. In another cxpcriment, 'Thorndike (1932) read pairs of words and numbers to subjects.. Hc designcd a list of 1,304 pairs so that certain word-number scqucnces like "bcaver-86 charade-17" werc prescntcd 24 times each. Subjects asked to give the numbers following words could respond correctly in 38% of the cases, but asked to give the words following numbers, were correct in only .5%, a result no better than guessing. Recognition Processes. 'The process we know as "recognition" is simply the special case of retricval from LlM where the stimulus is some sct of characteristics of the object retrieved. When something is retrieved by recognition, there is also retrieved, of course, all sorts of other information associated in LTM with the item retricved. What is not retricved, however, are the internal steps of the recognition process itselfhence, our inability to say how we recognized something. In our model we assume that new memory structures are gencrated by bringing together the contents of focal attention with information accessed from ITM. Λs a result, a new structure is formed, and when this structure is accessed, it will provide a memory of the corresponding thought episode. Since retrieval requires thosc cues to be present that were indexed to the I'TM content at the time of lcarning, recall is most likely to be successful if the cueing stimulus is encoded in the samne way at recall as it was at the original presentation. This leads to the interesting prediction, in paired associate learning, that the subject must recognize having seen the stimulus item in order to excced chance in his recall of the response member of the pair. This prediction was confirmed by Bernbach (1967) and Martin (1967), using visual and oral stimuli, respectively. T’hat the encodings of the stimulus must be essentially the same at presentation and test for correct recognition was nicely demonstrated by Rubin (see Woodworth, 1938). He showed reversible figures to his subjects: cither half could be seen as figure or as ground. Depending on whether the black or the white ficld is seen as figure, the stimulus will be encoded and perceived in two different ways. Subjects were instructed to treat onc color as figure, the other as ground. When they wcrc subscqucntly prcscntcd with old and new stimuli for recognition judgmcnts, with instructions to view cither the same, or the other, color as figure, their performance depended on whether or not the color treated as figure was the same or had been reversed. In the former condition, 49% of the figures were recognized; in the latter condition, only 9%—almost the same as the percentage (6%) of false recognitions of new figures not presented previously. Tulving and his colleagues (cf. 'Tulving & Thompson, 1973) have presented considcrable evidence to show that, for successful recognition and recall of paired associates, stimuli must be encoded in the same way at time of test as at time of original presentation. Bower and Winzenz (1969) demonstrated that digit scquences werc only recognized as previously seen if the digits were grouped in the same subscquences at both presentations. The cxtensive body of rescarch showing the close relation between the perceptual and conceptual encoding of the stimuli and subsequent recall is very nicely described in Bower and Hilgard (1981, Chapter 10). Somne of the strongest cvidence for the direct relation between heeded information and memory comes from the cxtensive rescarch on memory that is incidental to performing certain tasks. Because cxccllent reviews of this literature alrcady cxist (Saltz, 1971; Smirnov, 1973), we will only sumnmarize the main findings. The information committed to memory corresponds closely to the aspects of the stimuli that must be hecded in order to perform the task (Smirnov, 1973). Incidental memory from soıme tasks is so good that explicit instructions to commit the information to memory do not improve performance on subsequent memory tasks. All of the above studies test only memory for physically present stiinulus information; later, we will discuss memory for thoughts. Thus, there is a wide spectrum of possibilities between the extreme SR view, which assumes that uniquc cues are linked to unique responses, and the extreme rationalist position, which assumes that all information is semantically integrated, and all possible inferences are drawn (and stored) when new information is encountered. 'The information processing vicw, which we have just skctched, takes an intcrmcdiate position, making specific predictions about the conditions under which information will be stored and the conditions under which it will be available for recall. ## Extensions of the IP Model 'The information processing model describes the cognitive processes as producing a sequencc of states, cach marked by a small collection of information in attention and STM. For the moment, we will disregard information from the external environment that is available in sensory stores, and simply consider the successive states of heccded information in STM. Formnally, we can represent the time course of information in STM as a scqucnce, cach clement of which is the output of the process that opcrated on its predccessor and the input to the process that will produce its successor. We deliberately omit further description of the process that crcates these input-output relations because, from the vicwpoint of attention and consciousness, this process is opaque and its intermediate states are not reportable. Cognitivc tasks vary dramatically in well-dcfincdness and specificity, as do the relations between inputs and their outputs. If the task is to find the sum of 2 and 3, the subjcct will usually access and retrieve the correct answer, 5. In this case, the output is determined, at lcast semantically, by the input and process. However, if a subject is asked to name a word starting with "A," the input is insufficient to determine what word will be selected. Subjects report that a word simply 'occurs." (Most college students retrieve the same word, "apple.") 'The retricved word is determined by the structure and organization of lT'M. T'he same opaque retricval process makes it impossible for subjects to report veridically why they responded "rcd" when askcd to name a color—although they are quite willing to speculate about the reasons. Our hypothesis is that the subject is only aware of input and output of such processes, and has no further direct information about the process itself. He does not know which clements in the stimulus, which cues, were functionally important for access to the response information. 'This doesn't mcan, of course, that subjects have no cognitive control over the responses they gencratc. 'They can cvaluate and process in other ways the information they access before responding with it. Λ subject, for example, may retrieve several words starting with "Λ," then retrieve additional information in order to mnake a sclection among them. Subjects may also retrieve and apply additional constraints to the response bcfore it is verbalized (c.g., "word should bc unusual," "part of book title"). In such circumstanccs, subjects can report additional information (the additional information they have retricved and stored temporarily in STM) beyond the stimulus and response. 'There is considerable cvidence that subjects can and do conform to task instructions (the Aufgabe) in responding. If asked for a beverage they will respond with the name of a beverage. Hence information in attention and STM imposes constraints on accessed information and cognitive structures, cven though it does not always detcrminc uniqucly which specific structure will be acccssed. 'The general and basic point is that subjects cannot gain access to information in LTM without bringing that information into STM, hence into attention. The model we are proposing has strong implications for recognition and lcarning which wc wish to cxaminc in some detail. In the next section, wc will examinc cxperiments on recognition processes. 'Then we will review cvidence that suggests strongly that only information in attention is comnmitted to memory, and cvidence on the cffect of automation of responses through practice upon reportability. ## RECOGNITION PROCESSES By recognition proccsses we mcan the processes or mechanisms by which sensory information is encoded and familiar patterns and structures are identified. 'T’he Structuralists assumed that complex patterns were recognized by identifying their clements, and thus assumed that clements were identified prior to recognition of the pattern. The Gestalt psychologists argued that the complex patterns were recognized prior to identification of their parts. We agree with the Gestalt position to this cxtent: that in many situations, a complex pattern is acccssed without prior conscious awarencss of its parts. Whatever use is made of fcatures in the recognition process itself, these features nced not be accessible to awareness. Gencrally, we recognize familiar faces, words, and objects dircctly, that is, without storing in SI'M the features cxtracted from the stimuli and used for discrimination. 'There is cvidence, also, for direct recognition of more complex patterns and relations, cspccially when the presentation is visual. Claparèdc (1934) found that his thinking-aloud subjects did not report intermediate stages when gencrating interpretations and hypotheses for complex visual stimuli. Similar findings are reported for subjects noticing relations in geometry problems (Henry 1934). In recall and retricval of familiar information, unless it requires problem solving with the aid of successive associations, proccsses leave only the final product as trace in ST'M. 'The phenomenon is so familiar that it appears not to have been tested by experiment. 'There was ample cvidence, however, from introspcctive reports directed at the issuc of the cxistencc of imageless thought for Woodworth (1938, p. 787) to reach the conclusion that "what is imagcless is not thought as much as recall.' ## Evidence for One-Stage Recognition We have argued that recognition is a onc-stage process, whose intermediate products are not available in STM for verbal reports. Lct us look at the evidence for this position, which is in direct opposition to that held carlier by the Structuralists. We will show, first, that in the recognition of complex patterns, lower-level components cannot generally be recognized prior to recognition of the larger pattern, and, second, that relatively fragmentary perceptual information often suffices for recognition of a whole complex pattern. With respcct to the first point, Johnson (1975) has shown that subjects cannot recognize a single letter faster than the complete word containing that leuter. 'There is even more extensive evidence for the second point. Elements of a pattern sometimes do not even need to be presented, much less heeded, for successful recognition of the pattern. Warren (1970) presented subjects with a recorded sentence, replacing one or more phonemes with pure tones. Subjects almost never noticed the substitution. Warren and Warren (1970) showed that subjects could hear the correct word in a sentence even when context had to be used to disambiguate the stimulus. For example, the stimulus "eel" was recognized, appropriately, as "whecl," "peel," or "hecl," depending on context. Similar results have been obtained by Cole (1973). See also, Best, Morrongicllo, and Robson (1981). Strong cvidence for the opacity of recognition comes from some rescarch inspired by Kulpe, who was intrigucd by trained introspective observers occasional confusions of imagined with perccived images. In these cases the subjects were unaware of the inputs that caused them to retricve familiar structures. Replicating an original study by Perky (1910), Segal (1971) showed that subjects instructed to form images of familiar objects in front of a white screen were influenced in their imagery when, without their knowledge, images werc projccted on the screen. For example, if subjects were asked to imagine a coke glass, they were more likcly to describe a glass with "Coca-Cola" written on it when such a glass was dimly projected on the screen than when it was not. In another study, (Segal, 1968), two incomplete red squares were projected dimly while subjects were forming an image of either a plant or a violin. When qucstioned afterwards, only one of 33 subjects reported noting any projected images; twenty of 32 subjects (about onc standard dcviation above chancc) answcred corrcctly whcther thc image was projected while they were imaging the violin or while they were iinaging the plant. Subjects making corrcct judgmcnts would report the following kinds of grounds for their decisions: Before the image of the plant that I reported, I imagined a pot of geraniums—I think that was projccted. 'Thc image I had of a plant was funny, so I think that was projected. (Segal, 1968, p. 394) Subjects thought that the projccted images were images of plants and violins, and were confused when given a verbal description of the actual images which were neither plant-like nor violin-like. Hence their responses provide no real cvidence for awareness of the projected images. In a followup study by Segal and Fusella (Segal, 1971), 64 subjects generated thrce different images; an image was projected during one of these ımnental imaging tasks. Subjects were able to gucss the period when the image was projected only at about chance level. When half of the subjects were shown a picture of the projected image, thcir ability to infer when it was projccted was almost doubled. When the other subjccts werc given a verbal description of thc projccted imagc, "a triangular-shaped design of 3 green bars," their ability to infer the period of presentation was reduced to less than half. The authors argue that the perceptual similarity bctwccn projected imnagc and remembered displayed image allowed subjccts to make more accurate judgments. It should be pointed out that the projected images are casily detected when subjccts arc given only a discrimination task, and not a scparate imaging task (Segal, 1968). 'Thus, although the projected image is visible, it is not scparately perccived during the image-generating task. In an carly study, Pillsbury (1897) investigatced the ability of traincd subjccts (among them 'Titchencr!) to recognizc misprints in bricfly presented words. Subjects were better able to detect omission of letters than blurring or substitution of letters—operations more likely to preserve the shape of the presented word. Of course people frequently find typos and recognize the intended word from partial and misleading informnation. Perhaps more interesting, Pillsbury's subjccts reported seeing lcttcrs that wcrc not prescntcd. For cxamplc, a subject shown "disal," responded "deal," and reported, "There may be somcthing between "e" and "a," but I an not surc" (Pillsbury, 1897, p. 377). Pillsbury also attempted to facilitate rccognition of the intended word by giving a synonym before prcsenting the stimulus. In this condition, the number of mispellings correctly identified decrcased by ten to twenty per cent. Subjccts occasionally saw the spoken synonym, or part of it, rather than the word presented. When "dwelling" was spoken and "acsidance" displayed, a subjcct rcad "dwclling" and claimcd to have scen the letters "... welling." Sometimes the words that subjccts saw reflected quite different meanings from those intended. When "pane" was spoken and "winxow" presented, onc subject responded "ache," and claimed to have scen "aiche." Pillsbury also found evidence that parts of recently presented words occasionally intruded and were "seen." Much of Pillsbury's rescarch has been supported and extended with more modern experimental techniques, but without the use of verbal reports to capture the heeded information (cf. Morton, 1964; Neisser, 1967). In an interesting study, Ellis, Shepard, and Davies (1979) showed that subjects were able to recognize famous peoples’ faces from partial information, cither of features or of contour. We can extend this analysis to reading as well. For simple text, comprchension may be almost immcdiate, without intermediate steps in awareness. If texts are vaguc or ambigious, they may provide cues for triggering personal experiences, a mechanism that can account for the "predictive" ability of horoscopes (cf. Snyder & Larson, 1972; Ulrich, Stachnik & Stainton, 1963). In sum, there is strong cvidence that the recognition process is opaquc, so that subjects cannot report what cues allowed them to retrieve information from ITM or what part of the recognized structure was actually contained in the stimulus. Of course, subsequent to recognition, the recognized structure can be matched against information available to the senses. It is only undcr special circumstances (especially, the requirement of rapid response after brief presentation of the stimulus) that the report of the recognized structure does not reflect the presented information veridically. ## "Spontaneous" Recall According to our model, retrieval of information from LTM is a dircct function of the information hccded—thc information accessed in ITM will be associatcd with some subsct of thc hccded information. We showcd carlier that the goals and task information that are hecded can effectivcly prcvent irrclcvant information from being acccsscd without conscious intermediate states or intent ("incidental" or "spontancous" recall). Hilgard (1948) describes cmpirical demonstrations of 'spontancous recall" by Kohler and von Rcstorff (1935) and Bartel (1937). Kohler and von Rcstorff lct subjccts solvc an arithmetic problem, then showed them a shortcut for certain multiplication problems: $( \mathrm { a - b } ) ( \mathrm { a + b } ) = \mathrm { a } ^ { 2 } - \mathrm { b } ^ { 2 }$ Half of thc subjccts werc given a scries of other arithmctic problems, while thc other half werc given match-stick problems and thcn both werc givcn a new arithmctic problem, where the short-cut ımethod could be used. Seventy-two percent of the subjects in the match-stick group spontancously applied the short-cut method, while only 26% of the others did so, indicating that in the absence of interference from intervening material "spontancous" recall of the short-cut occurred. Kohler and von Restorff give the following protocol cxcerpts (translated from page 78) for spontaneous recall of the short-cut. Herc you can do this again–(a+ b)(a— b). Right? But I am still not sure of that. Perhaps I could come up with your method by myself. (Kohler & von Restorff, p. 78) The subjects who failed to use the special method all recalled it when they were specifically probcd for it afterwards. 'The information was in mcimory and was sometimes (not always) used without conscious intent--that is, by recognition of its relevance to thc ncw task. Kohler and von Restorff (1935) and Bartel (1937) dcmonstrated thc same phenomena in experiments using a mechanical construction set. Experts in their domain of expertise display spontancous and immediate recall of similar and relevant information (Chase and Ericsson, 1982). In contrast, novices have difficulty in retrieving, or even knowing that they know, relevant information (Bloom & Brooder, 1954; Λllwood & Montgomery, 1981, 1982). Hencc, acccss to relevant information depends on the adequacy of the encoding. Λ rich "indexing" of information may climinate the necessity for a consciously driven scarch for adequate retrieval cues. ## Recognition and Inference From recognition of faces, it appears that people rely on only a subset of cues to recognize acquaintances. 'They make many crrors of recognition, and can often recognize individuals with bcards shaved off or hair style changed (sometimes without noticing the change). Wc can therefore conclude that people, through recognition, gain access to an ITM structurc that contains more information than was used in acccssing it from the stimulus. With brief presentations of stimuli, where there is no time for attending to the stimulus after recognition, subjects obtain cssentially no information about what features actually evoked the recognition. Hess (1975) showcd a group of twcnty men two photographs of an attractive young woinan. 'l’he only difference betwcen the two pictures was that one had been retouched to make the woman's pupils larger than in the other. 'The men responded (as measured by the sizes of their own pupils) twice as favorably to the picture with the larger pupils as to the other. When questioned afterwards, no subjeets reported noticing the sizes of the pupils. Some reported that one photograph was "more feminine" or "prettier" or "softer" than the other. 'The study demonstrates that one can be influenced by stimulus features without being able to detect which ones are responsible for the effect. In naturalistic situations (especially outside the laboratory), people can make many ccologically valid inferences about the stimuli they encounter. If they see a house, they can infer validly that it has a door, even if thcy don't noticc the door. Subjccts may gencrate invalid reports about stimuli by reporting these inferred features, which may or may not have actually bcen noticed. In normal pcrception there is no clear boundary between explicit observation and inference from the observation. When a subject reports secing a stage magician make an object disappear, this is clearly an inference rather than a direct observation. laboratory studies make clear the role played by this interaction betwcen obscrvation and inference in the recognition process. Bruner and Postman (1949) showed subjccts normal and altered playing cards for short durations in a tachistoscope. Subjects reported secing (i.e., recognizing) normal playing cards even when the cards had been altered so that suits and colors werc mismatched. Subjects, on obscrving a red four of Spades, reported secing cither the four of Hearts or a black four of Spades. Whether suit or color determined their choice appcared to be idiosyncratic for cach individual. In another study, Postman, Bruncr, and Walk (1951) showed subjects strings of letters, where some strings contained a single reversed letter. 'T’he reversed letters were correctly identified or recognized with shorter latencics than were requircd to recognize that the letters were reversed. ## Assessment of Recognition Processes Our postulate about rccognition processes allows us to argue against reportable intermediate states for such processes. However, to avoid circularity, we need to be able to assess independently when recognition processes occur. 'The sorts of independent evidence for recognition discussed in the previous section almost all related to open-ended tasks, or tasks where the time constraints were too severe to allow sequences of successive states to be hecded. In most cognitive tasks studied in the laboratory, there is a unique response that is "correct." In such cases, sufficient information must be extracted from the stimulus to generate the correct response reliably. Hence, at some prior time, lcarning with fecdback must have occurred; the cognitive structure that is accessed by recognition must exist already in I'TM. 'These two criteria give us some rather powerful mcans to discriminate recognition processes from the conscious proccsses for which verbal reports of intermcdiate states would be available. In order to sharpen our characterization of recognition processes, we turn now to a discussion of the automatization of cognitive processes, and the emergence of recognition processes. ## Automation of Responses Although we hypothcsize that attention is ncccssary for learning or changing cognitive structures, it is no longer necessary when the same cognitive process has becn executed many times. Only a few studics have attempted to capture changes in reported information as a function of degrce of expertise and experience with a given type of process. There appcars to be a close (negative) relation between degree of practicc and awareness of intermediate stages of a process. 'T'hc carly work of Ach and others suggested that the conscious content disappcared with extended practice and growing automaticity of the processes. More recently, Dcan and Martin (1966) found that overlcarning in pairedassociate learning leads to a decrcase in the number of reported mediating associations. 'The work of Schncider and Shiffrin (Schncider & Shiffrin, 1977; Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977) suggests that there arc clcar differences betwcen automatic and controlled processing, in terms of speed and of accessibility for modification and learning. From all this evidence, it sccms necessary to postulatc, as wc have, that imany highly overlcarned processes operate automatically without lcaving any more trace than their final result in S'T'M. Wc may distinguish betwcen automatic processes that subjects already possessed prior to an experiment, as part of their cognitive skills, and processes whose intermediate stages becamne more automatic, and hence less reportable, during the course of the experiment. In the case of the latter, reports from the automated processes at the end of the experiment will omit information about intermediate states of which the subjects were awarc at the beginning of the cxperiment. Wc will later provide some concrete examples of this phenomenon. Rccognition automates cognitive processes for a specific task. Since this task is represented cognitively, the subject can change it at any time. If he does, recognition will no longer determine the responses. It might be thought that if a response were strongly established, it would resist the owner's attempts to define thc task. Λch (rescarch reviewed by Ryan, 1970) thought he had demonstrated precisely this—the response to a stimulus could be cxplained as the outcomc of a compctition betwcen previous rooting of the response and its appropriateness to the current task. But more recent rescarch appcars to show that he was mistaken. I.cwin (revicwcd by Ryan (1970)) dcmonstratcd that as many as 300 repetitions of the initial associations did not cause false responses to later, different, tasks, nor lengthen the reaction times. Λch's carly results probably resulted from subjects’ confusions or misconceptions of what tasks they had actually been asked to perform. Rather similar cvidence has been obtained from cxperimental analysis of the Stroop effect. In the Stroop 'T'est, subjects are instructed to name the color of the ink used to print words that spell the names of other colors. It appears (Glaser & Dolt, 1977) that in spite of the instruction to name the color of the ink, the response corresponding to the printed word first comes to the subject spontancously, and has to be rcjccted actively. However, if the printed words arc semantically unrelated to color words the cffects arc small or non-cxistent (Klein, 1964; Kcclc, 1973). Let us focus more directly on the development of recognition-like processes in a given task as a function of amount of practice. The initial instructions to the subjccts communicate only roughly what the task is. Beginning with the first trials, the subjects will notice or actively scck regularities and constraints in the particular examples presented by the experimenter. When subjects discover redundancy in the information presented (syntactic constructions are constant, the responses stand in some rule-bound relation to information presented [Einstellung], or responses share a common characteristic that is not made explicit [set]), they can use thesc regularities to improve the efficiency (and the stercotypy) of their response processes. Quinton and Fellows (1975) studied the cmergence of changes in subjects’ cognitive processes with practice in solving three-term series problems (c.g., "Ben is taller than George; Dave is shorter than George; Who is tallest?"). 'They obser, ed that most of their subjects gradually shifted to a perceptual strategy that depended on recognizing problem types. Associated with the change in stratcgy, they observed a dramatic reduction in solution time. Wood and Shotter (1973) asked subjccts to respond with thc appropriate kinship terın to questions like, "What relationship to a man is his father's sister's daughter?" 'They found that, with practice, subjects tended to go from meaning to formal properties. The kinship terms were reported as organized in a spatial image. Λs one subject described it (Wood and Shotter, p. 509), "I was imagining in levels . . . I go up for father, across for sister .. . I go up and down and across in levels. After a while, up-across-down means cousin. In an interesting study, Wood, Shotter, and Godden (1974) showed that with more practice, subjects became less able to answer unexpected questions about the information presented. After presentation of a number of five-term series probleimns, subjects were asked unexpectedly about the order of two items, which was different from the order in the original problem. When this unexpectcd qucstion was asked after thc first problem, 55% of the subjects gave a correct answer, but aftcr the 21st problem, only 10%. Λ control group was presented with twcnty problems, but asked to arrange the terms in alphabetical ordcr before they reccived their first five-term scrics problem and thcir unexpected question. In this case they answered the unexpccted question correctly in 70% of thc cases. 'These studies show evidencc of a movement, with practice, from complete awareness of problem-solving steps toward more efficient solution by recognition. Luchins' (1940) classical experiments showcd that subjects, given a series of problems with the same rule for solution, solved test problems by a "blind" application of that rule, even when a much simpler solution was possible. Evidence indicates that the effect is not the result of inadvertent mechanization, but results from subjects' deliberate choices of strategy. Λ nurnber of experiinents have reduced the Einstellung effect by marking the test problems as separate problems rather than a continuation of the sequence of problems presented before (Jensen, 1960). Morcover, a single extinction trial (a problem solvable with a different rule) is sufficient to climninate the cffect. Luchins and Luchins (1959) supported this interpretation in an extensive review of Einstellung: What scemed to be important was not the recency of the E method, or that the test tasks immediately followed the E tasks, but the subject's attitude: that is, whether or not he vicwcd thc tasks as belonging together, as membcrs of a homogencous serics. (luchins & Luchins, 1959, p. 333) There is evidence for Einstellung effects in the performance of experts, in whose responses recognition processes should be prominent. When asked to "give the mathematical cxpression for all numbers that, when divided by seven, yield a remainder of 89," mathematically trained subjects were more likely than novices to notice the semantic contradiction in the qucstion and produce the syntactically correct formula (Krutetskii, 1976). Werthcimer (1945) found that mathematically trained subjects tended to use the complex general solution of a problem requiring them to calculate the arca of an altar window, while novices selected a simple and "insightful" solution. The reason cxperts rarely do worse than novices, we conjecture, is that their recognition processes are carcfully "debugged" during their extensivc lcarning cxpcriences. Morcover, the cxpcrt can always fall back on a systematic and conscious scarch for a solution, which should always give him an advantage over the novice. ## Perceptual-Motor Processes Rescarch on perceptual-motor processes also demonstrates that in these we normally have access only to ccrtain higher-level intermediate results. In a recent paper, Broadbent (1977) presents cmpirical evidence for a hicrarchical organization of such processes. Most studies of perceptualmotor processes using thinking-aloud protocols and other verbal reports have cxamincd problem solving with puzzles. As we reported in Chapter 2. in tasks allowing physical manipulation, Klinger (1974) found frcquent higher-level verbal evaluations of unverbalized solution attempts (c.g., "Yep," "Dammit," etc.), and verbalizations of attention-control processes (c.g., "I.et's see," "Where was I?" ctc.). When engaged in perceptualmotor manipulation, subjects did not verbalize, and appcared not to be aware of, the lower-level content or structure of their throught processes. Ruger (1910) found that subjeets could often solve one of his mcchanical puzzles several times, yct provide only a limited high-level account of the intermediate steps leading to the solution. It has been suggested that physical manipulation is different from thinking in not cmploying any internal (i.c., STM) representation (Durkin, 1937). ## INFORMATION ABOUT COGNITIVE STATES In this scction we will examinc the assertion that Sl'M contains all the information that is availablc for report. Wc will first discuss subjects' reports of being close to remembering somcthing (tip-of-the-tonguc), and their subjective fecling that they could recognize information they cannot rccall (feeling-of-knowing). Wc will ask whcther such reportable states, having testable bchavioral conscqucnces, can be represented in terins of structures in STM and how these structures can be used to help extract the information presumably present but currently inaccessible in I.TM. 'Then wc will ask how subjects can be confident about thc adcquacy and correctness of infornation they have recalled. Λ strict interpretation of our model argucs that the subject only knows what cucs and task information he heeded just prior to heeding the retricved structure. ## Tip-of-the-Tongue James (1890) is gencrally crcdited with first describing the tip-of-the-tonguc phenomenon. Early rescarch rclicd primarily on analyzing situations in which such phenomena occurred spontancously. Woodworth (1938) found that in such situations, the subjects almost invariably had additional information about the items they sought, beyond the mere "feeling" that it was in LTM. This additional information (e.g. knowledge of some syllables, number of syllables, initial letter) could usually be verified as valid partial information about the word being sought. Λ more systematc and controlled study by Brown and McNeil (1966) showed that subjects expressing a "tip-of-the-tonguc" fecling, but unable to recall a word, were able to report some of the letters in the word, the number of syllables, and the location of the primary stress, with much better than chance probability. Yarmcy (1973) studied the tip-of-the-tongue experience in naming famous people presented in pictures. When he asked his subjects to supply information in any one of several categories, they tended to mention first the place where they had seen a picture of the person, then when they had last scen one. Attempts to recall initial letters and numbers of syllables of names had no clear order preference. The amounts of such information retrieved were substantial, regardless of whether the subject succeeded in recalling te name, or even recognized it when the experimenter presented it. Koriat and Lieblich (1979) demonstrated that subjccts had betterthan-chance records in gucssing the letters and number of syllables even of words they didn't know. Λpparently these subjects used information about thc attributes that would bc typical for such words. Hence, memory for specific iteins and events can be confounded by inference from more general memory. In a couplc of studics Hart (1965, 1967) studied the validity of subjects' feelings of being able to recognize an item they couldn't recall. T’he questions he put to his subjccts involved general knowledge like, "Which planct in our solar system is the largest?" Hart found that subjects wcrc able to predict reliably whether they would subscqucntly recognize the unrecallable answers. 'They were also able to predict, although with lower accuracy, thcir ability to recognize lcarncd paired associates. Blake (1973), using brief presentations of trigrams followed by an 18-sccond distractor task, found that fecling-of-knowing judgments were markedly related to number of letters recalled correctly. 'l’he judgments were also rclated to ability to recognize the correct answers, even after differences in recall were held constant. These results were confirmned in a sccond expcriment that climinated the effect of the number of letters recalled initially. The result implics that thc cncoding of the trigrams was not entirely in terms of the component letters. ## 132 Protocol Analysis Wellman (1977), using a paradigm similar to Hart's, with pictures to be named, asked his subjccts (kindergarten, lst gradc, and 3rd grade studcnts) (1) to makc judgmcnts of "fccling-of-knowing," (2) to tcll what they knew about the thing pictured, and (3) to report if they had seen the pictured items. Judgments that they had seen an object proved to be better predictors of subsequent recognition than "feeling-of-knowing' judgments. 'Thc verbal comments showed a clear relation between anount of knowledge about the object, on the one hand, and a fecling of knowing and successful recognition, on the other. All of the above experiments provide evidence that the ability to make accurate judgments about one's memory or feelings is associated with the availability of related knowledge that can be acccssed prior to those judgments. ## Retrieval Without Direct Recognition 'The rescarch on both tip-of-thc-tonguc and fccling-of-knowing show that I.TM is highly organizcd. Subjects often know how stored information is encoded and generate the appropriate retricval cues to access it. Similarly, subjccts often know when they don't have information in memory, because they find that the information is not available where it should be stored. For example, one can know that onc docsn't know the phone number of the White House. If it were present, it would surely be associated to the stimulus, "White House phone number," hence would be recalled. The appropriate storage of relevant information with reasonable cucs is not mystcrious within our proposcd model, which vicws ITM as a richly indexcd and cross-indcxed data basc. When a subject is presented with new information, he will access (by recognition) the relevant I.TM structures and store some subset of the hecded information. At the same timc, new recognition access routes to the information will be crcated (new "index entries"). 'This continuing processing and storage of hecded information will allow direct access by recognition to many important picces of information. Machotka (1964) argues that our ability to judge and cvaluatc objects and pcople rapidly must be attributed to unconscious processing. Wc would argue, on the contrary, that relevant information can be accessed dircctly because it was heeded on a previous occasion and stored with appropriate access paths. When the ncw stimulus is presented, these paths can be used without the requirement of an unconscious review of previous experiences. Subjects often have to retrieve information that cannot be acccssed directly—that has not been indexed. Everyone has stored a vast number of personal experiences, thought episodes, and picces of detailed information that can only be recalled via an active scarch for retrieval cues and an active cvaluation of the retrieved l'TM structures. Only in this way can people recall how often they have gone to the movies in the past year, or have been swimming, or the names of all the different cars or detergents that they know. (See Chapter 5 for a discussion of these recall processes and associated verbal reports.) When subjects are questioned about information stored in I.'TM, their responses depend not only upon the presence or absence of that information, but also on whether the cues that are present are adequate for its retrieval. Inability to retrieve a memory structure is not equivalent to its absence from memory. One of the most reliable effects in the literature on human memory is the difference between the number of stimulus items that a subject can recall and the number of items that he can recognize as having been presented. Recognition that something has been seen before is the most sensitive test that an information structure is in LTM. 'The cues provided for memory retrieval may be consistent or inconsistent with the way in which thc storcd information is indcxed. When appropriate cues are available, imimcdiate recognition is triggered. In other cases, some of the information in the cucing stimulus may enable a successful heuristic scarch to be made for the information, while the remaining information is used to check proposed answers for adequacy. For cxample, if asked to supply an 8-letter English word whose 6th letter is e, a subject might narrow thc scarch by secking word endings of thc form e, finding ent, and then sccking words cnding in ent. Having found one (c.g., "dissident"), it is tested for length and rejected. Another (c.g., "accident") is accepted. 'The entire memory retrieval can thus be scen as an initial retrieval specification, use of some part of this specification to access a memory structure, and verification that the memory structure is consistent with the entire specification (Norman & Bobrow, 1979). What is hecdcd and thus reportablc in mcmory retrieval without direct recognition? 'The retricval cues have to be hecded and kept in ST'M. What are reportable in recognition, according to our model, arc only the input (the cueing stimulus) and the output (the accessed I.ΓM ## 134 Protocol Λnalysis structure). If thc answcr is not immediatcly rccognized, thc cucing stimulus may be augmented by hcuristic scarch and other problemsolving cfforts, and the intermediate products of these efforts can also be reported. Which retrieval cucs were cffective in accessing the I.TM structure can only bc reported in retrospcct by recall of these intermediate products or by inference from the nature of the information recovered. Within this framework we are able to capture rather nicely the inability of subjects to give informative reports for some of their cognitive processes. In recognition, the subjects simply do not have any information in STM to report. When pressed for a "reason" for their responses, they have no recourse but to rationalize (i.e., to infer after the fact what the cffectivc cues must have becn). When retricval involves intermediate scarch steps, however, subjects can report various items that were held temporarily in STM as the "reasons" for their responses. Turning to the positive sidc, what can subjects report about their retrieval processes and their memory structures? First, they can assess, with somc reliability, which of the itcms of information they recall is accuratc, and also thcir correctness in making recognition judgments. Morcover, subjccts have. some ability to prcdict whether they possess certain information in I'l'M even in situations whcre thcy are unable to recall that information. ## Judgments of Confidence Subjects can evaluate their confidence in the correctness of information recalled if they can retricve additional information that is redundant with it, hence permits it to be checked for veridicality. Λ subject who has the responsc "Monrovia" simply indcxcd to thc stimulus "Capital of Liberia" may be unable to assess the accuracy of his responsc. If Monrovia, however, cvokes "Monroc was President of the United States when Liberia was founded," this provides a rcason for confidencc in the answer. 'Thus, without any direct cvidence from the process of retrieval, confidence can be judged. Speed of retricval might also bc a partial basis for judgments of confidence, so that even the (rapid) immediate recognition may be judged correct with high confidence. In a recent paper Koriat, Lichtenstcin, and Fischhoff (1980) discuss thc relcvant rescarch showing that people can successfully assess thc correctness of their memories with a few exceptions. Howevcr, thcy arc overconfident in the corrcctness of their answers caused by overemphasizing cvidcnce justifying the sclected alternative and disregarding cvidence contradicting it. Hence, confidence judgments can be improved by asking subjects to list reasons, contradictions, then choices. Judging confidence involves accessing and reviewing relevant knowledge, and bias in confidence judgments is due to biased retrieval of such knowledge. In laboratory research, ratings of confidence in recall and recognition have frequently been shown to be predictive of correctness (c.g., Wearing, 1971). In rescarch on eye-witness testimony, however, the relation between confidence and accuracy is not uniformly positive (Deffenbacher, 1980). However, in a thorough review, Deffenbacher shows that in studies with high recognition accuracy, indicative of substantial memory, a strong relation is found between accuracy and rated confidencc. It is only in studies with lower (yet reliable) recognition accuracy that there is no relation between accuracy and rated confidence. Λpparently the circumstances that yield high accuracy also provide subjects with information on which to base their ratings. Some studies have sought to discover what that information is. Loftus and Bell (1975) have studied the process of recognizing pictures that were viewed with thc instruction to remcınber them for subsequent recognition. Λt the time of judging whether or not a picture had been presented before, the subjects were asked if their judgments rested on a specific detail or on general familiarity with the picture. Performancc was very much better when a dctail could bc namcd than when the subjects simply cited gencral faniliarity. From cyc-movement records during initial presentation of the pictures in an carlier study, Loftus (1972) found that the detail verbalized during the recognition trials was the detail that had reccived most fixations at the initial presentation. How can wc account for the numerous demonstrations that subjects’ responses to memory probes (especially leading questions and providing rcsponsc alternatives) can be altered by thc cxperimenter (Loftus, 1975, 1979)? 'These demonstrations of experimenter influence uniformly pertain to situations where the accuracy of recognition is low. In such situations, the actual evidence available in memory is compatible with a number of alternative responses, so that the one selected may depend on the experimenter's probe (compare Kubovy & Psotka, 1976; Kubovy, 1977). Wc are not aware of any such demonstration for information that subjects have memorized so thoroughly that they can assess confidence reliably. 'These results are highly consistent with our model. ## WHAT IS REPORTED? We have now rcvicwcd thc cvidencc for an information-proccssing model of cognitive processes that characterizes the information that is in attention and Sl'M at any point in time. We have shown that such a model is consistent with, and indeed supported by, a wide range of empirical evidence about recognition processes. In fact, we have been unable to identify any directly conflicting evidence. However, in the pages that follow, we will discuss a numnber of studies that have argued against various assumptions of our model by claiming incompleteness and nonveridicality of verbally reported information. We will see whether these arguments invalidate the picture we have drawn thus far. Our model proposes that verbal reports are based on information currently held in STM, or information retrievable from 1T'M that was at some previous time held in ST'M. In order to avoid circularity, we must be able to state, from indepcndent sources of cvidencc, what kind of information is heeded, and hence passes through ST'M. Although it may be vcry hard, in gcneral, to know what information is in a subject's STM at a particular timc, the assumnptions of the information processing model do allow fairly strong predictions to be made. First, the model claims that subjects' memories of carlier thoughts and information are a subsct of the information to which they attended. No new memory structures can be stored in l'IM or subsequently retrieved unless they were heeded when presented. 'The information that will be hecded, for example, in gencrating a mathematical proof or solving a mathematical problem will be different if the subjcct already has memory access to similar proofs or to relevant special methods or theorems than if he doesn't. With a knowledge of prior theorems, the subject may short-cut many steps in the proof. The existence of enormous individual differences in the knowledge held in memory means that predictions of verbalizations must be contingent on the retricvable information of cach subject. In many experimental studies of thinking, investigators have tried to avoid this difficulty by using "naive" subjccts—that is, subjccts who did not have any prior experience with the problem domain. Gestalt psychologists were alluding, in part, to the difference between naive and experienced subjects in their distinction between productive and reproductive thinking. In cases where wc can rule out reproductive, or recognition-based cognitive processes, we can make strong predictions that any informnation that is recalled must have been heeded in the cxpcrimcntal situation. Perhaps the best example of a situation where we can make this prediction is learning under experimental control, where a subject changes his behavior into behavior determined by the experimenter. Under our hypothesis, such learning can always be traced by concurrent reports of heeded information. We begin our review of evidence bearing on this prediction with studies using different kinds of verbal reports in learning experiments. We will then review all studies of which we are aware that contain apparently damaging evidence against our model. ## LEARNING WITHOUT AWARENESS The mechanisms and processes that emerged from the associationist and behaviorist analyses of learning were so simple that it must have been very tempting to propose that these processes were unconscious and inaccessible for verbal reports. Some influential theorists, like Thorndike (1932, 1933), argued that an association could be strengthened without the subject knowing what it was, hence that the subject should not be able to report it. In an experiment by Thorndike and Rock (1934), evidence was found that appeared to support such a view. By way of introduction to our topic, we will describe that study and some follow-up studies that refute the argument. Thorndike and Rock had subjects generate words as fast as possible in response to stimulus words. Subjects were told "wrong" if the response word was meaningfully related to the stimulus word (synonym, opposite, etc.). They were told "right" if the response formed a sequential connection with the stimulus (e.g., yours → truly, up → stairs, etc.). For ambiguous or unclassifiable responses, the subjects received no feedback at all. The subjects showed gradual and variable learning, which to the experimcnters implied lack of insight. Insight, they argued, should lead to abrupt, single-trial improvement in responses. The last assertion is not correct, as shown by a follow-up study by Irwin, Kaufmann, Prior, and Weaver (1934). Subjects after explicit instruction as to what words constituted correct responses, did not learn faster than subjects not receiving any instruction. In further experimentation, Postman and Jarrett (1952) found that both informed and uninformed subjects showed gradual learning. The informed subjects learned more rapidly than the uninformed. A detailed analysis of the behavior of uninformed subjects provided a wholly parsimonious explanation of this difference. Sometime during the experiment, the large majority of the uninformed subjects were able to verbalize the correct principle. Subjccts unable to verbalizc thc principle showed no improvement. Dramatic improvement was observed on and after the trial on which the principle was first verbalized. However, a much smaller, yct statistically reliable. improvement was found for trials preceding the first verbalization of the correct principle. Postman and Jarrett argue that this improvement could be due to lcarning without awareness, or to partially correct verbalized principles. An alternative hypothesis that would account for the results observed is that subjects who incidentally made a couple of correct responses were more likely to access or induce the principle. This study illustrated, incidentally, the potency of concurrent verbal reports. ## Concurrent Verbal Reports of Learning In Chapter 1, wc revicwcd the study in which Vcrplanck and Oskamp claimed to have shown that verbalized rules are dissociated from the behavior they were supposed to control. When correct behavior was reinforced, they made 71.8% correct responses, but only stated the correct rule for the bchavior in 48.4% of the trials. When correct statement of the rule was reinforced, they stated the rule correctly on 92.8% of the trials, but took the correct action in only 76.8%. Dulany and O'Connell (1963) showcd these results derived from two artifacts. First, the data analysis did not correct for guessing; making this correction reduces the percentage of correct responses in the first case to 43.6%, close to the percentage of correct rule statements. Second, they showed that Verplanck and Oskamp's rules werc somctimes ambigious. Taking account of thc ambiguity, in all but 1l of 34,408 trials the subjccts did cxactly what they said (in the rule statcment) they were going to. Hencc, the experiments provide no evidence whatsoever that the rules verbalized were inconsistent with the bchaviors. Numerous studies document the support for consistency between verbalized rules, concepts and hypotheses and immediately preceding and succceding bchavior, before subjects reccive fecdback. In Schwartz (1966), where subjects were asked their reasons for placing a card as they did, reasons consistent with placcments were given on all but 2 of 1,962 trials. Even more impressive, Frankel, Lcvinc, and Karpf (1970) obtained retrospective reports from subjects on the basis of their responses to four carlier discrimination-lcarning problems with 30 non-feedback trials cach, and found that subjects could provide such reports in more than 90% of the sequences of trials. In an attempt to differentiate between an incremental S-R theory of concept attainment and a cognitive theory, Prentice (1949) had subjects think aloud during concept attainment. In an experimental group the correct response was reversed after 20 trials. Prenticc predicted (cognitive or one-trial learning theory) that if no mention of the relevant hypothesis was made by the subject prior to the reversal there would be no difference between groups in learning times. When all subjects mentioning the relation in their protocols were deleted from the analysis, the difference between groups was about 20 trials as compared to a cognitive theory's prediction of no difference and an S-R theory's prediction of 40.\*\* Prentice thus infers that there are nonconscious processes operating. Λ critical reading of Prentice shows that the difference between the groups is barely significant. 'To infer, therefore, that the difference is 20 trials is clearly unwarranted. 'The concept-learning situation in Prentice's study involves only 8 different stimuli, cach capable of taking on 2 different values—-16 instances in all. Prentice reports that most subjects usually considered cxplicit hypothcses, and the solution emerged while they were summarizing the results of the last three or four trials. 'That attention to stimulus attributes is a primary component in lcarning is shown by the fact that experimental subjects attending to the right rclation bcfore reversal required about 15 trials less than average to learn after reversal. In all other studies coming to our attention where it is claimed that the learning proccss is unconscious, hence not reportable, the verbal reports were not given concurrently with the responses. In interpreting these studies, wc must thercfore makc further assumptions about memory in order to relate the verbal reports with the criterial behavior. In particular, it is risky to assunc that awareness during a lcarning experimcnt can be determined by questioning after the experiment is over. ## Assessing Awareness from Post-Experimental Questioning We consider next the situation where a subjcct is probed for information that is not then available in STM. Then the information must be retrieved from I.TM. Memory retrieval is fallable, sometimes causing access to other related, but inappropriate, information. Further, what information can bc recalled depends on what cues and probes are provided. Hence the completeness of the information retrieved will vary with the probing procedures. The controversy over whether learning can and does occur without awareness, as evidenced by retrospective verbal reports fron subjects, has recently been reviewed by Brewer (1974). Drawing on his work, we will seck to interpret the differences, primarily mcthodological, that distinguish studies finding lcarning without awareness from studies not finding such learning. One type of study has been criticized repeatedly for poor documentation of probing procedures and brief postexpcrimental interviews, which are sometimes not given after the learning trials but after an additional series of extinction trials (Spiclberger, 1962). 'This design docs not eliminate the possibility that subjects retain in STM the information about the rcinforcement contingency until it is lost during overlearning or extinction trials. To ensure a relatively complete verbal report, the probing should occur just after the last learning trials, preferably before the subject is told that the experiment is over. Many of the studies of this first type secm little concerned with these considerations. Furthermore, the verbal probes used have been global questions, like "What did you think the expcriınent was about?" (Brewer, 1974) In our framework, such probes will not elicit retrospcctive memory of the subject's own cognitive processes so much as cncourage him to gencrate hypotheses about the cxperiment, which may or may not be related to those processes. Λ sccond type of study, which has rcspondcd to the above criticisms by probing subjects just after the last learning bloc of trials and explicitly asking theı for their memorics of their cognitive processes during the preceding trials, has generally been unable to find cvidence for learning without reported awareness of the reinforcement contingency. The studies of this type have been criticized, in turn, for asking leading qucstions. We have alrcady discussed this issuc in the scction on effects of probing. The need for spccific probes is not well documented, but a gcncral motivation for it is given in Dulany (1962). Another important consideration is that the subjects often report contingencies that, while not identical with thc one the cxperimenter rcinforces, are correlated with it (lulany, 1962). Here failure to report the experimenter's version of the contingency may simply mcan this is not the version the subject is using, and may not at all imply incompleteness in the report of the contents of STM. In a third type of study, subjects arc asked to verbalize during conditioning experiments according to a technique suggested by DeNike (1964), in which the subject writes down "any thoughts that come to you that have any relation to the experiment" (p. 523). Using this procedure, DcNike was able to cxtend thc claim of consistency between written thoughts and behavior, finding that subjects' behaviors changed on the trial in which they wrote down their first correct hypothesis about the reinforcement. Λlso using D)eNike's techniquc, Kenncdy (1970, 1971) found that the behaviors changed before subjects wrote down that they were confident of their hypotheses or their verbal hypotheses were confirmed. Brewer (1974) points out that Kenncdy's finding, that behavioral changes were associated with trying out or modifying verbal hypotheses, does not challenge, but supports the validity of the verbalized information. Comparing different probing techniques with cach other indicates that the written thoughts clicited with DeNike's technique are incompletc as compared with information obtaincd with Dulany's postexpcrimental qucstionnairc (Sallows, Dawcs, & Lichtenstein, 1971). There is also some evidence that the incompleteness may be caused by the requirement of written responses. Silveira (1972) found a marked differencc in number and character of responses clicited during a crcativity test between written and oral response conditons. Writing the responses or ideas, as contrasted with giving them aloud, led to cvaluation and censorship. It has been assumed implicitly that the contents of STM after the last learning bloc are representative of the contents during the preceding trials. 'Γhis is a reasonable assumption for conccpt lcarning, and for cxperiments with deterministic reinforcement schedules, where there is no inducement for the subject to rcjcct a corrcct hypothesis. Several studics have shown that subjects arc unlikcly to change hypotheses in responsc to positive fecdback (Heidbreder, 1924; Karpf & Levine, 1971). Howcvcr, since subjects arc highly likcly to changc hypotheses in response to negative feedback, the assumption of stable hypotheses is less tenable for probabilistically determined fecdback conditions. ## 142 Protocol Analysis In a reccnt study by Williams (1977), all subjccts who learncd were assessed (by a proccdure of the Spiclbergcr type (1962)) to have bcen awarc of the reinforcement. However, in a second cxperiment with probabilistic relations, Williams found evidencc of learning without awareness (assessed by the same procedure). During the cxperiment, subiccts were cxplicitly (and falsely) told that "All the sentences I said 'correct' to met the same necessary requirements" (Williams, 1977, p. 93). 'These instructions would cncourage subjects to abandon correct and correlated hypotheses when negative feedback was encountered. A study by O'Connell (1965) shows clearly that if the subjects verbalize their hypotheses on cach trial, the verbalized reports account for thcir behavior even in a non-deterministic cnvironment with partial reinforcement. There is a related issuc of awareness of mediating associations. A serics of studies (Bugclski & Scharlock, 1952; Horton & Kjeldcrgaard, 1961; Russel & Storimns, 1955) have found that paired-associate learning can be facilitated by prior cxposure of the subjects to the proper mediating associations. Subjccts who first lcarned lists of paired associates of types Λ-B and B-C lcarned lists of type Λ-C faster than control groups. In all thesc studies informal post-experimental questioning gave no evidencc that the subjccts were aware of using any mediating B-list items. "None of the Ss was able to report any corrcct apprcciation of the nature of the experiment and most assuredly did not verbalize a pattern of A-B, B-C, A-C in learning thc third list (Bugclski & Scharlock)." This was interpreted as evidence for unconscious mediation in learning. However, the above studics can be criticized on the same grounds as the studies purporting to demonstrate concept learning without awarcness; and typically wce find different results in more recent studies that probe for rctrospective information in a more controlled and ambitious manncr. In a study by D)ean and Martin (1966), the subjects, after reaching critcrion for the third list, read cach stimulus of this list and were then asked to tell the experimenter cxactly what came to their minds when they saw the syllable on the screen. 'The subjects were then shown the entire list of paired associates and asked how the list was learned. Dean and Martin found that a mnajority of the subjects reported using at least one mediating term from the previously lcarned facilitating lists. An analysis of learning rates for cach of the reported mediation types (other than A-B-C mediation) showed clcarly that the cffective difference among groups was attributable to the occurrence or non-occurrencc of Λ-B-C mediation. When Dean and Martin had one cxperimental group overlcarn the paired-associate list for ten cxtra trials, they found a significantly lower occurrence of reported mediation, thus suggesting that direct and automatic processing had developed as a result of additional practice. In a study following a procedure similar to that used in Horton and Kjeldergaard (1961), Horton (1964) used a dircct question: "Did you notice any relationship between the pairs you just completed and the ones you learned carlier in the experiment?" Horton assessed three levels of awareness, where the highest level required naming the actual mediating items. With a varicty of cxperimental manipulations, he found a consistent relation between mediation (facilitative effect of previously learned PΛ lists), and assessed awareness. 'There are many differences between the studies reporting awareness of mediating items and those that report no awareness. Horton suggested that the difference between his study and Horton and Kjeldergaard stemmed from the factors in the experimental situation stimulating awareness. 'The two groups of studies also differ in the surictness of the learning criterion, which might have affected the retricvability of the mediating links. However, the most obvious difference, in our view, lies in the probing procedure. ## Sorting Without Λwareness of Concept In concept lcarning, it has been observed that subjccts can sclect appropriate instances in test trials without being able to state the concepts thcy arc using (Hcidbrcdcr, 1934, 1936; Phelan, 1965; Smokc, 1932). Although these studies have been cited in support of the notion that the verbalized information is incomplete, a more reasonable interpretation is that the subjects cannot formulate the concept as it is defined by the experimenter, although they can differentiate instances from noninstances by recognition. Correct sclection of instances could be mediated by processes like memorizing cxemplars or a set of correlated discrimination features without using a rule expressed in terins of common fcatures. Λ conccpt-formation task can cmploy a large number of different strategies. If the number of different stimuli is fairly small (20 or less) subjects might even memorize them or use a mixture of memory for cxemplars and rule learning. If a subject were activcly employing a hypothesis, we would cxpcct him to be able to report it. If he were relying on memory for exemplars, we would not expect him to be able to report them, for they would not all residc simultancously in ST'M. Under these circumstances, thc conccpt attainment task is a recognition task, and we know that recognition does not imply ability to recall. There is evidence that subjects sometimes perform conceptattainment or rule formation tasks by relying on similarity bctween the stimulus instance and cvoked cxcmplars in memory (cf. Brooks). None of these processes for concept attainment can be ruled out a priori, and in fact, verbal reports during performance might be the most useful data for discriminating among them. When Smoke (1932) asked subjeccts to identify the concept used by the experimenter from verbal descriptions, he found in four experiments that 20-25% of the verbal descriptions of the succcssful subjects were defective, and "usually too inclusive" (p. 20). 'This study, and other related ones, do not address the incompleteness problem as we would state it: Is the verbal report a complete and sufficient description of the information the subject actually has and uses? In Smokc's study the subjects who were classificd as unable to verbalize the concept could "almost invariably" (p. 20) draw two instances of thc concept froın memory correctly; but this does not imply that they had a complete and correct (though unverbalizable) criterion for making the selections. The question of completeness has been put to a more direct test in an intcrcsting study by Wilson (1973, 1975). Hcrc, thc subjccts wrote down thcir rules for positive instances at cach trial, and were then asked to sort a test series of instances. Wilson then assessed the information transmitted in thesc verbal descriptions by having the same subjects a weck later make re-sorts from the descriptions. In addition, naive subjects who did not participate in the learning experiment were asked to sort the test series on the basis of the individual descriptions provided by the original subjects. 'The results showed that the sorts made by subjects after a weck's delay agrced less closely with their original sorts during the concept lcarning cxpcriment than they did with the sorts made by the naive subjccts. 'This is cvidence that the subjects had more information at the time of the original experiment than they gave in their verbal reports. However, the correspondence between all the sorts was high, espccially considering that the verbal rule was not always applicable to all instances in the test series. In a second experiment, Wilson (1974, 1975) found that the degrce of incompleteness of descriptions varied with the stage of concept learning at which the verbalization of the rule was obtaincd. For rules verbalized cither at the very beginning of the experiment or at criterion, almost complete agrcement was obtained between sorts; but more discrepancies were found for rules verbalized at intermediatc stages of acquisition. Wilson attributed thesc results to subjects' difficulties in verbalizing the complex hypotheses they cntcrtaincd during intermcdiatc lcarning stages, and this interpretation was further supported by the greater length of the verbal descriptions for these stages. Onc alternative cxplanation, suggested previously, would be that the instructions used by Wilson ("to verbalize a rule"—the average number of words per rule was about 8) were inadequate to tap the subjects total information about positive instances. Another possible interpretation is that instances in the test series may have served as cues for retrieval and recognition of previously presented items that were not available to the subjects when they gencrated the verbal report. Some supporting cvidence is given by a study on discrimination lcarning by Frankcl, Icvinc and Karpf (1970), where thc subjccts could givc a retrospcctive description of "on what basis they had responded" (p. 346) that described more than 90% of their responses. ## Lack of Access to Relevant Knowledge In thc prcccding scction we showed that subjects may perform corrcctly on a conccpt-attainment task, yct usc the process of recognizing cxemplars without gencrating the abstract concept. 'This is an cxample of a more gencral principle: subjects do not, in many or most situations (and even if thcy arc able to access all the rclevant information), integrate all the information and abstract the higher-level rclations the experimenter has built into the stimuli. Scveral studies have shown that subjects sometimnes can report very different amounts of knowledge rclevant to the task, without corresponding differenccs in performance (Broadbent, 1977; Hull, 1920). Other studics show that subjccts can report accurate knowledgc at the time of probing, yct while cxccuting a cognitive proccss that should acccss that knowledgc, they report not heeding this information or report accessing somc inconsistent information instcad (Allwood & Montgomery, 1981, 1982). These findings are inconsistent with our model only under a couple of (dubious) assumptions. Spccifically, onc must assumc that exactly the same information is retricved and hecded in thc probing situation as when performing the task. In everyday experiencc, onc often docs not rccall information that, if rccallcd, would be rclevant (e.g., while shopping, or in conversation with others). Only for highly skilled performcrs can we be reasonably certain that relevant knowledge will always be retricved when required. A sccond assumption is that the knowledge decmed relevant by the experimenter can be and is used by the subject to completc thc task. Broadbent (1977) mentions an cxtreme case: Newton's 'T’hird Law of Motion is logically relevant to riding a bike, yet it is unlikely that anyone would use it to learn how to ride. In the following discussion we will bc concerned primarily with showing that in the studies discussed carlier these assumptions are not satisfied, and hence that the findings are consistent with our model. Λ more refined model, of course, would predict the deficiencies in recall as a function of task conditions and subjects' skill levels. One linc of rescarch demonstrated that subjects may differ considcrably in what relevant information they report, yet not differ discernably in performance. In his classical study, Hull (1920) presented Chinese characters that had one of several simpler signs (radicals) embedded in them. In one cxperiment, Hull investigated whether learning was facilitated by presenting the radicals in association with thcir correct responses, thus eliminating the process of abstracting these from the compound characters. Λt the cnd of the learning trials there was no reliable difference in correct assignment of conccpts between the condition in which the radical was presented and the control condition. However, when half the subjccts were asked to draw a picture of crucial features corresponding to the concept names, the concepts presented with the radicals were described twice as well as the others, as assessed by independent judges. Hull concludcd: The power to define is thus in some cases at least a very inadequate index of the functional value of a concept (Hull, 1920, p. 84). 'This study is frequcntly cited, wc think incorrectly, as evidence that the observable behavior is not generated by accessible cognitive structures. We will argue that in this experiment the information that allowed subjects to draw a picture of the crucial features of the concepts was only partially accessed, if at all, in actually generating the concept-naming behavior. Only 7% to 14% of the variability of the subjects' performance in Hull's data can be accounted for by the difference in their ability to define the concept (this quantity is not statistically significant). It is abundantly clear that the knowledge from the presentation of radicals was insufficient for lcarning the complex concepts. Identifying the cmbedded radicals was not an obvious matter. Hull (1920) showcd that marking the radical in red in the character led to considerable improvement in performance. Broadbent and his collaborators (Broadbent, 1977) have shown that subjects learn to control computer simulations of traffic and of an economic system without gencrating any verbalizable knowledge about the interrelationships of the independent variables. In one task (Broadbent, 1977), subjects were given control over the transport in a city by allowing thcm to alter the time interval betwcen buses and to set parking fees for cars. Λ simple computer model of this traffic system (unknown to the subjects) determined from the two parameters the average number of people on the buses and the number of empty parking spaces. 'The subjects were asked to achicve some specificd level of usage of buses and parking spaces by changing the variables under their control. Before and after their control experience, subjects were asked about simple relations (c.g., "Will a risc in parking fec incrcase or decrcase number of cmpty parking spaces?"), and cross-rclations (e.g., "What effect will a rise in parking fees have on the load on the buses?"). With cxperience of the complete system, subjects improved in their ability to answer qucstions about simple relations, but ability to answer questions about cross-relations decrcascd with experience. No relation was found between subjects' ability to control the system and thcir ability to answcr questions. 'The lack of such a relation may be duc, at least in part, to the high level of accuracy of the subjects' questionnaire responses (half of the subjects answered all of the questionnaire questions correctly at the end of the experiment). Although wc do not have concurrent reports on the subjects’ cognitive processes during the task, it is clear that they did not find the correct combination of parameters by mental planning, for they would have necded to try out, on average, six combinations of paramcters before the correct one was found. It is likely that the subjects relicd dircctly on the cffects of the last parameter change in sclecting new paramcter values, and hence explicit memory for the crosstalk relations may not have been necessary for their solution generated through successive approximation. In both Hull's and Broadbent's studies, there is no inconsistency with our modcl, in that therc is no cvidence that thc unreported knowledge was crucial for the cognitive processes involved in the respective tasks, hence no reason for gencrating it or storing it in LTM. Thc unreliability of retricval of relevant knowledge is nicely demonstrated by pcople's ability to detect their own errors. Allwood and Montgomery (1981, 1982) have studicd subjccts detecting errors in their solutions to problems in statistics. They found that subjects were able to find errors spontancously without a dirccted effort to verify their solutions (Λllwood, 1982). More crrors could be dctected if thc cxperimenter focused the subjects' attention to some problem-solving steps. The principal factor in retrieving the correct knowledge was a broader and more intensive retrieval effort than occurs during normal problem solving. It is important to note that these subjects were not very skilled in statistics, and did not have their knowledge of statistics well integrated. Being able to access knowledge in some form is not cquivalent to being able to apply that knowledge correctly. This is particularly true for knowledge that is presented to the subject and acquired "passively." When the subject can generate the knowledge himself, the generation process assures that the knowledge is integrated with other knowledge. In instruction in motor skills, it is particularly obvious that being told, for example, how to hit a tennis ball is not sufficient for the hitting. Subjects may even disregard the verbal instruction and attempt to discover a way to achicve a realization of the procedure by themsclves. At the same timc, thcy may be able to retricve the original verbal instruction. Even for cognitive skills, likc mathematics, subjects arc often as effcctivc in lcarning without instruction (i.c., by discovcring thc procedure) as in lcarning from cxplicit verbal instruction to use a spccificd proccdure (cf. Kersh & Wittrock, 1962). Λ similar result was obtained by Duncker (1945) in his analysis of subjects solving the problem: Why are all six-place numbcrs of thc form 276 276, 591 591,112 112 divisible by 13? Most of the hints given to subjccts were ineffective, although they clearly specify the gencral form of the solution (c.g., "If a common divisor of numbers is divisible by 13, thcy arc all divisible by 13."). Duncker's account of thc succcssful and unsucccssful hints was that subjccts were unable to brcak up the pattern abc abc and rcalize that it is mathematically cquivalent to 1001 \* abc. Haycs-Roth, Klahr, and Mostow (1981) give a dctailed analysis showing how advice given to a person playing a card gamne like Hearts requires a remarkable claboration and inferential activity using relevant knowledge about the task before it can help the player guide his actions. ## RETROSPECTIVE REPORTS OF EARLIER COGNITIVE PROCESSES In this section we will claborate on the model described carlier for retrospective reporting, and introduce more processes, mainly inferential, that subjccts rely on to gencrate information about carlier cognitive processes and previously heeded information. First, wc will review briefly our model of retrospective reporting and show that memory for the just preceding cognitive process appears to be markedly better than for carlier processes. Then we will turn to a discussion of the most frequent kind of retrospective questioning: questioning after the completion of an experiment session with many trials. Finally, we will discuss some other processes that can be used to make reliable predictions about carlier cognitive proceses without retricving episodic memory for those processes. ## Model of Retrospective Reporting Our gencral model assumes that the cognitive processes lcave in ITM a subset of the originally hecded information in the form of a retrievable trace of connected episodic memory. Retrospective reporting involves retrieval of these episodic memories and verbalization of their content. If the subjects are asked to report retrospcctively on their last previous cognitive process, it appcars that considerable episodic memory can be retricved from informnation and cues in STM. Further, because of the redundancy of recent episodic memories, incorrect information about them is not likcly to be produced. Mueller (1911) pointed out, however, that subjects sometimes confuse other retricvable information with information actually heeded during thc proccsses bcing recalled. For examplc, a subject might report an unheeded feature of a (hecded) object (recalled from previous experience with the object). ## Reports of General Cognitive Processes luring Experiments Requesting recall of general processes appears to be the most common procedure for collecting retrospective reports, and appears also to be the major source of cvidence cited by pcople who doubt the usefulness of verbal reports as scientific evidencc. In this typc of reporting situation, the subjcct is asked after thc cxpcrimcnt to tell thc cxperimenter, for example, "How did you do thesc problems?" or "Can you tell me what you were thinking about during the cxpcrimnent?" 'The rationale for asking such general questions is that any investigator would like to have their answers—namely, a compact veridical description of the subjects cognitive processes while performing the task. Our model predicts that such questions can be answered by direct retrieval of the information only if the subject has, during his performance of the task, already generated this kind of general description of his own cognitive processes. 'There is no reason to suppose that subjects generally do generate such information. To summarize veridically their cognitive processes, subjects would have to retricve the entire episodic trace of their processing to provide an appropriate data base. Let us consider some of the difficulties with an "idcal" reporting model of this kind. Finkenbindcr (1914) let subjccts solve a scries of over 30 problems, obtaining introspcctive reports during and after the solution. 'The subjects were later asked to recall the problems and their solutions, and the information recalled was compared with the carlicr reports. Finkenbinder did not quantify the results, but reports that while subjects, especially when given cues, did recall a good deal of information, they hardly ever recalled correctly short-cuts or erroncous solution attempts. In a couplc of studies by Smirnov (1973) subjects werc unexpectedly asked to give retrospcctive reports of what they remembered experiencing and thinking during different episodes, for example, as they went fromn their house to the office. The question was put unexpectedly one or two hours after thc subject reached the office. Below is a transcript of the first part of a typical report: First of all I remembcr thc moment I left thc subway. What prccisely? I thought that I must quickly takc up the neccssary position to get out of thc subway and walk fast, sincc I was latc. I remember l was in the last car. 'T’herefore, I could not get out quickly and had to go into the crowd. Previously the people leaving the car took up the whole width of the platform. Now, in order to secure a passage for those entering the cars, officials are stationed who turn the public from the edge of the platform. It caught my eye that at cach post stood a man for this purpose; otherwise the public would walk at the cdge of the platform. (There follows a description of several men standing at the pillars, not letting the passengers to the edge of the platformn.) I think l did not look at the clock. 'The road further is a blank. I remember nothing about it. 'There is only a hazy recollection from previous trips. I walked to the gates of the university without noticing anything. Don't remember what I thought of. When I entered the gate I noticed someone was hurrying. Who precisely, a man or a woman, I don't remember. More I don't remember ... Now about the first half of the way. I do not remember leaving the house. Summarizing the reports of all subjects, Smirnov (1973) notes that virtually all the recalled information referred to experiences related to walking to the office. However, subjccts were subjectively certain that they must have thought about other things, yet only thought related to walking to the office could be retrieved. Such a selective retricval can be casily understood from the assumption that subjects could only access retricval cucs rclated to the walking and thc physical cnvironment traversed. Within this framework, we can also account for highway hypnosis (Natsoulas, 1970) where people suddenly realize that they remember nothing of the last twenty or thirty miles of the highway driven. If we assume that subjects are primarily thinking or fantasizing using internal cues during this timc, and are able to perform the driving task ncarly automatically, no memory trace of the environment would be cxpected. In such cascs, subjccts cvcn losc the rctricval cucs to what they were thinking about, thus leaving a total blank. It is fallacious to assume complete retrievability of episodic information. All available data on subjects' memory for previously presented information and their cognitive processes in experiments with long series of similar trials shows subjects' memory to be poor. If it were not so, verbal learning experimcnts would take only a single trial. Experimcnts using distinct types of stimulus material for different trials appear to yicld much better recall (Frankel, Lcvine & Karpf, 1970; Burack, 1950), a result casily cxplainable in terms of distinctiveness of retricval cucs. If subjects used exactly the same processes on all trials, the failure to recall somc of thcm would not bc fatal, but wc know that subjects frequently change thcir strategies in the course of an cxperiment, and may also solve differcnt problems with different mcthods. Λ further complication is that subjccts rely more and more on recognition to solve problems as an cxperiment procccds, hence may find it harder and harder to recall their most recent cognitive processes. How does the subject go from the retrieved episodic scgments to gencralizations about his processes? Inferences will gencrally bc required, hence the veridicality of reports produced in this way has little ## 152 Protocol Analysis relevance for the veridicality of reports of directly heeded information. Subiects may commit other types of errors. 'They may coimnbine episodic memories from several different processes into a single structure. They may also makc gucsses as to the likcly proccsses when they cannot remcmber them (cf. Mueller, 1911). Several situations are documented where subjects do not recall all relevant information but short-circuit the retrieval. When subjects report on the frequency or representativeness of a solution procedure, they may very well rely on inferential or heuristic rules. Tversky and Kahneman (1973) have shown in several experiments that frequency judgments are closely related to ability to recall. In one experiment subjects were presentcd with a list of names of well-known pcople of both sexes. When the persons of one sex were more famous than those of the other, subjects overestimated the proportion of that sex in the list. Subjects also tend to judge consonants, like r and k as being more frequent in first than in third position, because words are casier to recall when their initial letters are given. Yet, in fact, consonants like r and k are more frequent in third position. On much the same grounds, subjects may infer that the particular solution procedures they recall are representative of all such procedures. In a review article, Smcdslund (1969) claims that verbal reports did not provide useful information on rapid mental processes in an arithmetic task he had studied (Smedslund, 1968). He described two reports that could be proven inconsistent--one with the subject's performance and spced in solving the test items, the other with the types of items actually given. ln the original paper, however, Smedslund does not mention inaccuracy in the verbal reports, and actually quotes those reports to support some of his general results. In Smedslund's study the conditions for verbal reporting were far from optimal, for the subjects were asked after a relatively large number of trials to tell how they did the tasks. Even under these unpromising circumstances, the verbalized information, with a few exceptions, seemed to satisfy the author as basically consistent with his observations of subjects' performance. In a study on the implicit learning of grammar, Rcber and Lewis (1977) explicitly claimed inadequacy of retrospective reports: These reports were replete with statements that conformed with neither the rules of the grammar nor the subjccts' own bchavior. (Rcbcr & l.cwis, 1977, p. 353) First, a brief description of their cxpcriment. On the first day, subjects were asked to memorizc 15 patterns of symbols, likc VSSXXVV. The subjects were then told that these patterns were generated according to rules and asked to construct new patterns from scrambled symbols conforming to these rules. On this anagram-like task the subjects were given no feedback. For thrce more days, the subjects were first shown the 15 exemplars and then asked to do the anagram-like task. After completing this task on the fourth day, the subjects were shown a set of patterns and asked to decide whether they conformed to the rules that generated the 15 sample patterns. During this test, subjects were asked to verbalize reasons for cach judgment as it was madc. Finally, after the test the subjects were asked to write and describe in as much detail as possible what they knew about the rules and to describe special strategies they used in the experiment. T’hus, two types of verbal reports were collected in this study, ncither of which corresponds closely with our notion of retrospective reports. It is interesting that Reber and l.cwis almost cxclusively criticize the general reports collected after the experiment rather than the verbalizcd rcasons given after cach judgment. Let us first discuss their evidence against the post-session rule descriptions, which is given in the form of a detailed analysis of an "average" subject. 'Thc subjcct's performancc in thc anagram-like task improved stcadily from day to day, providing clear cvidcncc that his cognitive processes changed and that he did not apply the same rules at all times. Reber and I.cwis compared reported regularities with the properties of proposed solutions to the anagram task, with the notion that prominent features recalled should also show up as parts of the anagram solutions. Although they found that features that were reported also appeared reliably as parts of anagram solutions, as cxpected, they also found that some admissible combinations werc not generated. But in analysing the data, the experimenters pooled all anagram tasks froın day 1 to day 4. Hence, we would expect regularitics discovered late in the experiment to have a low frequcncy of occurrence in the anagrams; this would constitute no evidence of cpiphenomcnality. One reported pattern involved a combination of symbols that could not occur in the anagram tasks (although it occurred in one of thc 15 learning cxamples). Given the large number of scqucnccs cxposed in thc coursc of thc expcriment, and thc consequent possibilities for errors of recall, the subject's reports appear to cxhibit a rather high level of validity. Furthcr, in 69% of the cases where a subjcct rcjccted a pattern correctly and verbalized a rcason for the rejcction, this rcason was "correct" in terms of the experimenter's grammar. 'There is no cvidence that in the remaining 31% of the cases the reasons given were inconsistent with the subjects'rules. Apparent inconsistency of responses may simply be due to the fact that on successive occasions of retrieval, slightly different cues and context lead to different responses. Rcber and Allen (1978) give the following example from a protocol: An M-sandwich [the subject's term for an item beginning and cnding with M]. I know the last time I saw that I said no to it. But this looks right. Perhaps you can have an Without additional evidence, there is no reason to suppose that the subject is not reporting the actual information (""This looks right") that leads him to his response. (Reber & Allen, 1978) Reber and Allen (1978) point rather clearly to problems of retrieval as the source of inconsistency and "incorrectncss" of verbalized reasons. 'They note that most of the "incorrect" rules concerned features that a pattern cannot have. 'These rules were often discovered spontaneously, as shown by the following protocol segment: RM? I don't rcmembcr secing RM bcforc. Perhaps that's not right. No, you can't have an RM (Rcber & Allen, 1978, p. 215) Most reccntly Dulany, Carlson, and Dewcy (1983) replicated the learning study of Rcber and Λllen (1978). Along with their judgments of grammaticality, the subjects were instructed to underline the part of the letter string that made it well-formed or cross out the part that made it ungrammatical. Dulany ct al. found that the rules as (impcrfectly) understood by subjccts accounted for the individual subjects' pcrformances completely. Hence, imperfect rules or patterns that the subject has learned account for his responses. ## Other Processes Without Awareness In this section we will show that all instances that have been cited of lack of awareness with or without contradictory inferential reports can be traced to recognition processes. We will discuss first some studies involving stimuli that readily clicit responses. 'l’hen, in the next section, we will turn to the rather extensive literature on insight in problem solving and thinking. We will argue that insight involves direct access to pre-existing cognitive structures in LTM. Finally, wc will discuss subjects' uses of inferential strategics to extract information about previous expericnce as a substitute for episodic memory of cognitive processes. In situations where subjects' spontancously generated behavior is studied, we cannot rule out recognition processes based on S-R links that have been established previously. If we knew the subject's entirc prior history, we should, in principle, be able to identify the association that is later retrieved. Let us discuss a study by Rommetveit and Kvale (1965b) already considered in Chapter 2. Patterns were displayed to signal to subjects playing a wheel of fortune whether they would win or not. When the experimenters asked a boy to describe the differences between positive and negative patterns, he said he did not know, although he had been able to anticipate the rewards correctly on previous trials. When pressed by the cxperimenter, he finally attempted a verbal description and gave one that was inconsistent with the actual signals. In this and many other similar accounts, it seems appropriate to attribute the error to absence of the information from memory rather than to inconsistency between memory contents and verbal reports of them. When information is not in memory, it cannot be reported verbally. Howcver, it still remains to show that recognition processes are sufficient to account for thc performancc. First, observe that subjects necded only to make a binary prediction, "win" or "lose," so that any acccssed information implying likelihood of winning would suffice. In fact, subjccts achicved their better-than-chancc predictions by sclecting figures characterized by roundncss as "winners" (Rommetveit, 1965). But subjects might alrcady have in I.'I'M an association between "roundness" and "goodness." Moreover, cxperimnental variations, likc telling the subjccts that they will have to describe the figures afterwards and showing the subjects initially how the figures differed, may very well have changed their perceptions of the figures, and hence changed the cues that otherwise led to recognition of some figures as 'good'. Such an explanation is consistent with our carlier characterization of recognition processes. We can usc the same type of explanation for the finding by Rees and lsracl (1935) that subjects, solving a scries of 15 anagrams having identical structure, would select, for items with multiple solutions, the solution fitting the commnon structure, without reporting awareness of that structure. 'The anagrams all used the simple permutation, 54123. Six out of ten subjccts did not report awarencss of the permutation common to all the solutions, suggesting that they did not have this information at the timc they made their report. How can we explain how the four of these six subjects who made no crrors sclected the saine permutation in 15 consecutive trials without retaining knowledge of the structure in SIM? We would attribute the result to the spccial properties of the permutation, 54123, used in this cxpcriment. Subjccts did not have to learn this particular pattern, but could dccipher the anagram by using their normal visual scanning strategies, long since lcarned and automated: fixate at the left or ncar the middle of the stimulus, and scan from left to right. This strategy would revcal the anagraın after only a couple of trials—probably in less than a sccond. If this cxplanation is correct, then if more complex permutations were used, subjects would be aware of the structures of the solutions. This is exactly what Rees and Isracl found in their study. Kaplan and Schoenfeld (1966) recorded subjccts' cyc movements while they solved relatively simple perınutation anagrams. 'The letters in the anagram wcre spaced so that the subject was able to fixate only a single letter at a time. From the cye fixations they were able to determine when subjects anticipated a certain permutation. 'They found perfect agreement between anticipation and reported awareness of the permutation structure: two subjccts both displaycd anticipation and reported noticing the structure, whercas one did ncither. In various problem-solving tasks, ample cvidencc has been recorded for pre-established scan or motor behavior. For example, Lindley (1897) studicd subjccts tracing a figurc without repcating any linc or starting over. Subjects tended to start in the left-hand corner of the figurc, which made a solution imnpossible. It took subjccts considcrablc time to bccome awarc of the difficulty and change their behavior—a conscquence of their established habits of writing and reading. We propose a rather similar account for a series of cxperiments by Wason and Evans (1975) that they take as evidence for an unconscious response gencration process coupled with a separate process for giving justification or reasons for their responses. It is entirely possible for subjccts, especially if forcefully prompted, to generatc reasons for responses cvoked by recognition. Even when the response process generates intermediate reportable states, subjects may provide reasons that are more acceptable socially than those actually responsible for gencrating the response. However, in cxpcriments where thc subjects' responses cannot be accounted for in terms of immediate recognition, we feel obliged to scrutinizc the evidence that suggests a dissociation between heeded information and reported reasons. 'T'hc principal task environment in which experimental psychologists have proposed a dissociation between gencrating responses and giving reasons for them is logical reasoning, in particular, in tasks testing the understanding of the implication relation (Evans & Wason, 1976; Wason & Evans, 1975). In these expcrimcnts, all subjects with formal training in logic are screened out. Subjccts are told that the probłem has to do with four cards, cach card having a letter on one side and a number on the other. 'The subjects are then given the following rule: "If there is a I) on one side, then there is a 3 on the other side." They are then shown one side of cach of four cards, showing a D, B, 3, and 7, respectively. 'They are then told, "I want you to list for me those cards, and only those cards, that you must sce in order to find out whether the rule is true or false." In general, subjects want to see the cards with D) and 3, while the "correct" cards are those showing D) and 7. In the model proposed by Johnson-Iaird and Wason (1970), it was proposed that subjects could bç divided according to degrees of insight. Subjects without insight would sclect thc cards showing symbols mentioned in the rule. With partial insight, subjccts would also select instances where the card could falsify the rule. With full insight, subjccts would rule out the card (the one showing 3) that was irrelcvant to falsifying the rulc. Goodwin and Wason (1972) found support for this model by analyzing subjects’ verbalized rcasons for sclecting cards. Requiring subjects to give written rcasons had only a small effect toward inducing correct solutions. In fact, some subjects even changed from more nearly correct solutions to less correct solutions. 'This was interpreted by Goodwin and Wason as evidence that the subjccts' understanding fluctuated. Wason and Evans (1975), studying subjects’ responses to diffcrent rules (c.g., "If P, then not Q"), found that most subjccts chose to look at cards with symbols named in the rule regardless of the form of the rule. They advanced the hypothesis that the choice is based on a simple matching process identifying the names of the symbols in the rule and another process of rationalization to provide the justifications. Evans and Wason sought to test this two-stage hypothcsis by tclling subjects (corrcctly or falscly) which cards should be chosen, and asking them to givc rcasons for the choices. Subjects were most confident in their reasons when the cards sclcctcd by the cxperimcnter were those that they themsclves would havc chosen, cxccpt that thcy were about cqually willing and able to generate reasons with confidence that the 3 should be chosen as that it should not be. Subjects giving a reason for not selecting the 3 cited irrelevance. Subjects forced to give rcasons for selccting it gave as the reason a possibility for falsification. This result has been claimed by Evans (1975) to show that verbal reports do not reflect cognitive processes. We interpret it differently. Subjects presented with the original choice task usually fail, as we have seen, to carry out a thorough cnough analysis to arrive at the correct answer. On the other hand, when presented with an answer they believe to be correct, they carry out additional analysis to discover why it is correct, and from that analysis, they are able to provide a justification for the answer. It is presenting an "answer" to the subject that changes the cognitive proccsses. Evans (1982) has recently presented his own interpretation of these cxperiments which is consistent with ours. Both he and we interpret the original decision process as a recognition process, so that subjects cannot report the intermediate steps—their "reasons." A study by Brunswik and Hcrma (1951) appcars to bc a cornerstone in Brunswik's (1956) argument for lack of awareness in learning of probabilistic rclations betwcen cues and outcomes. In order to understand fully thc results of this study, wc havc to discuss how information about previous stimulus events may influence subequent perccptions. Brunswik and Herma presented their subjects with weights of two different colors, onc to be held in cach hand. For some pairs of weights, thc subjects wcrc askcd "which of thc two objccts appcared heavier at thc first moment of lifting??" (Brunswik & Herma, 1951, p. 284) Immediate impressions were to be expressed as a snap judgment. The subjects were allowed to judge the weights as cqual, yet discouraged from doing so. Each subject always held weights of a given color in the same hand, although the color varied among subjccts. In one cxperiment, the weights of one color were heavier most (80%) of the time. Interspersed were trials where the weights were cqual. During these test trials subjects tended to judge weights in the hand that normally reccived the lighter weights as heavier. Brunswik and Herna attributed these systematic responses to learning of a cue-response relation. After the completion of the 72 test and learning trials, subjects were asked, "In your opinion, which objects were on the average heavier, the green or the red?" (Brunswik & Herma, 1951, p. 288), and also a similar question regarding the weights in the right and left hands. (Remember that color and position were perfectly correlated.) Most of the subjects (about 75%) answered both questions incorrectly, but, of course, thcrcby reported correctly for the relation in the test trials. (Subjects did not have to make a judgment for the trials where the weights were objectively different.) Brunswik and Hermna (1951) notc that "some" subjccts explicitly asked if the question referred only to test trials, or to all trials, and were told the latter. As no separate analysis was made of these subjects, we simply don't know whether most subjects misinterpreted the question or in fact did not remember the relative weights in the trials without a test. Moreover, there is no evidence from the study's data that the subjects learned anything, if by learning we mcan a stable change in behavior. Uznadze (1966) shows that contrast effects of stimuli, likc those exhibited in the Brunswik-Hlerma cxperiment, can bc obtained for a varicty of stimuli—pressure, loudness of auditory stimuli, illunination, and weight. Theories explaining these phenomena have been proposed, most notably Helson's (1964) adaptation-level theory. 'These thcories can account for the subjects' bchavior in terms of short-termn shifts in the perceptual and sensory systems, without learning. In particular, it can account for their demonstration of "reversal learning" (Brunswik & Herma, 1951). In this cxperiment, the authors showed that after providing lighter weights to one hand (and eliciting the judgment of "heavier" when cqual weights were provided on test trials), the judgments could be reversed by giving heavier weights to that hand. An adaptation-level theory can also account for thc "onc-trial lcarning" cffects that puzzled Gibson (1969) in her discussion of this study. After a single presentation of uncqual weights, subjects show a 90% tendency to give a biased judgment on the subscquent test trial of cqual weights. Lacking evidcnce against the adaptation-lcvel theory, we argue that it provides a more parsimonious explanation of the bchavior than docs cuc-response learning. In Gibson's review of studies on learning stimulus-response relations in probabilistic environments, she finds very strong support, cxccpt for Brunswik and Herma's study, for the necessity of awareness in order for learning to occur. ## INSIGHT AND ACCESS TO SOLUTION IDEAS Apart from cases where the subjects rely on automatic processes, there are other forms of incompleteness in reports where information that was once in focal attention (in STM) is not verbalized. Information in STM is casily oblitcratcd. In a fcw scconds, thc contents of STM can be destroyed or made inaccessible by requiring subjects to perform certain types of tasks—-for cxample, repcatedly subtracting 7 from a given number (Brown-Peterson paradigm). With any shift in the locus of attention, of which this paradigm provides an cxample, the previous contents of ST'M become unavailable. If an intermediate result in a scqucnce of processes causes a direct exccution of other processes that make full demands on SIM, the intermcdiate result may reside for only a brief moment in SIM, and may bc lost before being reported. Under thinking-aloud conditions, it has been observed (Duncker, 1945) that informnation leading to the direct recognition of the appropriate action often tends not to be verbalized. Similar observations have been made (de Groot, 1965) about the reports of chess grandmasters considering possible moves in chess positions. A frequently cited study by Maier (1931) on subjects' retrospcctive reports about a hint given during solution of the Pendulum Problem gives some cvidence for the same phenomenon. Subjects who described the solution as emerging in a single step did not report any memory of the hint. Λ result of Maier's study that is less often mentioned was that al/ subjects who mentioned more than one step in the solution of the problem reported that the hint had been administered. The two related mechanisms mentioned thus far-the absence of intermediate stages of acts of recognition from STM, and failure to report transient contents of ST'M—are fully adequate to account for the phenomena of sudden "insight" that are the subject of so many anecdotes in the literature of crcativity (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977, pp. 240-241). The studies cited in support of sudden insight are based on retrospective accounts of "rcal" creative acts, often reported many ycars after the cvent. Fortunately, a number of studies have addressed this topic in a more controlled cxperimental environment. Durkin (1937) sought to crcate favorable circumnstances for "insight" with subjects thinking aloud while solving block puzzles. While subjccts occasionally reported insights, the background steps leading to the emcrgencc of the insightful ideas could always be detcrinined from the concurrent thinking-aloud protocols. Of this kind of insight, Durkin (1937, p. 81) says: When it occurs, it comes with an onrush that makes it sccm very sudden —an "out of the blue" cxperiencc. But it can always be found to have devcloped gradually. 'T'he suddenness must be regarded as due to the conccalment of the background. It does not bring in a ncw kind of process. (l)urkin, 1937, p. 81) For gcometry proofs (Henry, 1934), and for a varicty of "insight" problems (Bulbrook, 1932), the thinking-aloud protocols showed that the progress to solution was cither gradual or was determined by trial and error. In neither case was it necessary to postulate additional kinds of processes. Insight or illumination of a creative idea was by many carly investigators described as the result of a period of unconscious work, or incubation, following on prcliminary work in becoming familiar with the problem (preparation). During this period of alleged incubation, these accounts go, the scientist or inventor has laid the problem aside in favor of other activities. However, it has been suggested (Woodworth, 1938) that during the period of incubation, the scientist will occasionally lapse into thinking about the problem, cven while working on a different task. Woodworth (1938) cites a study by Platt and Baker that suggests that subjects are not aware of the durations of these unplanned episodes of concentrated thought on the problem. Clearly, such unanticipated thought processes, if they occur, will bc very difficult to retricve in retrospcct. Generally such episodes are terminated, often abruptly, by external dcmands—-as, for examplc, in a driving situation. It is also possible, as has been suggested by Simon (1966) that no new idcas are gencrated during incubation, but instcad, Einstellung effects that keep attention directed toward unproductive lines of scarch are dissipated by forgetting during this period. There is considerable evidence, though most of it is anccdotal, that many "creative" ideas are, in fact, reproductions of idcas from memory derived from the idcas of other people. Machotka (1964) mentions an art student who "generated" a poster design that she later recognized as having previously scen in the window of a storc. According to Lowes' (1927) analysis of Samuel Coleridgcs phrases and imagery, it can be seen that many of them came from reading, without Coleridge being aware of the sources of most of thcin. If other people's idcas can be mistaken for novel crcative ones, so can ideas that actually were gencrated by the subject himself at some carlier time. From rcscarch on daydrcaming (Singcr, 1975) and undirected thought (Klinger, 1971), there are suggestions that such thought episodes are difficult to recalì fully unless the retrospective reports are obtained shortly thercafter, or unless the subjects label or rehcarse the thought content for subscquent recall. Studics using concurrent verbalization (Bertini, I.cwis, & Witkin, 1964; Kazdin, 1976; Klingcr, 1971) provide detailed and informative accounts of undirected thought processes. In sum, thinking that is not closcly related to the cxternal cnvironment can somctimes be retricved with situational clucs, but seldom otherwise, except when it is verbalized concurrently with the thought process. ## Insight as Recognition Lct us now review thc cvidence wc have surveyed as to whether recognition processes, as we defined them carlier, are sufficient to account for the phenomena reported above. The most important hypothesis in our model is that recognition processes simply access an existing structure in I'T'M, without modifying, altering, or generating old or new cognitive structures. In Maier's (1931) problem-solving cxperiment, there is no disagrcement that subjects had the pendulum solution available in I'TM. The cvidencc in Durkin's (1937) study is cven clearer. Λn expcrimcntal group of subjccts first solved several small block puzzles with different configurations, while a control group did not. The large block puzzle now given to all subjccts could bc broken up into subproblcms, which corresponded to the smaller puzzles given carlier to the cxpcrimental group. Thus, only subjccts in the experimental group had in I.TM accessible cognitive structures corresponding to the subproblems; and predictably, only these subjccts had insight cxperienccs, with solution ideas corresponding closely to the carlier generated solution to the subproblems. In many complex tasks it is, thcreforc, likely that a subject will generate information that cannot all bc held in STM, but is acccssible from ITM. In some tasks, such partial results will be uscful and recognizcd, in other tasks, thcy may bc of limitcd usc and hard to retricvc—becausc of similarity confusions or other rcasons. Durkin (1937) suggests that sudden insight occurs prccisely in thosc tasks where the relevant information is too cxtensive to be all retained in ST'M. Sudden reorganization, which resembles closcly the usual descriptions of insight, can, when thc problem situation is beyond thc subject's 'apprchension span," be found to be related to previous responses (p. 84). Is it necessary to postulate unconscious processes to explain the sudden emergence of problem solutions? 'Therc arc at least two phenomena that must bc accounted for. First, the subject, in solution by 'insight," does not perccive his success as being a result of conscious cognitive processes. Sccond, subjects feel confidence that the suddenly appearing thought is the solution. 'Thus it might be claimed that both the solution finding processes and the testing processes were unconscious. The source cited most widely in support of the importance of unconscious processes is Poincarć (Ghisclin, 1952). Λ critical reading of Poincaré does not provide any evidence for unconscious processing, nor for the belief that Poincaré himself favored such an interpretation. Poincarć, discussing mathematical crcation from the vicwpoint of a completely "logical" mind, makes some observations, strikingly similar to those currently emphasized by information processing psychology, about the limitations of humans. He points to the limits of short-term memory as an explanation of occasional errors in generating proofs, and observes that the primary component of mathematical skill is a finer representation of mathemnatical knowledge that yields better effective memory, yet is restricted entirely to the mathematical domain. Mathematical creation, according to Poincarć, is "making new combinations with mathcmatical cntitics alrcady known." Hc concludes that a mcchanical combination of all possible alternatives is practically impossible, because of the large number of alternatives and he asserts that mathematicians only consider combinations that have a potential for yiclding intercsting results: Never in the field of his consciousness do combinations appcar that are not really useful, cxcept some that he rejccts but which have to somne cxtent the characteristics of useful combinations. (Poincaré, 1952, p. 25) Consistent with both of these observations is the view that the objects of mathematical thought arc abstract entitics and patterns rather than detailed realizations of strings of symbols and the like. Poincaré (1952) describes some circumstances in which he had sudden insights into mathematical relations. We note with interest that in the cases he cites, the insight involves seeing a correspondence between his current problem and some other devcloped domain of mathematics that was stored in, and accessible froin, his L'I'M. In these retrospective reports (recorded long after the original experience), he has, of course, no memory of his thoughts just prior to his insights—the ideas emerging in response to heeding the suddenly cmcrged solution may well lead to loss of accessibility of such prior hecded content. He only mentions his memory of the general social situation in which the sudden insight occurred. He makes the important observation that: These sudden inspirations ... never happen except after some days of voluntary effort which has appcared absolutely fruitless and where nothing good scems to have come, where the way takcn secms totally astray. (Poincaré, 1952, p. 27) Further, the subjcctive fecling of certainty of the correctness of the solution is occasionally mistaken: We almost always notice that this falsc idca, had it been true, would have gratified our natural fecling for mathematical clegancc. (Poincarć, 1952, p. 29) Although Poincaré considers the possibility that unconscious processing continues after the conscious work and delivers the resulting solution, he rejccts this proposal as unreasonable. He points out that in no case do the "unconscious processes make any calculations." In his experience they simply point out the similarity of two existing structures in LTM. In his final proposal, Poincaré (1952) suggests that during the active conscious processing that preceded insight the inventor activates and gencrates a lot of mathematical structures "from which we might reasonably cxpect the desired solution" (p. 30). This model of the process is quite consonant with our model of problem solution by rccognition. Poincaré's cxplanation requires no more unconscious processing than the unconscious steps in the recoguition proccss that we have discussed beforc. ## Regeneration—Hypotheses Wc will argue that for the most part our bchavior is mediatcd by cognitive proceses that generate actively the responses that are sought. 'This is true cven when thc same task is presented repcatedly. In many cases where the same behavior is required again and again, the conscious level of control is changed to a monitoring rolc, and the corresponding memory tracc may becomne weak or disappear. In thc common case where one is wondering, for cxample, whcther one turned off the stove or locked the door to one's house, unless some cxplicit attempt was made to memorize this event or some deviation occurred from the normal course of events, one is generally unable to retrieve any episodic mnemory even a few scconds later. Most people have returned to the door to check whethcr it was lockcd, and found it to bc so, which shows that the process was actually exccuted. Even in situations with rather full retrospective reports, subjects often have difficulty in retricving the corresponding cpisodic memory. However, this doesn't imply that they cannot give valid reports on "what thcy must have donc." When repcating thc samc task, like multiplying two 2-digit numbers in one's head, a subject is highly likely to encounter the same information cach time. We might call memory of this information "regeneration memory" to distinguish it from memory of the individual episodes. Regeneration memory, of course, is simply contained in LTM, and does not constitute a separate specialized memory. For the most part, regencration memory provides a good source for determining how we did behave when the behavior concerns responses to invariant knowledge structures or stable aspects of the environment. 'T'he answers that subjects give to questions likc, "Name the current President of the United States," or "Give a word starting with 'A’," can be retricved from regeneration memory as well. Regeneration memory would provide invalid reports if thc identity of the President had meanwhile been changed, or if some other word starting with "A" had occurred immediately bcfore. 'The possibility that subjects may be relying on regencration memory rather than cpisodic memory should be ascertainable through retrospcctive reports. Wc believe that subjects are able to discriminate between the two types of memory. However, there also are paradigms that will diffcrentiate the two. It is possible to prcscnt the subject with incomplete information so as to climinate reprocessing, yet to present sufficicnt information to serve as a retrieval cuc for episodic memory. For example, regeneration memory would not provide an answer to: "I asked you for the name of a certain kind of famous person. What kind of person was I asking for?" or "I asked you for a word starting with a letter. Which letter was it?" Although we do not find in thc literature experiments that support directly the idea of regencration memory, we would likc to discuss some results that providc indirect cvidence for such a mechanism. 'T'hc first result is that subjccts "unconsciously" change thcir attitudes as a result of being asked to argue for an opposing view. The change is unconscious in the sense that subjects don't report being aware of changing their attitudes and pcrccive thcmsclves as having had the samc attitudes cven before the experimentally induced argument (Bem & McConnel, 1970). 'T'he experimental results can be understood if we assumc that gencrating an attitude judgment involves rctricving rclevant facts from lTM, yet does not leave a retricvable episodic memory trace. After arguing against thcir original vicws, subjects in making the postexperimental attitude judgments may retrieve some of the newer facts, and thus be biased in the dircction they had argued. If we now assume that the subjccts don't have any episodic memory of thcir previous judgment or judgmcnt process, they may cxplicitly rcgenerate thc process, or possibly rcalize that it would be the same as their current attitude. (The correlation bctwccn recall and current attitude is very high: .96 to .98.) Control subjccts without any expcrimcntal manipulation bchave as if they make two attempts to generate attitudes—one for the recall and one for the current attitudc. We can also account for the finding that the subiccts who remcmbered the instruction to give cvidence against their prior attitude showed less attitude change. (Thc nunber of subjects forgetting this component of the instructions was remarkably high.) Remembering the restriction might reflect memory of difficulty in suppressing counter-arguments that were accessed at the time for making the attitude judgment. In an intcrcsting scrics of studics, Fischhoff (1975,1977) has demonstrated that being informed about the answer to a question or the outcome of a situation changes subjects' pcrccptions of how well they knew thc answer (knew-it-all-along cffcct), or how likcly they judged the outcomc of the situation to be (hindsight). Fischhoff (1977) had little or no succcss in getting subjects to disregard the information and climinate thc bias, by different kinds of instructions. The information presented appcared to integrate irrevocably with prior information (Fischhoff, 1977). We think that these results should be interpretcd in terms of reprocessing. Subjects do not have acccssible episodic mcmory of thcir cognitive proccsses for a judgment—thc judgment is gcncrated ancw cach timc. T'his is consistcnt with thc finding that when information relevant to thc judgment is changed, so is the judgment process and its outcomc, without any reportable change in thc proccss. This reprocessing vicw can also account for Fischhoffs observation (1977) that subjects can "remember" or rcgencrate many of their original judgments an hour later, when thcy are not given additional information. The subjects were instructed to remember thcir original responses, but wc don't know if the subjccts would havc been cqually accurate if they were simply askcd to answer the qucstion again (i.c., asked cxplicitly to reprocess the answer). Λ similar analysis can account for the surprising observation that training and trcatment will not change self-report mcasures taken prior and subscqucnt to trcatment, cven when objcctivc changes are demonstratcd (Howard, 1980). Howard (Howard, 1980; Howard, Ralph, Gulanick, Maxwell, Nance, & Gcrbcr, 1979) suggcsts that information uscd to gencrate the ratings changes along with thc training and treatment. Hcncc, thc posttraining ratings will not cmploy thc samc scalc as the pretraining ratings (response-shift bias). Item 13: In a heated discussion I generally become so absorbed in what I am going to say that l forget to listen to what others are saying. Subject at Pretest: "I listen to what other pcople say when I'm talking to them. I'd say—2 (I disagrec on the whole).' Subject at Posttest: "All these group exercises made me realizcd that I don't listen to people. I should have put +3 (l agree very much) the first time I filled this out. But the group really opened my cyes and helped me to try to be more of an active listener and so while I still soinetimes forget to listen to people, overall I'm not doing nearly so badly now. I'll put – 1 (I disagrec a little)." (Howard et al., 1979, pp. 3-4) In order to ascertain that pretraining and posttraining ratings are judged on thc same scale, subjccts are askcd to make both judgments after the training or treatment. Using retrospective pretest and posttest comparison, Howard (Howard, 1980; Howard & Dailey, 1979; Howard et al., 1979) finds reliable differenccs attributable to the training and treatment. 'T'he primary difference betwcen the changes duc to training and the previous two changes is that subjects will heed and hence have explicit memory for acquired and changed memory structures, which allows them to assess the change attributed to training and treatment. ## CONCLUSION In this chapter, we have marshalled the evidence for a simple hypothesis that is at the core of our model of human information processing: the information that is heeded during performance of a task, is the information that is reportable; and the information that is reported is information that is heeded. Wc havc cxamincd all of the studics of which we are aware that have been cited as challenging this hypothesis, and have found that they do not, in fact, refute it. Wc have also examincd a grcat many studies on recall, not designed with this hypothesis in mind, and have found that they, too, are compatible with it. Wc conclude that the hypothesis provides a substantially correct basis for understanding and interpreting verbal reports. One kind of information that subjects clcarly cannot report, because it is not available in STM, are the cues that allow them to recognize stimuli. The result of the process of recognition (i.c., the thing recognized) is hecded and can be reported, but not the intermediate steps in the recognition process. Inability to report recognition cues must not be confused with failure to report contents of STM. Many of the other claimed gaps in verbal reports are attributabie to memory failures or confusions, especially when subjects are asked to make general retrospective reports, rather than to report specific recent episodic memories. Likewise, when subjects fail to recover from LT'M information that has been requested of them, they may reason about the situation and report the results of their inferences instead of memories. With this basic hypothesis in hand, wc arc now in a position to discuss the kinds of inferences that experimenters are justified in making from verbal protocols takcn concurrently with performancc of a task. This will be the topic of the next chapter.