# Maori vision and the imperialist gaze / Postscript (February 1997)

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Tom Flynn Tim Barringer：《Colonialism and the object empire, material culture and the museum》\Tom Flynn Tim Barringer：《Colonialism and the object empire, material culture and the museum》\Tom Flynn Tim Barringer：《Colonialism and the object empire, material culture and the museum》\auto\Tom Flynn Tim Barringer：《Colonialism and the object empire, material culture and the museum》.md

# Maori vision and the imperialist gaze

Ngapine Allen

The Treaty of Waitangi, our founding document, was signed by Queen Victoria's representatives and the New Zealanders', as Maori people were then identified, on 6 February 1840 (Angas 1847a). As a nation founded on colonialism, mainstream New Zealand – the Anglo-European Treaty partner – has struggled with various concepts of its own, and of Maori, identity. Recent attempts on the part of intellectuals to forge a bi-cultural identity have been largely resisted as a result of entrenched racism. This chapter re-explores the territory of identity. The establishment of Maori art history in New Zealand universities reflects an awareness, inevitable if belated, that New Zealand is a South Pacific nation. Ten years ago no one would have accepted that Maori could have an art history.

This account focuses on the travels and wanderings of a Maori house of great significance, presently displayed in one of New Zealand's major museums and at the centre of a restitution claim. The history of this Maori house, I shall argue, demonstrates a need for greater awareness of cultural difference. The intention here is a bi-cultural approach which acknowledges that museums are places where several cultures live together. Addressing this issue, and actively involving the people directly concerned with a sacred and revered cultural treasure, facilitates cultural exchange.

My visit to the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1995 marked one of those life-time, momentous personal experiences, made more poignant by the fact that a Maori house had once graced its courtyard. Ancestors immortalised in the carvings of the house were present. To follow in their waewae tapu – sacred footsteps – is a spiritual journey.

To introduce the ancestors, their world and worldview, is not a journey into the past, but into the future. The Maori term i mua describes the concept that the past is in the future. The Maori reality is that what you can see is in front of you. Hence, ancestors, viewed from a Western historical perspective as behind’, are, from a Maori perspective, in front'. Conversely, the future is something you cannot see and is therefore behind you. To conceptualise this, you must reverse your notion of history. Contrary to expectations, however, the cosmological view as recorded within a Maori conceptualisation is a close corollary to the Christian Creation in Western historical accounts. In the beginning there was nothing, then there was darkness and then light. We can better understand the significance of Maori myth when we recall that George Grey (Governor of New Zealand from 1845-53 and 1861-8) attempted to record all Maori myths and superstitions – a bank of information that could potentially be used to cripple the infrastructure of Maori society (Grey 1971).

The Maori ancestral house encapsulates the spiritual world; indeed, every ancestral house is imbued with cosmological history. This was true of the house which was brought to the South Kensington Museum in the nineteenth century and the house as it survives today. Built upon the land with the sky and heavens arching above, the house metaphorically symbolises the primal parents Ranginui (the Sky Father), and Papatuanuku (the Earth Mother), their close embrace in the realm of Te Po (the dark and not so dark period) which followed Te Kore (the nothing but not the nothing) and their separation – the cause of light and enlightenment. This relationship is manifested within the physical structure of the dwelling: the supporting timbers reaching skyward evoke the male component, the insulating fibrous materials, the female element.

It is a moving experience to approach an ancestral house. Imagine a person on hands and knees with their face directly towards you, a very humble position. The house is structurally positioned with the bargeboards as arms and the two large posts on either side as legs. The front of the house is the face with an eye, the window, and mouth, the doorway, always open to welcome you inside. The gable mask is connected to the ridgepole, the backbone of the ancestor's body. From there the ribs connect to the sideposts, poupou and the named ancestors carry their bloodlines to these poupou who are named, and define the powerful allegiances (Harrison 1990).

The house which came to London in 1882, Mataatua, was named after a waka (canoe). As Harrison explains,

Physically and symbolically the house can be likened to an upturned canoe and parts of it to parts of the human body. The backbone of the ancestor and its parallel is the keel of the canoe. Similarly, the heke (rafters) inside the house are the ribs of the ancestor which are mirrored by the thwarts of the canoe, the ends of which bear the family marks and symbols of rights to occupancy, as are the ancestral pillars in a meeting house.

(Harrison 1990: 24)

Built in 1874, the house was named to evoke a powerful symbol for the people. The mana (prestige) of the house was measured by the named ancestors associated with it. These are all the descendants of the Awa peoples who were of the Mataatua canoe, who peopled the whole Bay of Plenty seaboard. My own great grandmother was born at the northern end and was a direct descendent of Te Rangihouhiri of the Ngaiterangi and one of the ancestors carved for the house. This house signified a powerful alliance binding the kinship ties of the Mataatua Confederation of tribes, cementing over old intertribal conflicts, vital in the period following the Land Wars (1860–72) and ensuing confiscations. The Mataatua Confederation sought redress and, in naming the house Mataatua, the people could establish their rights to occupancy and territory in the Land Courts that the new European regime had established.

A new house is always an important undertaking, but this house in particular reflected the urgency of the times. Mataatua was built as a meeting house to facilitate large gatherings and the occasion of the opening was organised as a show of solidarity. The government and tribes recognised the significance of this occasion as a vehicle for land negotiations; it continued for three days from 7–9 March 1875. The Minister of Native Affairs, Donald McLean, was present with the magistrate and agents (Mead 1990: 38–45). Every tribe was anxious as to where the confiscation lines would be drawn. Although the circumstances were demoralising, the descriptions recorded in the local press show the remarkable resilience of the chiefs.

My great-grandmother's grand uncle was the renowned Ngati Maniapoto, warrior chief and a key negotiator in the aftermath of the Land Wars. He was delayed in attending the opening and arrived shortly afterwards. He was invited with a government agent, whose task was to closely monitor tribal activity. The agent's own account reads:

Monday, the 17th, (1875) the party moved on to Whakatane . . . after going through the ceremony of first entering the house, they took possession as the guests. Tukehu stood up and welcomed the guests ending with a song. Hori Kawakura (the Ngati Awa host) said, 'Welcome Maniapoto to your house Mataatua, the house that has been built for you and the Governor. You showed yourself obstinate when in the bush, never the less you are here at last. I have touched you with my greenstone (charmed him to Whakatane)'.. . A Waikato chief, Tukorehu, replied to the speeches and then Rewi spoke on his own behalf.

(Mead 1990: 47)

The Under-Secretary for the Native Department was H. T. Clarke. From his remarks, it seems that the kaupapa (reason) for the house being built - to indicate peace – was accepted:

Thanks for your welcome. I have nothing to talk about. I cannot help looking round the house of Ngati Awa. I was here when the house was opened. Some of the people had appealed to the hills of Whakatane to know if the house had been built for evil or good and the echo replied good.

(Mead 1990: 47)

In 1990, the Ngati Awa, after two recorded requests in 1920 and 1983 for the repatriation of their taonga (treasure), compiled a report on the House of Representatives to present to the Waitangi Claims Tribunal. They claimed that the house

was a living community house and remained so until it was rudely dismantled by Captain Preece in 1878 in an amazing exhibition of pakeha [a person of predominantly European descent] ignorance of Maori custom on the one hand and arrogance on the other to even think of asking a community to give up its premier tribal structure to be taken overseas to show off the might of the British Empire. Such a request would not be tolerated today.

(Ngati Awa 1990: 47–8)

The authors of the 1990 report asked Why did the chiefs agree in the face of internal opposition? What benefits did they expect would come to Ngati Awa? Were they scared of the Government?’(Ngati Awa 1990: 47-8). As the report assumes that the Crown understands the Maori background to these claims and questions, I will examine them further.

My great grandmother, Pera Te Rangihou-McMillan, was a young girl at the time. Tutored by the tohunga (priest), she became an authority on whakapapa (genealogy) and history of our Ngaiterangi tribe. The full extent of Maori deprivation began with the arrival of Europeans in our land. While the truth is often unpalatable, where it concerns colonisation it is particularly important to correct the historical record. We should recall, also, that descriptions of events by past observers are affected by their prejudices.

From a Maori viewpoint, as Herewini Ngata observes, the colonisation process began with the establishment of missions which invited further immigration. An immediate consequence was the importation of a variety of infectious diseases - from syphilis and gonorrhoea to tuberculosis and typhoid – causing the decimation of the Maori population by as much as 60 per cent by 1850 and leading, eventually, to dispossession, depopulation, despondency, desperation and depression' (Ngata 1994: 4-6). Suppression by the established central Parliament of Maori attempts at self-determination resulted in the Land Wars of the 1860s and the acquisition by the government of millions of acres of Maori territory (which continued well into this century). In just ten years from 1890 to 1900, three million acres of land had been purchased by the government and only three million acres remained in Maori ownership; that is, 10 per cent of the original land mass (Ngata 1994). The dispossession continued. Many people were landless. The photographs of Maoris from this period document the appalling social conditions and there is no doubt that the people did fear further repercussions of colonisation.

Mataatua had been built in 1874 through the will to survive, but the deprivation and fear of further dispossession effectively meant that Mataatua stood little chance if the government wished to bargain for it. The fear and deprivation was, I believe, the reason that it was possible for the government to seize treasures such as Mataatua. Mataatua was not the only house to be appropriated. There were others.

In the social climate of the late nineteenth century, the acquisition of a fully carved house was the supreme trophy. Maori pleas to retain such taonga are recorded in government records and we can identify that superiority and manipulation by government agents to extract treasures from war-defeated, impoverished people from the tenor of the reports. Such imperialistic force – the removal of treasures in an attempt to reinforce the imperial centre – is one of the key issues in the study of colonialism in relation to material culture and art. While England represented the imperial centre in relation to New Zealand, the relatively new local regime was itself a centre of imperialism.

Another Maori house, described as our greatest national treasure' (Mead 1984c), was built in 1842, by the master carver, Raharuhi Rukupo and, as Rongowhakaata kaumatua (elder) Darcy Ria, observes: ‘There is still much to be learnt [as to] how the government acquired the house in 1867’ (Ria 1994). According to official accounts, the carver protested against the removal of his house and sought its return by leading the petition: ‘Our very valuable house had been taken away, without pretext, by the government: we did not consent to its removal...I did not consent, but told him [J. C. Richmond, then Minister of Native Affairs] no, it is for the people to consider' (Ria 1994). Richmond's written reply stated that he had asked to take the house at ‘a large meeting of three or four hundred people and there was only one objection’. He had asked the magistrate to gain consent' which appears to have been achieved with a payment of one hundred pounds. But discontent continued and in 1878, after a second petition, the Native Affairs Committee voted a final payment of three hundred pounds.1

Mataatua, the house taken in 1878, was built by the master carver Apanui Te Hamaiwaho and his son Wepiha Apanui who both protested at its removal. Wepiha Apanui conducted major consultations between Maori and pakeha (Mane-Wheoki 1993). A consistent feature of both cases is the master carver's protest and the silence of the majority, which suggests that they were being manipulated. Equally telling in the official accounts is the absence of arguments actually used by the agents to procure the houses. In the case of Apanui's house, Captain George Preece, the government agent, recommended that the Government should give the Ngati Awas some substantial recognition in return for same' (Mane-Wheoki 1993: 63). In both cases there also appeared to be some haste on the part of the agents to arrange the removal without having settled payment.

Internal opposition arose when the house was dismantled. In uniquely Maori fashion, the women threatened to conceal the ridgepole to protect the backbone and sacredness of the ancestors. But the house was despatched and sent to the Sydney Exhibition in 1879. Later, the government, keen to tour its exhibit would claim that the house had been given to Queen Victoria. But there is no instrument of transfer on file. When the house was removed, the government acted ruthlessly and Ngati Awa justifiably felt duped. Apanui then asked for three thousand pounds which was refused (Mead 1990: 64).

Until this point in the history of Mataatua house, we can conclude that the tapu (sacredness), and mana (sovereignty) of the house had been eroded. As the indignation of the Ngati Awa Report suggests, the separation of the house from the whenua (land) was a desecration. The house is obviously more than a house of ancestors of Mataatua, the foundation of the tribe; it also symbolised the tribal waka (social cohesion) and the cosmological connections. From this point the history of Mataatua becomes paradigmatic of the many desecrations of our houses in captivity and of mana Maori (the prestige of Maori people in general).

South Kensington Museum's accession number² for a Maori House given for a proposed Colonial and Ethnographic Museum was 422-1882, a desirable feature in the Colonial Annexe' according to the New Zealand Colonial Secretary (Mane-Wheoki 1993: 63). The house was shipped from the periphery to the centre of the empire and arrived, via Sydney and Melbourne, in England in 1882. Following the example set by the Sydney exhibitors the house was displayed in the quadrangle of the South Kensington Museum with the interior carvings turned outwards, maximising the exhibit's spectator appeal, but removing it from its own context. The house, as evidence of the reach of the Empire and juxtaposed with the exhibits ranging from machines to fine arts, was codified as a subordinated other'. A year later, the house was installed in the grounds of the museum and the carvings and weavings returned to positions in which they were originally conceived. Four years later, when new work was being carried out at the museum, the house was dismantled and stored.

New Zealanders had by this time embraced the idea of exhibitions with fervour, the first taking place in Dunedin from January to May 1865. In 1885, the first government-funded exhibition was held in Wellington, and Dunedin followed again with an exhibition which opened in November 1889 and closed in April 1890. This second exhibition heralded New Zealand's official celebration of fifty years of British rule and included a Maori and South Seas’ exhibit.

The example of the American extravaganzas of the turn of the century provided the next New Zealand exhibition with its most ambitious plans to date, and the government, spurred towards creating a South Pacific Empire, invested in research into the latest developments in World's Fairs and International Exhibitions. In 1904 T. E. Donne, General Manager of the Government Department of Tourist and Health Resorts, was in America as New Zealand's Commissioner to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition. The New Zealand Premier who promoted the International Exhibition vigorously from 1903 requested in the Governor General's opening address to parliament, that Donne should

visit various centres in the United States and proceed to London and Europe in order to arouse interest amongst manufacturers and others in the colony's forthcoming exhibition. Donne spent some time in London [and] other large British centres . . . the Liege International Exhibition and various European cities.

(Cowan 1910: 23)

On his return to New Zealand he was appointed one of the Vice Presidents of the next exhibition.

In the International Exhibition at Christchurch in 1906 indigenous people were paraded as exhibits before the Anglo-Saxon populace - evidence of a little Pacific empire. The 1906 exhibition marked the beginning of the New Zealand search for a local and international identity. The New Zealand and South Pacific Exhibition in 1925, again in Dunedin, likewise featured an ethnographic section. The scale of the Maori section was the largest ever attempted.

At the turn of the century, Maori art was subjected to colonial disciplines: interested pakeha (Europeans), such as Augustus Hamilton, were instrumental in creating what has been described as a ‘veiled orthodoxy' (Neich 1983) in the art of carving whereby the carvers under patronage were persuaded to carve classical art' contrary to their own unique traditions, thus creating a hybrid art of pseudo-carving. In the wider picture these pakeha had effectively set about creating a pseudo-culture on a much larger scale and with full government support.

Perhaps the most influential person in the archetypal colonial representation of the Arawa carvers and their work was the government minister, T. E. Donne. He had his own Maori House - a small standard model built for tourists, named Te Wharepuni a Maui', measuring 20 ft by 12 ft – which he lent for the exhibition. Similar to the Rauru' house now in Hamburg, Germany, this house was built by Neke Kapua to suit the pakeha experts as, according to the Official Record, a more perfect specimen' (Cowan 1910: 323).

The most remarkable feature of this pa (fortified settlement) was the unprecedented method by which the pakeha (European) experts fabricated it themselves; structures were built from borrowed carvings from museums, from various tribes and new carvings were commissioned; they even invited living exhibits – real Maori people! In this final act, the exhibition creators excelled themselves for, in Pacific empire fashion, the crowning achievement was the copy-book charade imported from the European and American imperial displays of parading Pacific Island peoples. In this show of empire, the containment of Maori culture was complete as the visiting islanders were welcomed on the place deemed appropriate, the marae (sacred ground in front of the meeting house). By the time the exhibition came to a close in 1907, New Zealand had gained dominion status.

In London, proposals for the Mataatua house to be exhibited at the Festival of the Empire in 1911 did not come to fruition because a whole village and Maggie Papakura's concert party from Rotorua, went to England to represent New Zealand instead. This tokenistic display of Maori culture was extremely popular and provided an exoticism central to the kind of racial ideology underpinning imperial displays.

In the first two decades of this century, a number of people from New Zealand were aware of Mataatua house in the South Kensington Museum and a wounded soldier on leave in England, Harry Devenish Skinner, pursued ways of repatriating the house to New Żealand. The Maori House remained in storage until 1924, however, when it was displayed at the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley.

It was returned to New Zealand for the New Zealand and South Seas Exhibition in Dunedin in 1925. After this exhibition, the house was removed to the Otago Museum and restoration was undertaken. Skinner, who had studied at the University of Cambridge Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology during the First World War, was appointed curator of the Otago University Museum in 1919, and under his direction the house was reconstructed according to museum orthodoxy. It was shortened and contained within its stone walls, thus losing its connection to Ranginui and Papatuanuku and thereby ceasing to represent its unique tribal origins; other tribal carvings replaced those that had suffered over the years of travel and display. Although the replacement carvings belonged to an East Coast house and established an older tribal connection, this was merely coincidental and it is doubtful whether this was a primary concern for the curator. The house Mataatua remains at the bottom of the South Island, on exhibition to this day. For one hundred and sixteen years, the Ngati Awa people have mourned the loss of their sacred treasure; yet there remains the possibility for one more, hopefully final, journey for Mataatua, to its tribal lands at Whakatane in the North Island.

The exhibition, Te Maori: Treasures from New Zealand, which toured cities in North America between 1984 and 1985, and the same exhibition retitled Te Maori: Te Hokinga Mai: The return home, which travelled the length of New Zealand for another two years, created significant attitudinal changes toward taonga Maori. The elevation of Maori carving from craft to fine art, through its display in museums such as the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York and the awestruck reaction of American visitors to the exhibition, impressed the wider public at home. A contributing factor was the enthusiastic participation of Maori in opening rituals and forums which accompanied the exhibition. Although Mataatua was not included in the travelling exhibit, the Otago Museum was one host venue and the Ngati Awa people, disputing the museum's ownership, began negotiations for its restitution.

In 1990, Te Runanga o Ngati Awa published Research Report No. 2, Nga Karoretanga o Mataatua Whare (The wanderings of the carved house Mataatua) as part of a large claim to the Waitangi Tribunal seeking redress for land grievances. In November 1994, at Wairaka Marae in Whakatane, Ngati Awa presented their case before the Tribunal. The Otago Museum was invited to make a presentation to the Tribunal at Wairaka as well as the Crown. At the time of writing, the Waitangi Tribunal - a statutory body – is yet to evaluate the submissions and publish their recommendations. Although the Tribunal is the judiciary body handling Maori claims with the Crown, their decisions are not binding on the government and interested parties are still able to contest its decisions.

From Mr Firth's visit to the King Party', The Daily Southern Cross, June 9, 1869, Auckland:

PAENGAHURU: The land is like a stricken bird, whose wings are quivering on account of the pain.

## Postscript (February 1997)

In contemporary New Zealand society, issues of ownership of cultural treasures are being handled with varying degrees of success. Carved burial chests and fully decorated waka (canoes) have been returned to tribes or local museums. At the time this chapter was presented as a paper at the AAH Conference in London, the Museum of New Zealand invited elders of the Rongowhakaata to Wellington to discuss the future of Rukupo's house, Te Hau ki Turanga (discussed above). The elders agreed for the house to be exhibited in the new museum which is scheduled to be opened in February, 1998.

In 1996, the Waitangi Tribunal recommended to the Crown that Mataatua be returned to Whakatane. By the end of the year, the carvings were sent to the Whakatane Museum and are safely there until Ngati Awa construct a new marae and reconstruct their premier house.

