# Design Anthropology ## Object Cultures in Transition Edited by Alison J. Clarke Blo msbury Aca demic An imprint o f Blo msbury Publishing Plc B L O O M S B U R Y LON DON • OXFORD • NEW YORK • NEW DELHI • SYDNEY Bloomsbury Academic An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 50 Bedford Square London WC1B 3DP UK 1385 Broadway New York NY 10018 USA ## www.bloomsbury.com BLOOMSBURY and the Diana logo are trademarks of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc This edition first published 2018 A previous version of this book was published by Springer, 2011, with the title Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the 21st Century © editorial and introductory material, Alison J. Clarke © individual chapters, their authors Alison J. Clarke has asserted her right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as Author of this work. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers. No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on or refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication can be accepted by Bloomsbury or the author. British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. ISBN: HB: 978-1-4742-5904-0 PB: 978-1-4742-5903-3 ePDF: 978-1-4742-5905-7 eBook: 978-1-4742-5906-4 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress. Cover design: David A. Gee Typeset by Lachina To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com. Here you will find extracts, author interviews, details of forthcoming events and the option to sign up for our newsletters. ## Table of Contents List of Illustrations v List of Contributors ix Acknowledgments xiii Introduction xv 1 Susanne Küchler Materials and Design 1 2 Harvey Molotch Objects in Sociology 19 3 Alison J. Clarke The Anthropological Object in Design: From Victor Papanek to Superstudio 37 4 Maria Bezaitis and Rick E. Robinson Valuable to Values: How ‘User Research Ought to Change 53 5 Jane Fulton Suri Poetic Observation: What Designers Make of What They See 69 6 Jamer Hunt Prototyping the Social: Temporality and Speculative Futures at the Intersection of Design and Culture 87 7 Pauline Garvey Consuming IKEA and Inspiration as Material Form 101 8 Nicolette Makovicky “Erotic Needlework”: Vernacular Designs on the Twenty-First-Century Market 115 9 Vladimir Arkhipov Functioning Forms/ Anti-Design 133 10 Diana Young Coloring Cars: Customizing Motor Vehicles in the East of the Australian Western Desert 147 11 Lane DeNicola The Internet, the Parliament, and the Pub 161 12 Daniel Miller Interior Decoration—Offline and Online 169 13 Erin B. Taylor and Heather A. Horst Designing Financial Literacy in Haiti 179 14 Arturo Escobar Stirring the Anthropological Imagination: Ontological Design in Spaces of Transition 201 Index 217 ## Illustrations 2.1 New York City subway turnstiles. © Noah McClain 2.2 Toilet Fountain, San Francisco Exploratorium. © Harvey Molotch 2.3 Frustrated mover, New York City subway turnstiles. © Noah McClain 3.1 A set of wooden Japanese combs collected by Papanek as exemplars of indigenous design tied to cultural ritual and evolved ergonomics (in this case the elegant aesthetic of Geisha hairstyling). Victor J. Papanek Foundation, University of Applied Arts Vienna 3.2 A collection of fishing hooks from Papua New Guinea, used by Papanek to show design development within indigenous cultures. Victor J. Papanek Foundation, University of Applied Arts Vienna 3.3 Victor Papanek and his wife Harlanne in their Copenhagen apartment 1973, with a backdrop of indigenous artifacts. Victor J. Papanek Foundation, University of Applied Arts Vienna 3.4 Tin Can Radio: radio receiver designed for use in the developing world at 9 cents a piece. By Victor Papanek and George Seeger at North Carolina State College. Originally published in Victor J. Papanek, Design for the Real World (New York: Pantheon Books, 1971), 163. Victor J. Papanek Foundation, University of Applied Arts Vienna 3.5 Tin Can Radio receiver decorated with colored felt cutouts and seashells by a user in Indonesia according to their own taste. Originally published in Victor J. Papanek, Design for the Real World (New York: Pantheon Books, 1971), 163. Victor J. Papanek Foundation, University of Applied Arts Vienna 3.6 Front cover, Global Tools bulletin no. 1, design by Remo Buti, Edizioni L’uomo e l’arte, Milan, 1974. 5.1 Billboard without an advertisement. This caught Gen Suzuki’s eye as he passed it in a Tokyo subway station. He understood later that what intrigued him was the boundary between the object and its environment. © Gen Suzuki 5.2 The coffee Gen Suzuki was served on a summit in the Alps; the whipped cream on top was the shape of the mountain he had just climbed. © Gen Suzuki 5.3 Gen Suzuki’s design for a pen stand was inspired by his observation of rolls of tape stacked on a friend’s desk. © Gen Suzuki 5.4 This image of a shoe store in a Russian mall became a powerful metaphor for the simple and honest ‘old world’ offering to Eastern European consumers. © Annette Diefenthaler 5.5 Images documenting observed uses and meaning of color in Brazil. © Katie Clark 5.6 The overloaded dolly; a typical sight in Brazil that inspired the idea of a bag that is not only a container but can also carry things bigger than itself. © Katie Clark 5.7 The Havaianas zip bag embodying how expressions of color, gestures, and versatility play out in Brazilian culture. © Katie Clark 5.8 The final rendering for the surgical tool: It embodies the signature contrast of rigid and organic visual elements. © Katie Clark 6.1 Neugenics Birthmark TM Heath Insurance Advertisement, 2002. Designer: Heather Frank. © Heather Frank 6.2 Neugenics Birthmark TM Heath Insurance Advertisement, 2002. Designer: Heather Frank. © Heather Frank 6.3 Hydrogen Energy Future, 2004. Designers: Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby. © Jason Evans 6.4 Blood/Meat Energy Future, 2004. Designers: Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby. © Jason Evans 6.5 BrandX: Louis Vuitton Series Image #1, New York, 2007. Designers: Peter Allen + Carla Ross Allen. © Peter Allen + Carla Ross Allen 6.6 Skinthetic Redux: Chanel Series Image #4, New York, 2009. Designers: Peter Allen + Carla Ross Allen. © Peter Allen + Carla Ross Allen 7.1 Family Photographs: IKEA showrooms encourage an impression of absent occupants. © Pauline Garvey 7.2 Knitting needles suggest domestic activities. © Pauline Garvey 7.3 Breakfast tray on bed in IKEA showrooms in Stockholm. © Pauline Garvey 8.1 Koniaków lace maker Marta Legierska sits by the window in her cottage making lace. She has worked as an artisan for over sixty years. © Nicolette Makovicky 8.2 ‘Stringi’ on display for sale at the home of a lace maker, Koniaków. Designer: Krzystyna Gazurek. © Nicolette Makovicky 8.3 An elderly lace maker sits outside her home working on a summer day in Istebna. © Nicolette Makovicky 8.4 Antique Koniaków lace from a bonnet (detail). Design attributed to Maria Gwarkowa. © Nicolette Makovicky 8.5 Fine, traditional Koniaków lace tablecloth worked in silk (detail), 2009. Designer: Beata Legierska. © Nicolette Makovicky 8.6 A young man inspects the designs of his mother, Ana Gemera. They sell lace and refreshments from a small stall outside their home near the summit of the Ochodzita Mountain. © Nicolette Makovicky 9.1 Vladimir Antipov\`s shovel, Moscow, Russia, 1998. © Vladimir Arkhipov 9.2 Vasilii Arkhipov’s television antenna, Kolomna, Russia, about 1993. © Vladimir Arkhipov 9.3 Albina Leonidovna Falko\`s children’s steering wheel, Perm, 1978. © Vladimir Arkhipov 9.4 Alexei Tikhonow\`s ‘close-stool,’ the Ryazan region, Russia, 1990. © Vladimir Arkhipov 9.5 Sven Hünemörder\`s balalayka, Russia, Altai region, 2003. © Vladimir Arkhipov 9.6 Vladimir Arkhipov\`s case, Bordeaux, France, 2009. © Vladimir Arkhipov 10.1 Car on a homeland. © Diana Young 10.2 Blue and white car, Ernabella. © Diana Young 10.3 Blue Toyota 4WD on a homeland. © Diana Young 10.4 Red and white car. © Diana Young 13.1 A Digicel mobile money outlet in downtown Port-au-Prince. © Erin B. Taylor 13.2 T-Cash’s logo, Se lajan kontan! aims to convince customers that mobile money is just as good as cash. © Erin B. Taylor 13.3 Branding in a Digicel office in Port-au-Prince, with advertisements in both French and Haitian Creole. © Erin B. Taylor 13.4 A vendor wearing a Digicel t-shirt in the Marche en Fer, Port-au-Prince. © Erin B. Taylor 13.5 A mobile money transfer using Digicel’s TchoTcho Mobile uses French. © Erin B. Taylor 13.6 Mercy Corps developed leaflets in Haitian Creole to explain how mobile money works to recipients of conditional cash grants in Saint Marc, Haiti. © Erin B. Taylor 13.7 A T-Cash instructional leaflet and a TchoTcho Mobile cartoon. © Erin B. Taylor ## Contributors ## Vladimir Arkhipov Vladimir Arkhipov, born 1961 in the USSR, collects and curates ‘self-made’ objects and runs the database www.folkforms.ru as a resource for objects with ‘biographies.’ His collection of re-made and self-made objects is internationally renowned and has been exhibited in art galleries across Europe. He is the author of Home-Made: Contemporary Russian Folk Artifacts (2006; 2012), Design del popolo: 220 inventori della Russia post-sovietica (2007), and Home-Made Europe: Contemporary Folk Artifacts (2012). ## Maria Bezaitis Maria Bezaitis is a principal engineer with the Intel Experience Group in CCG where she leads the UX Pathfinding and Platform team. Maria’s own research has focused on the changing nature of the smart technology landscape and the rise of technologies that augment human skill. She finished her PhD at Duke University in French Literature. Maria started her post-academic career as managing partner at E-Lab, a firm that pioneered the use of ethnography and design planning for product development. She serves on the advisory board of TTI Vanguard, a global technology thought leadership organization and is the president of the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference. ## Alison J. Clarke Alison J. Clarke is professor of Design History and Theory and director of the Victor Papanek Foundation at the University of Applied Arts Vienna. An extensively published design historian (MA, RCA/V&A) and social anthropologist (PhD, UCL), Alison is co-founding editor of Home Cultures: The Journal of Design, Architecture and Domestic Space, editor of Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the 21st Century, and author of the award-winning Tupperware: The Promise of Plastic in 1950s America. A regular contributor to media, including The Genius of Design (BBC), Alison is presently completing a monograph for MIT Press exploring the activist politics of 1960s and 1970s design. ## Lane DeNicola Lane DeNicola is a researcher, analyst, and critical designer working at the intersection of information, education, and culture. Currently the director of Institutional Research for the College of Arts and Sciences at Emory University, he has been a lecturer in digital anthropology at University College London, a programmer at the Center for Space Research at MIT, and an analyst at the MIT Lincoln Laboratory and the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory. ## Arturo Escobar Arturo Escobar is Kenan Distinguished Teaching Professor of Anthropology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. His work concerns social movements, women and place, the World Social Forum, globalization and the decolonial option as well as, most recently, pluriversal studies and design. His main academic publications include Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World (2011 [1995]), Territories of Difference: Place, Movements, Life, Redes (2008), and two collections of essays in Spanish, El final del salvaje. Naturaleza, cultura y política en la antropología contemporánea (1999) and Más allá del Tercer Mundo. Globalización y diferencia (2005). ## Jane Fulton Suri Jane Fulton Suri is partner and chief creative officer at IDEO. Educated as a social scientist, she has pioneered a human-centered approach to design through work with clients representing diverse organizations, from governments and nonprofits to Fortune 500 companies. A practitioner of careful observation to stimulate empathic creativity, she authored Thoughtless Acts: Observations on Intuitive Design (Chronicle Books 2005). In 2015, Fulton Suri taught IDEO U’s online design thinking course Insights for Innovation. ## Pauline Garvey Pauline Garvey is lecturer in anthropology in Maynooth University, National University of Ireland, as well as co-editor of Home Cultures: The Journal of Architecture, Design and Domesticity Space. Her research interests include material culture, Nordic domesticity, and design anthropology. Recent publications include a special issue of the Journal of Design History (“Design Dispersed: Design History, Design Practice and Anthropology,” 2016 with Adam Drazin). Her ethnography of Swedish Design and Ikea was published in the 2017 monograph Unpacking Ikea: Swedish Design for the Purchasing Masses (Routledge). ## Heather A. Horst Heather A. Horst is a principal research fellow (professor) and a vice-chancellor’s senior research fellow in the School of Media and Communication at RMIT University, Melbourne. Her books include The Cell Phone: An Anthropology of Communication (with Daniel Miller, Berg 2006), Hanging Out, Messing Around, and Geeking Out (with Mizuko Ito et al., MIT Press 2010), Digital Anthropology (with Daniel Miller, Berg 2012), and Digital Ethnography (with Sarah Pink et al., Sage, forthcoming 2015). ## Jamer Hunt Jamer Hunt is the director of the MFA Transdisciplinary Design program at Parsons The New School for Design, New York. His academic teaching and professional practice, Big + Tall Design, focus on conceptual, collaborative, and communication design as a means for exploring the politics and poetics of the everyday. Hunt served on the board of directors of the American Center for Design and the editorial board of Design and Culture. For seven years, he was director of the Masters Program in Industrial Design at the University of the Arts in Philadelphia and is co-founder of DesignPhiladelphia. ## Susanne Kü chler Susanne Kü chler is professor of anthropology at University College London. Her research focuses on the material in art and design, the nature of innovation, and the cognitive work of Images. Kü chler is currently working on a new manuscript, The Material Mind, which develops the theoretical implications of her past ethnographic research into the making of sculpture and social memory. It takes insights into the nature of innovation in Oceania to the laboratory context of material science and offers a critical review of existing theorization of material aesthetics and the formalized nature of thought symptomatic of knowledge economies. ## Nicolette Makovicky Nicolette Makovicky is lecturer in Russian and East European studies at the University of Oxford. She has published extensively on the relationship between craft, modernity and ideology as well as craft and the post-socialist informal economy. Makovicky is the editor of Neoliberalism, Personhood, and Postsocialism: Enterprising Selves in Changing Economies (Ashgate 2014) and co-editor of Economies of Favour After Socialism (University of Oxford Press 2016). ## Daniel Miller Daniel Miller is professor of material culture at the Department of Anthropology at University College London. He is currently running the Why We Post project (www.ucl.ac.uk/why-we-post). Recent books include Social Media in an English Village (UCL Press 2016), Webcam (with J. Sinanan, Polity Press 2014), Digital Anthropology (with H. Horst, Bloomsbury 2012), Stuff (Polity 2009) and The Comfort of Things (Polity 2008). ## Harvey Molotch Harvey Molotch, professor of sociology at New York University, conducts research on product design as well as urban development and security. His books include Against Security: How We Go Wrong at Airports, Subways, and Other Sites of Ambiguous Danger (Princeton 2012); Urban Fortunes (California 2007); Where Stuff Comes From: How Toasters, Toilets, Cars, Computers and Many Other Things Come to Be As They Are (Routledge 2003); and Toilet: Public Restrooms and the Politics of Sharing (NYU 2010). ## Rick E. Robinson Rick E. Robinson is professor of practice in the Department of Information Science at the University of Colorado Boulder. He holds a PhD in human development from the University of Chicago. As a co-founder of E-Lab and iota partners, he has been a pioneer in using observational research for new product development. Robinson’s current work focuses on understanding the interactions people have with increasingly pervasive data about themselves, others, and the world. ## Erin Taylor Erin Taylor is an economic anthropologist and since 2011 has held the position of research fellow at the University of Lisbon. She is the author of Materializing Poverty: How the Poor Transform Their Lives (2013 AltaMira) and editor of Fieldwork Identities in the Caribbean (2010, Caribbean Studies Press). Additionally, she is the managing editor of PopAnth: Hot Buttered Humanity and sits on the editorial board of the Journal of Cultural Economy. ## Diana Young Diana Young is a social anthropologist. Her research is focused on visual and material culture including color, art and photography, space, ecology and architecture, anthropology of museums and consumption, with a regional focus on Indigenous Australia and the Pacific. Forthcoming publications include “Colour as Palettes” for the Routledge Handbook of Beauty and an edited volume Rematerializing Colour. Recent exhibition curation includes written on the body (2014) and In the red (2012). ## Acknowledgments This book is the outcome of a lengthy and stimulating journey into the various objects, disciplines, and debates that form the bridges between contemporary design and anthropology. Many of the contributors are colleagues from academia, industry, and design with whom I have shared discussions, or to whom I simply listened intently, at conferences, workshops, and events over the last two decades. Design Anthropology is a testament to the generosity of the contributing authors, whose articles arose from a genuine collective interest in disseminating knowledge beyond the tight parameters of their disciplines to specifically address the phenomenon of design anthropology and its future potential as an emerging field. I would like to thank enormously Martina Grünewald whose academic insight, inspiring observations, and adroit editing skills underpinned this edition from start to finish, and Kathrina Dankl with whom this project was first initiated. My thanks also to Rebecca Barden, Daniel Miller, Harvey Molotch, Jane Fulton Suri, Bill Moggridge, and the designers and students with whom I have explored the intersections of design and anthropology.