# Introduction ## Alison J. Clarke Design Anthropology: Object Cultures in Transition brings together leading practitioners and academics from the fields of anthropology and design as a means of opening up a dialog around their joint potentialities and shared commonalities. Set against the backdrop of an exponential rise, over the last decade, of transdisciplinary design areas (design studies, critical design, design sciences, co-design, post-design, transition design, design ethnography, speculative design, et al.), this volume explores the ways in which the methodologies and theoretical emphases of anthropology serve design as a socially engaged activity. Since an earlier edition of the book was published under the title Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the Twenty-First Century in 2011, there has been a proliferation of networks, companies, projects, publications, and initiatives made within an area loosely defined as ‘design anthropology.’ Despite the ongoing expansion of the field, both as curricular component and area of study within itself, this volume does not make claims for design anthropology as a discrete discipline, area of research, or methodology (Gunn, Otto and Smith 2013). While the volume broadly concurs with wider claims of design anthropology’s capacity to build “closer relations between using and producing, designing and using, people and things” and acknowledges that a “move is required away from a problem-orientated approach towards designing” (Gunn and Donovan 2012: 1), it considers the respective methods and historiographies of anthropology and design as having a discrete worth within and of themselves. As anthropologist Susanne Küchler puts it in the opening chapter of this volume “[D]esign distinguishes itself from mere things . . . by the ‘inherence’ of intellectual expectations in the work itself, and anthropology’s contribution has been in unraveling the intersubjective nature of the kind of thought that is made concrete in design.” (Küchler, this volume: 1) ## Early Genres of Design Anthropology In the early 1960s, Victor Papanek, the staunch critic of market-driven Western industrial design, devised a low-tech radio receiver for ‘underdeveloped’ countries based on the ethnographic observation of Indonesian indigenous cultures. The design comprised a recycled juice can, transistor, earplug, wire, paraffin wax and wick, and could be topped up using local cow dung as a sustainable power source. The stark industrial utility of the tin can lent itself to customization through the application of surface decoration (shells, traditional embroidery, etc.) easing the artifact’s appropriation into traditional rituals and rites. This vernacularized form, a synchronous artifact framed by the contemporary media theories of Marshall McLuhan and ‘sensitivity’ toward local cultures, aimed at promoting mass communication among dispersed tribal groups and isolated communities in non-literate areas. Manufactured for less than nine cents a unit, the design received UNESCO sanction as a user-based project fostering participatory and appropriate technology approaches. In the broadest sense, the object foretold of a potential future in which design and anthropology co-joined in addressing cross-cultural issues of social inequality, rather than a burgeoning consumer culture, bolstering informal and alternative economies of product design. Further into the twenty-first century, the “tin can radio” has come to stand for the broader ambitions of a late-postwar design counter culture geared towards social inclusion and pitted against corporatized power (Blauvelt 2015). This genre of the ‘humanitarian object’ perfectly summarizes the main thesis of Papanek’s best-selling polemic Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change (1971), which promulgated the concept of design as a natural extension of anthropological analysis and practice (see Clarke, this volume). Yet, early on, these materialized forms of design anthropology caused disquiet among the established design fraternity. In 1973, Gui Bonsiepe, a former faculty member of the high modernist Hochschule für Gestaltung in Ulm (HfG), condemned objects like Papanek’s tin can radio as “paternalistic design covered with a humanitarian coating,” a crude post-colonial mechanism “doused in the ideology of the noble savage.” (Bonsiepe 1973: 13–16) Both design and designer were condemned as being complicit in furthering American military dominance and capitalist expansionism. Anthropology was fraught with the legacy of its colonial past and the ethical dilemmas of fieldwork, while design had to strive to establish itself as a serious mode of social and critical intervention operating beyond a Western model of rational modernism. Indeed, the idea of ‘design anthropology’ as a recent phenomenon emanating from 1970s post-industrial society and manifest in the rise of human-computer interaction design, systems thinking, social innovation strategy as well as user-centered research, crucially overlooks how the early political histories of design and anthropology were intertwined within the project of Cold War development politics (Clarke 2016). As post-development anthropologist Arturo Escobar argues in this volume, a branch of ontological design built on the legacy of 1960s design activism still harbors the potential for transforming post-development and ecological discourse: [T]ransitions towards entirely new ways of being-in-the-world are possible however unthinkable they might seem in particular current situations. These transitions are possible based on an ostensibly simple observation: that in designing tools (objects, structures, policies, expert systems, discourses (even narratives) we are creating ways of being. Change, from this ontological perspective, can be understood as residing firmly within the scope of design […]. (Escobar, this volume: 202) Escobar views the contemporary rise in ‘critical design studies’ as a direct successor to the early, if failed, attempts to unite the shared social imperative of design and anthropology. From the embrace of phenomenological theory within 1960s and 1970s architectural discourse to the central role of anthropology and interpretative archaeology in highlighting the significance of material culture as a non-literary historical source through which to understand the agency of design as an expression and maker of power relations (Rudofsky 1964; Glassie 1975; Shanks and Tilley 1987), design and designers have been an integral part of social science discourse (Miller 1987). Indeed, from the early 1960s onwards, even within the upper echelons of professionalized design—namely, the International Council of Societies of Industrial Design (ICSID)—anthropology and the broader social sciences were brought to bear on international policy as affiliations with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). This union, which saw anthropological methods and considerations applied to industrial design as a tool for ‘development,’ ultimately resulted in industrial design’s key role in 1970s entente Cold War politics and the signing of the Ahmedabad Declaration of 1979, a pivotal event, which saw design dispersed within broader post-colonial social science.<sup>1</sup> ## The ‘Agentive Turn’ and the New Design Politics The mutuality of people and things, the confluence of the material and the social is, as sociologist Harvey Molotch (this volume) contends, an ongoing process. Since the 1990s, the separation of object and subject has been made all but redundant in theorizing around our contemporary material world. In bio- and nanotechnology, design innovation and engineering, the sheer proliferation of materialities, which cut across definitions of nature and culture, has brought the artifactual theories of the academe, from Bruno Latour to Alfred Gell, into the realm of mainstream design discourse (Gell 1992, 1999; Latour 1993, 1996). And, while anthropology was arguably the first discipline to take the consumption of things and the agency of artifacts seriously, it is now the area of materiality that promises to be the shared disciplinary concern of design and anthropology (Drazin and Küchler 2015). A large-scale transdisciplinary “material turn” has expanded interest in design as a broader facet of the politics of ontology, the politics of making and the agency and social life of materials (Swenarton, Troiani, and Webster 2007; Bennett and Joyce 2010; Coole and Frost 2010). The once peripheral question of ‘where stuff comes from,’ in the broadest theoretical sense, is now central to the social sciences (Molotch 2003). As Molotch contends in his overview of this ‘material turn,’ if sociologists (as opposed to anthropologists) write about mass-produced goods at all, they “treat them as distractions from other putatively more worthwhile aspects of existence. [Sociologists] inherit as a Freud-Marx blend, a vision of consumer goods as fetish. Stuff provides noxious evidence of corrupted sensibilities, hegemonic oppression, or false needs.” (Molotch, this volume: 19) The non-hierarchical and holistic approaches of material culture as embraced within anthropology have opened up the definitions of design beyond formalistic and aesthetic analysis. The ‘found,’ vernacular and homemade artifact, borne of adhocism and the improvisation of everyday life, is a trope through which design and anthropology come together in re-assessing the socially embedded, informal and anti-commodity form (Jencks and Silver 1972). Contemporary movements such as ‘post-craft,’ in which the boundaries of making in analog and digital realms merge, and ‘slow design,’ in which the designer’s focus shifts from object- to process-oriented approaches, bring new economies of design to the fore. Yet, anthropologists have long acknowledged the mutability and diasporic nature of vernacular forms and their ability to transgress, unsettle, and agitate cultures, as much as bind them. Designed goods, genres of making and materials are increasingly understood as embedded in, and constitutive of, the broader politics of neo-liberalism and personhood, as anthropologist Nicolette Makovicky highlights in her ethnographic case study of the merging of vernacular craft traditions with erotic underwear in Poland, as demanded by marketization and shifting nature of informal economies (this volume; Makovicky 2014). Similarly, the work of sculptural artist Vladimir Arkhipov (this volume) centers on the curation of found and retrieved self-made utilitarian design, plucked from derelict post-socialist homesteads and the roadside of his native Ryazan, Russia. Disassembling the logic and hegemony of commodified product culture, objects such as a Soviet-era TV antenna modeled from discarded cutlery are re-cast as ‘commodity folklore’ invoking a methodological approach, as much as an aesthetic statement, that exposes design as integrally bound to internalized notions of State, technology, and personhood. Adapted, salvaged, and reinvented, these commodity folk forms, which once littered the post-Socialist landscape, embody the anthropology of everyday life as it is actually lived, rather than envisaged in the large-scale design studios of vast corporations. The social life of objects has been a preoccupation of anthropology since the rise of consumption and material culture studies of the late 1980s (Appadurai 1986; Miller 1987). As scrutiny has shifted even further from the lives of goods beyond initial production cycles into the post-consumption phase, anthropology’s emphasis upon geo-political understandings of informal economies and modes of appropriation has inverted design’s concern with sustainability as a production-phase phenomenon. Disposal, waste and recycling are now understood as cultural, as well as logistical concerns, which design anthropology is ideally poised to navigate. With degradation, decay and the movement into alternative realms of value beyond the market inherent in the complexity of designed stuff (material and immaterial), new areas of design-anthropological discourse (e.g., transition design and post-development discourse) emerge and a new politics of design is forged (Norris 2012; Tonkinwise 2014; Gregson and Crang 2015). The notion of what actually constitutes a ‘designed product’ has taken on expanded transnational and cross-cultural meaning, crucially disassociating design from a linear process of mediation toward a holistic model. As well as acknowledging ‘designed things’ as having agency beyond that conferred by a singular designer, Diana Young’s ethnographic study of customized, discarded motor vehicles, among the Anangu desert peoples of Western Australia shows how apparently discarded and functionally dilapidated technological artifacts ‘live,’ through color and landscape, beyond the auspices of their corporate makers. Their chromatic significance extends beyond the dictums of a global forecasting industry; instead, these vehicles add to a world of “colorful goods,” providing a “means of materializing and developing ideas and connections about the presence of the Creation Ancestor, which hitherto had been confined to evanescent effects across the landscape or painstakingly produced during ritual.” (Young, this volume: 151) Young’s vivid account of the aboriginal currency of cars as modes of color inseparable from an indigenous cosmological scheme, challenges a type of design studies that has sought to mark distinctions between social, technical, and aesthetic functions (Crilly 2010). ## Design Anthropology, the Brand, and the Corporation Design, of course, is not restricted to the materiality of things; but rather operates as a dispersed phenomenon. The global design entity IKEA is a case in point. The single largest globalized purveyor of mass branded furnishings goods should not be understood simply as a corporation, neither as a brand or typology of objects, argues anthropologist Pauline Garvey in this volume. Far from embodying the superficiality and transience of contemporary consumer culture, the extraordinary extent of IKEA’s transnational reach relies rather upon its relevance as a practice. It is not the agency of the designers or the behind-the-scenes manipulation (by anthropologists and marketing experts), which manifest the corporate behemoth that is IKEA. Theories around brand sociality and value co-creation imply IKEA is “putting shoppers to work not only in obliging them to assemble flat-pack furniture but also in absorbing and territorializing their expertise, skills and creativity.” (Garvey, this volume: 103) Yet, Garvey counters this idea through extensive comparative ethnography of the brand, spaces, and social relations, arguing instead that IKEA operates as ‘collectivized inspiration’ in which designers are merely creative brokers, rather than guiding innovators. The corporate role of anthropologists and their ‘complicity’ in branding, advertising, and consumer persuasion stretches back at least as far as the 1950s (Packard 1957). In more recent decades, urban myths and legends have abounded regarding the rise of the corporate design anthropologist. As early as 1991, the New York Times featured an article titled “Coping with Cultural Polyglots” (Deutsch 1991) exploring the role of anthropologists within commercial and technological corporations. Business Week, later that year, reported that anthropologists were “Studying Natives on the Shop Floor (Garza 1991).” A wealth of similar stories about the intervention of anthropologists into the corporate workplace, with titles such as “Anthropologists Go Native in the Corporate Village” (Kane 2007) and “Into the Wild Unknown of the Workplace Culture” (Koerner 1998), sketch out a kind of parody of ‘authentic’ anthropologists whose attentions have turned from ancient Papuan New Guinea gift cultures to the banality of Western corporate and consumer culture. This popular fascination with the reversed role of the anthropologist as an observer of ‘ourselves’ persists under newspaper bylines hailing corporate anthropologists as fortune-tellers of our design and technological futures. Figures such as prominent Intel anthropologist Genevieve Bell take on guru-like roles (similar to figureheads of the future forecasting industries) seen to mediate between technological innovation and social worlds (Phelan 2013). Anthropologist Lucy Suchman’s oft-retold involvement with Xerox PARC, as part of a research and development strategy in the late 1980s, was feted in the business media as a best practice example of how design, transfigured by anthropology, might enhance a product’s success. Legend had it that Suchman’s ethnographic study of Xerox users led to the development of the ‘breakthrough’ design of the big, green photocopier button. According to the hero of the tale herself, this myth of corporate anthropology’s ‘magical’ power is in fact an entire fiction that undermines the intent of deep research and its findings. Far from being an advocate of the ‘simple’ green button, Suchman’s user-research challenged its very existence. As she puts it herself, “the green button actually masked the labor that was needed to become familiar with the machine and incorporate it effectively into use.” (2007: 3) The branding of corporate anthropology in this reductionist way, she suggests, arose with the need to understand the worker and consumer beyond the economic paradigm; anthropology had a role both as a brand (offering human interest and public relations caché to corporate employers via the media) and as social science promising new and appropriable insights into worker and customer culture and experience. Technology-based corporations like Intel (see Bezaitis and Robinson, this volume) engaged anthropologists during this period to expand their understanding of ever-fragmenting global markets. Design models like the ubiquitous ‘smart home’ offer a homogenizing vision of technological innovation. But an anthropological approach, which promotes cross-cultural and non-secular understandings of everyday life (from Hindu to Buddhist culture), takes into account ‘soft’ factors such as notions of pollution, sacredness, humility, and modesty otherwise overlooked in Western discourse around the appropriation of technologies (Bell 2006). Similarly, design companies such as IDEO encourage designers themselves, not just adjunct anthropologists, to use their observational skills and intuition in thinking beyond functional problem solving and into the social realm of things (Fulton Suri, this volume). The shift towards cultural sensitivity through ethnography, while underpinned by a marketdriven agenda, could optimistically be construed as a move towards socially responsive design. But early on, some critics pointed to the inherently reactionary nature of using consumers themselves to generate ‘bottom-up’ innovation, much as politicians have moved in the last decades towards focus groups as a means of trading complicity for ‘real’ social innovation. To quote one such critic from the neo-Marxist online journal spiked: As an example of a relatively new form of immersive research, the discipline of ethnography emerged out of social anthropology: that is, white men studying black natives in the jungle, in an attempt to understand and control them. Today, we are the natives, caricatured in the interests of research. (Perks 2003: 1) The commodification of ethnography and the incorporation of anthropology within corporate and political settings, as well as the ethical dimensions of design ethnography have more recently been opened up to much more rigorous academic scrutiny (Moeran 2012; Baba 2014). As examples of ethnographic research into aging, social exclusion, and the value of peripheral economic cultures reveal, anthropological methods have the capacity to generate effective social innovation. But where are the crucial points at which design and anthropology diverge? Jamer Hunt’s essay critically unravels the ways in which the relative practices deal with issues of temporality (anthropology is of the now, design is of the imagined future) and points to the largely unproblematized incorporation of ‘quick and dirty’ ethnography within business. Advocating the role of critical and experimental design in helping to address global-scale problems, Hunt concludes that “we can no longer be content with anthropology’s hands-off sensibility and design’s ‘more is more’ mentality” (Hunt, this volume: 87, 88) and likewise “it is no longer sufficient for only a few in the academy to encounter the incisive work of anthropologists and for the vicissitudes of commercial interests to drive the work of designers,” argues Hunt. As the realm of speculative and critical design has increasingly dealt with (often dystopic) design futures reaching beyond Modernist rationalism and progressivism (Dunne 2006; Dunne and Raby 2013), the idea of anthropology as a discipline ‘applied’ to design (as method or cultural contextualizing) has given way to a co-joined practice; asking what it is to be human now and how humanity might be further imagined. ## Design in the Pre-Digital and Post-Digital What of the post-digital shift to ‘non-thing’ design, the digital spaces between people and things in an immaterialized context? Early user-based and ethnographic research was carried out under the auspices of human-computer interaction (HCI) in the 1960s and 1970s, joined later in the 1980s by the field of ‘interaction design.’ Digital anthropology and interaction design have moved theory and practice around twenty-first-century object culture far beyond the remit of those early corporate design anthropologists and myths of big, green photocopier buttons. Yet, while the shift from analog to digital life and its ensuing social relations has long been the concern of those involved in designing interactions (Moggridge 2007), the emergence of digital anthropology has thwarted any residual conceptual divide between the ‘para-world’ of the digital and the ‘real world’ of the analog (Horst and Miller 2012). Whereas the less mediated world of the pre-digital was formally lent greater authenticity, the focus on digital design anthropology has led to a radical overturning of this basic supposition. Design anthropology, in its most diluted form, is reduced to little more than a social add-on for co-design projects needing ‘tick-box’ solutions for user-engagement. Yet, it has much greater potential to analytically engage with emerging areas such as critical algorithm studies, which urgently need methodologies and expanded insights into micro and macro implications of non-transparent forms of design and engineering (Baker and Potts 2013; Pasquale 2015; Demos 2016). In this respect, Lane De Nicola (this volume) brings into question the core rhetoric of the ‘Internet of Things’ designers and corporations routinely build upon. Challenging the inherently optimistic vision of ‘techno-science’ and the social egalitarianism embodied in Latour’s commonly appropriated notion of “The Parliament of Things” (with its quasi-objects and networked human-object relations), De Nicola provocatively proposes an alternative model under the title the “The Pub of Things.” A “wilder, woolier terrain” of inquiry for the anthropologist, “The Pub” filled with “opportunists and miscreants,” he argues, works as a more succinct model for researching the objects that populate everyday human lives in the post-digital context. As corporate research ostensibly considers the ways in which users talk and practice the digital in bounded ways, theorists focus on the agencies of objects. De Nicola postulates that just as a traditional anthropologist asks “What of the people on the ground in this discourse?” so too must the critical design anthropologist by considering the less obvious and ‘checkered terrain’ of actors and agents in the Internet of Things, “[t]he voyeur spying on his neighbors” or the exploitation of increasingly personalized data gleaned by poaching advertisers. Daniel Miller, in his chapter dealing with the practice of interior design as “a foundational attribute of merely being human” further challenges the artificial divide between offline and online, and the imperative of critical anthropological inquiry to look beyond definitions of ‘professional’ design spheres. Building on a long-term global ethnography of social media (Miller et al. 2016), online, argues Miller, is as much a place of habitation as any physically embodied space which involves perpetual acts of interior design. Critical anthropology that ceases to differentiate between offline worlds and online worlds can open up crucial questions regarding the contemporary nature of ordinary human lives—issues of migration, social relations, and co-living beyond a ‘bricks and mortar’ approach. Ultimately, argues Miller, “the shift of our skills as interior decorators from offline to online does not make us less human or post-human,” rather design anthropology must look precisely to “de-exoticize” the online world, understanding this type of crafting as a type of design “that makes us all ordinarily human” (Miller, this volume: 176). Just as design processes form an integral part of what it is to be human in an everyday sense, the anthropology of design is, of course, inseparable from the larger frameworks of cultural, economic and social life. The poignant significance and power relations of design are made evident in the nuanced ethnography of mobile money services, which over the past decade have grown primarily across Africa, Asia, and Latin America, explored in Erin Taylor and Heather Horst’s chapter “Designing Financial Literacy in Haiti” (this volume). As the use and availability of mobile handsets has increased, their role in broadening the constituency of financial inclusion for the poor through access to mobile money services has been embraced by governments, industry, and development sectors alike. Yet, through the application of a design anthropological approach, Taylor and Horst complicate this seemingly simple equation of ‘access’ and ‘availability,’ arguing instead that a design perspective encompasses a broadened understanding of literacy as an index of aesthetics, branding, and historically located value around specific forms of technology and material culture. This branching out into anthropology offers design a timely intervention into alternative and new economies, beyond the mass scale of industrial object-based production; whereby social innovation might lie at the core, rather than the periphery, of its practice. This collection of essays outlines a seismic shift in the way experts and users conceptualize, envisage, and engage in object cultures. As the output of contemporary design becomes evermore diverse, the term design itself is increasingly redundant in its capacity to capture the sheer heterogeneity of the processes, practices, and materialities involved in the making of stuff. Designers are now as likely to engage in social research as they are in the making of form: Once an intuitive process, gauging cultural relevance has become part of a burgeoning area—design anthropology. Observational techniques, human focus and emphasis on the machinations of the everyday are essential in interpreting the complex implications of consumer culture, technological interaction, and media. As the values of expanding new markets challenge homogenous, globalized understandings of product worlds and users, the desire for indigenous, grassroots, and nuanced insights has never been more acute. Similarly, a social imperative, the challenge to the monopoly of market models with the creation of alternative economies of design, has reignited critical design discourse. It is precisely this pressing recognition of a need for change with which the agencies and lives of products and technologies, as much as their designers and users, are now explored and probed beyond disciplinary boundaries; consequently propelling social understanding to the forefront of the design agenda and moving contemporary object cultures firmly into the center of academic inquiry. ## References Appadurai, A. ed. (1986), The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Baba, M. L. (2014), “De-Anthropologizing Ethnography: A Historical Perspective on the Commodification of Ethnography as a Business Service,“ in R. Denny and P. Sunderland (eds.), Handbook of Anthropology in Business, 43–68, Walnut Creek: Left Coast Press Inc. Baker, P. and A. Potts (2013), “‘Why Do White People Have Thin Lips?’ Google and the Perpetuation of Stereotypes Via Auto-Complete Search Forms,” Critical Discourse Studies, 10 (2): 187–204. Bell, G. (2006), “The Age of the Thumb: A Cultural Reading of Mobile Technologies from Asia. Knowledge,” Technology and Policy, 19 (2): 41–57. Bennett, T. and P. Joyce (2010), Material Powers: Cultural Studies, History and the Material Turn, London and New York: Routledge. Blauvelt, A. (2015), Hippie Modernism: The Struggle for Utopia, Minneapolis: Walker Art Center. Bonsiepe, G. (1973), “Bombast aus Pappe,” form 61 (1): 13–16. Clarke, A. J. (2016), “Design for Development, ICSID and UNIDO: The Anthropological Turn in 1970s Design,” Journal of Design History, 29 (1): 43–57. Coole, D. and S. Frost (2010), New Materialism: Ontology, Agency, and Politics, Durham: Duke University Press. Miller, D., E. Costa, N. Haynes, T. McDonald, R. Nicolescu, J. Sinanan, J. Spyer, S. Venkatraman, and X. Wang (2016), How the World Changed Social Media, London: UCL Press. Crilly, N. (2010). “The Roles that Artefacts Play: Technical, Social and Aesthetic Functions,” Design Studies, 31 (4): 311–44. Demos (2016), “The Use of Misogynistic Terms on Twitter,” research summary report. Available online: http://www.demos.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Misogyny-online.pdf (accessed June 15, 2016). Deutsch, C. H. (1991), “Managing; Coping with Cultural Polyglots,” New York Times, February 24. Drazin, A. and S. Küchler (2015), The Social Life of Materials: Studies in Materials and Society, London: Bloomsbury. Dunne, A. (2006), Hertzian Tales: Electronic Products, Aesthetic Experience and Critical Design, Cambridge: The MIT Press. Dunne, A. and F. Raby (2013), Speculative Everything, Cambridge: The MIT Press. Garza, C. E. (1991), “Studying Natives on the Shop Floor,” Business Week, September 30. Gell, A. (1992), “The Technology of Enchantment and the Enchantment of Technology,” in J. Coote and A. Shelton (eds.), Anthropology Art and Aesthetics, 40–66, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Gell, A. (1999), “Vogel’s Net: Traps as Artworks and Artworks as Traps,” in E. Hirsh (ed.), Alfred Gell, The Art of Anthropology: Essays and Diagrams, London: Bloomsbury Academic. Glassie, H. (1975), Folk Housing in Middle Virginia: A Structural Analysis of Historic Artifacts, Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press. Gregson, N. and M. Crang (2015), “From Waste to Resource: The Trade in Wastes and Global Recycling Economies,” Annual Review of Environment and Resources 40: 151–76. Gunn, W., J. Donovan and R. C. Smith (eds.) (2012), Design and Anthropology, Farnham: Ashgate. Gunn, W. and T. Otto (eds.) (2013), Design Anthropology: Theory and Practice. London: Bloomsbury. Horst, H. and D. Miller (2012), Digital Anthropology, Oxford: Berg Publishers. Jencks, C. and N. Silver (1972), Adhocism: The Case for Improvisation, Cambridge: The MIT Press. Kane, K. A. (2007), “Anthropologists Go Native in the Corporate Village,” Fastcompany.com (December 18). Available online: http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/05/anthro.html (accessed June 15, 2016). Koerner, B. I. (1998), “Into the Wild Unknown of the Workplace Culture,” US News and World Report, August 10: 56. Latour, B. (1993), We Have Never Been Modern, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Latour, B. (1996), Aramis or the Love of Technology, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Makovicky, N. (2014), Neoliberalism, Personhood, and Postsocialism: Enterprising Selves in Changing Economies, Farnham: Ashgate. Miller, D. (1987), Material Culture and Mass Consumption, Oxford: Blackwell. Moggridge, B. (2007), Designing Interactions, Cambridge: The MIT Press. Molotch, H. (2003), Where Stuff Comes From: How Toasters, Toilets, Cars, Computers, and Many Other Things Come to Be As They Are, New York: Routledge. Moeran, B. (2012), “Opinion: What Business Anthropology Is, What It Might Become . . . and What, Perhaps, It Should Not Be,” Journal of Business Anthropology, 1 (2): 240–97. Norris, L. (2012), “Economies of Moral Fibre: Materializing the Ambiguities of Recycling Charity Clothing into Aid Blankets,” Journal of Material Culture, 17 (4): 389–404. Packard, V. (1957), The Hidden Persuaders, New York: D. McKay Co. Papanek, V. (1971), Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change, New York: Pantheon Books. Pasquale, F. (2015), The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms That Control Money and Information, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Perks, M. (2003), “Ethnography Exposed,” spiked, December 30. Available online: www.spiked-online.com /articles/00000006E039.htm (accessed June 15, 2016). Phelan, D. (2013), “Technology’s Foremost Fortune Teller: Why Intel Has an Anthropologist on Its Payroll,” Independent, September 25. Available online: http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech /features/technologys-foremost-fortune-teller-why-intel-has-an-anthropologist-on-its-payroll-8839723 .html?version=meter+at+null&module=meter-Links&pgtype=article&contentId=&mediaId=& referrer=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.google.at%2F&priority=true&action=click&contentCollection =meter-links-click (accessed June 15, 2016). Rudofsky, B. (1964), Architecture Without Architects: An Introduction to Non-Pedigreed Architecture, New York: Museum of Modern Art. Shanks, M. and C. Tilley (1987), Re-Constructing Archaeology: Theory and Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Suchman, L. (2007), “Anthropology as ‘Brand’: Reflections on Corporate Anthropology,” paper presented at the Colloquium on Interdisciplinarity and Society, February 24, Oxford University. Swenarton, M., I. Troiani and H. Webster, eds., (2007), The Politics of Making, Abington and New York: Routledge. Tonkinwise, C. (2014), “Design Studies—What Is It Good For?,” Design and Culture 6 (1): 5-43.