# Materials and Design Susanne Küchler Materials, once thought of as determined by form and function, are now the functioning thing itself. Crunchable, foldable and portable, reactive and proactive, materials designed in laboratories range from the practical to the unsettling. What they have in common is to draw our attention to a material world that is composed, akin to music, as ‘poiesis,’ the numerical and temporally sequenced logic that is capable of enchanting without knowing, and of inspiring relational actions without similitude. Design has been a longstanding concern in anthropology with a formative tradition of thought reaching back to the eighteenth-century historian and philosopher Johann Gottfried Herder ([1778] 2002). Herder’s theory of sculpture pointed to the poetic nature of communication, shared by both language and repetitive actions of the body, and the relation between this poetic element of communication and the emotional pull of the resulting product. These ideas were famously developed by Franz Boas (1955 [1927]) into a concept of ‘virtuosity’—understood as the pleasures of practice that are given substance in basket making, pottery making, or Northwest Coast wood carving—as well as by Marcel Mauss (1934), who drew attention to highly developed body actions that embody aspects of a given culture. More recently, this notion of the algorithmic and relational nature of technical action was taken forward by Gregory Bateson (1973) in his theory of “style, grace, and information,” by Fred Myers (1999) in his analysis of the prototypicality of Aboriginal painting, and by Alfred Gell (1998) in his theory of the indexical logic of manufactured artifacts. Design distinguishes itself from mere things, in the words of David Freedberg (1991), by the ‘inherence’ of intellectual expectations in the work itself, and anthropology’s contribution has been in unraveling the intersubjective nature of the kind of thought that is made concrete in design. Despite these formative ideas that open up the world of design to anthropological introspection, there has been one notable lapse of attention. As Margaret Conkey (2006) has shown in her discussion of style, design, and function in the Handbook of Material Culture, anthropology took with ease to the conceptual nature of the classical notion of ‘disegno,’ in which an act of drawing was thought to be prefigured by a concept, embedding wherever possible the representation of mental schema into the context of social practice. It has coped very badly, however, with materials and their functional, sensorial, and technical capacities, which must enter into conference with the algorithmic and poetic qualities of making in order for a shared concept of form and function of designed objects to arise (Reckwitz 2002; Miller 2005). In failing to include materials in their reckoning of design, anthropologists have missed a chance to question what is social about design, assuming it to reside in the process of production known as ‘co-creation’ in which designers, standing in for the ‘ideal’ consumer, inform the inventive discovery and deployment of commodities (Barry 2005; Barry and Thrift 2007). Other disciplines, notably the history of science and the history of art, have delivered studies of historical and institutional contexts of design with an increasing emphasis on materials and the manifold ideas that inspire their trade and their use in design (Wagner 2001; Schiebinger and Swan 2005; Klein and Lefèvre 2007; Rubel and Hackenschmidt 2008; Lange-Berndt 2015). The publication of studies on the agency of matter and the re-emergence of materials as paradigm for the social sciences that coincided with the end of the first decade in the twenty-first century summarized what materials science had long recognized, namely, that the question of what is social about design and design’s relation to material and immaterial frames of reference required to be fundamentally reconsidered (Bensaude-Vincent 2004; Bennett 2010; Coole and Frost 2010; Buchli 2015). To understand the theoretical and also methodological implications for disciplines concerned with the study of design, we need to look closely at design’s changing relation to materials. ## Materials by Design “We live,” as Mike Ashby and Kara Johnson (2002) have pointed out, “in a world of materials”; we make things out of materials, and we see potential in materials before giving form to it. Yet, the materials we use for our design are no longer just found or grown, but are themselves subject to design in being “made to measure” (Ball 1997). Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent and William R. Newman (2007) have pointed to the growing polarity between the natural and the artificial in a world in which the majority of materials that surrounds us is engineered to assume functions that we used to associate with technical devices hidden in objects. What is distinctive about these materials is their composite nature and membrane-like quality, which allows them to stretch over any shape, merging formal and functional qualities in the very fabric of the material. Materials, once thought of as covers, such as the surface of a wireless keyboard, are the functioning thing itself—the keyboard is crunchable, foldable, and eminently portable, and feels to the touch like denim. Known as ‘smart materials,’ materials by design range from the practical to the hilarious and unsettling, but in common they draw our attention to a material world that does not just represent who we are, but also is capable of standing in for us, substituting some of our own capacities. The goal of research into smart materials and structures is the animation of the inanimate world, by endowing it with more and more of the attributes of living things, and by creating networks of integrated artifacts that work relationally, forming huge complex systems of sensate things that (eventually) really learn (Küchler 2008). Alongside such chemically engineered materials, the rediscovery of ‘old’ materials today plays a prominent role in the fabrication of environmentally friendly materials for the future through new engineering techniques. Materials such as flax, bamboo, and hemp, typically found in archaeological and ethnographic collections, evoke ideas of heritage, identity, and place, but also open up debates about cultural rights and property. The rediscovery of known materials shows that all materials are potentially new. What distinguished the material we associate with the rise of modern imagination, however, involved making the technical function part of the material itself. This material was rubber, first processed by Charles Goodyear in 1839. It was soon followed by the innovation of synthetically produced, stretchable, and moldable materials with the invention of Bakelite, the first synthetic resin chemically formulated in 1909, and later, around 1938, of polystyrene for plastic materials and perlon fiber as well as coatings such as Teflon. Arguably, it was the capacity of natural rubber and its synthetic variants to cover any surface, irrespective of form, that created the capacity for new artifacts with new functions, such as the diver’s suit, the rubber hose, and the raincoat (Mossmann and Smith 2008). New ways of life in domains reaching from leisure to work were made possible by a ‘stretchable’ material that came to compare fittingly to the many new actions that took life beyond its known limits (Meikle 1995). Social science’s interest in the legacy of the chemical revolution and in the design and the take-up of new materials has classically been low in the English-speaking world. Anthropology, ironically, has arguably borne witness to the chemical revolution’s social effects perhaps more than other disciplines, as the rise of chemical engineering provoked shifts in political economy, which led to the local touchdown of the ethnographic method. An example of the distant effect of the chemical revolution that anthropology came to chart is New Guinea, where European incursion followed the chemical development of soap in 1823 by Chevreul, who first separated natural dyes from the complex mixtures of oils, resins, and gums. This was made possible, in turn, by an earlier discovery by Nicholas Leblanc, who in 1801 extracted alkali from common salt and thereby created the basis for the development of the first chemical industry in Europe. From the 1830s onward, soap and candles were made with chemically manufactured vegetable oils instead of animal tallow, and by 1840 coconut oil extracted from copra was imported from the Pacific Islands into Europe. Local histories of the global reach of an economy that began to function increasingly on the back of trade in raw materials for chemical engineering are, however, as yet largely unwritten, albeit from a purely historical, Eurocentric perspective (Smith and Findlen 2002; Schiebinger and Swan 2005). Much without us noticing, in a move that was as swift as it was seemingly unremarkable, a rapidly advancing material technology has invaded into every aspect of daily life in the modern world, subtly altering the infrastructure of life in a manner far more effective than paradigm shifts in scientific knowledge (Latour 1992; Hansen 2000). Nanotechnology, materials, and information technology are now combining with biology and the life sciences to enable further integrations with pervasive effects from design (biomimetics) to end product (bionics). A world of materials, readily equipped with technical function, now cuts across all known classifications of nature and culture in quantities that now reach into the tens of thousands (Silberglitt 2001). Bruno Latour has captured the vanishing of the relevance of existing systems of classification in which ‘things’ were radically other to ‘persons,’ inventing for us a vocabulary that makes manifest the agency of nonhumans and the recalcitrant materiality of humans (Latour and Woolgar 1979; Latour 1996). Latour (2001) speaks of a “parliament of things” to draw attention to the ways in which material technologies form assemblages that interrupt, revise, or restructure political life. As anthropology has come to appreciate artifactual agency (Gell 1998), following the history and philosophy of science where materials made by ‘design’ have become the new epistemic object par excellence (Daston 2004; Bensaude-Vincent and Newmann 2007), it is dawning on us that distinctions—between the social and the material, the natural and the artificial—upon which our most trusted methods have rested for the past century have indeed become obsolete. As connections of molecules made tangible in materials take on a presence in our lives without us even being fully aware that they do so, materials by design have become far more than the mere technical substrata of a world lived in analog to a digitized presence. Ready-made with a use and a user in mind, virtually un-reconstructable yet affecting the very infrastructure of life, new materials challenge anthropology to respond with a theory of design that enables us to understand how materials work and what they do from a social science perspective. Libraries of materials are wrestling with an avalanche of designed materials, estimated at between 40,000 and 70,000, that no longer fit existing classificatory paradigms. Such libraries have sprung up since the mid-1990s, a commercial example of which is material connexion, with its outlets in New York, Milan, and Beijing. As the need for material consultants is increasing in all sectors of industry, design, and architecture, such libraries are rapidly becoming the main knowledge resource about what materials can do. As new materials are not just composites, which cannot be easily disentangled either conceptually or physically, impeding such actions as copying and recycling, but are also at least potentially aggregates in their systemic capacity for propagation and replication, those that need to select materials are facing a real problem. Knowing materials to the extent that one can select from a range of several thousand materials that more or less fulfill the same function has become a specialist domain for the material consultant. To assist designers in steering through this minefield, there is now burgeoning literature on the huge range of engineered materials from which designers and manufacturers can choose in the fabrication of any artifact (Benyus 1997; Hongu and Philips 1997; Askeland and Pradeep 2002; Ashby and Johnson 2002; Gay, Suong, and Tsai 2002; Mori 2002; Addington, Miller and Schodek 2004; Wessel 2004). Publications on new materials also comprise handbooks directed at a specialist audience in design and industry (Satas and Tracton 2000; Stattmann 2003; Beylerian, Dent, and Moryadas 2005). Handbooks furnish the designer with an image of a material, its functional characteristics such as luminosity or tensile strength, but leave out any discussion of experience of use. Ashby and Johnson (2002) have recently begun to fill this gap in writing a phenomenologically oriented guide to designed materials, modeling the range of effects of materials so that designers can take these effects into consideration. Using grid systems, they map out acoustic, olfactory, tactile, and motion-sensitive factors inherent in materials and arrange these on a spectrum at the center of which is the egocentric and relative sensorial space of a person. Most new materials take the form of screens or fibrous membranes, a fact that cannot quite be explained by the perceptual paradigm implicit in this phenomenological account of new materials. Simulating cloth, such membranes, much like skin, form both a boundary and a point of contact between the human and the material world, binding people in social and economic relationships while simultaneously defining their difference. Individuation, which we used to associate with the consumption stage of commodity production, is now taking place at the moment of materials design and selection in a manner that is raising important issues about the difference such materials will make to our notion of and intellectual expectations directed to diversity. The thriving economy in new materials revolves around highly mobile and complex materials, moving from institution to institution as they are adopted, transformed, and manufactured into products to suit a number of distinct functions. The inseparable link between materials and knowledge is now recognized to present a huge potential for growth but also to be highly vulnerable to factors affecting transmission and take-up. The materials industry in the United Kingdom—in which new materials are presenting a steady increase—has today an annual turnover of around £200 billion, contributing 15 percent of GDP to the economy, and employing 1.5 million people directly and supporting a further 4 million jobs. In 2006, a report by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) identified a number of challenges to the UK materials sector’s place as a world leader in materials science. Recognizing the volatility of an economy run on the back of materials that need to be known in order to be taken up, the report emphasized that central to any future success would be the transfer of knowledge of materials across a network of stakeholders: an interconnected web of customers, universities, research and technology organizations, designers, and other intermediaries. As a result, the UK government created the Materials Knowledge Transfer Network in 2006 in order to improve the capacity of the United Kingdom’s innovation performance by increasing the breadth and depth of knowledge transfer. Designers and industry are facing the new relation between materials and knowledge with anxiety, as untold numbers of designed materials fail to reach a market. Over and above the question of how to design with materials in mind, what material knowledge actually is when the distinction between nature and culture is meaningless, how this knowledge is transmitted, and what ‘new’ materials do when they come to replace existing materials in artifacts that are pivotal to identity are concerns that have not yet even begun to be addressed (McDonough and Braungart 2009). It is here that anthropology can contribute with a theoretical understanding of the nature of materials selection drawn from ethnographies, which testify to the absence of the distinction of the natural and the artificial in societies we tend to have disregarded in studies of design (Strathern 1999). ## New Materials: A Story of Uncertainty and Risk<sup>1</sup> Global policy makers have embraced cutting-edge scientific research that takes the potential societal benefit of newly invented materials as axiomatic. Governments in the United States, Germany, China, Japan, and South Korea posit the development of advanced materials as crucial to global competitiveness and national security, and essential for addressing the broader challenges of clean energy, food security, and human health and well-being. As a result, the early twenty-first century is being defined by a flourishing new materials economy driven by a flood of engineered technological materials whose capacities offer far-reaching promises—but just how sustainable are they and what may the difference be that they make to society and culture? In science, innovation for its own sake is privileged, with a trajectory that goes from invention to successful initial application on a case-by-case basis; failures are not highlighted or even acknowledged. From this perspective, new technology looks entirely positive, and tends to be adopted by policy makers without a broad evidence base as to its potential consequences. In social science, which focuses on the societal use of new materials after initial application, over a prolonged period of time, the view is very different. From this perspective, production quickly segues into overproduction, and use often into misuse. Recent ethnographic research shows that a staggering percentage of materials invented and manufactured at great cost fail to establish a secure market within the first five months, often for social rather than scientific reasons. One example of failed materials is Azlon, a class of regenerated protein fibers developed as a wool substitute during the 1930s and 40s. Fibers made from milk (Aralac) and peanuts (Ardil) were commercially produced in the United States and United Kingdom during World War II shortages and marketed as patriotic fibers; however, they were structurally weak and had to be blended. The range of unfamiliar trade names resulted in ‘forgettable’ fibers that were both physically and cognitively difficult to identify and failed to create a strong niche market. After 1945 they came to be culturally associated with wartime deprivation and substitution, and only recently have they re-emerged as luxury sustainable fibers with health-giving properties. ‘Qmilch’ is one such contemporary milk fiber being developed in Germany and marketed as highly desirable and beneficial to the skin. New materials may not be effectively mobilized, designers may remain ignorant of their potential, or consumers may fail to become attached to them. For every lasting ‘success,’ therefore, many materials come into circulation and then fail, exacerbating the very problems new materials are supposedly developed to solve. At the same time, the privileging of innovation drives the development of yet more new materials, instead of fully exploring the potential and qualities of recent inventions, leading to waste, overproduction, increased risk and uncertainty, and an increasing lack of knowledge about the materials that surround us. Indeed, there is a general resistance to thinking about materials at all. The new materials market has produced two distinct phenomena, each taken individually presenting huge problems for society and the environment—together they present perhaps one of the greatest challenges. The first is overproduction—materials innovated in the laboratory do not offer resistance to tools and skills and thus can, with the right machinery, be produced in any quantity and quality for as long as there is a demand in the market. The second is disposal— new synthetic materials do not degrade or degrade in time spans that are unknown to human civilizations. The precedent for this was set in the 1950s with the commercialization of the first mass-market new material: plastic (Mossmann and Smith 2008). The consequences unleashed by the unbridled development of plastics comprise some of the greatest environmental challenges of our times, and yet people are still hypnotized by what Meikle (1995) called the ‘exuberant proliferation’ of design and new materials. And in our obsession with novelty, we overlook the fact that materials are not inert; they leak, transform, and interact with what is around them in ways that are invisible and unsuspected. Asbestos and plastics are two examples that immediately come to mind (Norris 2010). We are all familiar with the overwhelming representations of the Great Pacific Garbage Patch; there are vast areas of miniscule particles of plastic marine debris suspended in columns in each of the five major gyres in the world’s oceans. Its impact on marine life has been catastrophic. Various artists have attempted to convey the enormity of our falling out of love with these plastics and our wastefulness, potently brought to mind by Chris Jordan’s images of dead baby albatrosses whose stomachs are full of plastic, or sea turtles bound with netting. The effects of these marine rubbish dumps are inconceivable, and research has only just begun on the impact of molecular changes as plastic breaks down. Indeed, the term ‘plastisphere’ refers to ecosystems that have evolved to live in human-made plastic environments, such as the image by Andrea Westmoreland. But this disguises the hidden dangers of the Garbage Patch, the ‘shadow’ it casts over the marine life below it, turning vast areas of the ocean floor and the deep sea into marine deserts we cannot see, but the consequences of which are already affecting us, in the loss of edible marine resources. There are at present two competing approaches to how best to mitigate the uncertainty and risk that surround the discovery, deployment, and disposal of materials: one calling for increased governance, the other emerging from open access models for developing shared knowledge resources. But both approaches are hampered by existing economic and management systems set up for commodity production that either unnecessarily restrict movements of materials or are totally unaware of the possibilities and consequences. The governance model directs almost exclusive attention to identifying and securing materials resources, driven by narratives of risks, volatility, scarcity, frontiers, resilience, and governance, and calling for a holistic approach that includes (a) strategic, diplomatic efforts in the international arena to boost supply through trade agreements and knowledge exchange; (b) increasing the efficiency of resource use; and (c) improving the husbandry of resources through reuse, remanufacture, and recycling in secondary markets. The governance model argues that it is de facto resource politics, not environmental preservation or sound economics, that is set to dominate the global agenda, played out through trade disputes, climate negotiations, market manipulation strategies, aggressive industrial policies, and the scramble to control frontier areas. The open access model on the other hand is all about finding innovative advanced alternatives through increased connectivity, with narratives of opportunity, experimentation, and collaboration. Examples of its implementation are the United States’s ‘Materials Genome Initiative,’ launched in 2011, which aims to double the speed of new materials innovation and deployment through computational research, and develop a national public–private infrastructure to integrate emerging data into generic open-access materials databases within an evolving intellectual property (IP) framework. The computational research uses algorithms to generate millions of potential new materials and model their physical properties without their ever having been manufactured, and models spatially and temporally the new materials’ behaviors and properties during product design. Supercomputing clusters at Berkeley have been harnessed for the Materials Project, which aims to compute the properties of all known materials and make them available to researchers, thus improving software’s predictive capacities for new material combinations and allowing for targeted screening of the potentially most useful materials before they have been synthesized in a lab. It is claimed that such advanced combinatorial techniques accelerate tenfold the transition from new materials discoveries to practical applications. In contrast, Harvard’s open-access ‘Clean Energy Project’ is seeking a clearly defined advanced-material solution to a practical problem. Aiming to develop high-performance organic photovoltaic candidates for solar cell materials, it is currently the world’s largest computational chemistry experiment. Using IBM’s World Community Grid, the global public can participate by donating idle computer time for computational research. This has so far generated 2.3 million candidate materials, whose properties have been made available in online databases, allowing other materials scientists and engineers to design experimental new products. The screening and selection of suitable virtual candidates results in what Andrew Barry (2005) has termed ‘informed materials,’ whose properties are simulated by computers and whose proposed use is built into their very existence, yet whose real social use once manufactured cannot be predicted or imagined. The story of these millions of computed new materials can be seen to offer a counterpoint to the by now familiar narrative of lack-of-sustainability determined by resource depletion. But is simply speeding up advances in technology really going to solve the global challenges that confront us today? This new materials economy also throws up uncertainties, risks, and anxieties attached to the potential social life of these materials. What kinds of meanings will be embedded in them, what relationships will we build with them? How much will be wasted? The pursuit of novelty and innovation for their own sake, and the reluctance to develop the full potential in new materials before moving on to develop further new ones, many of which will be discarded, is not new, and a famous industry story may serve as a cautionary example. Dupont developed the elastane fiber Lycra over twenty years before launching it in 1959 (O’Connor 2011). Lycra was specifically invented for use in women’s girdles, and since all women wore girdles in the 1950s, a huge mass market was ensured. Then came Women’s Liberation. Women abandoned the girdle and the market for Lycra collapsed. No one wanted it. Bales of Lycra fabric lay unused in warehouses until the aerobics movement erupted, and Lycra was rediscovered for use in the workout outfits Jane Fonda made famous. Suddenly, everyone wanted clothes that stretched—not just for gymnastics, but for everyday use; now Lycra is ubiquitous, mixed with many other fibers. In this case, working together, science and society created a new market for the fiber that had been on the edge of being abandoned, fully developing its potential. The problem is fundamentally anthropological—how do people from very different and overlapping cultures interact with, use, and understand highly mobile materials in their changing environments? An understanding of the use and usefulness of materials is a vital factor in the success of any solution to a sustainable materials economy, as high-velocity materials alone will not enable us to overcome our current strategic reliance on simply improving remanufacture and recycling. For this to happen, materials, and the understanding and actions we direct toward them, have to be taken seriously as objects of research by both materials and social science. With theoretical traditions that balance cultural relativism with universalist principles and a disciplinary foundation in fine-grained ethnography as a methodology, anthropological studies of the cultural perceptions of materials in use have never been more urgently needed. The story of materials use, the inter-subjective, often surprising, and yet deeply empathetic understanding that communities bring to materials is a story that is sensitive to the needs, hopes, and aspirations of society and that sees success not in the scale of consumption, but in the duration and quality of use. Ironically, in a world in which potentially millions of materials compete to be turned into objects with rather more limited forms and functions than they are technically capable of, we are now generally ignorant of the properties, levels of sustainability, and future impact of the material objects that surround us. And this precisely at a moment when materials are beginning to take over the technical functions we once associated exclusively with object forms. The step-change in both the quantity and inherent qualities of materials is swift and largely unrecognized outside the laboratory environment, arriving in the marketplace as a fait accompli, apparently undifferentiated from previous materials. This leaves existing structures of training, monitoring, and planning for their long-term impact hopelessly behind and unable to respond intelligibly. Without a deep understanding of the role of the social in materials development and use, how can we define the criteria of success and understand how and why some materials fail? How are we to evaluate the ‘usefulness’ of materials and, by the same token, avoid wasting their potential and simply creating more waste? Understanding the value of new materials through a nuanced study of social and cultural values is a core contribution that social science ought to be making. In the rush to create future forms of living and burdened by our industrial past we have forgotten the very simple fact that, like humans, materials need two to tango: scientists who study how to think with materials and social scientists who study how materials are used and experienced. The task ahead is not just about finding the right way to innovate materials and bring them to market but how to break down the silos of training that have been with us since the mid-nineteenth century by partnering up materials and social science in ways fit for the demands of the twenty-first century, from the bottom up. The making of futures has always been shrouded in uncertainty and risk; in our material world, the challenges can only be overcome if science and social science work together. Social science, and anthropology in particular, is called upon to assist brokering conversations across disciplines in ensuring that the question of the difference made by materials designed in laboratories includes questions of society and culture. For what enables materials to be taken up and resonate—spurring on new imaginaries and new actions much beyond the potential originally informing the design of a material—has been revealed by recent ethnographies sensitive to the question of what materials are, what happens when they are taken up, and what they do unwittingly to cultural imaginaries and actions (Drazin and Küchler 2015). The following section is a brief excursion into one such ethnographic study, which shows that a material such as fiber, let alone the woven and dyed fabric that is made from it, is taken up with intentions that are rather surprising and with effects that are reaching far beyond the society within which the material has come to resonate. ## Material, Substance, and Effect This section discusses a case study of the take-up and transformation of cloth in a Pacific society. The Pacific Islands are famous for the diversity and visual complexity of their art traditions, which are an inseparable part of trade and exchange, and flamboyant rituals. The rich and complex intellectual expectations that resonate with the world of the concrete have been the subject of numerous ethnographies that have provoked the theorizing of the analogical relation between concepts of the social and the material. The ethnography with the most lasting theoretical impact has been Marilyn Strathern’s (1986) work The Gender of the Gift, which explored the relational nature of actions and their intellectual understanding, which is thought to effect the making of persons and things alike. Social and biographical relations in Melanesia are internally defined and are likened to the aggregates of the gendered identities of bodily substances that need to be disaggregated (decomposed) for discrete persons to emerge, capable of physical and ideological reproduction. Such actions of taking apart invisible, composite substances involves the selection of material substances that are likened in terms of their transformative capacities, rather than merely their physical properties, to the relational capacity ascribed to bodily substances. When specific materials with concrete properties are chosen, such as, for example, softness and malleability as found in types of wood, associations with skin and bounded surface make the matriline materially manifest in ways that paradoxically effect the momentary accentuation of the fiction of patrilineal descent. Gendered substance and material effect are complementary entities in a ritualized opposition scenario that makes visible and conceptually present what is at once the same and different (Bateson 1958). Distinctions such as natural and artificial, person and thing, bodily substance and material, do not apply here, where effects are derived from fusions of the alchemy of materials with the properties of persons. The unlikely ‘likeness’ of Pacific ethnography with the condition of contemporary design is underscored by the way materials are handled and transferred as knowledge, access to which is hotly contested (Barth 1990). For those interested in the articulations of a knowledge-based economy run on the back of materials, it is to Pacific ethnography that they should turn. No better example has been given of how to excavate the inherent socialness of material knowledge, relating to the calculated selection of concrete materials, than Frederick Damon’s (2004) analysis of the materials used for the construction of the Kula Canoe, famous in anthropological literature as the material expression of an image of the social body and of the cultural imaginary surrounding mobility in an island world. Damon shows how the many different types of wood chosen in the construction of the seafaring canoe are at once significant for the technical function of the canoe, as they are for the cultural imaginary supporting social identity, as they are taken from trees that are grown in places associated with the biographical relations that make up a matriline and also with the temporal cycles unique to the practice of the shifting cultivation of land. When making a canoe as a gift to secure an affinal relation, the knowledge that is required to create a socially acceptable and seaworthy canoe demands an understanding of the complex relation between material, substance, and effect. The transformative effect that is unleashed when translating artifact production from one material to another, subtly altering daily life and relations of labor and loyalty, has been examined by ethnographers in relation to the introduction of cloth in the Pacific (Colchester 2003). Readily colored and often patterned, yet otherwise recalling the known and much desired material properties of partibility and portability, alongside the ability to be folded and to be wrapped around bodies and three dimensional forms, cotton cloth was readily seized in many areas of the Pacific when it became available through traders. As Nicholas Thomas (1999) has argued convincingly for Eastern Polynesia, it was Polynesians, rather than missionaries, who carried a wave of Christianization across the Pacific on the back of the new material, which was harnessed and transformed in ways redolent of established notions of status and deportment associated with prosperity and fortune. Arguably, the impact of cotton cloth was marginal across areas in the Pacific where a cloth aesthetic prevailed already, maintained by and existing alongside indigenous fiber technologies utilizing the bark of the paper mulberry tree and the leaves of the pandanus plant. Others, like Lissant Bolton (2001) and Hauser-Schaublin (1996), have argued that in areas of the Pacific where non-cloth aesthetics prevail, articulated in the emphasis not on the planar surface of the wrap but on the line, the string, and the frond, cotton cloth was met with a very different response. Jarring with a fundamentally different conception of status, based not on temporal but on spatial modalities of differentiation, imported cotton cloth was resisted and/or acted upon in a manner that led to the transformation of the material in ways that made it compliant with an established material aesthetic. Sweaters are still today unraveled, dresses shredded before being reworked into openwork forms. Where the donning of cotton clothing was enforced, relations of labor and loyalty changed dramatically, as women no longer could maintain their work in gardens unhindered by the new strictures of cleanliness and modes of bodily deportment. The complex relation between the work demanded by the new material and the relations that became associated with the worked upon product is best illustrated with the case of the Polynesian quilt in the Cook Islands, a chain of tiny islands in the eastern part of Polynesia where cotton cloth was greeted enthusiastically (Küchler and Eimke 2009). Cook Islanders had for long been preoccupied with the coloration of its bark-cloth and the patterning of its pandanus sleeping mats, both difficult to achieve and requiring a lengthy process of soaking, burying, and drying. Ready colored cotton relieved of this time-consuming work so convincingly that already 25 years after Chinese traders had arrived in the footsteps of missionaries, the main island of Rarotonga had its own cotton plantation. Yet, cotton cloth was not merely used for the purpose destined by missionaries who encouraged the sewing of clothing and the domestication of the household, which followed in the wake of the new material with its demand for cleanliness and care. Women began to sew large and complex planar sheets from shredded pieces of cloth, known later as tivaivai or patchwork quilts. Competitive, potlatch-like presentations of quilts and the sewing of quilts for important life-cycle events in which they figured as major items of exchange sustained the development of sewing bees, which began to run the political economy of the islands. Elevated with the support of the church, which regarded them as eager followers of its mission, women had—already by the mid-nineteenth century—taken over the positions of ariki, the partially divine and partially human-ordained office of the chief, taking these positions from men who, since the condemnation of their ritual artifacts as idols and the acceptance of Christianity, could no longer pool divine power through the mechanism of sacrificial exchange. In a move that was as swift as it was seemingly unremarkable, women, who had previously moved in marriage in the opposite direction to divine power, access to which was granted to wife-giving groups among islands that became enchained in such exchanges, had assumed control over the relational nature of such actions. Patchwork, in the Cook Islands, thus provoked a radical shifting of the axis of power relations, from a vertical topology of a chiefly polity centered in particular locations to the horizontal topology of a decentered polity that began to grow its radius by means of reconnecting the lost and the forgotten touchdowns of power through the circulation of products of women’s labor (Siikala 1991). Relations of labor that came to be associated with the actions upon shredding and re-stitching patches of cloth were able to effect the transformation of Cook Island society from nucleated island groupings to an expanding transnational community by means of what is known as skeuomorphism, or a translation of properties of form expressed in one material into another. In the same way as cotton cloth was not really new, but merely enabled the exploration of new properties in a material medium already central to actions at the heart of the configuration of the social body, patchwork was not new, as the missionaries had thought, but a material translation of the topology of a sculpture onto the planar surface of cloth. It was this move that enabled patchwork to partake in the concepts surrounding the actions that had been central to the strategic calculation of biographical relations right up to European incursion. The formal relation between sculpture and patchwork is plain to the eye in an overtness that is not dissimilar to the quite unnecessary vertical seam at the back of the Wellington boot that allows us to recall its affinity with its counterpart made from leather. In the quilt, it is its scale that stands out, connecting the miniaturized with the magnified through a process of the multiplication of proportionally self-similar motifs in ways that are reminiscent of the sculpted wood of god staffs. Rendered invisible in the sculpture, which was tightly bound with tapa cloth, sennit cordage, and feathers, was the relational nature of acts of sacrificial exchange that accompanied the refashioning of the polity over time. The relational nature of acts of exchange through which women reconstitute their connectedness across the expanded diaspora is also invisible in the patchwork. Hardly ever coming together in one place, Cook Island patchwork is made by three distinct modalities of technical acts, which can be described as partitioning, grouping, and mirroring. The resulting quilts have different names and are associated with distinct types of social relations. There is the patchwork proper (taorei) whose reduplicated motifs are made of tiny patches of cloth, which is gifted in an asymmetric, transitive, and relational manner between grandmother and granddaughter. Then there are the symmetrically appliquéd motifs of a quilt (tat aura) that are gifted between affines, and the mirrored motif of the snowflake or cut out quilt (manu), which is gifted between friends and casual acquaintances. What we are looking at is, in fact, an instantiation of a modular time-map hidden in the sculpture beneath its wrap and hidden in the quilt in the seeming divide of its distinct material techniques. The work that Pacific Islanders put into the quasi-alchemic combination of materials would defy understanding were it not for the intuitive manner by which one can grasp the analog relations that are foundational to the social fabric. Methodologically speaking, inter-artifactual relations and the reconstruction of the temporal and sequential nature of a logic of which they partake become important in the analysis in ways that remind of Bruno Latour’s analysis of the complex web of relations between human and nonhuman actants in the laboratory setting, where seemingly very different materials are designed in a not too dissimilar manner. ## Enchantment by Inherence: Material Properties and Design Responsibilities The anthropology of design has to be cognizant of the complexity of contexts that are not so much referenced by the objects as they are inherent within them and that objects activate as logic capable of inspiring new actions and new thoughts, rather than merely reflecting in a representational manner contexts of production and consumption. This chapter has argued that it is not, as conventionally thought, the form and function, but the material properties of objects that carry the propensity for enchantment for reasons that are by definition complex and difficult to predict and reconstruct. It is for this reason that the designing of materials in the laboratory is not to be taken lightly, and it is also for this reason that designers need to be both materials and anthropologically savvy. ## References Addington, D., D. Miller and L. Schodek (2004), Smart Materials and Technologies in Architecture, Burlington: Architectural Press. Ashby, M. and K. Johnson (2002), Materials and Design: The Art and Science of Material Selection in Product Design, Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. Askeland, D. and P. Pradeep (2002), The Science and Engineering of Materials, Salt Lake City: Thomson Engineering. Ball, P. (1997), Made to Measure: New Materials for the 21st Century, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. Barry, A. (2005), “Pharmaceutical Matters: The Invention of Informed Materials,” Theory, Culture and Society, 22 (1): 51–69. Barry, A. and N. Thrift (2007), “Gabriel Tarde: Imitation, Invention, and Economy,” Economy and Society, 36 (4): 509–25. Barth, F. (1990), Cosmologies in the Making: A Generative Approach to Cultural Variation in Inner New Guinea, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bateson, G. (1958), Naven: A Survey of the Problems Suggested by a Composite Picture of the Culture of New Guinea Tribe Drawn from Three Points of View, Stanford: Stanford University Press. Bateson, G. (1973), “Style, Grace, Information in Primitive Society,” in A. Forge (ed.), Art in Primitive Society, 78–90, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bennett, J. (2010), Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things, Durham: Duke University Press. Bensaude-Vincent, B. (2004), Le libérer de la matière? Fantasmes autour de la nouvelles technologies, Versailles: Inra. Bensaude-Vincent, B. and W. R. Newmann (eds.) (2007), The Artificial and the Natural: An Evolving Polarity, Cambridge: MIT Press. Benyus, J. (1997), Biomimicry, New York: Perennial. Beylerian, G., A. Dent and A. Moryadas, eds. (2005), Material Connexion: The Global Resource of New and Innovative Materials for Architects, Artists and Designers, New York: Wiley & Sons. Boas, F. (1955 [1927]), Primitive Art, New York: Dover Publications. Bolton, L. (2001), “Classifying the Material: Food, Textiles, and Status in North Vanuatu,” Journal of Material Culture, 6 (3): 251–68. Buchli, V. (2015), Immateriality, London: Routledge. Colchester, C., ed. (2003), Clothing the Pacific, Oxford: Berg. Conkey, M. (2006), “Style, Design and Function,” in C. Tilley et al. (eds.), Handbook of Material Culture, 355–73, London: Sage. Coole, D. and S. Frost (2010), New Materialism: Ontology, Agency and Politics, Durham: Duke University Press. Damon, F. H. (2004), “On the Ideas of a Boat: From Forest Patches to Cybernetic Structures in the Outrigger Sailing Craft of the Eastern ‘Kula’ Ring, Papua New Guinea,” in C. Sather and T. Kaartinen (eds.), Beyond the Horizon: Essays on Myth, History, Travel and Society, 123–44, Helsinki: Finnish Literature Society. Daston, L., ed. (2004), Things That Talk: Object Lessons from Art and Science, New York: Zone Books. Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), Materials Innovation and Growth Team (2006), “A Strategy for Materials.” Available online: http://www.matuk.co.uk/docs/DTI\_mat\_bro.pdf (accessed May 8, 2017). Drazin, A. and S. Küchler (2015), The Social Life of Materials, London: Bloomsbury Press. Freedberg, D. (1991), The Power of Images: The Study of the Nature of Response, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Gay, D. V., H. Suong and S. Tsai (2002), Composite Materials: Design and Application, Boca Raton: CRC Press. Gell, A. (1998), Art and Agency, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Hansen, M. (2000), Embodying Technesis: Technology Beyond Writing, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Hauser-Schaublin, E. (1996), “The Thrill of the Line, the String and the Frond, or Why the Abelam Are a Non-Cloth Culture,” Oceania, 67 (2): 81–106. Herder, J. G. ([1778] 2002), Sculpture: Some Observations on Shape and Form from Pygmalion’s Creative Dream, trans. and ed. J. Gaiger, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hongu, T. and G. O. Philips (1997), New Fibers, Cambridge: Technomic Publishing Company. Klein, U. and W. Lefèvre (2007), Materials in Eighteenth-Century Science: A Historical Ontology, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Küchler, S. (2008), “Technological Materiality: Beyond the Dualist Paradigm,” Theory, Culture and Society, 25 (1): 101–20. Küchler, S. and A. Eimke (2009), Tivaivai: The Social Fabric of the Cook Islands, London: British Museum Press. Lange-Berndt, P., ed. (2015), Materiality, Cambridge and London: The MIT Press. Latour, B. (1992), “Where Are the Missing Masses: The Sociology of a Few Mundane Artifacts,” in W. Bijker and J. Law (eds.), Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Socio-Technical Change, 225–58, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Latour, B. (1996), Aramis, or the Love of Technology, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Latour, B. (2001), Das Parlament der Dinge, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. Latour, B. and S. Woolgar (1979), Laboratory Life: The Construction of Social Facts, London: Sage Publications. Mauss, M. (1934), “Les Techniques du corps,” Journal de Psychologie, 32 (3–4): 271–93. Reprinted in Mauss, M. (1936), Sociologie et anthropologie, Paris: PUF. McDonough, W. and M. Braungart (2009), Cradle to Cradle, London: Vintage. Meikle, J. L. (1995), American Plastic: A Cultural History, New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. Miller, D., ed. (2005), Materiality, Durham: Duke University Press. Mori, T. (2002), Immaterial/Ultramaterial: Architecture, Design and Materials, New York: Braziller. Mossmann, S. and R. Smith (2008), Fantastic Plastic: Product Design and Consumer Culture, London: Black Dog Publishing. Myers, F. (1999), “Aesthetics and Practice: A Local Art History of Pintupi Painting,” in H. Morphy and M. Smith Bowles (eds.), Art from the Land, 218–61, Charlottesville: University of Virginia. Norris, L. (2010), Recycling Indian Clothing: Global Contexts of Reuse and Value, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. O’Connor, K. (2011), Lycra: How A Fiber Shaped America, London and New York: Routledge. Reckwitz, A. (2002), “The Status of the ‘Material’ in Theories of Culture: From ‘Social Structure’ to ‘Artefacts,’” Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 32 (2): 195–217. Rubel, D. and S. Hackenschmidt (2008), Formless Furniture, Frankfurt: Hatje Cantz. Satas, D. A. and A. Tracton (2000), Coatings Technology Handbook, New York: Marcel Dekker. Schiebinger, L. and C. Swan (2005), Colonial Botany, Science, Commerce and Politics in Early Modern Europe, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. Siikala, J. (1991), Akatokamava: Myth, History and Society in the Southern Cook Islands, Auckland/Helsinki: The Polynesian Society in Association with the Finnish Anthropological Society. Silberglitt, R., ed. (2001), The Global Technological Revolution: Bio/Nano/Materials Trends and Their Synergies with Information Technology by 2015, Santa Monica: Rand. Smith, P. and P. Findlen, eds. (2002), Merchants and Marvels: Commerce, Science and Art in Early Modern Europe, London & New York: Routledge. Strathern, M. (1986), The Gender of the Gift: Problems with Women and Problems with Society in Melanesia, Berkeley: University of California Press. Stattmann, N. (2003), Ultra Light—Super Strong: A New Generation of Design Materials, Basel: Birkhäuser. Strathern, M. (1999), Property, Substance and Effect: Anthropological Essays on Persons and Things, London: Athlone Press. Thomas, N. (1999), “The Case of the Misplaced Ponchos—Speculations Concerning the History of Cloth in Polynesia,” Journal of Material Culture, 4 (1): 5–21. Wagner, M. (2001), Das Material in der Kunst: Eine andere Geschichte der Moderne, Munich: H. C. Beck. Wessel, J. (2004), The Handbook of Advanced Materials: Enabling New Design, New York: Wiley-Interscience.