# Valuable to Values: How ‘User Research’ Ought to Change Maria Bezaitis and Rick E. Robinson In the early 1990s, in major research labs like Xerox PARC, Microsoft Research, and Bell Labs, technologists worked with social scientists incorporating the tools of anthropology to describe how people thought machines worked, to understand the interactions between people and technology, and the reciprocal impact of organizations, practices, and technologies on one another. ## Introduction—The Immigrants’ Tale Neither of us is an anthropologist. Nor is either of us a designer, although one of us is left-handed. But both of us do, rather happily, self-identify with the ‘design/anthropology’ intersection around which this volume is organized. We work in this space. We’ve built networks here, we (mostly) think here. But when either of us attempts to tell anyone what it is that we do, we almost invariably start with the fact that we were trained in the social sciences or the humanities (respectively)— with where we come from as an introduction to what we do. We are, in a word, immigrants. And like most immigrants, our experience, as well as our expectations and outlook on the future, are blendedly influenced by both our originating contexts and our somewhat different understandings of the workings of the contexts we now find ourselves in. One of the facts that makes this space an appealing one is that we are hardly unique in this. Among our immediate colleagues over the years have been anthropologists in some number, but also cognitive psychologists; sociologists; students of literature, linguistics, history, and criticism; people trained in the fine arts, theater, and performance studies; divinity scholars; art historians; and biologists. That leaves aside the similarly broad range of the disciplines that have historically worked in the design and development domains: engineers, designers, strategists, and so on. The design/research intersection seems to be a very appealing destination for folks trained in what were once unrelated fields. The reasons an immigrant has for leaving a well-settled home are always varied, but a constant across those variations is the idea that the future could be different—at an individual level, but perhaps more importantly for many, the potential to bring change to the world, to shift the ground, to alter the rules. It has been no different for us. Like many immigrants, we retain a good deal of where we come from in the ways that we think and in the values that we maintain, while at the same time trying to make as much out of the opportunities we came here to explore as we can. We aren’t writing a history of the ‘user research’ space; we are much more interested in a bit of prescriptiveness for the field as it continues to grow, but that prescription does depend on our articulating how we understand the ‘somewhere’ from which the trajectory starts. It matters to us that we are anchoring this chapter in the specifics of our own experience, because a big part of what we are trying to lay out here is the importance of the essential humanness of what we do: We are individuals situated in a field and in practices. We, and the organizations we work in and for, have very particular values. What we want to stress is not some abstract notion of how a practice develops, but that the articulation and evolution of practices and values matter to the quality and the future of this work. Working through that notion brought us to yet another story—perhaps less comfortable but equally crucial—that has to do with power and differentiation. Each of us came to be doing what it is we do (notice how we neatly sidestep attaching a label) by quite different paths. In the decade gap between when Robinson left the University of Chicago and started at Jay Doblin & Associates and when Bezaitis left Duke University and began to work at E-Lab, the nature of the field and the opportunities for researchers had already changed significantly. In the decade or so since then, what both designers and scholars face is an altogether differently constituted field. We chose the immigrant figure deliberately: We want to emphasize that the work of design, development, strategy, and innovation was the place to which we and many of our colleagues came, bag and baggage. We don’t think that there is a simple tale of assimilation here; it hasn’t become a happy melting pot; our unum is still pretty pluribus. That’s not to say that the work of design has been unaffected by the influx of new people, new terms, new methods, and new frameworks. In a fairly condensed period of time, these new arrivals have had a profound impact on the design world, have shaped and affected what had been a small intersection (that between research on and about people and the work of design) to the point where it is now a field itself, a recognized domain of both expertise and value. This development seems to have strengthened the attraction between the new territory and the wide range of disciplines new and old that came to it. The other reason for working through the figure of the immigrant, however, is that it potentially characterizes not just our past but also our prospects. We do not believe that these blends of social science and design are capabilities that necessarily belong in any or every corporation. Nor do we believe that once they do they should necessarily become a permanent fixture. Companies become disposed to and in need of these capabilities for specific reasons in specific contexts. It is just as easy to imagine that these contexts will change, and in those changes corporations may cease to value what social science and design can deliver. In this sense, we’ve signed up for a lifetime of migration, and if that’s the case, we, in all of our wonderful differences, had better be prepared to understand clearly the lessons to be learned from the various places we’ve tried to call home. Over the past twenty years or so, the practices and values of the human sciences have added richness to a range of shared vocabularies and created, rather than simply altered, ways of working. Some of these ways of working refer heavily to the domains and disciplines from which they came; some not at all. Labels aside, the practices of the majority of the field are hybrids with a strong sense of ‘hereness’ to them. As the community grows, in both size and in range of roles, there is an understandable impulse to craft a singular identity, to find common labels for the ‘we’ and the ‘work,’ and to be able to train and support new practitioners without the same disruption between disciplinary training and professional identity that many of us went through in getting here. On the other hand, though, there is a peculiar way in which recourse to a common label allows us to ignore the realities of organizational terrain, politics, and growth. To recognize those realities moves (or should move) conversation around practice to a more fraught one that also deals with power. Power, organizational politics, and frank assessment of effectiveness are not often what gets discussed when we talk about the ‘value’ of this work. It should be. There is no ‘canon’ here yet; those other, original homes are far too valuable to the everyday work of this domain to ever be someplace we are no longer from. But we need more than method and process agreement to prosper. What follows is a discussion that seeks to surface the lessons and experiences that have got us where we are today so that we can move to a discussion of what should happen next. ## Part I: How We Got Here Only one of us went through graduate training with a non-academic career in mind. And for most of the senior researchers we know in industry, that accidental non-path seems reasonably common. A half a generation ago, there were few mentors, organizations, or communities that could have served as an inspiration to look outside of the academic track (leaving public and museum work aside). For our purposes, the careers we have each led are nicely emblematic, if not entirely representative, of the experience of many researchers involved in the emergence of this work. While Robinson was in the midst of a post-doctoral fellowship, a major advisor (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, himself an immigrant from Hungary in the 1950s) introduced Robinson to Jay Doblin, the former head of the Institute of Design in Chicago who, with strategist Larry Keeley, ran a small design planning consultancy known at the time as Jay Doblin Associates. The expertise Doblin was looking for was explicitly methodological; what we later came to call “figuring out how to figure things out.” Beyond the fundamental intrigue of methodology, the aspect of the work that was the most surprising, most engaging, was the practical aspect of it. The developmental disciplines (design, engineering, strategy) at Doblin were able to open up their work practices to engage with the research work, and this became an opportunity for a related, almost mirrored, need on the part of a researcher to pull apart the reasoning, the assumptions, and the processes that had become second nature in order to make research and theory a practical and useful thing in a setting where that value was not assumed. The point was to foster a dialogue between the researcher and the designer, and the goal in that interaction was to make research useful to design and to create for design a place from which it could reflect on its work. At that time, being a researcher in that context meant demonstrating a real difference to both process and outcome—to make the work of other professionals go better and to influence, through design and engineering colleagues, the making of very real things. Robinson’s first major project at Doblin provided an opportunity to work with anthropologists Lucy Suchman and Jeannette Blomberg and their colleagues in the Work Practices & Technology group at Xerox PARC. The idea that the folks at PARC were prodigiously credentialed in their various academic domains, active in professional societies, and yet worked for a copier company was something more than simply eye opening. That they existed and that the group was well-known and respected was a kind of validation, like finding other immigrants from home thriving in the new country. But more important was that their work, the breadth and catholicity of their methodologies, the intense collegiality of their practice, made a developmental space available, opened up the idea that new collaborations, different practices, and new applications were possible: a much different way of looking at an alternative career than simply seeing it as a slot in an organization that you perhaps did not know existed. This was something that could be built, and a trajectory opened up beyond one project, one problem. With the PARC group very much in mind, Robinson, John Cain, and Mary Beth McCarthy left Doblin to form E-Lab, a multidisciplinary group with the explicit goal of delivering research that could be a basis for design. The emphasis was on developing the forms of research that could be relevant to many client audiences. E-Lab did not have the kind of ‘productization’ that market research had, didn’t go as far toward realization as the product development consultancies, and did not have an MBA credentialed ‘strategy’ practice. Indeed, it was a struggle to find the language to describe what it was we were doing to prospective clients. Design effectively became the means to making the research useful. It was nice (and necessary) to have clients who ‘got it, but without providing those clients with ways to talk with their own colleagues, superiors, and funders, expanding the range of opportunities we had to work with was akin to making converts, one at a time. With its concurrent emergence of important technologies and its intense, post-recession entrepreneurialism, the early 1990s offered a unique opportunity for the design field to enhance its role and expand its offer. Firms such as IDEO, Fitch, and Design Continuum had, earlier in the decade, merged multiple disciplines, particularly engineering and industrial design, and begun to change the way that business thought about the place and value of design. Around the same time, in major research labs like Xerox PARC, Microsoft Research, and Bell Labs, technologists had been working with communications designers, usability and human factors engineers, and, especially at PARC, social scientists who had started to use the tools of anthropology, linguistics, sociology, and psychology to describe how people thought machines worked, to understand the interactions between people and technology, and the reciprocal impact of organizations, practices, and technologies on one another. In the business world at large, there was something of a buzz about this kind of hybrid (the ‘newness’ of it, though, is debatable; Suchman 2000), and there were new channels for that buzz—publications like Fast Company, Wired, Business 2.0. Outside of the corporate labs, doing research for hire meant finding a way to describe what kinds of benefits a company might garner from what was then an unfamiliar approach and then to put a price tag on it, which often meant to argue for relative worth in a zero-sum budgeting process. Much of the writing and speaking we did in design and management venues (see Robinson 1993, 1994a, 1994b, 1998, 2001; Robinson and Nims 1996; Robinson and Hackett 1997; Cain 1998) was in part a kind of marketing. The talks and papers were attempts to find common cause between market researchers, product managers, designers, engineers, and the small outposts of social and human scientists working (together) in industry. The language we were trying to find mattered inside E-Lab as well. Descriptions of the work had to make sense to all of the disciplines. It was important that both researchers and designers feel that the ‘we’ of the company was an inclusive ‘we’ rather than a one-sided one. The language of ‘valuable’ work, defined largely by distinctive methodologies and successful product outcomes, started when the field (and the company) was very young. Shortly after Bezaitis joined, E-Lab came to focus on a synthetic moment—the development of ‘a framework’—as the target for the fieldwork and the central output of projects. It was the explicit move to focus our discussions and value claims on the idea of frameworks—which we characterized as “useful representations of how experience is framed for the user”—which differentiated E-Lab’s value in the market and the space in which the practice grew. The term ‘frameworks’ was a placeholder for the notion of distinct and specific analytic organizations (‘frameworks’ evolved to become ‘experience models’ in the course of E-lab’s acquisition by Sapient in 1999) that linked data to questions. How those analytic organizations took their various and particular shapes was a function of the collaborations and multidisciplinary perspectives that sustained the work right across the range of projects. ## Hallmark as a Case in Point In one of Robinson’s notebooks, dated 11/94 – 1/95, are notes on the first project that E-Lab did for Hallmark Cards. We had spent hundreds of hours in Hallmark stores—pilots of a new format—during one of their busiest seasons, and were now spending more hundreds of hours watching those tapes again, trying to figure out what was valuable to know, what was germane to the questions our clients were asking. They aren’t field notes (which were kept in logged notebooks linked to the raw data), but rather a sort of laundry list of issues that might or might not have been important: “lighting,” it says, and “vis. noise, blockage, interest, orient/nav.” And in the midst of the list, “a theory of navigation and vis. orient is here somewhere.” The note would have been more accurate if it had said, “is out there already.” We were working on overlaying behaviors on to floor plans, trying to winnow the general from the specific, and the flat maps were stubbornly remaining two dimensional no matter how many arrows or colors we arranged over them. At the same time, co-founder John Cain was teaching a course in ‘interactive media’ at the Institute of Design, and using—as an approach to the issue of ‘navigation’—architect Kevin Lynch’s classic The Image of the City (1970). Sitting in our crowded technology/work room, John suggested that how Lynch’s book framed orientation in the city might work for how shoppers saw the Hallmark stores, too. Lynch had looked at how people find their way around cities, both familiar and not, and had re-classed features of the urban landscape into a short set based on how people used them: paths, edges, nodes, districts, and landmarks (imagine the role of the lake in Chicago or of Central Park in New York City). Many in this field like to speak of ‘insights,’ a term we find both empty and imprecise (Robinson 2009). Psychologist Howard Gardner and his colleague Joseph Walters, in their developmental studies of genius, creativity, and forms of giftedness, speak more specifically and usefully of ‘crystallizing’ moments: observations, ideas, connections, which are not complete in themselves, but which catalyze a well and richly prepared ground into a completely different way of seeing the world (Walters and Gardner 1988). The Lynch analogy was one of those—the final form of the idea did not flash, complete and pure, into the room. Rather, the concept needed to be worked against the data. We had to figure out a way to represent it, and we had to reframe the angle from which we saw the data—not shifting it in our heads onto two-dimensional maps, but seeing the three-dimensional topography as a visitor might have seen it. It worked brilliantly, but it was work, not a flash of insight. That merging of disciplines, the value of that move from rich, high-quality data to a simpler but more useful representation of how experience is organized for the user, became one of the central tenets of E-Lab’s work and practice. In the growing field of design research, that particular philosopher’s stone eventually converted ‘ethnography’ and ‘design research’ to shorthand terms for a larger process. In much of the business discourse, the assumption driven by this terminology—and by many of the claims of design and research consultancies—was that field methodology defined the practice and value of ethnography. Even within our group, there were heated disagreements about the priority of technique versus theory or analysis or synthesis. And in retrospect, we see that our communications in every press contact, every pitch, conceded this ground. As the use of terminology like ‘user-centered research’ became widespread, so the meaning of ‘ethnography’ became both broader and looser. The market-facing vocabulary of product development and marketing linked the growth of many different practices and intentions to a single measure: the success of the product at the end of the process, linking research with design in the case study format. The case study is perhaps the staple format of business education and development, the lingua franca for communicating the general or the applicable from the specific and the protected. The case study tied work to a narrative of how the thing made became better or more valuable after the application of a research or design or innovation process. It demystified the role of research in development, providing a way to connect the before to the after. It implicitly made the product the thing that was moving ahead, changing, getting better. But in doing that, the arcs of research came to tiny ends with each project finish rather than building and accumulating across instances, clients, and careers. In much applied ethnographic work of the past decade or so, that difference has ossified somewhat; it has become embedded in the general discourse of the field, allowing the term ‘methodology’ to be widely used as a shorthand description for an enterprise’s larger research approach, and much more insidiously, allowing discussion to skate over the surface of an organization’s intentions, politics, and values. What conversation there is about the value of work like this came to be couched in production-like terminology; outcomes, findings, ‘insights’ as products, winding their way through a complex process, to which particular disciplines ‘add value’ through understanding, innovation, or skill. As hybrid work moved out of research labs and ‘advanced concepts groups’ and into product development organizations, the direct dialogues between researcher and designer became process interactions between research and design functions, with all of the politics, tradeoffs, and—to be fair—advantages which that entailed. The ideal that motivated the relationship between researcher and designer in the Doblin context, at PARC, and many others gave way to a different set of organizational and corporate values, processes, and mandates, which complicated the initial motivation to create a basis for reflection and to make better products for people. Not necessarily a bad thing but one requiring more attention than we, as a field, have given it. ## Part II: Practice and Power The 1990s ended with tremendous success and what seems to us now a calcifying disingenuousness. Collectively, we worked to address the demand we created in part by training new researchers from a huge range of backgrounds but also by trusting that tools and processes would compensate for uneven foundations or variations in skill. As a community, we glossed over the differentiations and power relations inherent to the value we worked so hard to produce. The ultimate effect was that one approach to research—one that privileged the fieldwork’s technical side and immediate insights—became widely understood, almost expected, as the way to do user research, among practitioners and those who consume research in various parts of the enterprise. There were multiple important consequences. The labels of ethnography or user research, already interchangeable, came to stand for much less than they really should have. Consequently, we were less prepared as a community and as individuals to deal with the realities that were lurking right around the corner. The difference between descriptive work and research that reflects an analytic organization is one of the persistent lines of distinction that characterizes ethnographic research not only from market research, but also from any work that attempts to locate its value in the technical act of collecting data in situ, from real people in real places. E-Lab’s move to try to focus on frameworks was a struggle even inside the organization, largely because developing a framework is not a straightforward or easily transferable expertise. Finding that central meme, à la Geertz’s ‘deep play in the Balinese Cockfight (1973), requires not only observational and analytic skills, but also an affinity for the work of abstraction and a considerable stock of relevant theory. Some people are better at this than others. Some people are better trained for it than others are. Some people are more interested in this kind of analysis than others are. This is true of any disciplined field, we would argue. The expertise involved in the development of a framework or an experience model established the high-value end of the work and, in a practical way, divided the community. In the consulting context, in particular, frameworks represented a level of strategic and organizational value and the capital associated with them. It was the development of frameworks that made ethnography relevant to the strategy arms of the organizations that contracted the work. In this sense, E-Lab was a microcosm of a phenomenon that would trouble the entire community going forward. What kind of work is strategic and what is not? What does that mean for value? Do we share the same skills? Should we? At the close of the 1990s, the field was understood to be a valuable one, with a rather fuzzy outline starting to take shape at the intersection of the human sciences and design. There was a demonstrated ability to be responsive to a wide range of conditions. The strength of the field was evident not only in the number and range of businesses that populated this intersection but in the ways in which the client side—advertising agencies, consumer products manufacturers, retailers—began, broadly, to bring the expertise in-house. But it also showed signs of division and fracture that it continues to struggle with today. New demands of scale and speed, as well as simple maturation, brought out our organizational inexperience at E-Lab. We were not managers by training and avoided the kinds of confrontation and disappointment that addressing differences in value entailed. We let the differentiation (and its associated power relationships) inherent in multiple sources of value remain ambiguous. But that had to change, eventually, and it was the move to working as part of global corporations that provided the ground for lessons about growth and success. These were very different from how to talk about, how to ‘sell’ ethnographic work. In many important ways, the fact that the dot-com crash resulted in a diaspora, in a proliferation of practices, rather than any sort of diminished importance, is a testament to the effectiveness with which that first round of lessons was learned. Corporations have come to expect ‘design research or ‘user understanding’ in a far broader range of instances and settings than most of us foresaw. But, unlike the early 1990s, when the definition of ‘ethnographic’ work was often in the hands of the people who had started practices, groups, or companies, by the early 2000s, there were expectations and established territories everywhere. For many researchers who arrived from practice-focused startups, as if from the provinces to the big city reality of multinational corporations, the different environment was a shock. The immigrant’s process of adjusting and learning began again. The new world was inside corporations with established corporate cultures, rewards systems, and business processes. Organizations at the scale of an Intel (Bezaitis) or GfK (Robinson) or IBM or Microsoft are awash with realities that have nothing to do with experimentation and discovery, some of the values that marked E-Lab’s and other early firms’ defining moments. But these realities are crucial to succeed at the heart of big companies who have survived for quite a long while without ethnography and design. In those big companies, well before the dot-com bust, social scientists of many stripes had already arrived and begun to work through (and around, in some cases) their organizational realities. The People and Practices Research (PaPR) team at Intel, launched in the mid-1990s and developed through persistence and struggle internal to itself and relative to the rest of the company, is one such example. The individuals who started there—Tony Salvador, John Sherry, and later Eric Dishman, Genevieve Bell, Ken Anderson, and others—had less experience overall with the startup as a path into applied work. Their early modalities of work at Intel were marked as much by working under the radar as they were by a corporate culture that rewarded brilliant individuals. PaPR’s interlocutors were not designers but engineers, computer scientists, strategic planners, and marketers. The notion of teamwork at Intel included the business groups with which PaPR researchers worked. Nested inside an organization of scientists, individual expertise was an established path to success, precisely what had been overshadowed by E-Lab’s emphasis on multidisciplinary experimentation and collaboration. Between 1998 and 2005, PaPR researchers demonstrated a savvy ability to adapt to their setting, and in a corporate reorganization in 2005, Salvador, Sherry, Dishman, and Bell moved into three business groups to lead groups of social scientists and designers in product group settings. Between 2006 and 2010, thanks in no small measure to the paths blazed by PaPR’s first wave of researchers, PaPR became a bona fide R&D group rather than an organizational experiment.<sup>1</sup> In this timeframe, its charter was to conduct exploratory research at a global scale without the requirement of research questions that speak to the immediate and short-term needs of the business groups. This positioned PaPR in a manner that was distinct and complementary to its colleagues in the business groups, who are tied to their organization’s focus on a product roadmap. Individuals in PaPR were hired for their demonstrated expertise because expertise is a requirement in a culture that fundamentally values science, but also because that expertise enables them to change the terms of the work in applied settings. Demonstrating expertise is not the end game, it is a precondition for powerful exploratory research, and it is a precondition for practice in the real world (Bezaitis 2009). Deep domain expertise rooted in disciplinary history and training is that which allows a domain’s fundamental terms to evolve into something new. The slow shift away from a star culture in PaPR, where programs, as opposed to individuals, are the first and foremost highlight, was a difficult one, with both personal and professional origins. Academic training, for example, does not necessarily cultivate the values of collaboration, teamwork, and multidisciplinary exploration. Corporate cultures, particularly those indebted to scientific models for research, are guilty here, too. Reward and promotion systems still privilege the contributions of the individual scientist over the role played by an individual in the context of a group that works toward a shared set of program-level goals. Individual expertise and collective practices both matter. Survival as an independent business or as a group inside a large corporation like Intel is a function of making one work well with the other. In small and in large corporations, individuals have to be visible as experts. Without experts, companies of any scale can’t grow in new ways. Growth does not simply emerge from the messiness of practice. Messiness doesn’t scale well. It is messy! Growth happens because individuals relinquish themselves to new influences and to the hard act of co-creation, but it also happens when individuals surface as leaders. Evolution in the value and role of a particular domain in an applied setting happens because the assumptions and values of that domain find new purpose and direction given their present circumstances. It is fair to say that expertise is a prerequisite to this kind of disciplinary evolution. We are writing this at a time when ethnography’s role inside many corporations and consultancies has an articulation that has been developed in the contexts of its application over the last two decades. ‘User Experience’ has become the expected and pervasive reference for the processes and techniques that feed qualitative, observational research into productive development processes. As the value of this kind of research has been linked to key deliverables and processes, business groups allow for much less exploratory work and become committed to—indeed reliant upon—known ways of doing the work. New drivers—efficiency, cost-savings, the native language of the business group—begin to surface as priorities over the need to use the human sciences to discover the right terms, tools, and theories for doing the work over time as these same businesses change. This is not just a question of new techniques generated by the truckload by design and innovation consultancies and presented annually at conferences like EPIC. This is a question of fundamental disciplinary evolution that accompanies the changing business climate, shapes it, and is shaped by it. These are questions of survival, and if we do not pave the way to what happens next on our own, corporations will take the liberty to do it for us. If history provides any lesson here, they will do it by continuing to absorb and to reproduce the ‘best of ’ and do away with the rest. We need to begin to scrutinize the constraints in which we work now and to consider explicitly how these contexts will continue to shape the value of the human sciences in industry. Just as importantly, we need to ask ourselves what are the values that are at the core of our practices, individual and collective? Good questions, obviously. But how to start? ## Part III: Errant Sons, Wayward Daughters Broad acceptance of ‘ethnographic’ work and the ‘user-centeredness’ of design and innovation means that demand, which was formerly a struggle to create, is now seemingly entrenched across companies large and small. The work of inventing a field seems to have given way to the yeoman-like application of method, and the trend away from an idealist stance toward a practical one seems to have accelerated. Outsiders have become assimilated. Of course, this demand won’t stay entrenched for long if the field does not develop. Easy, oversimplified approaches will continue to evolve toward commoditized tool kits and lose any critical differentiation they have from other market and consumer research approaches. Like many established immigrants, we worry about the future of our inheritors; we worry about losing the old ways even as we celebrate the success of the next generation. In the first part of this chapter, we talked about the role played by the early and realistic need of the field to explicitly connect the work we do to real outcomes and literal value. We did not argue that this was a wrong turn but that we are probably now at a point where we need to explicitly counterbalance it with a new emphasis on values, on purpose, on ‘good work.’ In the second part of the chapter, we reflected on another phenomenon that seems to us broad but unacknowledged: the touchy and difficult issue of differentiation of skill and expertise among practitioners, and how moving the locus of expertise off of individuals and onto methodology perhaps ameliorated the tension that comes with connection of organizational influence to stratification of expertise. As strange as it may seem, these two very different impulses have together enabled a kind of conceptual drift in the purpose, values, and dynamic of applied interpretive social sciences. We’d like to see a correction to that course. We propose to start with two practical but overarching organizing principles here, each fundamental to redirecting the growth of our field. The first is the need to acknowledge distinctions in kinds and levels of expertise. The second is the need to articulate the values of organizational entities, practice groups, and individuals explicitly. The first depends in large part on the externalization of knowledge and the difficult recognitions that doing that well will entail. In our working practices, across two decades and seven major, growing practices, the hardest transition for a social scientist or humanities-trained researcher seemed to be the externalization required in a high-communication, multidisciplinary practice group. From fieldwork through to the creation of audience-destined materials, this is a very public process and setting. But making personal knowledge public is what makes the work work. And it also becomes the ground on which distinctions of contribution, fit, and expertise are played out. It is, in fact, a risky place to work, and mistakes or missteps are often high profile and high consequence. We think some practices have managed to inculcate these habits of public work and community very well. And we think that as a field, we can collectively examine what works toward this end and what does not. That would be far more profitable, eventually and to all, than ever more case studies claiming the invention of new methods. The second, the values question, is one that we think has not been addressed. But the corporate tide around the issue is turning, and it will become not only easier, but likely incumbent on practices to be clearer and more explicit about what they are doing, to what end they use their various methodological and analytic tools, who they speak for, and to be able to explain the choices they have made, and how their work delivers on the expectations entailed by the values themselves. Corporate social responsibility, hard choices about environmental and social consequences, has made values in and of organizations a critical topic, though still quite difficult to address. And at the individual level, the recent emergence of studies in positive psychology on the notion of ‘good work’ has shown that innovative, complex responses to wicked problems are more likely to come from a kind of engagement that can only come when individual values are an explicit part of the activity (Csikszentmihalyi, Damon, and Gardner 2001). ## Part IV: Expertise and Practice As a manager of a practice, responsible to senior management for the effectiveness of groups, questions of expertise and practice abound: How do we take advantage and build momentum around inventive experiments by individuals? How do we create space for individuals to flourish and survive in the settings in which they work? How do we apply expertise to shape practice in the settings in which we operate? How do we acknowledge different kinds of strengths and deal directly with the ways in which corporations value these strengths differently? Reflected in these questions are a very wide range of purposes and intentions that span the personal goals and commitments of an individual leader to the interests of the corporation to the growth of a field that exceeds the boundaries of any one place. This returns us to the importance of individual expertise, domain training, specialization, and individual contribution. The point here is not that it never matters. There is space for experts and expertise. But a collection of individuals with lots of expertise doesn’t constitute a practice, and in such an absence, there’s limited basis for the evolution of the work. All you can hope for is that new experts will come to replace the old expertise that is no longer needed, which is the blueprint for a model of work that many of us left in the first place. If we intend to stay in some form in the world of applied, industrial research, focusing on practice is a matter of survival. A key challenge then is to work that balance out, the balance between individual training and knowledge, and that of the work created across a group of individuals in a business—the two key characteristics of the ‘hereness’ of our work. Expertise itself is balanced against the commonality and identity that is forged, again in very particular senses, in practice. Across disciplines, practice emerges. Over time, practice grows. Across practices, the field can grow; but only if knowledge is shared, sources are acknowledged, individual threads are recognized, and the collective effort is seen in both its parts and as a whole. This is how we create a history. It is this history that helps us decide, actively, where we go next. ## Part V: The Value in Being Explicit about Values Finally, we need to come all the way back around to where we started: the connection between the work we do and the ‘places’ where we have come to do it—the worlds of design, engineering, product development, brand, and business strategy. The purpose of these disciplines and divisions is to create new ‘things’ (a term we use broadly to include material as well as non-material entities such as ‘identities’), and the initial impulse to find research that could provide a more instructive basis for making those things comes from those disciplines. So the research work has always had, in this venue, an instrumental end, no matter how idealistically any individual researcher may have framed the larger intent (us included; see Robinson’s Capitalist Tool apologia during the height of the boom, 2001) of understanding behavior, experience, work. This history is crucial: for, as the field expands, interested researchers continue to arrive, unaware of this fundamental responsibility to getting something new made, to making some sort of change take place, and begin to work as if it is enough to do research. The point is that this was never enough. That is not a bad thing. One way of understanding the work that we do, in all its variations, is that we look at a present set of ‘what is’ conditions and develop a knowledge-supported imagination of what “could be.” The truth of good design work has always been somewhere between complete invention and acknowledgment of inevitability. Probably the wrestling with inevitability, and getting around it, is the impulse that most directly connects design and research. It seems to us that the early phase of the rise of human-centered design, design research, and ethnography in applied settings gave us a more nuanced, more complex understanding of the ‘now.’ It established in industries the idea of understanding the individual, social, and cultural influences on why people think the way they do, why they use what they use, and why they need what they (think they) need as important bases for good design. Less obviously, the hand-in-glove work between the two fields makes researchers complicit in a conscious attempt to shape the future, not just in understanding the present. Design, by definition, involves an alternative, always somewhat subversive (Marcuse 1978) plan for the future. When research is twinned to that effort, when—to stretch the application of Jean Piaget’s famous title—understanding is invention, the research that informs the design bears a significant part of the responsibility for those options and those limitations. If the work we do makes a particular alternate future more likely, that means directly affecting other folks’ choices. We have made a choice about what others ‘ought’ to do, which is exactly what we sign up for when we undertake to do ethnographic research in applied settings. So, we have a responsibility to articulate why we are making those choices. How and what we have weighed in providing that framing advice to our development colleagues. We use the term ‘good design’ almost reflexively as evaluation and often as explanation. When something is tabbed as ‘good design’ (by a magazine or an award from a professional association), we agree or not in the instance, but we accept, usually tacitly, that good design is different from indifferent design or bad design. Despite that, we do not usually think of ‘good’ in its moral or ethical sense, as in ‘good versus evil’ (unless we are from Google). Positive, thoughtful, or responsible design has included in it not just a final function or form, but a large number of distinctions understood and choices about those distinctions made in a particular light, with particular reasons for them. A child’s toy, perhaps, can be safe or unsafe, educational or mindless, responsibly made or using the worst but cheapest materials available. It is not a toy made to be bad, but in each of the moments where choice matters, the choice made has been, in the current context at least, toward something less than as good as it could have been. So the values that shape the making of things are not simply those of the individuals involved in the project(s). Corporations like to act as if these choices are not personal, which makes it easy to ignore the idea that values are being expressed throughout a seemingly ‘rational’ process. That does not mean that the issue of responsibility goes away. But where and how do we get values back into the work, especially if that might just mean conflict with the disposition of value in a business process (such as innovation, product development, communications, or business strategies)? Just as a practice is an important locus for the externalization and evolution of expertise, it is also, we think, at the right scale and locus to ask, forcefully, “to what end are we doing this work?” with an emphasis on the “we.” There are, of course, broad issues such as privacy standards where the articulation of values needs to take place across the practical manifestations of the many institutions (corporate and academic) that inform applied work. But clearly articulated values also provide the basis that a particular practice at a particular intersection of knowledge, individuals, intentions, and possibilities can use to orient locally, to nurture identity, and to push back against the limited and often narrowly construed sets of goals that a larger enterprise ‘wants’ in any given year. Of course, the answer to the question “to what end are we doing this work” changes as a function of the audience and the location of the audience—management versus development, for example. This has deep implications for the kinds of stories that we tell and how values must necessarily shift to address specific individuals who are responsible for different kinds of decisions. We are not arguing here for any particular set of values, only for the conscious and explicit articulation of them in, by, and for working practices; an explicit awareness of what we are doing, with whom, and for what end. We believe that this notion is supported by a distinct push toward explicit values and away from a sort of corporate agnosticism afoot in some of the most interesting work in areas such as corporate social responsibility and environmental and social activism. The World Wildlife Foundation’s Tom Compton, in a 2008 report entitled Weathercocks and Signposts, eloquently critiqued the predominant “marketing approach” to “motivating environmentally-friendly behaviour change” by arguing that “any adequate strategy for tackling environmental challenges will demand engagement with the values that underlie the decisions we make.” Compton makes a nice distinction between the figure of “weathercocks” (“weathervanes” to American English speakers), or indicators of where or how things are going in the present (e.g., percentage of households recycling), with the figure of the “signpost,” which tells us where to go, and often, how far it is or how difficult it is going to be to get there. Giving us guidance on getting somewhere is more important, and more difficult, than telling us how we are doing now. In the basic notion of design as the work of planning, how to get to ‘next’ from ‘here,’ we believe that values, as much as ‘additional value’ or ‘experience,’ should be the forward anchor of that arc. The conceptual figure of ‘signposts’ is something that may have the potential to become part of how any research practice materializes its work, much in the way that ‘frameworks,’ ‘experience models,’ or ‘customer journeys’ have become boundary objects for ethnography and design. Creating signposts entails more active constructs than the more generally descriptive idiom of EPIC-type work usually affords a research practice. What makes a particular direction or evolution for any new ‘thing’ better than another is not an inquiry that can be bracketed out of a primary research question. Most applied ethnographic work brackets questions of form, engineering, marketing, and distribution in the pursuit of interesting models of how things work now. But when we take what ‘ought’ to happen into account, where a product or a techno-human ‘ecology’ should go, and the role the inquirers have in marking that way, become primary research objects themselves. And in this is the connection between our two bits of proselytizing. The importance of rethinking the work as the creation of both a body of knowledge and an engagement with what that body of knowledge might be used for. Not to claim that all outcomes are foreseeable, but that they cannot be managed unless you are clear as to what the practice is after. This clarity needs to live at the heart of our commitments inside the organizations in which we work. Immigrants’ tales often hinge on the connections and differences between generations, and on the ways in which values are maintained or how they change. What it means to fully inhabit a new country is in the new ways of realizing the original ‘things could be different’ impulse. The first decade or so of concentrated work has made a next generation of work possible. But techniques and methodologies are not the best measure of change, nor the standard of innovation; they are a means to measure our ability to sustain ourselves in the present context, a component of necessary expertise. If we bound the field (or a practice bounds itself ) by how it does its work rather than by what it is trying to accomplish, we have missed the point, and the opportunity. In social as well as business contexts, values have always driven change. Deep humanism underlies both the work of social and human scientists as well as our colleagues in design and development disciplines. But we cannot assume their nature or their applicability. Values, like all human frameworks, are tractable things, and they are changed by the things we make and by the way we make things. Researchers and designers can, by making articulation and externalization an everyday part of their practice, keep the goal of making things better a realistic ideal. ## References Bezaitis, M. (2009), “Practice, Products, and the Future of Ethnographic Work,” in M. Cotton and S. Pulman-Jones (eds.), EPIC 2009: Taking Care of Business. Proceedings of the EPIC 2009, 92–107, Washington, DC: American Anthropological Society. Cain, J. T. (1998), “Experience-Based Design: Toward a Science of Artful Business Innovation,” Design Management Journal, Fall: 10–4. Compton, T. (2008), “Weathercocks and Signposts: The Environment Movement at a Crossroads.” World Wildlife Federation UK. Available online: www.wwf.org.uk/filelibrary/pdf/weathercocks\_report2.pdf (accessed February 2, 2016). Csikszentmihalyi, M., W. Damon and H. Gardner (2001), Good Work: Where Excellence and Ethics Meet, New York: Basic Books. Geertz, C. (1973), “Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight,” in C. Geertz (ed.), The Interpretation of Cultures, 412–53, New York: Basic Books. Lynch, K. (1970), The Image of the City, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Marcuse, H. (1978), The Aesthetic Dimension: Toward a Critique of Marxist Aesthetics, Urbana & Chicago: Beacon Press. Robinson, R. E. (1993), “What to Do with a Human Factor: A Manifesto of Sorts,” American Center for Design Journal: New Human Factors, 7 (1): 63–73. Robinson, R. E. (1994a), “The Origin of Cool Things,” in Design That Packs a Wallop: Understanding the Power of Strategic Design. Proceedings of the ACD Conference on Strategic Design, 5–10, New York: American Center for Design. Robinson, R. E. (1994b), “Making Sense of Making Sense: Frameworks and Organizational Perception,” Design Management Journal, 5 (1): 8–15. Robinson, R. E. (1998), “A Cure for the Black Box Blues,” Perspective, Summer. Robinson, R. E. (2001), “Capitalist Tool, Humanist Tool,” Design Management Journal, 12 (2): 15–19. Robinson, R. E. (2009), “‘Let’s Bring It Up to B Flat’: What Style Offers Applied Ethnographic Work,” in M. Cotton and S. Pulman-Jones (eds.), EPIC 2009: Taking Care of Business. Proceedings of the EPIC 2009, 92–107, Washington: American Anthropological Society. Robinson, R. E. and J. P. Hackett (1997), “Creating the Conditions of Creativity,” Design Management Journal, 8 (4): 10–6. Robinson, R. E. and J. R. Nims (1996), “Insight into What Really Matters,” Innovation, Summer: 18–21. Suchman, L. (2000), Anthropology as “Brand”: Reflections on Corporate Anthropology, Lancaster: Lancaster University. Walters, J. and H. Gardner (1988), “The Crystallizing Experience: Discovering an Intellectual Gift,” in R. Sternberg and J. Davidson (eds.), Conceptions of Giftedness, 306–31, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.