# 11 The Internet, the Parliament,<sub>and</sub> <sub>the</sub> <sub>Pub</sub> Lane DeNicola Internet-of-Things proponents and designers of the present moment often build rhetorically on a virtuous vision of a new egalitarianism derived from a restructured relationship between humans and the built environment. Undeniably that vision must be accounted for in anthropologists’ analyses, but it must also be set in analytic relief with what empirically seems a wilder and woollier terrain, one just as filled with boors, blowhards, opportunists, and miscreants as any pub one might care to frequent. I want to discuss a recent movement in the field of industrial design and what it might mean for anthropological approaches to object culture, but let me start with a quick story about my car keys. A little over a year ago as I write, changes in my personal circumstances meant that for the first time in roughly fifteen years I would be relying heavily on an automobile to commute to my full-time workplace. A silver lining to that change was that it afforded an opportunity to do something I’d wanted to do for some time: try out one of the new breed of fuel-efficient vehicles. In comparison with most Westerners, if I had to guess I’d say the purchase of a new-model vehicle is an uncommon occurrence for me, having happened only once before (1989) in nearly five decades of personal history. As a result I went into the process knowing there was a lot I didn’t know. After some consideration I settled on a new all-electric model, which, while not exactly “inexpensive” for what is essentially a sub-compact, enjoyed a substantial tax incentive from the state in which I reside and averaged only about US\$20 per month in “fuel” (electricity). Aside from the innovations at its core, the vehicle incorporated a number of amenities that struck me (as someone used to older, well-worn automobiles) as technologically exotic: seat warmers, tirepressure sensors, a satellite radio, wireless connectivity with my smartphone, and so on. One of these “innovations” in particular—the ignition key—has proven an unexpected challenge to the way I’ve grown used to thinking about vehicles and driving. To put it in less-than-technical terms, the car “knows” when the key is nearby.<sup>1</sup> On its own this wouldn’t necessarily be that big of a change. My partner and I have owned a car or two with key fob “remotes” that allowed the owner to unlock the doors from a distance, and this key does work that way as well, but it’s also importantly different. To unlock the door or the trunk you simply use the button on the door handle while you have the key “on your person.” In bodily terms, you don’t search your pockets or purse for your keys as you approach the car; as long as they’re “on you somewhere” you can open the door. The same goes for “starting the car up.” Rather than inserting a key into a lock-like switch that you then rotate to engage, you simply place your foot on the brake and push a power button while the key is “ready at hand.” Naively this might seem an unqualified convenience, but my experience is mixed. Try as I might, I cannot completely let go of the niggling anxiety I feel at not being sure I have my keys “on my person” until I try to open the door. In abstract terms, it has transformed “authentication”—I have the authority to enter this vehicle—from a matter of material mechanism to one of ambient presence. To complicate matters, the car “knows” a number of other things as well: when the key is inside the vehicle versus outside; which door the key is closest to; and when an “adult-sized” person is sitting in a front seat.<sup>2</sup> This sensory capability allows the car, for example, to inhibit the unlocking of the door opposite the key-holder (possibly a security measure) and to inhibit the door locks when the keys are inside but no adult is in a front seat. The sales representative, clearly not that sure himself of all the implications of this arrangement, reeled off a rote but reasonable design rationale: it prevents you from accidentally locking yourself out. As the mundanities of middle-class life in America go, this has effected a fairly potent reconfiguration of human-object relations. Appadurai (1988) noted long ago that “the powerful contemporary tendency is to regard the world of things as inert and mute, set in motion and animated, indeed knowable, only by persons and their words” (p. 4). Yet on several occasions I’ve elicited the help of my partner to conduct experiments, looking for clues that would help me to understand who or what “says” or “knows” what when (she possesses a second key which the vehicle can apparently distinguish from the first—the complexities multiply!). This may not be quite the sort of object “enunciations” Appadurai had in mind—may not be—but it’s clear that my own normalized driving practices and posture toward automobiles must be massaged to suit. ## The Internet of Things This vignette is intended to set the context for a discussion of what is being generically referred to these days as the “Internet of Things,” a discursive confluence of industrial design and digital media, perhaps the latest instantiation of the technological manifest destiny that has long been proffered to us Moderns (the “Electric Age,” the “Space Age,” the “Green Revolution” and similar imaginaries). The reader will not be especially surprised if my intention is neither to laud nor apologize for this new technoromantic vision, but there are already very clear signs that it has gained broad purchase and, I think, begins the unfurling of a vast terrain for anthropological insight into object culture. My objective here, beyond attempting to articulate the relevance of this development for the study of design, is to point out that the concept of the colloquy of things is not new for anthropology, but its popularization within dominant industrialized societies may be. It is not an especially bold guess that most people—by which I mean not just Western Moderns, but the majority of the earth’s human population—would agree that consumer technologies such as mobile phones, social networking sites, and videogames are powerfully shaping our understanding of the world and interaction with each other. Since this array of “consumer-level” communications and media appliances is the most broadly familiar to the widest variety of people, to a degree it only makes sense that such technologies would figure most prominently within anthropological study. In most senses they are both clearly present and comparatively apprehensible, designed as they are to be used by “the average consumer.” Organizing the Internet into tiers of mediation, we could reasonably refer to such technologies as the human-human tier, wherein the artifacts involved have “interaction and exchange between humans” as their primary end. The portion of the Internet that this ignores, however, is growing at a stunning pace. Consider that an expanding variety of pedestrian activities leave electronic traces—not just formal “communications and entertainment” but commercial transactions, consumption, civil discourse, physical movement, and so on. From “Quick Response” codes and tiny radiofrequency ID tags to environmental sensors, data storage, cellular and Wi-Fi transceivers, and full-blown embedded computers, digital technology is now widely employed in many industrial sectors, connecting material objects to electronic databases, histories of production, and communities of use. In their early manifestations of course these technologies were stand-alone appliances (e.g., a GPS receiver), but their proliferation has been accelerated primarily as a result of being “piggybacked” on originally unrelated devices—mobile phones, digital cameras, and so on. This has instilled “location awareness” and “data logging” as default properties of many objects and spaces. Illustrative examples include the unabated growth in the “smart homes” and “connected cars” sectors, where proponents hawk networked thermostats, door locks, security or dashboard cameras, onboard navigation systems, and integrated digital audio, all accessible (or exchanging data) via the Internet. One thing such cases have in common is that a person is still typically assumed to be “in the loop,” controlling or consuming “data” with immediate functional utility. Let us call this the human-object tier. Certainly “the home” and “the automobile” are celebrities within the vast cosmos of artifacts, stand-ins for the universe we inhabit and core platforms for the expression of who we are. On that basis, one could argue that these are exceptional examples and not especially generalizable, yet even more pedestrian artifacts—sneakers with embedded geolocation receivers, for example (DeNicola 2012)—have been designed with the specific idea that the routes they record have immediate utility to a human engaged in a narrowly defined activity (e.g., jogging). As conceived by its proponents, however, the Internet of Things (IoT) lies still further down the chain of mediation. For IoT designers, coming together through such venues as O’Reilly Media’s “Solid” conference, the prospect of “revolutionary advances” goes beyond added convenience or customized “user experience” to the very core of our relationship with the built environment. Expand those sneakers’ sensors to other modalities and increase their onboard memory many orders of magnitude. The utility of the “data” they collect might well be at some remove in space and time from its collection, but no matter. Data “stands in reserve,” woven in with the value of the artifact as a whole. No longer is “data” the email, image, map, or music track ready for “end use,” rather it is reams of sensing logs, status updates, authentication keys, and links to other objects. The essence of a pair of sneakers becomes intensified when they “know” or make legible the details of their history, the sociopolitical context of their own manufacture, their mean time between failures, the toxicity and biodegradability of their materials, the demographics of those most likely to purchase them, the labor or trade agreements under which they were made economically viable, and so on. This “data” we could refer to as the human/object tier, connoting a superposition of alternatives with a slash rather than the interface suggested by the hyphen. Here artifacts are designed to encapsulate and render themselves as a locus of human relations. One could argue that a knot is merely a configuration, not materially different from the rope in which it’s tied, yet the distinction could not be more relevant to human action. Similarly, artifacts are best understood as crystallizations, bundles or configurations of human relations, and while this is hardly news for those who study object culture, the reification and popular sublimation of the idea via the field of industrial design certainly would be. Critical anthropologists may first observe that—like its “revolutionary” antecedents— the most likely near-term ramifications for the design of the Internet of Things will be shaped by and for elites, with “externalized costs,” environmental distress, social inequity, and similar unintended consequences passed on to majority populations. On the other hand, anthropologists of digital culture will also be aware that the perceived utilitarian importance of (for example) mobile phones within rural and developing world contexts appears to have grown at least as great in recent decades as it has for developed world cosmopolitans. Again, my specific point here is neither to critique nor to advocate, but rather to point out that a discursive movement has gained coherence and to suggest how anthropologists might make some sense of it. Before dismissing too quickly the revolutionary rhetoric deployed by IoT devotees, we can attempt a fuller account of how it operates. At an abstract level (and particularly among working technical designers) “digital” denotes the regime of logic and discrete (as opposed to continuous) mathematics, with “data” registered as quanta (bits) rather than smoothly varying quantities like temperatures or voltages. This is an abstraction whose material instantiation in silicon and microminiaturized electronics is marbled through a vast global network of material flows. At the level of popular discourse, however, the term “digital” connotes a relative historical frame—“physical” or “analog” media (e.g., paper) is the old and wasteful, “digital” is the new and efficient. “Digital” alludes to the “Information Revolution,” accelerating innovations in consumer technologies and amateur media production and distribution. It references the democratization of communication, enhanced participation, and reinvigorated civic life—while at the same time raising the specters of alienation, sedentarized domestic life, pervasive pornography, and unchecked prejudices. It stands in for the privileging of network access over physical location, coding such qualities as mobility, translocality, and individualism as “virtuous.” The “digital” precipitates norms of exact replication, concepts of “patterns” as property, and fluid and instantaneous exchange—as well as complexity, ephemerality, inscrutability. It capitalizes on the metaphors of numerology and esoteric traditions, paradoxically engendering both anonymity and surveillance. It also implies artificiality as opposed to organicism, but the obvious hybrid examples of genetics and bioinformatics lend it a chimeric quality. Arguably the synthesis represented by the digital yields a “new organicism,” a reprise of the living/not-living Frankenstein’s monster in the figure of the cyborg (Haraway 1991). ## The Parliament of Things Of course, the regular reinforcement of this qualitative division between “digital” and “physical” entails no small measure of work. In its essence, it bears a striking similarity to other grand dualisms, such as the one Latour (1993) famously articulated between society and nature. A foundational project of modernity, this reordering of the ineluctable interdependence of society on the one hand and the “natures” perceived by pre-moderns on the other became (he argued) unsustainable in the postmodern era. No longer, for example, could we leave intact the illusion that the sprawling infrastructures required to sustain contemporary societies were generally decoupled from environmental consequence. Neither were the “pure objects” modern science reputedly made of “nature”—races, microbes, genes—so unequivocally separable from their social milieu. Rather, these must be understood as quasi-objects, indivisible assemblages of both physical objects and enunciations, nature and culture, with scientists and other actors standing in as mediators or interlocutors, those who would speak on their behalf: Let us again take up the two representations and the double doubt about the faithfulness of the representatives, and we shall have defined the Parliament of Things. In its confines, the continuity of the collective is reconfigured. There are no more naked truths, but there are no more naked citizens either. The mediators have the whole space to themselves. . . . Natures are present, but with their representatives, scientists who speak in their name. Societies are present, but with the objects that have been serving as their ballast from time immemorial . . . what does it matter, so long as they are all talking about the same thing, about a quasi-object they have all created, the object-discourse-nature-society whose new properties astound us and whose network extends from my refrigerator to the Antarctic by way of chemistry, law, the State, the economy, and satellites. The imbroglios and networks that had no place now have the whole place to themselves. They are the ones that have to be represented; it is around them that the Parliament of Things gathers henceforth. (p. 144, emphasis mine) Consider this invocation of “parliament” (from the French parlement, “discussion”) as a metaphor for a seemingly disparate network of human/non-human actors, one engaged in a vigorous, ongoing democratic process, one of self-ordering and reflection. It is almost as if— at the risk of relishing the homology a bit too much—the early progenitors of the Internet of Things got assigned We Have Never Been Modern in the 1990s while they were thinking up their industrial design capstone project. Artifacts in the Internet of Things are inscribed with their own material dependencies; they serve as “links” into the networks of individuals and communities that make use of them. They become “animated” to an extent and are accorded agency, interacting with humans and each other via a literal Network. “Socially responsible consumption” is enabled by the new transparency of industrial production and its effects. A certain optimism, endemic to technological revolutionaries (and perhaps only a bit peculiar for a critical philosopher/ anthropologist of science), is evident in the supposition that the exchanges over these networks could or would resemble parliamentary discourse. This may be reasonable enough in the context of major issues in science with broad societal impact—the spread of disease, the risks of nuclear power, climate change, and so on. Arguably a critical mass of the actors involved will indeed be driven primarily by understanding, discussion, decision-making, and action on such matters. What of the people “on the ground” in this discourse? The parents trying to get their kids to wash their hands where water is a precious commodity? The consumers who aren’t entirely sure how their power is generated or why they should care? The coal miners trying to ascribe meaning to all of this “vocational retraining” suddenly laid as an inevitable part of their futures? They too will have their representatives in this parliamentary space, but more to the point that space would presumably be recognizable as “parliamentary” via its conventions and rules—who may speak when and about what. ## The Pub of Things? Let us shift for a moment, then, away from context of “technoscience” writ large to that of the everyday objects that populate human lives. However compelling the resemblance, the parliamentary metaphor may prove an ill fit for the cultural researcher sussing out (for example) the way the meaning we attach to photographs changes when those photographs are transmitted automatically to a networked frame on our parents’ wall, or certainly the anthropologist working with IoT designers at Intel, or trying to make sense of DIY design communities coming together via the Instructables website. A naive transplantation of the Parliament of Things into the context of the Internet of Things is interesting in its suggestion of the radical potential of “human-object relations rendered legible,” but limitations become quickly apparent. Given the fact that, especially early on in this anticipated trajectory, anthropologists will be listening to how people talk about artifacts differently (or not), it’s relevant to consider the types of stories that can be told, the characters or roles that “things” (in the enriched sense of the Internet of Things) can be allotted when they are transmuted into IoT “actors,” connected to and affected via the Internet. In one distillation, such objects can “watch” or “listen” (registering ambient temperature, say), they can “record” (maintain a history of that temperature over time), they can “signal” or “speak” (regularly updating you via TXT on the temperature) and they can “act” (shutting off a furnace). This palette of behavioral modes lends itself to a diverse set of anthropomorphisms, “characters” to be discursively mobilized by human user/occupants. A traditional set of car keys is a sort of “credential,” comparatively “mute and inert,” but a car that appears to be “aware” of the presence and identity of those keys makes them something else entirely. The aforementioned examples of smart home security devices lend themselves to a characterization as “guards” or “sentinels,” vigilant and mostly silent except to signal irregularities. “Agents” and similar proxies, automatons empowered to act on your behalf, have been a prominent character type on auction and investment websites for some years, and the field of tele-robotics has brought that character type into the artifactual realm. Compromising audio and video recordings of celebrities and others are today a pop-culture genre, to the point that online clearinghouses do a thriving business helping to sort through such troves, casting smartphones, smart pens, teddy bear “nanny cams,” and similarly inconspicuous artifacts not just as the instruments of spies, voyeurs, and paparazzi, but as enabling actors in their own right. Commercial constructions such as Apple’s Siri and more recently Microsoft’s Cortana are quite literal but archetypal examples of “the guide” or “concierge,” elsewhere manifested as the guide, oracle, or personal secretary. Their role is to help human “visitors” or “tourists” navigate the wild proliferation of hybrid physical/digital things in this chaotic foreign space. The relationship is an interrogative one. We could likely expand this list, but the broader point is that there are limits to the speed with which humans’ long-standing relations with the built-environment can change. Artifacts or spaces must “make sense” not just in idealized function but in practice, in the same way computers could be sensibly appropriated within the domestic sphere only via reference to the typewriter and the television. The ascription of “character” is a method commonly employed by designers for making that connection, if only for certain classes of products, and analysts of object culture will likely be able to capitalize on anthropology’s cross-cultural fluency in storytelling and character when analyzing such artifacts. So we have before us a scenario, a middle class society wherein the domestic sphere is ubiquitously networked and permeated with digital computing. In the home, each tick of the power meter or unlocking of a door contributes (so the narrative goes) to the potential of “the quantified self,” each passage of automobiles on the highway becomes an opportunity for a mutually beneficial data exchange. Yet anthropologists would undoubtedly be surprised to learn that home security, traffic volume, and carbon emissions were the only (or even the most) common topics in this discourse. What of the advertiser eager to capitalize on our consumption practices? The chronic speeder looking to avoid tickets? The voyeur spying on his neighbors? In contrast with the discursive metaphor of the parliament, this checkered terrain arguably resembles the traditional public house or “pub” (coincidentally, a space trafficked by anthropologists at least as often as parliament houses). The pub as an idealized space is undeniably one of discourse and collective interaction, and without a doubt it has its own set of conventions and perhaps even a few rules about who may speak when and about what. However, intercourse there is typically less formalized and scheduled, less planned or “goal-oriented.” Liaisons are more often serendipitous, and the topics may range widely from the trivial, coarse, and sensational to the nuanced, politically grand, or philosophically challenging. Fewer hearings and inquiries, more darts and pick-up lines. The Pub of Things would foreground just these dimensions, rendering the myriad trivial exchanges of the IoT at the micro level as nonetheless relevant signs through which meaningmaking even at the macro cultural level could be discerned. Might we draw in an altogether different literature, one that newly refracts the Internet of Things via critical social insights into the public sphere (Habermas 1989) and the “third space” of coffee houses, bars, and pubs (Watson 2002)? IoT proponents and designers of the present moment often build rhetorically on a virtuous vision of a new egalitarianism derived from a restructured relationship between humans and the built environment. Undeniably, that vision must be accounted for in anthropologists’ analyses, but it must also be set in analytic relief with what empirically seems a wilder and woollier terrain, one just as filled with boors, blowhards, opportunists, and miscreants as any pub one might care to frequent. ## References Appadurai, A. (1988), The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press. DeNicola, L. (2012), “Geomedia: The Reassertion of Space within Digital Culture,” in H. A. Horst and D. Miller (eds.), Digital Anthropology, London and New York: Berg. Habermas, J. (1989), The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere, Cambridge: The MIT Press. Haraway, D. (1991), Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature, New York: Routledge. Latour, B. (1993), We Have Never Been Modern, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Watson, D. (2002), “Home from Home: The Pub and Everyday Life” in T. Bennett and D. Watson (eds.), Understanding Everyday Life, Oxford: Blackwell/Open University.