# 12 <sup>Interior</sup> <sup>Decoration—</sup><sub>Offline</sub> <sub>and</sub> <sub>Online</sub> Offline and Online Daniel Miller We can appreciate what people spend much of their time doing online, once we realize that online worlds—just as much as offline worlds—gift us an insight that is surely the foundation of any broad-minded design anthropology: the appreciation that interior design is not limited to professional expertise. It is actually a foundational attribute of merely being human. ## Introduction Mary, who lives next door to you, is a museum curator and designer specializing in interior decoration; indeed you could say she is something of an artist. Okay, perhaps her name is not Mary. Actually I have no idea what the name of your next-door neighbor is. But the point I am making is that I don’t need to know their name. Whoever you are, and whatever the name of your next-door neighbor, I am going to persuade you that that person is actually a museum curator and interior designer and perhaps something of an artist. For me to be able to make that claim it would have to follow that everyone who has a place to live in can be described in those terms. Finding an ‘anyone’ within an ‘everyone’ is not an easy task; which is why this paper is based on a rather peculiar experiment: an exercise designed to capture the idea that all people are equal in their capacity to exemplify this interior design and curating capacity. For this purpose, the first examples used in this paper come from a publication called The Comfort of Things (Miller 2008). The book is a description of the material culture of thirty households mostly from a single street (and its side streets) in South London. The thirty were selected from the one hundred that took part in this anthropological study. But I will then move from these offline worlds to the way people curate what they post online, since we can see that one of the key failures in understanding online life today is the failure to recognize first that this is a place in which we now live, and second the analogy with curation and interior decoration that could help us understand the content of much of what we post. ## Householders as Museum Curators What does it mean to suggest that we are all museum curators? Well, to curate is to feel responsible for, and look after the objects in your possession. To be a museum curator suggests that at least some of these objects will be chosen for public display, and these will illustrate some theme. Mostly, they are historical evidence for past events, but they may also be evidence for taste, or the work of an artist or some such conceptual framework. If households have selected from their possessions which objects to display, and given thought to how they will be organized and presented, then it is reasonable to see a normal householder as at least analogous to a museum or art gallery curator. One of the reasons an object may be selected for display is that it has become inalienable (Weiner 1992). Something that perhaps once was a mere commodity that could have been owned by anyone. But over time possession itself has turned it into something that has deep resonance for that family, not just a display item, but perhaps even a potential heirloom. At this point, it is inalienable in the sense that no one would sell such a thing; its monetary value is just not the point. For the elderly, it is likely to be time that is the principle behind curation. This museum is in effect a précis of their past. Such was the case with Dora. We carried out an inventory of all the objects found in her living room. On reflection, these turned out to be a résumé of her full life. One of the most poignant is the bright red piggy bank that today she still fills with twenty pence coins. When full it contains fifty pounds, which can be spent—a routine that reminds her of her origins in poverty. There is one photo of her as a little girl, living a life made hard from birth when her father was gassed in the trenches in World War I, and another photo of her as a Girl Guide. There is just one table inherited from her mother, and from the period when she first worked is her sewing machine, also a decorated box, and a valance from the Jewish family that ran the alteration shop where she was employed. There is a picture of the first wedding dress she made for herself, six decades ago, that sees its counterpoint in several examples of needlework from recent years. Though she has the two engagement rings from her two marriages, few possessions—only the government condolence letter for her first husband’s death—remain from the first marriage, which was mired in poverty. From the second marriage, which took her to Portugal and Spain, she has a table, a carpet, and an ornament from Portugal. She displays a photo of herself with her husband at a dinner party, another of one of his ancestors, and a decorated box from his family. Following his death she left most of their lavish belongings to his family, returning to England to unpack some of those things she had saved on her own account. Of these she treasured the stylish cutlery, egg cups, and silver cups from a high class London shop. With the thrift that is reflected in her piggy bank she would buy cutlery one at a time until she reached five, when the manager would give her the sixth for free. She has a certificate from the ambulance service she worked with during the war, and a photo of the luncheon room where she worked afterward for twenty-five years, ending with a certificate of freedom from the City of London where the luncheon room was sited. There is a picture from when she looked really good in the 1960s, a photo of a close friend, a letter from Mrs. Thatcher, and a picture from a holiday in France. There is no reason to imagine that Dora intended this résumé effect. It is rather the result of this “economy of relationships,” such that each significant relationship, whether to persons or periods and events of her past, ultimately became reduced to just one or two objects, as other mementos make way for other relationships. Clearly the more relationships one has lived through, the more any one relationship has to be pruned back to one or two total mementos in the performance of economy. Household curation is generally balanced between two principles. The first, exemplified by Dora, claims no aesthetic relationship between what is displayed since the logic is derived from their function as memorabilia. But most younger people will at least, to a degree, follow a competing principle of curation, the imposition of interior design. On this street there were some extreme examples of paramount design. The house that proclaims there is “no color but cream.” The house whose doctrine is that objects must express dynamism, not make museums. So on the walls are not pictures, as in other houses, but clothes hung as decorations, which can be changed over time. Thirty pairs of jeans are carefully ordered according to the precise degree of wash, fade, and distressing. A similarly overt cosmology is evident when one walks into a Feng Shui house. It speaks to a life that insists no sentiment or other interest can disrupt the tyranny of calm order. Gifts from relatives—indeed all gifts—are carefully stowed away in unseen cupboards or given away. Here, light, the sound of fountains, rock and wood, are all where they should be, consistency resolving contradiction. This Feng Shui is just as important as an antidote to his wife’s stressful work as a management consultant as it is to a householder’s own work as an acupuncturist with an Eastern spiritual inflection. Most people offer a compromise between these two conflicting principles of biography and design. Often, the core linkage is that biography is not usually directed to the person alone but is a material expression of the way identity comes from relationships. To preempt the second half of this paper, much of what we see can be de-coded once we realize that home decoration mainly reveals the individual as a ‘social networking site.’ Di, for example, like many others, wants to retain something of her parents’ possessions as memories, but doesn’t want these to undermine the autonomy she has carefully constructed for her own life. So when they move house she takes certain things, but keeps them today, not in the house, but in her garden shed. The shed is both near enough and far enough to exemplify the place in her life she wants her parents to inhabit. This matters because the most consistent relationship she has cultivated in her life is to the house itself. Starting from her hippy days, the house became the repository of ethnic paraphernalia that stands also for her liberal attitudes reflected today in her work with immigrant children. Even her husband at their divorce knew he could not ask for things from this, their once shared, house. The house is full of her emotional repertoire. It has places to cry in, to have great sex in. She can look at a wall of tickets to rock gigs she has been to. But it is also her logistical base, without children, the object of her practice of care. The house links the very particular schema of emotions and pragmatism that is Di’s aesthetic form. If Dora as a curator has objects that mark her identity as a social networking site at each stage in her life, the same principle can be applied to the spatial design of the interior. One Irish couple, who have retired from a life of owning pubs, recognize that the photographs and images on display are so numerous that they joke there is no need to paint since you cannot see the color of the walls behind. On careful inspection, it emerges that the relationships are grouped around themes. One cluster relates to their lives as publicans. There is another area that is effectively a Catholic shrine of religious images. Yet another is dedicated to the educational qualifications of relatives. But as well as kin, there is also a small area which preserves mementoes to deceased customers, some of whom, one comes to realize, ended their lives with no one else to remember them but the landlords of their favorite pub. Sports, weddings, Irish Republican heroes, childhood, and holidays all constitute additional genres of relationships that jostle for room within an economy constituted essentially by the size of space available for explicit memorialization. One way to define anthropology as opposed to, for example, psychology or economics, is to recognize that while these other disciplines tend to focus upon people as individuals, anthropologists see people as social networking sites. Understanding the way this is revealed in the home interior takes us part way on the route to the shift from offline to online. The other is an appreciation that this curation can involve immateriality as well as materiality. The case of Malcolm conveniently makes this point. Malcolm’s work fluctuates between Australia and the United Kingdom, but what he understands as his permanent address is his email, and the nearest thing to home is his laptop. Both his friendships and his work are largely organized by email, a place he constantly orders, returns to, cares for, and where, in many respects, ‘his head is.’ But to understand the intensity of this relationship to his laptop, we need to read the anthropologist Fred Myers (1986). Because, Myers notes, that for many Aboriginal groups there is a tradition of avoiding the physical possessions of the deceased. Malcolm’s mother was Australian Aboriginal and most of her possessions were indeed destroyed at her death. But he took from her a mission to locate and preserve the history of his family, including those members once taken away from their parents. As he sees it, too much Aboriginal history is viewed as lying in police records; he wants a proper archive he will deposit in an Australian State archive. Malcolm has an antipathy to things. He has given most of his inherited or childhood objects away. In his devotion to immateriality he prefers anything digital. He is getting into digital photographs. He downloads music and immediately throws out the covers. Very unusual in this street study, he even gives away his books after he has read them. One could relate this to his mobility, one could relate it to his interest in the potential of new technologies, one could relate it to this Aboriginal inheritance. There is more. His father sold antiques but the result was that as soon as he started becoming attached to things in his childhood, they would be sold—another possible source of his detachment from things. Once again then, his personal habitus (Bourdieu 1977) is over-determined, meaning that people do things usually not from a single influence or cause, but from the reinforcement that comes from several different influences. Even Malcolm cannot decide how much his mobility is cause and effect. But the overall result, as he puts it, is “I think I’ve set myself up to be out of touch with objects and things, so there’s probably something psychological behind that.” He has a more ambiguous relation to less tangible things like documents, sorting both his mother’s and his own things into neat box files. But his real identification is with digital forms. He constantly updates and sorts his emails, which becomes the updating of his social relationships. In going through them he recalls all those friends he owes emails to. One could try and stretch the Aboriginal inheritance. The laptop as a kind of digital dream world that connects current relationships with those of the dead; a place he comes in and out of, as more real than merely real life. He retains this intense concern with lineage devoting much of his time to creating order out of kinship history. He seems obsessed that if he were to die, that thanks to constantly sorting his emails, he would leave a legacy that was archived and up-todate, so no one would have to do the work he did recovering and ordering his ancestral lives. But for my purpose, what he typifies is first the multiple determination of his cosmology. Both father, mother, and his work come together as possible explanations. One could not claim to have predicted him, but given what we now know, this relationship to his laptop that at first seemed so bizarre, can certainly make sense. It is an aesthetic, a material cosmology. One can see how the horizontal dimensions of order—the various current influences—merge with the vertical of historical influences to produce this over-determination in his background. ## Curating the Online World Over the last few years most of my research has been concerned with the study of the Internet and social media. One of the problems faced by academics in this field is the way people dismiss online activity as trivial. If people spend time on de-tagging photos or in other ways organizing how they appear to others online this is seen as a displacement activity. Yet, once we see the analogy with our use of ornaments on the mantelpiece and posters on the wall we can see that this is just the same activity as interior decoration, only transposed to a different place. But first, we must acknowledge that this is in some ways where people live. In 2012, I published a book with Mirca Madianou called Migration and New Media (Madianou and Miller 2012). This was a study of Filipino domestic workers in England who had left their own children behind in the Philippines. One of my closest informants was actually not a mother. She is a young woman who works in London partly as a cleaner, mostly as a carer for the elderly. She has been in London for two and a half years. During that time, except for those occasions when I have insisted that she comes out with me, she has never been to a film, or a pub, or practically any other form of London site or institution. All she ever does is work, return to her home where she sleeps in a bunk bed above another Filipina worker so that both can save as much money as possible. Much of her leisure time is spent in direct communication with her family, including social networking sites, which used to be dominated by the social network site Friendster and now more by Facebook. One could say that she works in London, also that she sleeps and eats in London, but in many respects she lives with her family not in the Philippines but really and truly on Facebook. Once we recognize that online can be a living space then we can use ethnography to investigate more seriously the way people decorate and curate these spaces. Sometimes, the reason a person lives on Facebook may not be migration but a change in their own condition. In another book called Tales From Facebook (Miller 2011), I give a story taken from research in Trinidad about a man I call Dr. Karamath. A distinguished expert on human rights he had spent much of this life traveling as a Caribbean representative in many international forums. In his sixties, Dr. Karamath suffered from a serious injury such that from now on he will always be housebound in Trinidad. But then using Facebook, bit by bit, Dr. Karamath replicated exactly the kinds of networking relationships that he had fostered before his illness. He soon found that even for someone with as international and cosmopolitan experience as himself, who had met so many people in so many lands, Facebook could take this whole operation up a gear. He could now be in contact with yet more people in yet more countries, and far more effectively than had ever previously been the case. Before it had mattered that this friend was in Washington and that one in Toronto, and there were weary overnight flights and the cold alienating layovers in airports to negotiate. Not any more. On Facebook he could be simultaneously in many countries. He developed new transnational friendships with people who have a similar interest in politics—but also share an affection for a specific art form: the posters and agitprop from the 1960s that dominate his home decoration and that of some of these friends. It was clear that, even though they had never met, thanks to their facility with a webcam, this little coterie of friends had a good knowledge also of the art works, prints, and paraphernalia of their respective homes. It seemed as though Facebook with its complementary cousins, Skype and webcam, had managed to somehow replicate the older circuit of cocktail parties in which each had in turn hosted the group. So the decorations of the home could still create an ambience that helped generate productive conversation and friendship. For Dr. Karamath, a key to this linkage is webcam and the next stage in this research on Trinidad was a book concerned specifically with the impact of webcam (Miller and Sinanan 2014) including the way webcam has contributed to this sense that people can live together in an online space. One of the most remarkable conclusions was that webcam works much better when you treat it like a home than when you treat it as a communication device. A Trinidadian studying in the United Kingdom and her long-term partner with whom she had lived for two years prior to the separation would have webcam on the entire time, even to the extent of watching each other while one or the other was sleeping. The importance of such ‘always-on’ media is that they actually obviate the need to directly communicate. As she noted, “But what was nice about it was that it wasn’t demanding, so it wasn’t like we had to be in contact with each other.” ‘Always-on’ webcam meant a return to the co-presence of a shared home, where mostly they would have been getting on with their own work, knowing they might have a conversation when cooking or eating. In fact, the same individual makes quite sure never to establish a Skype correspondence with her mother precisely because she feels terrified at the idea of an equivalent demand for co-presence. In such cases, the same ambience that is created through the shared co-presence in the curated spaces of the kitchen or the TV room is now shared equally online, but often alongside online spaces such as Facebook. Most recently, I have worked within a team of nine anthropologists who simultaneously carried out fifteenth months of ethnography in nine locations of which two were in China and others in Brazil, Chile, India, Italy, Trinidad, and Turkey (Costa et al. 2016). Again, we can find examples of where it is the interior design of online contexts that show us where people live today. One of the projects represents what may have been the largest migration in human history. Over 200 million Chinese people moved from rural areas to work in factories. Xin Yuan Wang (2016) lived for fifteen months in one of these factory towns. She feels that she studied two migrations; one was from the village to the factory, but the other was simultaneously from their non-working life being mainly spent offline to their non-working life today being mainly spent online, since they spend much more time on Chinese social networks than mixing with other factory workers. Both of these migrations were intended to bring them closer to the modern life of China, symbolized by places such as Shanghai. But she argues that in many ways it is the migration to living online rather than the migration to living in the factory that has done more to fulfill their aspirations. Online they curate their QQ sites (QQ is the main Chinese social media platform) with images of the weddings and consumer goods they strive for, and through the organization and curation of these images at least in some sense feel they possess them. But actually we do not have to just consider the condition of migration or mobility. My own ethnographic research project (Miller 2016) took place in some villages north of London. As part of this research, I came to realize that the practice of interior decoration has recently become the primary mode by which children socialize. The impulse to do this has been evident for decades as the first time teenagers achieve spatial autonomy we saw a riot of bedroom decoration. But quite early on Horst (2009, 2012) recognized the link between this and their online activity. On the one hand, they lived in teenage bedrooms where adults were not welcome, and which were heavily decorated as teenage bedrooms in styles their parents often did not like. At exactly the same time, they decorated their MySpace profiles in colors but also music and digital decorations. Horst noticed that often the colors they used for their bedroom continued into the colors they used for their MySpace profile. And remember, the bedroom was just as cut off from adults as the online. In short, offline and online are parts of the same continuous life just as a smartphone in your pocket ensures you can remain connected with this online world. So the imperative toward interior decoration was already evident. But thanks to the ability to craft interior decorations online this can start to develop even earlier. In my ethnography, I found that the dominant platform for the younger age was now Minecraft and that many of those playing were under ten years old. The basis for playing Minecraft is often building oneself a home. Indeed, if you visit a platform such as Pinterest you can find sections devoted to the decoration of home interiors called “interior design.”<sup>1</sup> Parents are now extremely confused as to what is going on here. They see a bunch of children in their living room, none of whom are talking to each other as all are absorbed online, but online they are bonding through Minecraft building homes and interiors. So is this good socializing between children meeting face to face, or as in Sherry Turkle’s (2011) phrase, are they “alone together,” being antisocial? Is this good working with their hands? Is it, as one parent put it, “the new Lego?” Or a sign that children no longer build things by hand? But then it is doubtful the parent did much of her own DIY in the act of interior decoration. Finally what does this tell us about the relationship between anthropology and design? One of the initial tasks of anthropology was the exploration of worlds that were unfamiliar. The idea was that through empathetic engagement with peoples, often in those days tribal peoples, we would bring back an account which humanized those others and showed how from their point of view their cultural practices were merely life experienced as normal and as mundane as we experience our own. Today, the alien and exotic world that people are struggling to understand is often online. But in this chapter I have argued that an approach from Design Anthropology can accomplish this same task of reducing the different to the ordinary and mundane. The point has been to show that we can appreciate what people spend much of their time doing online, once we realize that online worlds—just as much as offline worlds—gift us an insight that is surely the foundation of any broad-minded design anthropology: the appreciation that interior design is not limited to professional expertise. It is actually a foundational attribute of merely being human. The key technology we used to inhabit the world around us in the past, and that we will use to inhabit this new online world, is the technology of interior decoration, that which makes an abstract space into a personal or family space. We make ourselves AT home through making ourselves A home. So, as argued in our Theory of Attainment (Miller and Sinanan 2014: 4–20), the shift of our skills as interior decorators from offline to online does not make us less human or post-human. The point of this chapter is to show that interior decoration is one of those crafts that makes us all ordinarily human, irrespective of where this takes place. ## References Bourdieu, P. (1977), Outline of a Theory of Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Costa, E. Haynes, N. McDonald, T. Miller, D. Nicolescu, R. Sinanan, J. Spyer, J. Venkatraman, S. and X. Wang (2016), How the World Changed Social Media, London: UCL Press. Horst, H. (2009), “Aesthetics of the Self: Digital Mediations,” in D. Miller (ed.), Anthropology and the Individual, 99–113, Oxford: Berg. Horst, H. (2012), “New Media Technologies in Everyday Life,” in H. Horst and D. Miller (eds.), Digital Anthropology, 61–79, London: Berg. Madianou, M. and D. Miller (2012), Migration and New Media, London: Routledge. Miller, D. (2008), The Comfort of Things, Cambridge: Polity. Miller, D. (2011), Tales From Facebook, Cambridge: Polity. Miller, D. (2016), Social Media in an English Village, London: UCL Press. Miller, D. and J. Sinanan (2014), Webcam, Cambridge: Polity Press. Myers, F. (1986), Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self, Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institute Press. Turkle, S. (2011), Alone Together, New York: Basic Books. Wang, X. (2016), Social Media in Industrial China, London: UCL Press. Weiner, A. (1992), Inalienable Possessions, Berkeley: University of California Press.