# amatae O3o skdeT ## Acknowledgments I am indebted to so many for their generous assistance in the development of this book. Among these are my good friend and design historian colleague, Victoria Matranga, H/IDSA (honorary member of Industrial Designers Society of America), who shares my passion in recognizing pioneers of the industrial design profession, and documenting their work and contributions to the field. She has been design programs coordinator for the International Housewares Association (IHA) for many years, organizing juries for annual IHA student design competitions, and serving as IHA's historian, publicist, and researcher. She is also an independent consultant, curator and researcher of houseware exhibits for museums, design firms, and private organizations, as well as an accomplished writer of design history. For this book, she shared numerous photographs and vital facts about pioneer designers from her vast collection of design history information. My late friend, Tucker Madawick, before his death in 2006, graciously provided me with extensive literature and photos concerning the history of automotive design and many of its pioneers, for which I am eternally grateful. His career only started in 1939, so he was not one of the original pioneers of the early 1930s, but his artistic talent, business sense, leadership skills, and personality exceeded many of his worthy predecessors. He was a tower of strength to the profession, and is sorely missed. Another valuable source was the Industrial Designers Society of America (IDSA), from whose files, newsletters, and publications over the years came a number of images for this book. Thanks to senior creative director Karen Berube and executive director Daniel Martinage, both of IDSA. Also thanks to Rosemary Morrow at Redux Pictures for image of Henry Dreyfuss, and to Larry Sommers at the Chicago Athenaeum and Sara Kitchen at Skyhorse Publishing. Descendants of pioneer designers featured in the book were most helpful with photos and information about their deceased family members. Among these were William Waltman, grandson of Chauncey “Chick" Waltman; John Northup, great nephew of Amos Northup; Linda Braming, the daughter of John McLeod Little; Barbra Reinecke Sedory, daughter of Jean Reinecke; Merrily and Erik Holladay, the daughter and grandson, respectively, of Robert Davol Budlong; Alyce Gordon Rideout, the daughter ofJohn Gordon Rideout; Harry Teague, son of W. Dorwin Teague, Jr.; and Tom Tjaarda, son of John Tjaarda. Surviving organizations founded by pioneers were generous in providing photos and information about their founders. These include Mariela Cedeno of Nessen Lighting, founded by Walter and Greta von Nessen in 1927; Customer Service at Movado Group, Inc., for the image of Nathan George Horwitt; Curt Bailey of Sundberg-Ferar, founded by Carl W. Sundberg and Montgomery Ferar in 1934; Doug Studer at Deskey, founded in the 1940s by Donald Deskey; Sarah Matheny of Teague, founded in 1926 by Walter Dorwin Teague; Carol Hwang of CMG Worldwide, representative for Loewy Design, LLC, founded by Raymond Loewy in 1929, for image of Raymond Loewy; Judy Crookes of Henry Dreyfuss Associates, founded in 1929 by Henry Dreyfuss; and Larry Sliker, a former employee of Henry Dreyfuss Associates. Educational institutions, corporations, galleries, and museums were very helpful, as well. They include David Jameson, Iannelli Collection, ArchiTech Gallery in Chicago, for the image of Iannelli; Stephanie Coleman at Ryerson & Burnham Archives, the Art Institute of Chicago, for the image of David Chapman; Kathy Adelson, researcher at the General Motors Media Archive, for the image of Harley Earl; Janice Woo, director of libraries, California College of the Arts, for the image of Joseph Sinel; Lydelle Abbott at the Milwaukee Art Museum for images of Brook Stevens; Kay Menick at Art Resource and Antonia Moser at the Smithsonian Institution for the image of Donald Deskey; Chris Hunter at the Museum of Innovation and Science for the image of the Hotpoint refrigerator; Robert Dirig, archivist at the Art Center College of Design for information regarding Kem Weber; and Linda Baron at Herman Miller for the image of Gilbert Rohde. I'd also like to thank the many individuals who volunteered information about the pioneers in this book, including Michael Lamm for information concerning Amos Northup; Christopher Geoffrey McPherson for information regarding Helen Dryden; Chip Rowe for information about Egmont Arens; David Nowacek and Gene Schreckengost for images of Viktor Schreckengost; and my good friends Gifford Jackson for information about Jo Sinel, Budd Steinhilber for personal information about Raymond Loewy, Paul Specht of Goldsmith, Yamasaki & Specht for an image of the Playmate cooler, Hampton Wayt for little-known infor mation about Donald Dohner, and Gifford Jackson for information about many founders. ## Preface In January 1930, just three months into the Great Depression, my father bought a used 1927 Studebaker and took it on a two-week shakedown drive (at 30 miles per hour) from Reading, Pennsylvania, to Miami, Florida, and back, before he reported to his new job (he had just lost his old one). During the trip, he wrote to his 18-year-old fiancée (my mother-tobe) describing his trip, as well as how anxiously he looked forward to their planned marriage in June. When my mother passed away in 1983, I found these letters that she had saved (he had died 30 years before her). They included trivial remarks and jokes from radio comedians of the time (Amos and Andy), as well as private phrases of endearment, descriptions of the weather, sights, accommodations and landmarks—all the ordinary things anyone might write to a loved one back home. What caught my attention, however, was the unusual way he referred to his car. Phrases such as, "Tell Pop [her father] the machine is just getting warmed up," or in a later letter, “I took the machine to Lansdale and I guess I will go over Friday night and get it." I was puzzled: machine? Why didn't he call it the automobile? The auto? The car? The Studebaker? Why “the machine"? I now realize that like many in his generation who bought their first cars, he was incredibly proud to possess his very own “machine"! Not the machines exclusive to industry or corporations, such as steam engines, airplanes, zeppelins, skyscrapers, or dynamos that had enthralled the public for decades, but finally, his very own, personal, mechanical “machine," providing him the freedom to travel for fun, or for jobs in other places. The automobile was the magic carpet of the 20th century. People were no longer destined, like their parents and ancestors, to remain near the place they were born. My father was now emotionally part of, and committed to, the future: the “Machine Age," as were so many others of his day. The Machine Age was a time when public fascination with machines and the future inspired a new art form, "modern design," which transformed ordinary consumer products from mechanical curiosities into futuristic fantasies. The creators of these designs were called industrial designers, and their work inspired me to become one of them. As I pursued my lifelong career of industrial design, I began to realize that it hardly existed before my birth. I wondered, Where did it come from? How and why did it begin? Who or what started it? As my career progressed, I met and interviewed many founding designers who had in fact invented it, and I began to appreciate the incredible change in industry and popular culture that they had accomplished. So, after my retirement, I began to research these remarkable men and women, realizing that when they died, their role in this extraordinary period of history would be lost. As a lifelong practitioner of industrial design, I already had a library of books, magazines, professional society newsletters, and articles concerning the early profession, but about 20 years ago, I began writing obituaries of deceased designers for my professional organization by referring to my files or by contacting their descendants. I also interviewed or corresponded with those who had retired in order to learn more about their early careers. Some provided informal autobiographies or documents they had written, while others related incredible stories about their early experiences. In some instances, they had donated their papers to various museum collections. Most books about individual industrial designers focus on the handful of pioneer designers who became public celebrities in the 1930s, such as Raymond Loewy, Walter Dorwin Teague, Harold Van Doren, Norman Bel Geddes, or Henry Dreyfuss, all of whom wrote books about their careers and dominated the field well into the 1960s. Some may imagine that these few alone created the incredibly rapid and complete transformation of our physical environment to modern design in the 1930s, but this is not the case. There were dozens of others who shared in the creation of this new profession, some of whom preceded the big names by years, but who are little known or remembered today. This book is about the origins of industrial design in that time of economic trauma, its evolution over the years, and in particular the remarkable, relatively small group of individuals who conceived and created it. Their work includes many of the most popular design icons of the 20th century. This is the first time their careers and biographies have been merged into a single, chronological narrative of the rise of the profession. You will meet them, one by one, as they enter the business arena as young men and women, and follow their careers, some to fame and fortune, others to anonymity. Their unusual backgrounds, accomplishments, and careers, as can best be known at this time, are followed until their demise. Most were born between 1895 and 1910, and a few even survived into the 21st century. Of course, after these pioneers created the profession in the early 1930s, many younger designers followed them into the rapidly expanding field, including myself, until there are now more than 50,000 industrial designers. While a number of these designers are mentioned in the book as their ranks grew through the 1940s, 1950s, 1960s, and later, it is those few pioneers who started it all who are the stars and focus of this book.