# 1 INTRODUCTION

The central theme of this book is design, and more especially, the design of sustainable, functional objects. I explore this from a variety of angles to throw light on its different facets. It is my intention that the discussion will allow the reader to contemplate sustainable design from hitherto little-considered perspectives and in doing so appreciate its significant implications as well as its potential contribution to the creation of a more meaningful material culture.

To advance the subject of design one has to engage in the activity of designing. This is a critical creative stage in which the designer seeks to apply general, abstract ideas in the process of developing specific, defined artefacts. This transformative step distinguishes design from many other types of inquiry. Theoretical ideas inform the design of an artefact and, in turn, contemplation of the artefact can advance the development of ideas. It is an integrated and iterative process of development. Hence, the activity of designing is an essential ingredient in many of the discussions that follow, and Il include numerous examples of propositional design work in which I have attempted to articulate and develop the ideas through the language of design itself.

These various thoughts, arguments and artefacts sometimes overlap and, in the process, they are reinforced. Occasionally they may even conflict, but these points of difference, too, can be useful and instructive. I hope the discussions and examples will provide the reader with an informative and stimulating set of ideas from which to consider sustainable design, even if this is by disagreeing with some of the views presented here; dissonance is often an effective catalyst for action and change.

I have structured the book so that the discussion progresses from broad, general issues to increasingly detailed design considerations. In Chapter 2, I look at the current state of design and argue for a radical rethinking of material culture and our understandings of good design. In Chapter 3, I trace the history of sustainable development and make the case for seeing it as a contemporary myth that helps us come to terms with, among other things, our current environmental crisis. In Chapter 4, I use the analogy of a journey to explore the design process and to present an approach that may be more fitting for a sustainable future. In subsequent chapters, I consider historically enduring artefacts as a way of learning about object significance; meaningful objects and what we mean by meaningful; and the relationship between the spiritual and the material. I also use propositional designs as a way of illustrating the application of sustainable thinking, and reflect on this design activity to develop ideas about tacit knowledge and its fundamental role in the creative process. I propose an aesthetic typology for contemporary products as a way of informing our ideas of product design, and examine our conceptions of time and its relevance to sustainable design. In the final chapters, I consider the notion that many contemporary products represent a stagnation in creativity – an endgame – and offer an alternative approach, grounded in ideas of environmental and social responsibility, which can serve to stimulate creative design development. I also discuss the transient nature of objects and suggest that one way forward may be to more consciously acknowledge this ephemerality, and design accordingly. In the closing discussion I offer an in-depth consideration of one particular object as d way of understanding its intellectual and aesthetic meanings in relation to sustainable practices. In these various explorations, I have tried to emphasize the creative and positive contribution of design, rather than focusing on the oft-cited environmental ills of contemporary production and consumption. Of course, in any discussion of sustainable

design, we have to acknowledge the damaging consequences of our current activities, but the designer must go beyond this, not simply by designing environmentally friendly products, but by challenging our understandings of 'functional objects', by reframing our conceptions of products, and by reassessing our notions of product aesthetics. In recognizing the unsustainable nature of many current practices, we have the opportunity to build a more constructive and more profound approach that is, inherently, more sustainable.

Earlier versions of many of these discussions have been presented at academic conferences or published in scholarly journals; all have been edited and reworked for this book. In bringing them together for the first time, I believe they form a body of work that offers, in a way not possible within the confines of individual essays, a progression of ideas and an original conception and exploration of sustainable product design.

Sustainable design is a vast subject that we have barely begun to tackle and so it would be unwise to attempt a definitive solution to what is, in reality, an embryonic, dynamic and volatile area of human endeavour. By way of analogy, if we were to ask someone to describe their experience of long-distance flying we might receive one of several answers, such as: ‘It's all rather boring – you sit down, eat, watch a film and fall asleep,’ or ‘Take-off and landing are the most stressful because there are dozens of instrument checks and constant instructions from the tower,' or ’lt's exhausting, I’m on my feet for at least half the flight serving drinks, food and duty-free goods,’or again 'It’s fun – you're given colouring books and toys and the stewards are nice.' Answers to the same question can be diverse and contradictory, but despite these differences and inconsistencies, they are all reasonable – they simply depend on the point of view of the respondent. We can also see that the contradictions are not just differences of opinion; each reply accurately reflects real differences in experience. Similarly, our understanding of sustainable design will vary depending on our perspective – because new aspects of this complex subject are revealed each time we change our angle of view. It is for this reason that I have included a variety of entry points into the subject, starting with a broad view of the current discipline of product design and ending with a detailed analysis of one design example.

There are many ways that sustainable design can be considered, and the issues included here are varied and wide-ranging, but I do not claim that this book is in any way comprehensive. The reader will not find within its pages detailed accounts of product life cycle assessment,  the Natural Step,² Factor 10³ or other programmes that offer manufacturing or systems analyses and processes for moving towards sustainability; these subjects are covered more expertly than I could hope to do by other authors. My focus is creative design and it is from this standpoint that I begin my discussion.

I should also include a word on methodology. I am reluctant to call this work 'research'because the term conjures notions of scientific experiment or systematic, objective investigation and analysis. To adopt such an approach in design would be a mistake. Creative design studies do not always follow linear pathways, often they do not even follow logical pathways, and they are neither abstract nor objective. Therefore, they do not fall easily or solely within conventional understandings of systematic, scholarly research. The results of design are not verifiable by independent investigators adopting the same criteria and following the same methodology. Indeed, for a given problem, if different designers were all to arrive at the same result we would be sorely disappointed. In design we seek ad expect variety not consistency.

The path I have adopted here is probably closer to a phenomenological understanding than to scientific or scholastic research, by which I mean that the ideas and propositional designs are not only based on rational argument and the logical development of an area of interest. They are also the result of informed, personal consideration, introspection and reflection; lived experiences; direct awareness through the design process; and intuitive decision making.

I am very aware that my approach to sustainable design has been informed by my own personal history. I was brought up in one of the most savagely industrialized valleys of South Wales where the hills were treeless, smothered with slag heaps and pierced by mine workings, and where the river ran orange from industrial effluent. The air was thick with the filth, smell and noise of the Bessemer converter and blast furnace, and social inequities, poverty, deprivation and ignorance were starkly apparent. A career as an engineer, working in the oil industry in The Netherlands, the Middle East and the UK, revealed to me overwhelming evidence of further environmental destruction on a massive scale, unconscionably short-sighted rates of non-renewable resource depletion, and, in some areas, an arrogant trampling of ancient, inherently meaningful and, by any measure, sustainable ways of life. A personal interest in creative studies led me to a career shift, an education in art and design, and eventually to industrial design and exposure to further industrial processes with their own problems associated with resource depletion and waste production, and their own social ramifications.

All these experiences, which are strongly related to a number of interconnected industrial processes, together with some 15 years of postgraduate teaching, have informed the ideas and arguments I present here; in this, I owe a great debt to my students and colleagues, from whom I continue to learn.

The result is an approach to design studies that is, largely, normative, contingent and, because of the particular focus on sustainable design, implicitly polemical. In this way, I have endeavoured to acknowledge both the objective and subjective aspects of our nature, because design is a topic that lies at the junction of these two ways of thinking about, and interacting with, the world. It sits at the meeting place of science and art – but it is neither science nor art, it is simply and fascinatingly design.

In the following discussions, I frequently use the terms sustainable development and sustainability; most people tend to use these terms interchangeably. However, some authors have made a distinction between the two, arguing that sustainable development suggests an emphasis on development and economic growth, whereas sustainability gives priority to the environment.4 While there may be merit in this view, I see both terms as being useful to describe our current attempts to come to terms with the economic, environmental and social concerns that we are facing in contemporary society. In the fields of product design and production, these three priorities are inextricably interwoven and inseparable and it does not seem to me very helpful to draw potentially divisive distinctions. I therefore tend to use the term sustainable development to describe a broad process of development where economic, environmental and social concerns are considered simultaneously, and I use the term sustainability to refer to ways of living in which these concerns are responsibly embraced and permeate our various endeavours. This way of using these terms is,

I think, reasonable, even if it is not as nuanced as some would like. As will become evident, finer distinctions may be somewhat moot because actually achieving a form of development that is sustainable or achieving sustainability may well be impossible. Nevertheless, both terms serve to focus our activities on doing things differently and working in ways that are socially, environmentally and economically responsible, and so both terms can be equally useful. The notion of the sustainable in design is not about fine distinctions in terminology, it is not about developing single-issue arguments, and it is not simply about reasoned argument. Rather, it is about fully engaging in the world in a way that is empathetic, intuitive and aesthetic. If we are to immerse ourselves in the creative design process and become aware, through this immersion, of the beauty and fragility of the world, then the fruits of our endeavours will reflect this. It is not so much a matter of rational proof but a matter of faith and hope; faith that goodness can prevail and hope for a better future for all.

The following chapters trace one particular path through the oftenconfusing territory of sustainable product design. En route, there are a series of encounters with design and at each of these I play with a set of ideas – by pursuing arguments and, in some cases, by engaging in the design process. Each encounter is like a game in which the play continues until a point is reached where it seems appropriate to stop; and I have endeavoured to ground all these encounters on a firm foundation congruent with sustainable goals. Together, these suggest a direction that leads away from inconsequential novelty, the utilitarian, and the design of enduring objects that are readily discarded, and towards an emphasis on the symbolic, the development of a meaningful material culture, and the design of ephemeral objects of lasting value. It is my hope that this direction will bring us a little closer to a more sustainable vision for design.