# 2 RETHINKING MATERIAL CULTURE the cage of aesthetic convention

If we are to deal effectively with the many contemporary issues of environmental degradation and social disparity, we are going to have to rethink our notions of material culture, especially in the economically developed countries. Potentially, designers can make significant contributions to this endeavour by developing solutions that challenge precedents and demonstrate alternative possibilities—but to do this we will need to transform design education and design practice and develop new understandings of product aesthetics and our notions of 'good'design.

Whether we like to admit it or not, within the discipline of industrial or product design, there is a major emphasis on product appearance, in both professional practice and design education, and it is this preoccupation that, in many ways, renders product aesthetics hollow and superficial. The dominance of fashion-oriented, essentially trivial aesthetic definitions suggests a barrenness of thinking, a relinquishment of creativity, and a replacement of originality with bland, market-led, 'safe' solutions. This prevents industrial design from evolving into an

authentic, substantive discipline capable of effectively tackling the important issues of our time: the pressing contemporary concerns that are not being appropriately dealt with in product design and manufacturing are the ethical and environmental ramifications ot our actions. It is imperative that designers tackle these aspects of their discipline, as well as important questions of meaning, identity and culture associated with material goods.

Some years ago, I think it was at an engineering lecture, I heard it said that the majority of the world's diamond production was for industrial applications – for cutting tools, drill bits and grinders. These low-grade diamonds, which have no special aesthetic qualities, are crushed into grits of various sizes. Apparently, because of the high demand, and the relative rarity of gem quality diamonds, many of the processing systems have been geared towards the production of industrial diamonds. In these systems, the ore is crushed to the size of coarse sand and the dense diamond grit is separated out. With such a system there is no possibility of finding another Hope Diamond or Great Star of Africa – they are simply eliminated by the process.

Obviously, we need industrial diamonds, but we also need the Hope and the Great Star of Africa. Industrial diamonds are valued for instrumental reasons; they are a means to some other end. They are valued for their utility, they are used, they wear out and they are replaced. By contrast, the Great Star of Africa is valued for how it shines, how the light plays through its facets to inspire sheer awe – but it is totally useless in terms of function. The Great Star of Africa is not about function. It's about poetry and beauty and wonder; it is an end in and of itself. It has intrinsic value, it never wears out and it is irreplaceable.

In both education and practice, product design can be likened to industrial diamond processing. It tends to emphasize the production of competent, practical design solutions that conform to current norms and work within established notions of aesthetics, manufacturing, economics and utility. Accordingly, our mass-produced products are generally useful, ergonomic, convenient, economical and have a pleasant appearance.

However, there is also a need to generate solutions that defy current norms; that challenge convention; that re-conceive what design, production and products might be and, importantly, there is a need to create solutions that inspire. To do this we must ensure that such solutions are not automatically rejected or eliminated by the processes we have put in place, in both design education and design practice. For original thinking to flourish in design, we must value and nurture the unfamiliar, the atypical and even the perplexing, in addition to technical competency and design proficiency. Inevitably, creative insights and ideas that are of lasting value will be rare and hard-won, but they are urgently needed in today's world of design and production.

Over the past century, there have been many inspiring examples of design that have challenged prevailing stereotypes and stimulated and influenced subsequent designers. Historically, the work of van Doesburg, Gerrit Reitveld and the De Stijl group in The Netherlands from 1917,1 and of the Bauhaus designers in Germany, such as Marcel Breuer and Gunta Stölzl, in the period 1919–1933,² had an enormous effect on 20th century design, and their legacy is still influential. More recently, the work of the Memphis group in Italy during the 1980s had profound effects on design education and practice.³ In their time, these groups were highly innovative and groundbreaking; they were also of their time. The issues and agendas to which they were responding are not our issues and agendas. Today, we are facing new challenges associated with the globalization of industrial capitalism, the environment, national and transnational socio-economic disparities, and rapidly evolving scientific and technological developments. While incremental changes that address these issues are important and necessary, it is also essential to encourage ideas that break with convention, that test preconceptions and, potentially, reframe our notions of product design and post-industrial material culture. The Droog designers, again from The Netherlands, are dealing with some of these questions in innovative ways that lie somewhere between art and product design, between clarity and ambiguity, between seriousness and wry wit. It is quite appropriate that many of the Droog designs defy existing classifications because part of the process of rethinking the current place and role of industrial design is to reconsider its boundaries and scope.4

When the aesthetic definition of a product is regarded as a primary objective, in and of itself, we must consider from whence our aesthetic decisions are derived. Personal experience, memory, notions of taste and conventions of beauty are all sources. However, it is these very conventions that have influenced, configured and, to an extent,

determined personal experience, memory and taste. Here then is the paradox of aesthetic definition. It is informed by convention – our conventional notions of beauty and taste. But it is this very influence of convention that results in the endless regurgitation of variations on a theme and imprisons product design in its own cage of introversion. The resulting derivations and repetitions disregard and deny the necessity of innovation that lies at the heart of aesthetic expression. While many contemporary products may have the attributes of being economical, convenient and pleasing to the eye, they also tend to be monotonously mundane, inherently destructive of the environment, representative of grossly inequitable employment practices, culturally damaging in their blanket distribution and ethically questionable in terms of their marketing. These observations have an honourable precedent. Over 25 years ago the design critic Stephen Bayley spoke of the 'plateau of mutual pastiche' that determined the appearance of so many consumer products.⁵

Instead of viewing aesthetics as a direct aim, it can also be considered as an outcome of an approach to product design that has different objectives. Industrial design can then focus on the meanings of material culture and thus develop and evolve. Ironically, in doing so, aesthetic definition will also evolve, unconstrained by the customs and precedents of product definition. In other words, aesthetics will begin to be more profoundly related to the whole of what a product is. Consequently, the aesthetic definition of a product, when derived from a different source, will, without doubt, challenge current norms. It will find its own place as an outcome rather than an all-consuming aim. In doing so, product design can respond creatively to the critical issues of our times in ways that are thoughtful and inspiring.

The rejection both of convention and of aesthetics as a direct aim is not, however, a rejection of history and experience; in fact quite the opposite. Personal and cultural experience can be embraced as providing important insights and nourishment for product definition. Such nourishment is urgently required if we are to effectively address current questions in ways that overcome fads and fashions and which are rooted in meaningful and enduring human and cultural values. This must start in our design schools and in how we educate our young designers.

Avant-garde artists such as Marcel Duchamp and Richard Long, the composer John Cage, and the contemporary architect and designer Frank Gehry demonstrate that true creativity can be challenging and difficult to absorb. It is often commercially unsuccessful and sometimes, at least initially, even ridiculed and dismissed. For example, Duchamp submitted the piece known as Fountain to an exhibition in New York in 1917 that was jury-free and open to all works of art. This whiteporcelain urinal, which Duchamp had purchased from a supplier and signed R. Mutt, was, nevertheless, rejected from the exhibition. Despite this, it has become an icon of the 20th century and has caused people to reassess their ideas about art.6,7 Cage's musical composition 4’33” of 1952, 'for any instrument or groups of instruments'⁸ has been equally controversial and confusing and still prompts comment and ridicule. This piece has three movements, each of which is marked ‘tacet', indicating that the performer is to be silent throughout.

As Duchamp provoked questions about visual art, Cage caused us to reassess our preconceptions about music. Both demonstrated that new forms were possible that addressed important aspects of being human. Similarly, the works of sculptor Richard Long9 and architect Frank Gehry¹º are challenging and, perhaps, sometimes bewildering. But such contributions allow us to see anew; they disrupt our comfort and test our attitudes. There is a need for such work in product design, before the excesses of our current preoccupations bury us alive in waste, pollution and sheer banality.

Ever since the early years of the 20th century, when mass-produced consumer goods started to become widely available, products have been promoted as'new' and ‘leading edge' based on two major features – aesthetics and technology. The first encompasses the latest in fashions, styling and colours and is the primary focus of the industrial designer. The second includes such things as functional attributes and gadgetry and is informed more by aspects of engineering. Neither has given us a lasting and meaningful material culture. Rather, they have contributed to the unsustainable, inherently damaging characteristics of our current design and production approaches.

We need to encourage and value an avant-garde in the field of design because time passes, the world changes and new issues come to the fore and need to be addressed. This is especially true if, over time, our ways of doing things are revealed to have damaging consequences.

Fashion and much technological innovation is often superficial, trivial and invariably wasteful. It is time to establish new criteria for product design, for progress in design and for our notions of good design. An avant-garde based in meaningful and pressing contemporary issues could provide the impetus for new, urgently needed thinking and innovative directions in product design; an impetus that would rouse the discipline from its current stasis.

For new ideas to be meaningful, innovative and well-grounded, designers must be educated in issues that go beyond the traditional boundaries of design. Philosophy, historical and contemporary issues, current affairs and discussions that stimulate critical thinking can all be brought to bear on how we reconfigure our notions of products, product design and the creation and meanings of material culture in today's world.

An example here might serve to expose our presumptions and prejudices. Our traditional, socially embedded understandings of business, growth and capitalism are, in fact, relatively recent. Industrial capitalism grew from the British cotton industry during the Industrial Revolution and is, therefore, only a few hundred years old." The distinguishing feature of this system, which now seems so normal and unchallengeable, is that the surpluses of production began to be used to expand productive capacity itself. This gave us the notion of continual industrial growth, and the corollary of continually expanding consumption, disposable products, resource depletion, pollution and waste. We are living with the consequences of this today and are seemingly unable to free ourselves from its destructive grip. Before the rise of capitalism, however, the surpluses of production were used for other purpose's. They were invested in economically unproductive endeavours, which, viewed from our current frame of reference, seems both incredible and ludicrous. The great European cathedrals are one legacy of this which, incidentally, still fulfil a valuable purpose today.'2

I use this example not to suggest that we should somehow try to return to a pre-capitalist, medieval time, but simply to illustrate that existing norms do change, that alternatives are possible – and urgently needed, given the current rates of ecological devastation and the gross social imbalances associated with our present modus operandi. Critical thinking and the challenging of precedents and standards must begin to prefigure the design process and become more commonplace

and more substantive than is generally the case today. Designers will still have the important task of translating these ideas into form, but ultimately, it is the strength of the ideas that is crucial for the evolution of a lasting, meaningful and, hopefully, more benign material culture.