# 3 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN CONTEXT the evolution of a contemporary myth

To understand why, in the early years of the 21st century, sustainable development has become generally and positively recognized by governments, business and society as a whole, we need to take a look at its emergence as an idea. In this chapter, I provide a brief overview of some of the key historical events that ultimately led to our current notions of 'sustainable development' and 'sustainability',¹ and consider what might be seen as a subset of these concepts, namely ´sustainable product design’. I also suggest that sustainable development can be understood as an important, but nevertheless limited, mythic story that attempts to give meaning to some of our principal modern-day uncertainties.

The publication of Our Common Future in 1987 by the World Commission on Environment and Development, often referred to as the Brundtland Report, popularized the term sustainable development, which it described as a type of development that would enable us to meet our present needs in ways that would not jeopardize the potential of future generations to meet their needs.² Since then there have

arisen hundreds of 'principles of sustainable development', designed to suit all kinds of industries, interests and views.³ However, in general terms, sustainable development addresses three interrelated areas: environmental stewardship, social equity and justice, and economic issues.

In many respects, it can be argued that the statement of these three concerns is simply our modern, secularized way of repeating age-old wisdom teachings that have been expressed down the centuries in the form of mythology and sacred literature. Myths have always existed and will always exist because it is through the metaphorical language of myth that a culture articulates its deepest concerns. Sustainable development can be seen as our own myth, emerging from a culture of science, technology and reason.

We live in an age in which it is often regarded as inappropriate to include religious considerations in the discussion of contemporary issues. In North America there is a somewhat uncomfortable and certainly contentious division between Church and state, and in Europe politicians tend to avoid reference to religious beliefs, and when such references are made they are often surrounded by controversy.4 Religious concerns are almost never addressed in the business or commercial world, academics rarely include discussion of the religious issues that might be raised by a particular topic of debate and, increasingly, religious symbols are being viewed as unacceptable in many public school systems in western democracies.⁵ However, while the demise of religious considerations in public discourse is clearly evident, many of the concerns remain that were traditionally addressed by religion.

In the 1970s, scholar George Steiner suggested that the demise of an encompassing Christian teaching had deprived western society of critical understandings of social justice, history, the mind/body relationship, and of knowledge and moral behaviour.6 In this same period we began to see the emergence of (what eventually became known as) ‘sustainable development' as a socially acceptable, contemporary means of framing our enduring ethical dilemmas and moral choices, as well as our ideas of social justice and environmental stewardship. Indeed, historian Philip Jenkins wonders if environmentalism might not be the ideological force of our time, and he refers to the political scientist Hedley Bull's suggestion that such a movement could be a kind of worldwide, non-religious, political organization, equivalent to that seen in western Christendom during the Middle Ages.' However, this seems rather overstated because secularism and its ideologies are simply not universally accepted, being restricted mainly to western, especially European, societies. In addition, and notwithstanding its admirable intentions, we must also acknowledge that the basis of sustainable development is less rounded, less developed, and has a far more instrumental bias and utilitarian agenda than the heritage of wisdom teachings that are present in the world's great philosophies, religions and mythologies. In the latter, we find the emphasis on the inner or spiritual development of the individual and of the community – from which one's behaviour and actions in the world can be guided. Without this inner source it could be argued that our'worldly' endeavours tend to become superficial and, potentially, misguided.

Like many previous myths and religious traditions,8 sustainable development aspires to an indefinable, unattainable goal – a goal which, nevertheless, many consider worth aiming for, but which forever eludes actual arrival. Furthermore, the sustainable 'myth' tells us that if the message goes unheeded and we fail to alter our behaviours we will be the cause of our own destruction. The message is both ethical and environmental. It promotes greater social equity and improvement in the living conditions for those in need, especially in developing countries, and it encourages conservation of the natural environment and reductions in energy use, consumption and human greed. For example, environmentalists Gordon and Suzuki offer advice for saving energy in the home and suggest how larger-scale energy savings can be made. They also state as a ‘simple truth’ that the present generation is the last one that can save the Earth.9 Obviously, this statement is an assumption and a warning, but it is not a proven fact and it is anything but a ´simple truth'. Rather, it should be seen as a well-intentioned message to spur us into changing course. There are many other examples of writers who illustrate possibilities for moderating our impacts on the planet,1º and others who warn of the imminent dangers to our future because of our destructive lifestyles.1¹ In this context, sustainable development is seen as a way out of our predicament; a way forward that will enable us to live in closer harmony with the natural environment and achieve areater social equity and justice in our activities. This view of sustainable development, as something that encompasses all the essential elements required to achieve our goals is, as I will demonstrate, characteristic of a mythic story.

Another related aspect of sustainable development is its implicit sense of loss: a loss of a perfect state, a loss of innocence and a loss of harmony with nature and community; but we are urged by its advocates that, through right effort and right judgement, we can regain this lost idyll These ideas are anything but new; in fact, they are a constant theme throughout human history. Our yearnings are always for a paradise that has been lost through our own making – through foolishness, corruption or greed;¹² such stories appear time and time again in the world's mythologies and religious texts. In the Greek Myths, we are told that Pandora's curiosity led her to open the box that released suffering and disease into an ideal world¹³ and, in the Bible, Adam and Eve's disobedience results in their expulsion from the Garden of Eden,14 to which we are forever trying to return. Similarly, today we point to our own recklessness and indulgence in destroying habitats, air quality, water quality and the ozone layer and are now striving to regain a vanished ideal through something we have termed sustainable development.

The possibility that sustainable development may not actually be achievable in any practical sense does not, however, make it any less important. We have always created and will continue to create myths that allow us to understand our world and our place in it. The point of the stories in the Greek Myths, the Bible or the Bhagavad Gita is not so much about achieving an end state as about taking on the task of learning how to live in the world. Sustainable development can be seen as our contemporary, secularized version of the same idea. Caring for and respecting the natural environment, together with ideas of socio-economic security and social justice are notions that have been with us for a very. long time. However, their importance and mutual interdependence have only been reconfigured into an acceptable language for contemporary, developed, secularized societies relatively recently.

Economics and commerce go back to time immemorial, but in Christian cultures, profit and business have often been viewed with ambivalence. (I mention Christian cultures in particular because Christianity is the religion that has most strongly influenced the development of western industrialized societies.) There are numerous passages in the New Testament that cast riches and wealth in a poor light,15 and, whether taken literally or in terms of metaphor and symbol, these stories have

undoubtedly contributed to western society's love-hate relationship with the economic aspiration. Ironically, it was the accumulation of vast wealth within the Church and the associated corruption, scandal and exploitation of the common people that contributed to the Reformation during the first half of the 16th century. The advancement of science, technology and industry from this time eventually led to the Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution of the 18th century. As trade and commerce increased and expanded, the Church that had once been unified by Rome became fractured and fragmented. Protestantism grew through the establishment in the 16th century of Lutheranism in Germany, Calvinism in the Low Countries and Anglicanism in Britain, amongst others.17 These developments can be seen as attempts to reform religious practices and reconcile religion with the rationalism of the emerging scientific and industrial age.18 They occurred in a period of rapid scientific discovery, innovation and understanding; increasing applications of science in the development of technology; and expanding use of technology in creating commercial potential at a time of massive urbanization in Europe and colonial expansion abroad.

The scientific revolution and the Age of Reason are not only related to the fragmentation of the Church but also to a diminishment in its influence and power. Western societies, especially those of northern Europe, became increasingly secularized,19 a process that some argue is still occurring,2º as well as more individualistic, rationalistic, secular and far more urbanized.²1

These changes established the basis of the Modern Age, which can be taken roughly as the period from the 17th to the mid-20th century. However, by the second half of the 20th century, after 200–300 years of scientific, industrial and commercial developments and expansion, and with two world wars, the horrors of the Holocaust and the atomic bombings of Japan still in the recent past, there arose a need for new ways of interpreting the world and humankind's place within it. The older understandings no longer seemed valid or capable of dealing with questions arising from the existential angst caused by the threat of nuclear destruction, the increasingly obvious environmental damage from industrial activities, and the pluralism of a multicultural and an increasingly mobile qlobal population. Not only had the traditional reliaions by this time lost much of their relevancy but the Modern worldview that had evolved since the Reformation now, also, was

being challenged. During the second half of the 20th century, many new understandings developed and an era that has been termed the Postmodern emerged.

Prior to this, however, there had been many indications that people were concerned with the environmental and socio-economic consequences of the Modern Age. Thoreau's Walden, published in 1854, was highly critical of the expanding technologies of the time.²² The latter part of the 19th century saw the establishment of the world's first National Park²³ and the formation of the Sierra Club,²4 both in the US and both aimed at conserving natural places and wildlife. In terms of social issues, the late 19th century and first half of the 20th century witnessed the introduction of the first social security and health insurance acts and saw some initial activities in changing the prevailing attitudes concerning the rights of women and of homosexuals.2⁵ However, it wasn't until the later part of the 20th century that many of the environmental and social concerns began to be accepted on a larger scale, which in turn led to significant reform.

The 1960s were a time of considerable unrest, fear and uncertainty, especially among the younger generations of the western countries. The danger of nuclear war triggered peace campaigns in Europe and the US throughout the late 1950s, the 1960s and the 1970s. These extensive protests challenged the position of the establishment and the traditional, conservative bastions of power because it was perceived by many that the very future of the planet was at stake. These fears were not unfounded – in 1963 the world came to the brink of nuclear disaster with the Cuban missile crisis. This pervading threat to the future was evident in books and art of the time. Nevil Shute's novel On the Beach, published in 1957, was the story of a world laid waste by atomic war.²6 In the 1960s, works by Pop artists such as James Rosenquist and Larry Rivers contained numerous references to death, war and destruction.²7

Growing concerns about the actions of human beings and the threat to the future were spurred on by the publication in 1962 of Rachel Carson's Silent Spring,²8 which drew attention to the environmental costs of widespread pesticide use; this book is often linked to the start of the environmental movement.

The energy crisis of the early 1970s, caused when the OPEC countries placed an embargo on oil exports, raised public consciousness about energy use and led to developments in energy conservation and the consideration of alternative energy sources, such as wind power. The oil crisis put at least a temporary halt to the production of large, 'gasguzzlers' in the US, which were replaced by smaller, more modest and more fuel-efficient cars.

Increasing environmental destruction and air pollution and concerns about energy resources resulted in the emergence and expansion of the Green movement in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The Club of Rome was formed in 19682° and the US Environmental Protection Agency was set up in 1970.30 Friends of the Earth³1 in Europe and Greenpeace³2 in Canada were both founded in 1971, and the following year a United Nations conference in Stockholm led to the establishment of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).33

Alongside these developments that focused on the environment, there were also advances in social issues and human rights, areas that would also eventually become embraced by the term 'sustainable development'.34 The Civil Rights movement in the US, campaigning for the rights of black Americans, was at its peak at this time. Martin Luther King delivered his ’I have a dream’ speech at a Civil Rights march in Washington, DC, in 1963. During the mid-1960s, race riots broke out in major cities all over the US and in 1969 the US Supreme Court introduced desegregation. Women's emancipation was also on the rise at this time. In 1960, the contraceptive pill was approved in the US,35 starting the sexual revolution and influencing the progress of the feminist movement. In 1970, Germaine Greer's influential book The Female Eunuch was published, which challenged the subservient role of women in a male-dominated society,36 and in 1973 a woman's right to have an abortion was legalized in the US.37 This period also saw the beginning of the Gay Rights movement, which has been attributed to a riot that broke out at the Stonewall Inn in New York City in 1969 in response to a police raid;38 the subsequent decade saw the establishment of numerous homosexual rights organizations.

Therefore, during these years we see a multitude of changes and events occurring throughout the western world that, on the one hand, responded to increased environmental awareness and a recognition of the fragility of the planet and, on the other hand, social inequities and human rights. In 1972 a photograph of the Earth from space, taken by the astronauts of the Apollo 17 mission, reinforced the finite nature of the Earth and its vulnerability.3º When these many and diverse events are viewed as a whole, we can see that the foundations of sustainable development were laid in the 1960s and the early years of the 1970s.

The publication in 1971 of Victor Papanek's Design for the Real World – Human Ecology and Social Change⁴º brought the mood of the times to the attention of, and within the scope of, the product designer. Papanek's lambasting of conventional product design and his call to address real needs rather than created wants resonated with many young designers at the time. In 1973, E. F. Schumacher's Small is Beautiful – Economics as if People Mattered⁴1 began to show the relationships among economic enterprise, poverty (especially in developing countries), energy use and environmental repercussions. Schumacher's views on the introduction of appropriate technology in developing countries to allow greater self-reliance paralleled many of the sentiments of Papanek and began to be implemented through the establishment of the Intermediate Technology Development Group in the UK.4² Buckminster Fuller, who had been developing his ideas for the effective use of technology since the 1930s, came to renewed prominence in the early 1970s. Fuller believed it was possible to combat famine and poverty through the thoughtful and responsible use of science and technology – through an approach he termed ’comprehensive anticipatory design science'.43 He was one of the earliest proponents of renewable energy sources, and his ideas were very influential on the younger generation in the late 1960s and early 1970s.44 The work of Papanek, Schumacher and Fuller, amongst others, responded to the environmental and social reforms of the 1960s and presented a persuasive alternative for the product designer. This alternative path-was well intentioned and certainly idealistic, but it was none the worse for that. As another way forward, a way that would attempt to circumvent the shortcomings of industrial capitalism, it was perhaps inevitably and appropriately embryonic and optimistic.

Social discontent and fears of nuclear war and environmental destruction were manifested during the 1960s and 1970s in the form of protests and demonstrations and through the creation of special interest groups. From the late 1970s on, however, many of these concerns started to become integrated into the establishment in the form of legislation, agreements and representation. In 1983 the Green Party entered the West German Parliament with 27 seats.45 In

1987 the Montreal Protocol to limit the production of ozone-depleting substances was adapted.46 In 1989 The Netherlands introduced its first, and at the time the world's most comprehensive, National Environment Policy,47 and in 1992 the first UN Conference on Environment and Development, known as the Earth Summit, was held in Rio de Janeiro.48 During these years, further environmental and social issues became evident. Indications of ozone layer depletion over the polar regions and of global warming trends were revealed by scientists,49 and reports of the debt crisis faced by many developing countries were followed by pictures in the press of mass starvation in Africa, especially in Ethiopia.50 The gross inequities between rich and poor countries were raised to new levels of public awareness through the Live Aid Concerts organized by Bob Geldof,⁵1 and, during the mid-1990s there were numerous reports in the western press of the use of sweatshop labour by firms in developing countries that were supplying goods to US companies for consumption in the west.52 Throughout the 1990s and into the 21st century, attention became more focused on the role of business and its relationship to environmental degradation and social deprivation. In the US, Paul Hawken published The Ecology of Commerce (1993),⁵3 which proposed that business could be a primary mechanism to achieve a more sustainable future. In Europe, Wolfgang Sachs and colleagues offered an alternative approach to development in their book Greening the North (1 998)54 and in Canada, Naomi Klein's influential book No Logo (2000)55 was a scathing indictment of the branding techniques of big business, of globalization and of social injustice.

In recent years, more protests and riots have been seen around the world. The targets of these have been the major corporations and political leaders who make agreements that, according to the protesters, exacerbate social inequities and environmental harm. Demonstrations, sometimes violent, were seen at the World Trade Organization meeting in Seattle in 1999, at the G8 Summits in Genoa, Italy, in 2001 and in the following year in Kananaskis, Canada. In 2003, World Trade Oraanization talks collapsed in Cancun, Mexico, amid further protests and serious differences between rich and poor countries – especially with respect to government subsidies given to farmers in the richer economies which, it is alleged, render produce from developing countries less competitive. Also in 2003, we saw the reappearance ot the peace march in worldwide demonstrations against the US-led war in Irag, which many saw as a ploy to secure oil resources. These were

the biggest international displays of protest since the anti-nuclear and anti-Vietngm War marches of the 1960s. In 2004, there were student protests ahead of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum in Santiago, Chile,56 and at the G8 in Gleneagles, Scotland, in 2005 there were further protests and arrests,57 together with Live 8 concerts across the world, again organized by Bob Geldof, which called for greater social justice for poorer nations.58

These diverse events, changes and reforms constitute a significant shift in attitudes and understandings. To a large extent, the Modern worldview has become replaced by a Postmodern worldview, where absolute certainties have been supplanted by more relativistic values. In many cases this has led to greater tolerance and the acceptance of difference, although it also has to be acknowledged that in some areas, especially in some European liberal democracies, there have been signs of a growing intolerance, particularly in the area of religious beliefs.59 Environmental responsibility, social equity and human rights have now become established in our legislations and in our thoughts and actions. The notion of achieving more sustainable ways of living is held up by political and business sector leaders as something worth striving towards – even if there is little understanding of what a sustainable society might actually look like and even less of how we might get there from our current state of high energy use, resource depletion and consumption.

These changing understandings have affected the product design and manufacturing sectors in a variety of ways. In many countries, legislation now controls air emissions, water pollution and the dumping of toxic substances. International standards such as ISO 140006º lay down best practice guidelines for environmental responsibility, The Natural Step6¹ and similar programmes have been taken up by a number of major corporations, and tools such as life cycle assessment² have been developed to aid companies in designing products that have lower environmental impacts. However, there have also been developmęnts that run counter to understandings of sustainable development. Labour exploitation in developing countries is still widespread and is often associated with major western corporations. The production of very large automobiles with high fuel consumption has returned, especially in the US,63 and there is massive dependence on road transport in general, rather than on more energy-efficient and more

environmentally benign methods such as rail. The links that must be formed between local-scale initiatives and mass production in order to further environmental responsibility and greater social equity and selfreliance have received relatively little attention, and staggering rates of production, consumption and waste generation continue apace.

It seems that the vision of a sustainable society, especially when the population of the world exceeds 6 billion,64 is far more an ideal than a feasible possibility. In this and in other ways, sustainable development bears all the hallmarks of a mythic story – a story that tries to come to terms with, and provide resolution to, something that is beyond our grasp.

Steiner has explained that the term‘mythology' can be attributed to a body of thought if (1) it provides an idea of completeness – a total picture of humanity in the world, (2) it has a recognizable beginning and development, including key founders and texts, and (3) it develops its own stories, language and scenarios.65 In sustainable development we have clear evidence of all three. Firstly, its main elements of environment, ethics and economics provide an encompassing view for our physical, moral and socio-economic well-being. Secondly, while the seeds of sustainability may have been sown earlier, it began in earnest during the 1960s and 1970s through the protest movement, social changes such as environmentalism and feminism, and through key authors such as Carson, Schumacher and, in product design, Papanek. These ideas and principles became cemented during the 1970s and 1980s and the term ´sustainable development' was popularized through the publication of the Brundtland report in 1987. Thirdly, scenarios, stories, jargon and language are all rapidly emerging within the field to reify its concepts and ideas. It has its evangelists and prophets who proclaim the new vision and warn of dire consequences if we do not heed their words and change our ways. There has also been a plethora of books that emphasize the dangers of continuing on our current course, document environmental disasters, warn of the dangers to health of air pollution or speak out against the policies of major corporations. Some of these arguments are well founded, while others are more melodramatic but often more tenuous in their assertions. Nevertheless, the body of work that has arisen over recent years to address and begin implementing the ideas contained under the sustainable development umbrella constitute a rich and diverse set of

ideas. Furthermore, a lexicon of terms is emerging, such as 'the Natural Step' and 'Factor 10', together with the three Es of sustainability, 'product/service systems' and 'back casting and scenario development', which are familiar to those working in the field.

So we see that sustainable development appears to satisfy all the criteria of ‘myth’. It offers an idea of completeness, a total vision. It has a recognizable beginning, identifiable founders and key texts, and it is spawning a burgeoning collection of narratives, terminologies and scenarios. It contains many of the elements of more traditional mythologies and religions, but re-presented in a contemporary, secularized form.

These observations do not negate the value and importance of sustainable development, they simply allow us to see it from a somewhat different, perhaps more philosophical, perspective. While a future, sustainable condition may not actually be physically achievable, its very presence in our consciousness, as a potential goal of sustainable development, indicates a discontent with the current state of things and a need to strive towards something we believe to be better – for the environment, for others and for ourselves. British academic and cleric Richard Holloway has pointed out that down the ages there have been many of these notions of a final, defining destiny aimed at achieving harmony and human equality. He suggests that, while they are never entirely achievable, their main purpose is to spur us towards justice and compassion in a world filled by desire and greed.66

In this chapter, I have tried to show that sustainable development encapsulates and represents particular aspects of traditional teachings; it consists of several broad, interconnected themes that address some of the major pragmatic challenges of our time. However, it is often considered a kind of cure-all for today's environmental and social problems – and not merely as an element within a much larger narrative of meaning and significance. But without some greater aspiration or vision of human existence and purpose, it is hardly enough to inspire us, let alone sustain us. Sustainable development yields only a partial and, ultimately, a rather meagre picture of the human condition. It may address some of the important practical issues of environmental stewardship, social justice and economic security, but it is often stultifyingly prosaic. It is largely bereft of ideas that nurture and develop the inner person – the inspirational, the imaginative, the transcendent and the struggle for self-knowledge. These are aspects of our existence that fuel the artist, the composer, the musician and the poet. We have a long heritage of philosophical, artistic, mythical and sacred traditions that can provide us with a foundation on which to base our current endeavours and to address our environmental and social responsibilities. Sustainable development must embrace these vital aspects of human culture if it is to make a meaningful and lasting contribution.

In an age that gives short shrift to religion and the traditional mythical views of the world, it is sobering to realize that we have, in effect, created our own myth for our own time and in language that we can accept. But, as many are now rejecting literal interpretations of traditional sacred texts, we must be prepared to do the same for our own. If the question to ask of the traditional myths is not ’Are they true?' but ‘What do they mean?' then we must ask the same question of the evolving myth of sustainable development. We must not ask ‘Is it possible to achieve?’ but 'What does the creation of this new narrative mean in contemporary society and for us personally in our work and our lives?’ By asking such a question we can begin to see sustainable development from a different perspective. It represents much more than simply an analytical approach to environmental auditing or improving business accountability. It also represents a way of acknowledging our values and beliefs and ascribing meaning to our activities. In this sense, sustainable development offers a contemporary way of, at least partially, filling the void left by the demise of religion in public discourse. On the other hand, it must also be acknowledged that sustainable development is both ideological and immature. As such, it has neither the breadth nor the profundity of the traditions that, to an extent, it supersedes. It would seem, therefore, that our contemporary 'sustainable' myth might well be insufficient to sustain us.