# 4 DESIGN PROCESS AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT a journey in design

Industrial design began in the early years of the 20th century to provide design services for manufacturing.¹ Since then, its role has developed with the industry and today it is often the key ingredient of a company's success. A broad range of expertise, knowledge and skills enables the industrial designer to make important contributions to our modern, globalized systems of product development, production and marketing. However, when we add sustainable development to the mix of issues to be considered by manufacturing industry, the industrial designer is generally ill equipped to offer advice. In addition, a primary concern of manufacturing has to be the economic factor. When sustainability issues are raised, as they have been on an increasing basis in recent years, it is perhaps understandable that many companies are reluctant to deal with them; the issues are complex, company knowledge is often lacking and, perhaps most critically, any action to address concerns about sustainability is usually perceived as being detrimental to the bottom line.

Sustainable development often seems incompatible with conventional priorities and business norms. To develop a more effective relationship between sustainable principles and the creation of our material needs, it may be necessary to take a rather different approach. Instead of trying to ‘force fit’ sustainable principles into an existing and often unreceptive manufacturing system, it may be useful to approach the subject from the opposite direction, and consider how functional objects might be designed and manufactured to be compatible with principles of sustainable development. This would allow sustainable concerns to be included from the beginning and could provide much needed direction for developing new models of production. To do this requires a change in perspective and for the purpose of illustration I would like to use an analogy. The following comparison of two journeys demonstrates the type of shift in thinking that is required of the designer who wishes to explore the unfamiliar and uncertain territory of sustainable design.

In 1845, Sir John Franklin, an experienced explorer, set out from England to discover a sea route from the Atlantic to the Pacific through the Canadian Arctic – the fabled Northwest Passage. This was his fourth Arctic journey and the most well prepared and well stocked expedition ever mounted to the region. It comprised two ships with 129 men. The ships were fitted with the very latest technologies including steam engines and propellers to supplement the sails, a steam heating system and desalinators to distil drinking water from seawater. They took enough provisions to last three years, with over 60,000kg of flour and 8000 cans of food. They had a library of nearly 3000 books, early photographic equipment, silver plate, mahogany desks, dress uniforms and even a grand piano.² Sir John Franklin did not believe in scrimping; he-intended to live well and in the manner to which he and his men were accustomed; and that was his undoing. Despite his previous experience in the region, the technology, the planning and the immense supplies, not one crewmember survived: all died of starvation, illness and cold, and neither ship was ever seen again. Subsequent accounts from the Inuit of the region and the recovery of frozen remains have revealed a final struggle for survival of harrowing desperation and indications of cannibalism.³

The deaths of Franklin and his men were unnecessary and wholly avoidable. Seventy-five years earlier another Englishman, Samuel Hearne, had already explored the same region and had shown that the

Northwest Passage did not exist in any form that was useful as a trade route. Over a period of nearly three years, Hearne trekked 5000 miles in the area between Hudson's Bay and the Arctic Ocean. In contrast to Franklin's struggle for survival, Hearne was able to maintain detailed journals about the wildlife, the people and the environment; and he spent time making careful pencil drawings of what he saw.4 Unlike Franklin, Hearne travelled light, and looked to the indigenous people for guidance and instruction. He adopted their ways, their diet, and their modes of travel, and he was not in the least prejudiced against them, even though many of their customs horrified him and on more than one occasion he was cheated, robbed and abandoried.⁵ His willingness to learn from the native people not only made him unusual for his day, but also allowed him to successfully live and travel in the region.

The difference in these two stories is that, while both men were exploring new territory, Franklin's approach was impositional, whereas Hearne's was responsive. Franklin brought with him not only tons of supplies but also a set of values and expectations from another context. He tried to force-fit the norms and conventions of 19th-century England into the barren, frozen lands of the Arctic. And it worked for a while, until the supplies ran out, and then the entire expedition perished because they had not learned how to survive in their new environment. Hearne, on the other hand, responded to the new conditions. His lack of egotism and pretension meant that he was able to adapt to his new context and he became competent in the nomadic ways of the native people. In other words, Hearne's approach was sustainable whereas Franklin's was not.

The discipline of design is also about exploring new ground and charting new territory, and if we are to do this effectively and sustainably, we must be fully aware of the new context in which we find ourselves and learn to respond to it in an appropriate manner. We must also consider the baggage, in the form of preconceptions, that we bring along with us.

When we are in the midst of things, it is often difficult to appreciate the context: there are too many details getting in the way. So we must try to obtain a different perspective, and one way of doing this for our current situation is to look at it in terms of its historical development. In the previous chapter, I discussed the key historical events that led to the emergence of sustainable development in the late 20th century. Our

contemporary manufacturing systems are quite clearly a culmination of some 500 years of scientific progress,º the development of rationalism, the rise of utilitarianism,8 200–300 years of industrial capitalism,° a century or so of mass production and accelerating consumerism,º and perhaps 30 years of the age of information. And in just the last few decades, Postmodern understandings have also begun to permeate society, bringing with them perspectives that often challenge and undermine previously held certainties. Within this relatively recent period, the concept of sustainable development has emerged in response to the detrimental effects associated with our activities. When we look at it from this perspective, as a rather new but systemically challenging and potentially disrupting idea, it is not surprising that our industrialists, economists and politicians are having some difficulty in understanding what it means and how to reconcile it with longestablished industrial and economic norms.

What is clear is that many of our conventions and practices are no longer valid for the context in which we now find ourselves. As I will elaborate in later chapters, a multitude of social and environmental indicators make it only too apparent that contemporary production systems and consumption patterns are physically, ethically and spiritually untenable. And so we must move forward into unknown territory and explore new approaches that are more environmentally benign and personally and socially enriching. It is the role of designers, as well as design educators and researchers, to be in the vanguard of this exploration — to visualize new possibilities and offer new responses. As designers, we can set about this exploration in a variety of ways. At one end of the spectrum, we can be like Franklin and retain the practices that have brought us thus far, assuming they will take us further. Most companies and most designers seem to be adopting this approach. They move forward but in a manner that maintains the behaviours of an increasingly outmoded context. It is not unusual for environmental advocates to be viewed as unfortunate irritants or as being against technological advance and progress; one group has even referred to them as 'the new life-haters'.' Environmental legislation tends to be opposed at every turn because it is perceived as having a negative effect on earnings. One major company has made much of its use of recycled materials in its products, while simultaneously employing sweatshop labour in the Far East for product assembly.'² New products are developed but, for the most part, the main intention is to boost

sales, increase profits and foster growth. Whether or not the product is capable of making a meaningful and responsible contribution to material culture is often not even a consideration.

It is important to acknowledge that there are now numerous companies making genuine efforts to be more environmentally and socially responsible. But within the current system, where the dominant measure of success is financial profit, with little else of comparable importance, then change is slow and it is difficult to stray too far from convention.

This approach to design and manufacturing is impositional – the practices developed in one context (the Modern) are being applied within another (the Postmodern) that has different requirements. Essentially, it is merely a projection into the future of what has worked in the past. This may have been effective once, but today it is not viable. A central tenet of industrial capitalism is growth, but nothing can grow for ever, and we now seem to be reaching the limits of growth – at least in terms of the types of growth we have valued over the past century.13 To simply extrapolate from the past and to ignore the evidence around us of the consequences of our actions reveals a blindness to the circumstances, a lack of creativity and a moral failing.

At the other end of the spectrum, we can take an approach more like that of Samuel Hearne. This requires an open mind to the new context. We do not attempt to impose our outmoded behaviours but instead learn to adapt to the situation in which we now find ourselves. Only by fundamentally changing our approaches to deal with the new circumstances can we hope to develop new models for design and production that are more compatible with sustainable ways of living. Wrestling with existing models and trying to modify them is not an effective strategy. Progress is frustratingly slow, changes are incremental and acceptance of change is often grudging. By contrast, envisioning and building new models could, eventually, render the old ways obsolete. While improving the existing system is undoubtedly beneficial and to be encouraged, there are many examples showing that a more radical approach can be an effective strategy for instigating more fundamental change. An example from the world of product design would be the calculating machine. Until the 1970s, the basic operating principle of the mechanical calculator had remained essentially the same since the 19th century. However, with the advent of microchip technology those calculators, and the knowledge base and production systems that were in place to produce them, were rendered obsolete within just a few years. Manufacturers had to rapidly revolutionize their approach if they were to operate successfully within a fundamentally new context, or they found themselves quickly out of business. Another, more recent example is the transfer from disc-based formats of recorded music, where a tangible product was purchased from a store along with packaging, to a digital-based format that is flexible, accessible from home and less expensive; a similar revolution has occurred in the transfer from film-based to digital photography.

It is important to acknowledge that, in the case of sustainable development, while we recognize that many of our conventional approaches are unsustainable, we do not know what a sustainable approach might look like. This truly is a journey of exploration. But, like Samuel Hearne, we must leave behind our preconceptions, many of the things we hold dear and many of our expectations. This is not a comfortable thing to have to do; it is disconcerting and the route forward is uncertain – but this is the nature of exploration. It is also the nature of design. To be a designer is to be on uncertain ground.

So let us look at some of the things that, perhaps, we would do well leaving behind, or at least challenging, and then consider how we might begin to take some tentative steps forward.

The imposition of preconceptions on a design project is not only very common, it is also rather unimaginative. When it occurs, we are simply drawing on our existing notions of how objects should be – irrespective of the requirements of the object or the context of use. We just have to look around to see that this type of impositional design is the dominant form today – most cars look virtually the same and they have visual characteristics that are very similar to other products, such as CD players which, in turn, look very similar to vacuum cleaners. There are thousands of designers in professional practice around the world, all trained at universities and colleges to be creative – and yet so many of our products look essentially the same in terms of their overall visual language. Now, one might argue that this is a trivial point, that it is not so important how things look. This is not the case. It is critically important how things look – because 'how things look'is a reflection of ourselves, of who we are, of the things that we believe are important and the things we choose to ignore. So the fact that things tend to look the same, that the look of things is geared towards transient trends,

fashion and consumerism – these characteristics of products and design are actually very telling; especially when we know, unequivocally, that our current practices are so damaging to the environment and are socially inequitable.

We must ask ourselves why this is so, why do industrial designers tend to design in this way? In my view, it has much to do with the baggage that is brought along. The very term ‘industrial design' brings with it a great deal of baggage. It defines an approach, carrying with it a set of expectations, and it represents a particuiar set of knowledge and skills. Industrial design is closely linked, as a term and as a discipline, with the development of mass production and consumer goods in the early years of the 20th century. It is generally understood as the design of products for large-scale distribution and it is commonly described as a service profession to manufacturing industry.14 But the characteristics that are inherent to the term industrial design are today highly questionable, as are the characteristics of the industrial system it serves, because many of them are entirely incompatible with sustainable principles. For example, industrial design means the design of mass-produced products, often with an intentionally short life span, for mass markets, whereas sustainable approaches tend to place far greater emphasis on smaller, local-scale initiatives and product endurance. So the term industrial design is not very useful in discussions of sustainable development; the term 'product design', which is used interchangeably with industrial design, has many of the same problems.

Therefore, some of the baggage we might leave behind as we explore new, more sustainable directions would be the labels industrial design and product design and our conventional notions of what they imply about the production and aesthetics of functional objects.

A related issue here is the whole notion of the professionalization of design. Professions tend to categorize, separate and distinguish activities, and product design has become a defined, professionalized discipline, which implies certain ideas about material things. By contrast, sustainable development points towards approaches that are holistic and more inclusive and, certainly at this early point in the development of our understandings of the subject, we must encourage diversity and variety, trial and error, and experimentation. The narrowing of our understandings into a specific discipline and within the boundaries of a specific 'profession' is not consistent with the integrative, interdisciplinary and experimental approaches that are needed here. Carl Jung once suggested that one of the roles of religion is to shield us from the religious experience.15 Similarly, we could argue that one of the roles of industrial design, together with manufacturing industry, is to shield us from a meaningful experience of material culture.

Hence, the terms we use and the systemic characteristics they imply would seem to be a hindrance rather than a help, and it may be useful to drop them from the lexicon of sustainable design – at least for the present. Instead of thinking about design within this conventional frame, we can approach it in fresh ways and think about how to create a material culture that is consistent with, and beneficial to, personal and social well-being, environmental stewardship and econornic stability. To do this we must start with fewer preconceptions and improvise as we go.

This might seem rather unrealistic – but let us continue the analogy. If Samuel Hearne had turned to the other ‘professional’ explorers of his day for advice, he would have received the established view of how to go about Arctic exploration. Franklin took the established view, and even if he hadn't perished, his approach, despite appearances, was far more precarious than Hearne's.

A characteristic of improvisation is that we have to make do with what is available and use limited resources in creative new ways. A priori solutions are less feasible, and a type of design is encouraged tnat is more sensitive to, and contingent on, context. An important source of precedents of this type of approach is vernacular design. In traditional cultures, there is often a very good 'fit' between material artefacts and the environment, cultural values and beliefs, and ways of life. Traditional cultures can be excellent examples of how to live in more sustainable ways. Objects are often deeply symbolic and meaningful within these cultures, and for this reason they have value over and above functional benefit (this point will be explored in more detail later). We can learn from vernacular design because an important aspect of sustainable development is the 'local' and the specific characteristics of place. Vernacular design can provide us with at least some insights into the diversity and richness of locally appropriate design. We can also learn from the craft and folk design traditions. But it is our challenge to find ways of bringing together the local and the global to create designs that are suited to modern, technologically and economicall developed societies. Such an integration would also go some way to bridging the chasm that has grown between craft and design for industry.

To encourage exploration, improvisation and integration, perhaps, instead of trying to be professional, we should become amateurs and dilettantes. These terms are usually taken to be derogatory, but the word 'dilettante' comes from the same root as 'delight', and 'amateur' from the same root as 'amare', meaning love. To be a dilettante and an amateur is to be someone who delights in the diverse beauty of the world and engages in a pursuit because of a love of the subject. Rather than defining objects within strict boundaries, and 'professionalizing material culture, we need to open up new ways that allow us to delight in the act of creativity, and in the products of creativity – ways that are pursued because of a love of the activity and a love of the environment and the world. Most contemporary products are not expressions of delight, nor are they manifestations of love. It is difficult to feel delight when we know our products are causing enormous environmental devastation, and it is difficult to feel love of a subject that contributes to a system of manufacturing that is permeated by unconscionable social inequities. By contrast, sustainable approaches to design have the potential of not only ameliorating the environmental and ethical concerns associated with conventional practices, but also of helping to create a material culture that truly is a thing of beauty, in which we can find delight because it is a meaningful expression of human values that are responsible, ethical and caring.

Another facet of contemporary design is also worth challenging. We often hear that design is about solving problems. Ironically, contemporary design often seems not so much about solving problems as creating them. Marcel Duchamp once said, 'There is no solution because there is no problem'.16 If there is no problem then what does the designer do? In my view, it is more accurate and more constructive to say that designers create possibilities. We create possibilities of how things could be; but we have qiven less thought to the question of how things should be. When we pass from could to should we introduce an ethical dimension, and this is a key feature of a more sustainable approach.

The concern of this chapter has been the need to reframe how we think about the creation of functional objects in the context of sustainable development; the main points are summarized in Table 4.1. The development of fresh perspectives can be hindered by the terms, conventions and expectations of established practices, and so it seems appropriate to set them aside, at least for the time being, until we have developed a better sense of what sustainable development means for material culture. It is also useful to look at other areas of design, such as the vernacular, to see both the potential and the limitations of placing greater emphasis on 'localization'. However, creativity, imagination and innovation are needed to develop new directions that begin to weave together scales of production, levels of technological sophistication, and diverse cultural needs in ways that are environmentally, socially and economically responsible and desirable.

Table 4.1 Reframing design: A comparison of key characteristics
<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Conventional design</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Sustainable design</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Industrial design</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Design of functionalobjects</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Product design</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Creation of materialculture</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Specialization</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Improvisation</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Conventional</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Uncertain, uncomfortable</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Professional</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Amateur, dilettante</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Specific</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Holistic, integrative</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Instrumental</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Intrinsic</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Problem-solving</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Experimenting</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Solutions</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>PossibilitiesContingent design</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>A priori design</td></tr></table>