# 5 ENDURING ARTEFACTS AND SUSTAINABLE SOLUTIONS object lessons

A sustainable solution can be understood as one that possesses enduring value in terms of its meanings and characteristics. Therefore, in this chapter I will be considering objects that have existed in one form or another in human society for millennia and which are still made and used today. When objects have been produced over such long periods, spanning diverse cultures, languages and understandings, then we can be sure there are lessons to be learned from them about our relationships with material things and our contemporary efforts to tackle sustainable issues in design and manufacturing.

A perusal of the collections in many of our large national museums' reveals that certain kinds of objects have been prevalent in human society since very early times. When considering their endurance, we must distinguish between a specific object and a more general ’object type'. While a particular artefact might be rather ephemeral in terms of its use, its materials, its style or its motif, there are object types that have persisted across very long reaches of time; examples include pottery, fools, weapons, jewellery and statuary. Such objects have been in

continuous production for at least 5000 years, and the earliest examples of jewellery were recently estimated to be some 75,000 years old.² These types of objects are valued for their utility, their decorative and aesthetic qualities, and/or their symbolic or ritualistic roles. The value ascribed to an obiect will usually emphasize one of these attributes over and above the others. These object types can rightly be characterized as sustainable; the sheer longevity of their production and use clearly testifies to their enduring importance in supporting human existence or in nourishing human culture. As such, it will be useful to examine some of their general characteristics because these characteristics can be considered in relation to human needs and valuès, and therefore can inform our contemporary efforts to achieve more sustainable design solutions. Enduring objects, such as those I have mentioned, can be classified into three broad groups:

Functional: Tools, weapons and everyday pottery are valued primarily for their usefulness. If a tool is ineffective then its value is severely diminished – it would be described as ‘useless’. Similarly, a weapon is judged by its usefulness in hunting or in affording protection, and a ceramic pot by its ability to hold liquid. These objects are designed to accomplish practical tasks; design considerations focus on effectiveness, safety and user comprehension.

Social/Positional: Jewellery items such as necklaces, earrings and bracelets; products such as cosmetics and tattoos; and badges, brooches and medals are all non-utilitarian. While they serve a purpose, they are not practical implements or utensils. Instead, they are used to express identity, to be decorative, to enhance one's appearance, or to indicate one's rank, achievement or affiliation. Their chief characteristics are their social or positional qualities;³ they serve as social signifiers that can enhance one's sense of self-esteem, one's social acceptance or indicate one's social standing.

Inspirational/Spiritual: This category includes religious statuary and icons, and fine art objects. All these things refer to or convey inspiring, sacred or spiritual ideas; they are physical expressions of profound understandings and beliefs, and because of this they are considered deeply meaningful. They often have religious, magical or talismanic associations and can serve as reminders or touchstones for our most deeply felt yearnings.

These categories represent three very significant object types because each has stood the test of time and held its place in human society irrespective of culture, class, beliefs and language. We can therefore conclude that such objects are non-trivial and, at least in terms of their continuous presence and use in human society, sustainable. We can infer that they fulfil important human needs. Indeed, when we consider their characteristics in relation to our understandings of human needs, such as the modified version of Maslow's Hierarchy of Human Needs and Hick's natural, ethical and religious meaning,⁵ it becomes clear that, taken together, these three sets of product characteristics correspond to a broad and comprehensive range of human needs. Functional objects allow us to fulfil our physiological and biological needs as well as our safety needs, such as ensuring personal security or fending off danger. Social/positional objects refer to our need for love, belonging and social acceptance; our standing within a social group; our ethical awareness; our sense of achievement; and self-esteem. And inspirational/spiritual objects refer to our need to know, our search for meaning, our aesthetic sensibilities, personal growth, our spiritual needs, and our need to reach out beyond ourselves to help others attain their potential.6

However, many objects are not adequately described by just one of these categories. Instead, they bridge two or even all three. These more complex cases reveal that some combinations are highly problematic, both environmentally and socially, while others hold important lessons for the design and manufacture of sustainable goods. We can identify objects that have both social/positional and inspirational/ spiritual qualities, others that have functional and social/positional characteristics, and still others that have functional, social/positional and spiritual/inspirational characteristics. Objects that have only functional and spiritual/inspirational characteristics are probably not feasible.7 Let us now briefly look at examples that combine these various characteristics:

Social/Positional + Inspirational/Spiritual: This category includes things such as ornaments, commercial art pieces, souvenirs, home décor items, and statuary or art objects that have social/positional meanings attributed to them, such as status, esteem or personal identity. This can also include items based on traditional cultures and religions such as

the commercially produced Haida Masks of the Canadian west coast. These types of sculptures are produced today for the tourist or collector markets and in the process changes occur, Some of these changes can be positive, creating new opportunities for artistic expression while simultaneously opening up new avenues for economic development and selfdetermination. The changes can also be negative, especially when the objects become modified, clichéd and stereotyped in order to serve the market.8 When these non-functional objects become commercialized, their religious, ritualistic or cultural significance is no longer relevant, they become primarily deċorative and there is a danger of them becoming a pastiche or falling into kitsch. n terms of sustainability, these object types do not pose much of a problem – on the contrary, their production can be a valuable contribution. They are generally ‘low tech’ and are frequently handmade at the local level, employing local skiils, cultural and aesthetic sensibilities and perpetuating cultural ties, albeit in some cases in a new and often diluted form; but if taken to extremes this last point can become destructive to a culture's heritage. Nevertheless, opportunities for local employment using local materials and local designs are often socially and economically beneficial, and environmentally of relatively low impact. Furthermore, the handmade and personal or cultural significance of these artefacts means that the people who buy them will often keep them for a long time – even passing them down from one generation to another. They are often regarded as precious personal possessions and they may have a heritage value, which in turn prevents them entering the waste stream. Functional + Social/Positional: This category includes consumer goods such as automobiles, watches, music equipment, footwear and designer-labelled goods. All these possess positional value in addition to their essential utility. These are functional products that set one apart from the crowd and in terms of sustainability they are, by far, the most problematic. To a great extent these are mass-produced goods which are promoted and distributed globally; they drive consumerism and are the cause of many environmental and social ills. These objects not only combine functionality with positional value, they also become quickly outdated. There are two main reasons for this: firstly, both their functionality and their positional value are intimately connected to advances in technology, and secondly, their positional value is tied to changes in fashion and styling. Within our contemporary market-driven, mass-production system, the linking of technological progress and/or styling with social status has become an extremely potent combination. Today virtually all our utilitarian goods have the potential to be positional, from cars and audio products to refrigerators, kettles and bathtubs. When this occurs an object's value is determined not simply by its ability to properly function, but also by its ability to convey social position, aspiration or affiliation. However, the positional value of these types of objects is inevitably short-lived because technology is always advancing and styling is always changing. These factors spawn the upward spiral of consumerism that is so environmentally and socially problematic.

Functional + Social/Positional + Inspirational/Spiritual: This category includes objects related to religion and particularly to forms of prayer, for example a Muslim prayer mat, a Buddhist prayer wheel or a Jewish prayer shawl. Each of these articles serves a functional purpose: the prayer mat defines a space for prayer, every rotation of the prayer wheel represents a prayer's recitation, and the prayer shawl is a mnemonic.1º Inseparable from these functions, each has a symbolic religious or spiritual significance, and each is a signifier of social identity and, potentially, each may also be associated with social status or position. These are important religious and cultural artefacts that all pertain to our inspirational or spiritual understandings, and each is ‘used' in an active, functional way that is quite different from a religious statue or painting. These types of artefacts are considered precious because of their sacred associations and their design and use are steeped in tradition. Consequently, they are not simply discarded when a newer model or style comes along. They can therefore be described as sustainable; they have a long history in human society, they are highly valued and they have profound meaning.

These examples, the prayer shawl, prayer wheel and prayer mat, are each specific to a particular religious culture. There is, however, a similar object that is found all over the world and in most ot the major religions. I would like to consider this artefact in rather more detail because it holds important lessons for our understandings of sustainability and material culture.

Imagine an object that is used today by rich and poor, young and old, healthy and sick; an object that fulfils a prosaic, utilitarian role, and has a deeply spiritual significance; that can be decorative and highly aesthetic; and has for its owner a profoundly personal value that is inherent to that particular object, independent of price, quality or materials. Imagine, too, that such an object has a wide variety of designs and manifestations, that it can be mass-produced for a few pennies or, for a similar cost, made at home. Perhaps the contemplation of such an object would allow us to see anew some of the failings of our contemporary, rather limited approaches to product design and production, and offer some pointers for a more sustainable and more inclusive future.

In the tragedy of Baghdad a man scarred with the wounds of conflict holds this object.11 High in the Himalayas a young boy uses it to keep a tally. A smaller version can be seen in the fingers of an old man in a café in Athens. In New York it may be found in the pocket of a business suit or in a fashionable Gucci handbag. In many a Chinatown a stall can be found bursting with different versions in all shapes, sizes and colours. It is an object that crosses boundaries of time, belief, gender, culture and class. The year October 2002 to October 2003 was dedicated to it.1² In December 2003, 500 of these objects were used by British artist Mark Wallinger to decorate the Christmas tree at Tate Modern in London.'3 It is variously known as the mala, the tasbih, the rosary or simply as prayer beads, and through the centuries it has carved out a unique place in human culture as an object that ties the physical or outer person with the inner, contemplative and spiritual self. The widespread and enduring use of prayer beads, together with their fundamental relationship to the human search for meaning, make them an important artefact for consideration by the product designer seeking to better understand the relationship between sustainability and material things.

At their most basic functional level, prayer beads are used for keeping track of repeated chants or prayers. Their most common form is a simple circle of beads or knots on a string, ending in a tassel or religious symbol. They are thought to have originated in Hinduism about 3000 years ago.' Buddhists have also used them since very early times;15 the Muslim tasbih dates back to about the 9th century¹ and the Catholic rosary to the 15th.17 The Orthodox churches use knotted prayer ropes and the Baha'i faith uses a version similar to the tasbih. An Anglican rosary was introduced in the late 20th century in the US,18 and there are secular varieties known as 'worry beads'.

The uses and meanings of prayer beads are many. In fact, it is this rich diversity that makes prayer beads such a significant object for consideration in a discussion about sustainable design. Its uses and meanings include:

A Tallying Device: A bead, representing one prayer in the cycle, is held in the fingers whilst the prayer is recited. In this respect, prayer beads serve as a simple functional tool.

An Aid to Concentration and Meditation: Essentially, prayer beads are a device to assist concentration while praying or meditating.9 The fingering of the beads is a repetitive activity that can be done without thinking; importantly it is an activity that occupies the physical body. Pascal talked of using such routines to allow us to act unthinkingly and mechanically, in order to subdue the machine and the power of reason.2º This is a critical aspect of prayer beads; the repetitive action produces a quieting effect.21 We see similar mechanical routines   
practised all over the world because they are associated   
with spiritual growth. For example, the spinning of the prayer wheel, the raking of a Zen garden,²² and the rocking action of orthodox Jews during prayer. These practices are thoughtless or ’unreasoned' actions; they facilitate meditation and, potentially, inner growth. It is this fundamental purpose that raises prayer beads above the merely mundane and functional. The simple string of beads is an instrument of synthesis – an aid in bringing together the inner and outer, or the physical and spiritual.23 Thus, prayer beads are profoundly meaningful, which, as we shall see, is relevant to our understanding of   
sustainable design.

All the major spiritual traditions are expressed, on the one hand, through teachings and practices that are often somewhat esoteric and difficult to grasp and, on the other hand, through popular understandings and customs. In this respect, prayer beads have various other meanings that add to their widespread appeal:

A Talisman: Prayer beads are often regarded as a lucky charm.2⁴ In some religions losing one's prayer beads is an ominous sign,²5 and in Catholicism, even in recent times, the rosary has been associated with apparitions and miracles.26 It is commonly viewed as an object of comfort,²7 and in many Latin countries it is a ubiquitous adornment of a car’s rear-view mirror. Such associations are deeply rooted in the human psyche and, despite scientific and technological progress and our rationalistic outlooks, they are still very much present in modern, secular societies. Other common examples include the omission of row 13 in aircraft by major airlines in some of the world's most scientifically advanced countries,2⁸ and the commonly held superstition that walking under a ladder brings bad luck.

A Touchstone: Prayer beads can serve as a ‘remembering object'. It is not a mnemonic in the usual sense. Rather, it serves as a benchmarking device, a 'reminder object', similar to a souvenir, but for a person of faith it is a reminder of that which is true and meaningful.

Jewellery: Prayer beads can also be worn as jewellery. In this case, they are valued for their decorative and aesthetic qualities.

A Badge of ldentity: In various ways throughout their history, prayer beads have been used as an outer sign of one's religion, denomination or vocation.29

So far, I have discussed the object in terms of its use and meanings, but it can also be considered in terms of its physicality and materiality:

A Physical Expression of the Accompanying Prayer Cycle: In Catholicism the name rosary is actually the same as the name of the prayers that accompany its use. The design of the rosary, a circlet of beads attached to a pendant with a crucifix, is essentially a tactile map and visual diagram of the prayer cycle. Hence, its physical design is an indicator of its use and meaning.

The Physical Qualities of the Object: These include the size, weight, colour and texture of the beads, whether they are warm or cold to the touch, and how they sound when they are picked up and used. These are key aspects of one's aesthetic experience of the object. Prayer beads can be of plain wood or of precious jewels, simple or elaborate. The reasons for such variety can range from a genuine attempt to achieve an appropriate expression for a devotional object, to a choice that has more to do with social standing. Simple wooden beads can be an authentic expression of simplicity and humility, or a disingenuous outward expression of piety. A costly, bejewelled set of beads can be an entirely appropriate object for use in religious practice, or it can be a sign of wealth and social standing.3º Hence, the physical appearance of prayer beads can be diverse, variously interpreted and used to express a broad range of values.

Varieties of Manufacture: Prayer beads can be handmade from the simplest of materials or batch-produced in larger numbers by local artisans. They are also commonly made by mass-production processes. How it is made, what it is made from, and where it is made may have a bearing on the value ascribed to it by its owner. However, a cheap, mass-produced set of beads can be as precious to its owner as a set made from rare and expensive materials. Moreover, prayer beads often include an emblem identifying the place where it was purchased, such as a pilgrimage site. This adds a souvenir quality to it, but also a particular sacred association.

From this brief overview it is apparent that there is a wide range of meanings associated with this object. They span the utilitarian, the deeply reflective and contemplative, the talismanic, the emblematic and the decorative. Prayer beads can also serve as a touchstone of values and an indicator of social status. For these reasons, this object can acquire an exceptionally intense and highly personal quality of possession-ness; it is an object that one tends to really ‘own’in a very intimate way³¹ regardless of the fact that it may have cost very little and be made from mass-produced plastics.

There are two more aspects of prayer beads to bear in mind when considering sustainable design:

Evolution Over Time: Neither the prayer beads as artefact nor the cycle of sayings that accompanies its use were 'designed' as such. Rather, both evolved over a long period into the torms we see today. These forms are the result of both popular (or bottom-up) practices and institutional (or top-down) approval and modification.32

Evolution Among Different Traditions: The different forms of prayer beads around the world demonstrate that is easily adapted to diverse cultures and traditions, becoming a symbol of both belief and identity. Hence, its flexibility allows it to become acculturated and this contributes to its continued but varied use and meaning.

To this point, I have considered various types of enduring objects, and categorized and discussed them in terms of human needs and values. One object in particular, the prayer beads, warranted more detailed analysis because it is an important example that spans the various ċategories I have introduced. We can now look to the lessons this object might hold for sustainable product design, bearing in mind that we cannot necessarily draw any firm, generally applicable conclusions from the characteristics of just one object. Nevertheless, from the foregoing we can make the following observations:

The Physical and the Meaningful: It seems that a very powerful sense of personal possession-ness can be attributed to an artefact in which there are strong, interwoven relationships between the object, physical activity, tactility, visual understanding, aesthetic experience, meaning, inner growth and allusions to the numinous. The object discussed here, prayer beads, is fundamentally profound in its conception as a thing, and this is articulated through its physical design, its use and its meaning to its owner. It is a deeply evocative artefact that is neither trivial nor trendy, nor is it based on transient technological novelty or styling. For these reasons, it is not susceptible to many of the factors that render so many contemporary products short-lived and unsustainable.

The Heart of Sustainability: It is an object that relates to a broadly acknowledged set of human understandings that are independent of culture, religion, language or era; what Leibniz called the philosophia perennis³3 and Lewis referred to as the evangelium eternum.34 This undoubtedly contributes to its enduring and widespread use. However, a ceramic pot also spans culture, religion, language and time. So what is it that disfinguishes one enduring artefact from another and makes the prayer beads such an intensely personal and precious possession? Objects that have a wide range of characteristics and meanings, including the profound, greatly surpass those of basic, utilitarian goods and this is what makes prayer beads, and not pottery, so important for our understanding of sustainability. Many, if not the majority, of our contemporary material goods also exceed basic utilitarian needs; they possess layers of additional meanings. Yet, to a large extent, contemporary artefacts are readily discarded and are clearly unsustainable in their conception. By contrast, the prayer beads have been conceived in response to our highest needs, which have been termed self-actualization, transcendence³5 and religious experience,36 and which refer to attaining one's potential and relating to something beyond the ego.37 In addition to these higher intentions, prayer beads can also reference other needs, such as social standing and identity.38 And they also serve a basic function and have a variety of meanings related to popular culture. Thus, they can be understood, used and acknowledged in many different ways. An Essentially Personal Object: The intimate personal-ness of the ownership of this object is a rare but very important characteristic to bear in mind when considering the nature of sustainable objects. When we value an object in a deeply emotional and personal way, then it becomes precious to us and worthy of our care.

A Challenge to 'Localization' and its Link to Sustainability? There has been much discussion about the need for increased 'localization' to contribute to sustainable approaches in product design and manufacturing.39 To an extent at least, prayer beads would appear to challenge this claim. It is certainly true that in many parts of the world this object is made at the local level and of local materials such as plant seeds. It is also mass produced from inexpensive 'anonymous', unsymbolic materials, and yet can still hold a profound meaning and an intimate sense of possession-ness for its owner. This is because the locus of this sense of ownership is related more to what the object represents, or to that to which it points, rather than to what it actually is in terms of its materials or mode ot manufacture. Any detrimental reaction resulting from its cheap, ubiquitous ‘thing-ness'is overcome by its iconic associations, so that it can still be a deeply meaningful personal possession. This is perhaps the most important lesson for sustainability. The meaning of an object, even a newly manufactured, mass-produced plastic object, can provide a deep sense of ownership and value and can eclipse the specific characteristics and any physical shortcomings of the object.

From this it seems reasonable to draw a further conclusion. At its most basic, utilitarian, ‘undesigned' level, we ċould say that a functional object is capable of fulfilling an identified human need. When we go beyond this basic utility and introduce ‘design’, to give the product market appeal, then we start assigning to the product attributes that will, ostensibly, satisfy a range of other human needs, such as ‘a sense of belonging' and ‘self-esteem' needs. Objects designed to appeal to these needs (i.e. ‘functional, social/positional goods’) are often rapidly outdated and unsustainable. Beyond these 'middle-level'needs, however, there are the higher needs such as aesthetic and spiritual needs. Products conceived to refer to these can appeal to our highest potential and in doing so, the very factors that spur unsustainable practices in objects are overcome. In the one example of prayer beads, at least, we have a product that is inherently sustainable, more than simply functional, and ubiquitous. This example demonstrates that this combination is at least possible to achieve. The challenge is to see if it is possible in more common, everyday products.

At this point, we may try to take a few steps beyond the example of prayer beads to include some less explicitly religious products that are, at least to some extent, simultaneously functional, social/positional and inspirational/spiritual. It is difficult to give such examples, and any selections will inevitably be subjective and perhaps contentious. However, they might include some of the work by Philippe Starck, such as his Juicy Salif lemon squeezer of 1990 for Alessi. This product, which looks a like a pointed metal egg on three spindly legs, may not be especially functional, and its prime role would appear to have become positional, but it is also a strikingly sculptural and perhaps inspirational design. Similarly, the designs of Daniel Weil, Ron Arad and the Droog designers are not merely functional, nor are they simply a combination of function and social/positional characteristics. Their sculptural and aesthetic attributes tend to endow them with inspirational/spiritual qualities.

These examples are perhaps not ideal: their durability has yet to be tested and, in some cases, it is often difficult to get beyond their strong positional associations. However, they do provide some indication of direction. They combine the various product characteristics discussed in this chapter and encapsulate meanings, beauty and sculptural qualities that allow them to rise above the mundane.

Many of our contemporary products surpass basic utility: they include a multitude of technical features and styling and aesthetic considerations. The vast majority of these products are short-lived, unrepairable and, by any measure, unsustainable. Given this state of affairs, we are faced with the question, ’Is it possible to have an object that is more than merely functional, but which can also be understood as sustainable, and if so, what would be the characteristics of such an object?' This discussion has attempted to answer this question and has revealed that sustainable product design is not to be found simply in the physical definition of an object, in the types or scales of manufacturing, or even in the nuances of the design. It also suggests that sustainability does not necessarily require a return to local production, the use of natural materials or high-value materials, craft processes or even high-quality production. Instead, once basic utility is surpassed, we enter an area of design that deals with the social and positional aspects of material culture and it is this area, when added to function, that appears to stimulate consumerism, disposable products and unsustainable practices. However, beyond the social/positional lies another area of human understanding, the inspirational/spiritual, that seeks and brings higher meaning to our endeavours. When this level of understanding informs our material productions, the destructive tendencies within the social/positional can be overcome, leading to objects that are, in their fundamental conception, deeply meaningful. And it is only by attempting to make our material culture meaningful that we can hope to contribute to a sustainable future.