# 7 DESIGN, SUSTAINABILITY AND THE HUMAN SPIRIT how the other half lives

Long ago it was said that ‘one half of the world does not know how the other half lives’. (Jacob A. Riis¹)

In the 19th century, Jacob Riis wrote about the other half of society — the weak, the disadvantaged and the under-represented. In modern society, in the contemporary worldview and in the process of design itself, there exists a similar division – but in this case, the other half is not to be found externally, as a particular sector of society, but internally, as a facet of ourselves. The other half of who we are – the creative, the imaginative, the ethical and the spiritual – is also weak, disadvantaged and under-represented, compared with the rational, instrumental side of our nature. The emphasis on utilitarianism, economic efficiency, pragmatism, aggressive competition and the idea of progress in today's societies and today's world of design has limited and often eliminated the poetry, the elegance and the creative austerity of our other side. The suppression of this other half has led to what many see as a materially abundant but spiritually impoverished world. While this notion of two halves or aspects of our personhood should not be overstated or taken too literally, it is nevertheless a useful mechanism for considering further the nature of our thoughts and activities in relation to design.

There are many references to two halves or two sides of the human condition. These two sides have been characterized as inner and outer, higher and lower, physical and metaphysical, and body and soul.² This image of two facets of ourselves can be expressed not only as a duality between our material or physical side and our spiritual or metaphysical side, but also as a distinction in our ways of thinking and knowing, such as subjective/objective, intuitive/rational and holistic/analytical. There are also dualisms recognized in traditions such as Chinese Taoism, with its inseparable and complementary yin–yang relationship, yin representing emotion, the feminine and the passive, and yang reason, the masculine and the active. The yin-yang relationship also represents the inner/outer, heavenly/earthly or higher/lower aspects of our humanness.³ Also, distinctions have been made between what might be termed our 'scientific experience' and our'aesthetic experience', the former being characterized as transitive, transparent, homogeneous, specific and sequential, and the latter by their respective opposites – intransitive, opaque, heterogeneous, totalized and rhythmic.4

It has been said that attention to the development of the rational, scientific, logical and verbal side of our nature tends to prevail in our educational systems,⁵ and it has certainly become dominant in contemporary societies – overwhelmed as they are by advances in science and technology, utilitarianism, economic rationalism and consumerism.6 In a world dominated by such reductionist thinking, it is perhaps not surprising that the other side of our nature, the side that seeks meaning and higher purpose, has been neglected, suppressed and ill-developed in recent times, not to say disdained. The public school systems in North America effectively ignore our spiritual side,7 with often little or no reference to the teachings of the world's great religious or spiritual traditions. Spirituality, however, is seen by some as not just an additional element but as the central tenet of a more holistic approach.8 Moreover, and as I will discuss further here, art and aesthetics are closely associated with intuitive ways of knowing and spiritual development, but education in these areas is either absent altogether or frequently the first to be eliminated when financial constraints lead to the paring down of curricula in schools, colleges and universities. Today, the business world, higher education, modes of working and our ways of life are dominated by the rational, the temporal, the scientific and the analytical, and often by predominantly outer concerns for material gain and physical comfort. As the British philosopher Iris Murdoch has pointed out, 'Metaphysical problems now reach the popular consciousness in the form of a sense of loss, of being returned to a confused pluralistic world from which something “deep" has been removed.'9

The ’inner’ side of us includes self-awareness¹º and, beyond that, a cognizance of what might be termed spiritual awareness. Traditional wisdom teachings tell us that constant attention to, and development of, this side of our nature lead to true happiness, wisdom and enlightenment. However, this whole concept of higher and lower or outer and inner dimensions to our humanness has become increasingly foreign to us over the past few hundred years, as utilitarian, rationalistic understandings have developed and expanded. When the inner or vertical dimension is neither recognized nor understood, then inevitably we will, and do, choose to seek purpose, fulfilment and happiness through other means – focusing on such things as increasing comfort and pursuing enjoyment through physical or sensual pleasures. Cultivation of the higher faculties, the seeking of meaning, deeper understandings and spiritual development, and striving towards what Taylor calls a moral ideal,1 become anathema and, to a considerable extent, this has occurred in our contemporary world.

These observations link directly to products and product design. Once our physical needs have been met, we seek further products and experiences that provide us with comfort, convenience, enjoyment and distraction. Television, DVDs, computer and video games, hobby products, theme parks and the like are the sophisticated contemporary tools of existential distraction, their prime purpose being, in addition to the economic imperatives of the producers, to provide entertainment and transient pleasure. This emphasis on seeking diversion and pleasure through objects and acquisition is not only closely associated with spiralling consumerism, waste production and environmental degradation, our desire for such products also indicates that we seek fulfilment yig these sensual outer means, and not through the pursuit ot the inner. In turn, these activities are capable of occupying our minds so completely that they effectively thwart any tendencies towards an inner course.

It is important to consider how things might be if we attempted to redress this imbalance and gave more attention to the side ot our nature that contemplates purpose and seeks meaning. Such an understanding would permit a more even-handed approach to our activities, one that is urgently needed as we strive for more sustainable modes of living. For the designer, of course, this raises many questions about the relevance and nature of products. If our present lifestyles and the products that support them derive from an over-emphasis on our‘outer half’, then how would we live, what products would be important and how should they be designed if we placed greater emphasis on our other half — the intuitive, the holistic, the cesthetic, the heterogeneous and the ‘inner’? How would this other half live?

This inner aspect of our humanness – which, we are told, can be continually cultivated to seek and appreciate the ethical, the virtuous and the spiritual – is also the part of us that is imaginative, creative and aesthetically sensitive. Furthermore, because artistic endeavour relies upon these characteristics, it could be said that good art originates from, and is expressive of, our inner or higher side. Murdoch has said, ’Art makes places and open spaces for reflection, it is a defence against materialism and against pseudo-scientific attitudes to life ... Great art inspires because it is separate, it is for nothing, it is for itself. It is an image of virtue.’12

We see that both metaphysical and psychological discussions (see reference to Maslow in Chapter 5) point to an inner aspect of our being that is associated with virtue, goodness and higher potentials. It is a direction that is closely related to artistic endeavour and aesthetics, and tends to be seen as somewhat separate from our everyday outer activities. As such, it can provide something of a counterbalance to our more worldly, materialistic pursuits.

Like art, the discipline of design also calls upon our imagination, creativity and aesthetic sensitivity. Design, however, is not art. To suggest that it is, or can be, is to demean the discipline of design by failing to acknowledge its particular and distinct role. Kant defined art in terms of ‘purposiveness without purpose'13 – it has no empirical, practical or utilitarian intent. Design, on the other hand, is driven by a combination of social and economic motivators, and the products themselves are designed to be purposeful. Even though that purpose might often be trivial, the utility of the object together with the purposeful intent

behind its conception are what distinguish design from art. However, it must also be acknowledged that while design is not art, there are often commonalities in techniques, processes and thinking that bring the design and artistic processes close together. It is this proximity that allows us to consider design as a process of 'thinking and doing' that calls upon both the inner and outer sides of our nature. Good design is neither art nor purely instrumental device, neither wholly artistic nor wholly utilitarian, but an inseparable union of the two. Hence, design can be regarded as an activity which, potentially, bridges the two sides of our nature, and when it does so it becomes a holistic endeavour that looks towards our inner self to bring meaning and aesthetic balance to the creation of functional objects. If genuinely and honestly pursued, this will inevitably include an ethical component and even a spiritual element. When the inner aspect is acknowledged, developed and brought to the design process, it can have significant implications for how we go about designing and how we think about the nature of our material objects. Conversely, a functional object created without such a holistic approach will remain a prosaic device devoid of qualities that reflect our full humanity.

A more balanced approach to design allows us to consider both the quantitative and qualitative aspects of material goods in relation to inner/outer accord. After basic needs have been met, the quantity of material possessions an individual might see as desirable will be a function of many factors, including societal norms, but it is probably not too far off the mark to suggest that beyond a certain point, further acquisition can start to detrimentally affect one's ability to develop inwardly. Too many material goods, or a preoccupation with them and the ´benefits' they offer, can distract us from inner attention – this is a teaching of many traditions.

Regarding the design of functional objects, it is important to reflect on what our ‘inner' side can tell us about how we might define their qualitative characteristics. This is critical if our material culture is to express and support our higher potentials. This qualitative concern is not simply a question of high or low quality – but one of fitting quality, such that the object is congruent with our inner nature. Another way of thinking about this is in terms of ‘appropriate concern’. It would be reasonable to suggest that beyond a certain point, material goods can start to occupy a position of excessive importance in our culture and our lives. Therefore, there would seem to be a level of appropriate concern to be found in the design of objects – where decisions about materials, form development, features and detailing reflect an adequateness without being immoderate, indulgent or excessive.

This notion of appropriate concern for material goods is essential if we are to take a more balanced approach – one that affords greater recognition of our inner selves and that begins to address sustainability issues at a deeper, more fundamental level. To appreciate more fully the basis of appropriate concern it is necessary to look a little closer at our inner or other half.

His room was at the top, right under the roof, lowceilinged, with thick stone walls, a single bed, a priedieu, and a rough wooden armchair. There was a basin for washing and the usual crucifix on the wall, near a narrow slit of window which gave a partial view of the monastery's belltower. (Brian Moore, The Statement, 1995¹4)

To understand something of how the other half lives, we have many sources from history and around the world. From these we can gain an impression of how a life dedicated to inner development tends to regard material culture. This is not to suggest that we should all seek the life of an ascetic, but it does allow us to see our contemporary lifestyles in the economically developed countries from a different perspective.

Probably our most extensive sources that indicate the nature of the inner life and its response to outer concerns are the texts and traditions of the world's major religions. While there are many examples of great opulence ín religious artefacts and shrines, there is an important distinction to be made between artefacts of ceremony, ritual or devotion and those for personal use or comfort. If we look at the more ascetic traditions, where the pursuit of the inner, contemplative life is perhaps more fully embraced, we see that material comforts and possessions are often kept to a minimum. Consideration of these distinctive characteristics can give us some indication of how the other half tends to regard the place and nature of material goods.

Many teachings suggest that material goods, and especially a mind that is preoccupied with such things, hamper inner development. From the spiritual traditions of India we are told that the person seeking the inner path must seek it alone, free of aspirations and possessions.15 Buddhism regards possessions and attachments as a form of bondage that prevents enlightenment.16 In Judeo-Christian texts there are many passages that declare the necessity of eschewing material possessions and personal wealth.17 The Islamic faith tells us that, 'It is difficult, for a man laden with riches, to climb the steep path that leadeth to bliss.'18 The spiritual traditions of China exhibit similar attitudes, for example, the Tao Te Ching tells us that indulgence in fine clothes, foods and possessions places one far from the inner way.19

We see that for thousands of years, in many cultures, the pursuit of inner understandings has suggested a reduction in the importance and quantity of material goods. Monastic ‘rules' are often quite categorical about the dangers to spiritúal progress of private ownership, preferring to share possessions.2º Similar views on shared goods, simplicity and material austerity are expressed by other intentional communities that dedicate themselves to the spiritual life, such as the Shakers,21 the Amish²² and the Hutterites.²³ Such communities not only tend to minimize the quantity of artefacts, they also tend to reject decoration and embellishments, regarding unadorned objects more fitting to spiritual pursuits.²4

It becomes evident from various teachings and sources that inner development can affect one's attitudes to both the quantitative and qualitative aspects of material culture and, ipso facto, environmental stewardship and sustainability. From the designer's perspective, the qualitative implications are perhaps the most interesting and the more important because it is the qualitative characteristics that fall under the designer's purview.

This gives us some indication about directions and approaches to product desian that are consistent with inner priorities and the wisdom teachings of many traditions. There is, of course, no single, definitive 'right way' for product design, but we can derive some impressions that might be helpful in our search for more balanced, moderate and sustainable ways forward; ways that encompass both the outer imperatives and the inner potentials of the human condition. The notion of ’appropriate concern’ is an essential element for developing this more comprehensive approach. Wittgenstein considers a similar idea when he discusses inconsistencies among the four Gospels. He argues that the inconsistencies are preferable or even necessary and gives a

theatre scenery analogy: '... a mediocre stage set can be better than a sophisticated one, painted trees better than real ones - because these might distract attention from what matters.' Hence, the details of the tangible (i.e. the physical or the historical) are not so important. The respective artefact or account is, in each case, necessary, but only in a rough or approximate form that is sufficient to provide the background or the basis for what really matters. In the theatre example this is the play itself, in the case of the Gospels it is 'the putative transcendent reality' to which all sacred texts point.26

Schumacher, who pioneered the whole notion of appropriate technology, with its inherent idea of adequateness, expresses a similar view when he says:

To enhance our Level of Being we have to adopt a lifestyle conducive to such enhancement, which means one that grants our lower nature just the attention and care it requires and leaves us with plenty of time and free attention for the pursuit of our higher development.²7

In addition to the traditional texts I mentioned above, numerous contemporary figures such as Mahatma Gandhi and authors such as Murdoch, Schumacher and Taylor tell us that the most critical feature of being human is our potential for seeking meaning, higher purpose or Truth. In this endeavour the place and relevance of material objects, in terms of their quantity and quality, are somewhat ancillary. The least necessary to fulfil the essentials becomes enough, so that we can get on with the 'essential decisive thing'– more than this would be distracting and an obstacle to inner development. Adequateness is not regarded as simply tolerable;, but as preferable and necessary.

The re-orientation of product design and production to achieve a more balanced, holistic approach would also have pragmatic repercussions. The two sides of our nature are inseparable and complementary and so greater appreciation of our inner potentials would inevitably affect and benefit many aspects of our outer activities. A shift toward adequateness in the quantity of goods has the environmental benefit of reducing resource and energy use, reducing production of waste and pollution, and preserving habitats. A sense of adequateness in the qualitative characteristics of products has various implications for design, and is also relevant to more sustainable ways of living. Firstly, adequateness can be considered at a product's inception. The fundamental concept of the product, what it is, can be scrutinized with reference to inner as well as outer requirements. For example, I previously referred to products such as televisions and video games that are inherently and often excessively distracting to inner development. The conceptual framework of a product can therefore be examined with respect to its ability to create conditions that support and enhance our full potential.

Secondly, adequateness can be applied to a product's physical and qualitative characteristics; that is, how the product is designed and defined. An adequate or 'good enough' approach to product definition suggests a quite different set of priorities than we have come to expect in the fields of design and mass production. Functional convenience, precision, high tolerances and perfect finishes are constantly strived for, and are promoted as better and more beautiful - but these are the priorities of a design and production system that is, by and large, unholistic, driven by economic rationalism, severely detrimental to natural systems and often ethically questionable. These ideas of appropriate concern and adequateness can similarly challenge the approach of the Shakers, who also sought high precision and minute attention to detail in their products through dedicated craftsmanship. This approach, although emanating from a deep commitment to things inner, could be criticized as reflecting an excessive attention to material goods and their definition. Of course, a counter-argument here could be that the mode of work itself is a form of contemplation and its product a manifestation of inner pursuits. It does, however, pose intriquing questions as to the relationship between inner development and outer expression; and it is perhaps a particular irony that products from a group dedicated to the inner life now command extremely high prices and often become objects of status. A similar example might be the products produced in the 19th century by William Morris, with the best socialist intentions. Because of the attention to detail, craft and perfection, the products had to be sold at relatively high prices, thereby negating the egalitarian principles at the heart of their conception.

Hence, the precision and pursuit of perfection in mass production and in high-quality craft would appear to be, in many cases, contradictory to the evolution of conditions of adequateness so critical to inner development. In certain applications, precision is, of course, necessary to ensure that a product will properly function. However, precision and perfection are frequently unnecessary and they can be counterproductive for both inner development and sustainability.

A quite different approach to design and production is possible. The idea of 'rough' products, of imprecision and of adequateness in the making of everyday functional artefacts would seem to be more in line with the general direction of achieving an inner/outer balance and sustainable ways of living. 'Good enough' products can reduce concern, both in the making and in the use and ownership of products, to a level more conducive to inner development. The principles of sustainability point us towards a greater emphasis on local production and the provision of fulfilling, local employment. This contributes to environmental stewardship, by evolving a locally based industrial ecology, and to social equity, which is an essential element of sustainability and of spiritual teachings. Production that employs and values people rather than machines also implies a qualitatively different type of product. A machine aesthetic is obviously inappropriate. The human hand can produce beautiful qualitative characteristics but high tolerances and reproducibility are not its forte. Similarly, surface finishes that are uniform and precise are well suited to automated production - whereas multifarious or even unfinished surfaces are often more appropriate and more achievable when using natural materials and human labour. Moreover, because of their variegated, 'rough' qualities, such objects are able to absorb the marks of use more effectively without detrimentally affecting the overall appearance – this obviously contributes to product longevity and sustainability. Potentially, the production of such products at the local level, employing local people, can be an economically viable alternative to today's mass-produced, largely unsustainable products. The 'adequate' product can, because of its nature, and should, because of its intent, be relatively easy and quick to produce, making it an economically feasible alternative. Its viability and acceptability are, however, crucially dependent on imaginative, challenging and innovative design.

Such a direction for design has the potential to embrace and support our other half in the creation of our material world, as well as making a fundamental contribution to the goals of sustainability. It also has the potential of making our material world far richer, multifaceted, locally appropriate and culturally significant, which, compared to the global homogeneity arising from today's mass-produced objects, is a prospect to be welcomed.