# 8 FASHION AND SUSTAINABILITY the attraction of opposites

Fashion is merely a form of ugliness so unbearable that we are compelled to alter it every six months. (Oscar Wilde)

A conspicuous aspect of contemporary manufactured goods is that they have become objects of fashion. To promote fresh sales in an already saturated market, the appearance of products is regularly reworked and updated. This strategy kindles new interest and encourages what we might term the aesthetic obsolescence of previous models. There would seem to be irreconcilable differences between this notion of fashionable products and the principles of sustainability. Sustainability requires a drastic reduction in our ecological footprint,’ and increasing a product's useful life has been regularly advocated as a way of contributing to this goal. Fashion, on the other hand, suggests a passing trend or fad — something transient, superficial and often rather wasteful. It represents the opposite of longevity and, as such, would appear to be an impediment to sustainability.

Even though ‘fashion’ tends to be regarded in this way, and consequently is often frowned upon by those working in the field of environmental design, it need not be in conflict with sustainable principles. Indeed, it may even be a key element in working towards more sustainable ways of living. It is a mistake to discount fashion per se. There are positive as well as negative aspects to this intluential aspect of modern culture. If we approach it in the right way, and ensure that we are discerning and receptive to the aims of sustainability then, perhaps somewhat paradoxically, fashion in design can prove a valuable ally in the evolution towards more ecologically and socially responsible ways of produčing material products.

The term fashion is applied to that which is currently popular — it is commonly used in the context of clothing design, but there are also fashions in customs, manners, music and, of particular importance here, in styles of products and material goods. It is a term that implies change, something that is in fashion now will shortly be out of fashion because something else will have superseded it. Therefore, inherent to the notion of fashion is time (a topic I will return to in Chapter 12). As time passes, fashions change – things become old-fashioned and consequently no longer desirable. The rate of such change is now probably greater than it has ever been – which is often seen as a good thing for economic competitiveness and market stimulation, but a bad thing for resource conservation and environmental stewardship. However, these negative connotations pertain only to the way in which fashion is manifested and used. Change itself is inherently neither positive nor negative – it is the nature of the change that is important.

## Every generation laughs at the old fashions, but follows religiously the new. (Henry David Thoreau²)

If we consider some of the pros and cons of fashion we can, perhaps, discern where it can begin to help or hinder our progress towards sustainability. On the ‘pro' side we can say that fashion in design fosters creativity and the exploration of new, previously untried solutions. There is a vitality and a freshness in much fashion-oriented design that piques our interest and keeps our material world 'alive'with an energetic and often light-hearted joie de vivre. Fashion-oriented design captures our aesthetic interest and imagination, sometimes even despite ourselves, and allows us to take pleasure and momentary delight in its originality, newness and creative distinctiveness.

Fashion is a particularly appropriate, powerful and well-used tool in a free-market economy -- which constantly demands new solutions to stimulate the market and to create competitive advantage. In such an economy, fashionable solutions can bolster sales and prevent company failure – thus maintaining market viability and workforce employment. Such competitiveness requires and encourages ingenuity, imagination and innovation. In markets without such competition, as was the case in the former USSR, there is little incentive to be creative and to progress, not just technologically but also in terms of social development and environmental care. Without an incentive to be innovative, it seems, ‘fashion' becomes less important and there is a tendency towards economic, technological, aesthetic and social stagnation, which, because of outmoded technologies and approaches, can also be severely detrimental to the environment. Thus, while there are innumerable problems created by the free-market system, a noncompetitive system can result in a rather lacklustre and dull milieu that is damaging to the environment and to human welfare.

The ‘cons' of fashion in design are primarily associated with how it can detrimentally affect our values. Without some form of restraint, the emphasis on newness, novelty and innovation can become equally, if not more, damaging to people and the environment than a system that stagnates. An emphasis on the latest fashions in clothes, cars, electronics and home appliances, if unmoderated by something deeper, can foster bogus values – values that over-emphasize materialism as a way of finding fulfilment and happiness. This is clearly prevalent today in the economically developed countries. Advertising and marketing techniques are used continually to encourage consumerism by promoting it as a way to find success and happiness; and this is fed by fashion. This dominant message is patently false and, as I discussed in the previous chapter, is contrary to the teachings of the world's major wisdom traditions – all of which warn of the dangers of concerning oneself too much with material wealth and possessions.

Fashion-oriented design is thus closely linked to free-market economics – but when a company's prime emphasis is on profit, when this becomes its raison d’être, then human welfare and environmental responsibilities become unnecessary impediments to the maximization of profit and growth. Unmoderated, the fashion-oriented, free-market system becomes greedy – over-utilizing resources, creating immense

environmental damage, and deliberately and constantly creating dissatisfaction through morally questionable marketing techniques. It is starkly apparent that our predominant concern with profit and growth (and thus the processes we use, the nature of contemporary products and our'aesthetic preferences) reflects a grossly imbalanced and 'unsustainable' paradigm.

However, if we are to move towards sustainability in a timely manner, development and change will be essential. It is unlikely that there will be an abrupt, systemic shift in the ways we live and work which will suddenly align us with sustainable principles. It is more plausible that changes will occur incrementally and, hopefully, become increasingly congruent with sustainable thinking. An evolution towards sustainability will require many small, progressive shifts that bring us ever closer to our goal. Inherently, such an evolution requires innovation, change and creativity. Therefore, if we are to transform our ways from the‘unsustainable' to the 'sustainable', we need to employ those approaches that are precisely characterized by 'fashion'. The transition will be achieved by stimulating incremental changes in the right direction – each consequent step being an improvement over the last so that we swiftly progress towards more responsible, sensitive and holistic practices. Hence, fashion in design can be used as an important tool, if done with care, for generating timely and positive transformation.

In contrast to short-lived, fashionable products, the design of longlasting products is commonly seen as an appropriate means of encouraging more sustainable practices.³ While this argument has merit and is appropriate in some instances, it also has significant shortcomings. So many of our current understandings and modes of designing and producing products are inherently antithetical to the principles of sustainability. Therefore, one of the dangers of promoting product longevity is that it could simply prolong an unsustainable system while simultaneously adversely affecting employment opportunities. In many cases, to promote product longevity from our current standpoint would be ill conceived and premature. From where we are now, if we produce long-lasting products they will be products conceived by a mindset that is still steeped in, and only just emerging from, a century or more of product design, development and production that is unequivocally unsustainable. To think that we have the ability, at this point in our history, to design long-lasting products that fully address the complex, multifarious issues inherent to sustainability could be seen as arrogant, not to say foolhardy.

Instead of relying on product longevity, we should be exploring design with humility, and assume that whatever we design for today will not be appropriate in the future. Whatever we produce should be designed in a way that places little burden on the planet, in its production, use and disposal, while also providing healthy and fruitful work.

Sustainability is, as yet, beyond our grasp and its meaning beyond our full understanding, and so an appropriate way forward would be to take small, evolutionary steps in what we consider to be the right direction from our present position. As we do so, our understandings wil develop and our course will be continually modified. Thus, the carefully considered use of fashion in design can be regarded as a useful mechanism to stimulate interest and progress in directions that begin to embrace and articulate sustainable principles. If the economically developed nations are to advance towards a less materialistic society, to a more culturally advanced, meaningful understanding of how we live, then we will need many innovative approaches. To find new ways forward that satisfy the complex interrelations among the three main tenets of sustainability, we will need to try new things, and as we struggle to find better ways, we cannot expect these trials to be ‘correct', at least not wholly. The task is so large that the transition will generate many blind allies, many incomplete solutions and will require constant refinement and improvement. Therefore, we could say that many, if not all, of these trials will be transient, will last for a while before becoming superseded. They will, then, be akin to 'fashion'.

An important consideration when directing fashion in design towards sustainability will be a balanced approach that embraces economic viability, social well-being and environmental gains, or at least environmental neutrality. Economic viability requires the maintenance of fresh product lines and cost-effective production. To achieve this in a socially and environmentally responsible manner, sustainable principles point to a more locally based manufacturing system which emphasizes the development of local employment, the local economy, locally relevant and appropriate designs and the development of a cultural identity attuned to place.4 Social well-being is obviously closely linked to economic security, and also to the ways products could be designed. Thus, it becomes necessary to develop a design approach that, to

some degree, utilizes locally available materials, short production runs and changing designs, and that employs a local, skilled, flexible production workforce. This could provide good quality employment opportunities within a community and in doing so would provide people with economic security, community wealth and a sense ot personal worth and contribution – while also creating a stimulating, aesthetically vibrant and evolving material culture. The environmental gains of a more locally based emphasis can also be significant – allowing local repair, reuse and recycling in order to constantly improve and enhance products while simultaneously attending to environmental concerns. The integration of more locally based approaches with our current massproduction technigues for the manufacture of economically viable, socially responsible and environmentally sensitive fashionable products can provide a way forward that sustains a vigorous market economy while ensuring development and change towards practices that are both socially and environmentally responsible.

We must also consider what such a direction implies for the future of design, in terms of the nature of our material products, aesthetic norms and how we judge design. The key to achieving sustainability in product manufacturing is design excellence, but, as I discussed in Chapter 6, the criteria by which this is judged will likely be quite different from our conventional notions of good design. Designers will be challenged to balance and integrate, in thoughtful and creative ways, the various, often conflicting issues of sustainability. We must learn to use less and to use what is available, rather than always creating specific, new components and materials that require more energy and resources, and thus have a greater detrimental impact. Design which achieves all this will probably be quite different from our current notions of good design – so to judge it by outdated criteria would be to do a disservice to the integrity of the design intent. Contemporary aesthetic norms are based in capital-intensive, highly automated, unsustainable procedures. These procedures tend to reduce the potential for fulfilling employment and often ignore social and environmental losses. We can deduce, therefore, that products produced within a more sustainable paradigm will be aesthetically quite different from those which we have come to regard as meritorious. An aspect of the transition towards sustainable product design, therefore, will be to explore new aesthetic possibilities which are true to, and expressive of, new sensibilities.

There is no one correct way and no right solution – approaches and directions will always change as time progresses, as generations change and as tastes evolve. This is not necessarily a bad thing – it allows us to hone our approaches, to stay on our toes and to keep things fresh, vital and joyful – which is what fashion is surely all about.