# 12 TIME AND DESIGN crushed before the moth¹

Sustainable development implies a kind of development that can continue over a prolonged period. Hence, time is an essential ingredient of our notion of sustainable development. In this chapter, I would like to consider our understandings of time and their relationship to sustainable product design.

Products are by their very materiality transient; their usefulness is, unavoidably, a function of time. They become obsolete for a variety of reasons, all of which help fix a product in a specific time frame, which is usually a relatively short period ranging from just a few minutes to perhaps a few decades (see Table 12.1). Products appear on the market, are used for a while and pass into history. And, while products have always come and gone, the last 50 years or so have witnessed a burgeoning in the rates of product-related waste – many so called 'consumer durables' have irresponsibly brief life spans, and product production has expanded enormously.² As I discussed in previous chapters, these developmentş have coincided with changes in societal values and beliefs. The past half-century, with the ascendancy of Postmodern thinking, has seen a falling away of traditional values

and notions of truth, and the emergence of an increasingly relativistic outlook.³ Older beliefs and certainties have become less secure, and a culture with areater doubt has developed.4 Concurrently, education and work patterns have changed, with significant social etfects. People have moved out of their communities to find work or to attend postsecondary education. Long-established continuities have become fractured and society has become more atomistic and individualistic.⁵ These social and cultural transformations reflect changes in our understandinas – changes that are intimately related to our notions ot time and our attitudes to material culture. A reflection on how we think about time can be useful in revealing how we conceive and create our material world, and can lead to other ways of considering the desian of functional objects. Here, I would like to consider two quite different conceptions of time, namely secular time and sacred time. A distinguishing feature of these two understandings is how we regard the present. In secular time, the present is but a fleeting moment; in sacred time, it is eternally now.

Table 12.1 Factors contributing to product obsolescence
<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Disposability</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Products are explicitly designed to be short-lived and disposablefor a variety of reasons – including financial, hygiene, safety etc.Examples include razor blades; packaging; paper cups, plates andcutlery; and medical supplies such as syringes, scalpel blades etc</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Products wear out; this can be for a variety of reasons such astechnological, for example disposable batteries. However, the life ofa product is often prematurely curtailed because components areof poor quality and they are easily broken. Examples might includeinexpensive music equipment, children&#x27;s toys and low-qualityappliances</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Non-repalrablo</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Many mass-produced products are designed in ways that makethem difficult or not cost-effective to repair - inexpensive electricaland electronic products such as power tools and personal stereosare often less expensive to replace than to repair</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Functionalobsolescence</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>The function for which a product is intended is no longer requiredand the product has become redundant. For example, in somecountries the number of people who smoke tobacco has reducedsignificantly in recent years – and so the requirement for tobacco-related paraphernalia has also been reduced – ashtrays for homes,restaurants and cars, cigarette cases, cigarette holders etc</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Technologicalobsolescence</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Technology is always developing and therefore old technologies areconstantly being superseded – for examples phonograph cylinderswere replaced by records which in turn were replaced by compactdiscs</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Aestheticobsolescence</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>A product&#x27;s appearance becomes outmoded and. even thoughthe product might still function perfectly well, it may be replacedbecause its outer appearance is no longer new and perfect, orbecause its &#x27;look&#x27; is no longer fashionable</td></tr></table>

Generally, we regard time today in terms of secular time – the time of duration; time that passes; the time of clocks, schedules and agendas. It is chronological, linear and unidirectional. We can imagine it as a line drawn from the dark mysteries of the past, progressing forward into the vast potentials of the future. On this timeline we place periods and incidents that we consider important - geological epochs, eras and episodes in human history and significant events. With clocks and calendars and timelines we categorize and order our lives, our thoughts and our knowledge. In this concept of time, the past is seen as something that is over and often of little consequence to everyday life or contemporary business.6 Henry Ford summed up this view with his famous dictum, 'history is more or less bunk'.7 But in secular time the present is also of little importance; it becomes reduced to a momentary occurrence – it has no duration, it is simply the ever-reducible instant between that which is over and that which is yet to come. And so we see that with exclusively secular, sequential notions of time, the past becomes largely irrelevant and the present is condensed to a brief moment. It is hardly surprising, then, that our society tends to place great emphasis on the future. We plan for the future and forecast future trends, we set our sights on achieving next year's performance targets, and developing the next generation of technologies. We hanker after the latest models and the most up-to-date fashions, we strive to be on the leading edge, and we fear being left behind. We can buy next year's model today, we can buy now and pay later – the future is here, as the advertisements so often tell us.

This view of time and our focus on the future are perhaps inevitable developments of the Modern Age. Over the course of the last 100 years, western societies have undergone vast expansions in industrialization and capitalist economics – expansions based on the idea of continuous growth. These changes have spurred developments in technology, promoted 'the new' and 'the latest', and escalated the production of increasingly short-lived products. In fact, they have helped promote all the criteria of product transience I have identified in Table 12.1. This system has created enormous advances, variety and benefits, but has also led to unparalleled rates of resource depletion and waste production, and significant social disparities. These are all logical

outcomes of our contemporary market system – and our notion of time is inextricably caught up in these developments.

Industrial design was born of this milieu. From its earliest days it was a discipline strongly connected to advertising and marketing⁸ and its first practitioners were hired to give new looks to products to stimulate consumer interest.º In fact, the major contribution of industrial design has always been to define the outer appearance of products. While the inner workings, based on developing technologies, do change over time, outer casings can be defined more subjectively and can be updated much more rapidly, making the previous model seem oldfashioned and less dęsirable.1º And so, while products are discarded for a variety of reasons, it is the industrial designer who, often intentionally, creates aesthetic obsolescence.

The aesthetics of a product can be very powerful because they are a key factor in creating an emotional tie with the object. Aesthetics can help transform a product from an uninteresting and unusable collection of functional components into a useful and attractive object that provides a meaningful benefit to people's lives. Unfortunately, in our contemporary market system, product aesthetics are often reduced to the superficial styling of an outer casing that gives the impression of newness and progress, even though the hidden, functional parts remain unchanged. We see these ever-shifting stylings in most consumer products; they do little to improve the usefulness or quality of our material culture, but they do stimulate consumerism.

Rapid changes in product appearance, intimately connected as they are to our production and economic systems, are a function of how we conceive our world; they reflect our ideas of progress, our values and our understandings of time. They tend to support the contention that our thoughts, and indeed our lives, are focused on the future and the next thing, and that we have reduced the present to a fleeting moment. But there is another way of understanding time, another way of conceiving past, present and future. Before our modern, secular, chronological time, there was a quite different perspective.

In a world dominated by chronological time, the word 'eternal' is generally taken to mean a very, very long time, but this is a misconception. Eternity is beyond time.' Eternity encompasses all time. It embraces the past, the present and the future. Eternity does not progress or have duration, it simply is. Eternity means the eternal now.

Wisdom teachings from many cultures have taught us to live in this idea of the 'now', the present moment, rather than dwelling on the past or worrying about the future. According to these teachings, it is only this present, enduring ‘now' that is real and where we find meaning and fulfilment. 'Now' does not exist in time.

When chronological time comes together with the eternal now, a different understanding of time results, that of sacred time.1² Sacred time is the cycle of time. It is characterized by the cycle of birth, growth, death and renewal. It is the unchanging cycle represented by the seasons of the year and the monastic day. It is the basis of all sacred calendars and it has been recognized in most cultures and traditions throughout the world.13 It is this conception of time that is important for our understanding of sustainable design.

In contrast to the linear progression of chronological, secular time, sacred time presents us with a circular view of time, with repetitions and recurrences; it can be regarded as an endless repetition of eternities.14 Sacred time acknowledges both the physical and the metaphysical, the body and the soul. Physical existence in chronological time is balanced with metaphysical or spiritual awareness that, in many traditions, has meaning and significance beyond time. The philosopher Jacob Needleman has explained that we can only understand the meaning of our lives by attempting to reconcile these two realities, what Kirkegaard expressed as the finite and the infinite, the temporal and the eternal.15

The essential point for the purpose of this discussion is that the secular, chronological aspects of life, which are so dominant in contemporary society, are utilitarian and find expression in the language of utility, whereas the sacred is expressed in terms of poetry and symbolism.16 Consequently, if we wish to create a more meaningful and a more enduring material culture, one that not only mitigates the detrimental effects of our current methods, but is also a more complete articulation of human values, then traditional understandings of sacred time and the symbolic expressions that emerge from these understandings can provide us with clues of how we might proceed. A few examples of sacred symbolism will help to illustrate how these forms of expression weave together the physical world with spiritual understandings.

There is much symbolism in the design of a traditional Christian church. The entrance, generally found in the west side, symbolizes that a person is leaving the secular world and entering the sacred. Close to the

entrance is the font, the place of baptism, representing the beginning of one's spiritual journey, which leads to the east. The journey to the east, the journey of one's life, leads to the altar, which is located in a physically and (symbolically) spiritually higher place at the east end of the church and represents the gateway to God.17

Medieval maps employ similar symbolism. The 13th century world map known as the Mappa Mundi, in Hereford, England, is a good example.18 On this map, a line drawn in an easterly direction from the spiritual centre of the earth, represented by Jerusalem, leads to the Garden of Eden, beyond which lies God (i.e. east of Eden). Like the symbolism in a churçh, the journey to the east is, again, the journey towards spiritual truth. Unlike modern maps, which represent physical space at a particular moment, the Mappa Mundi represents both space and time.1º It depicts the world in all time, from creation to the end of days.2º It is a map that acknowledges both the physical and the spiritual, the secular and the sacred.

These dualities of the human condition are also evident in the Yin-Yang of eastern thought, and in the battlefield dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna in the Indian sacred text, the Bhagavad Gita.²1 And, in the book of Job, a line of which provides the title of this chapter, the moth symbolizes the passage of time.22

These brief examples offer a glimpse of the symbolism inherent to the world's sacred traditions. So why, we may well ask, is symbolism used in these traditions, and why is it relevant to our understandings of sustainable development? Symbolism is so prevalent in the religious and wisdom literature of the world because our apprehension of the eternal and the sacred defy direct description or depiction; instead, we can only inadequately allude to them. Today, living as we do in a more secular age, many of these symbolic meanings are lost on us and are of little generat interest. Despite this, there remain traces of the sacred in our culture, and there are new expressions of the sacred and the metaphysical constantly being developed by contemporary thinkers and artists. This is inevitable because, even in an age that tends to reject formal religion, we still seek meaning in our lives and struggle with the same dualities that have preoccupied humankind for millennia. No matter how much we may have desacralized our culture, we never entirely eliminate religious-type behaviours. For example, we still give special significance, or what might be seen as quasi-religious status, to certain places and events — the place of our birth or particular locations from our childhood.23 Visser has explained that the dining table represents a 'sacred' area in a house. It is a place where certain types of behaviour are expected and deemed appropriate. It is a place where cleanliness is very important and a place that must not be defiled. In the process of being laid for dinner, the dining table becomes ritually set apart; and the most formal dining table is one set with a white linen tablecloth, on to which the spotless cutlery and dishes are laid;24 the white tablecloth defines a pure, inviolable ‘sacred' space.

We see this idea of ritual separation, of setting thīngs apart, in other contexts. The white wall of the gallery or museum is an unblemished area on which works of art are exhibited. The white gallery plinth, used to display sculptures, has a similar role. It designates a space that is set apart for an object deemed worthy of respect because of its beauty or its artistic contribution. Major exhibitions at the world's foremost galleries and museums acquire almost semi-religious status, drawing large crowds to view the works of art and to pay homage to the artists.

In recent times many artists have attempted to express ideas of the sacred, but in less traditional, often abstract forms. Kasimir Malevich was an early proponent of non-representational expressions of the metaphysical; his austere compositions, of which Black Square of 1913 is perhaps the best known, were intended to counteract more utilitarian forms of art that were representational. For Malevich, art transcended everyday life. The canvas represented sacred space, a space set apart,25 and he regarded white as a mystic colour representing inner space. It has been suggested that his White on White painting of c.1918 was meant to convey something akin to enlightenmenf or a state of nirvana.26 Similarly, Ben Nicholson seems to have been attempting to express metaphysical qualities in his White Relief paintings of the 1930s,²7 and the American abstract expressionist, Mark Rothko, was striving to create works that were symbolic of the eternal and the spiritual without being either denominational or representational.28

Today, when the grand narratives of western culture are considered by some as no longer credible, many Postmodern artists have ostensibly chosen to reject profundity and meaning in favour of surface, superficiality and distraction. Nevertheless, when it comes to exhibiting their work, many of these same artists still seek to separate their creations from the everyday, secular world – and they rely on

convention to create this 'quasi-sacred' distinction. Damien Hirst encases his suspended carcasses in pristine, white-bordered tanks, and Gavin Turk's works are presented in glass cabinets on white plinths or in white-bordered frames.²9 Also, despite the alleged rejection ot traditional artistic concerns that sought meaning and depth, the struggle to convey ideas about the sacred remains a constant theme up to the present day. Chris Olifi's controversial painting The Holy Virgin Mary, 1996, which features balls of dung and shapes cut from pornographic photographs,3º and Hirst’s 2003 exhibition Romance in the Age of Uncertainty, which represented Jesus, the disciples and various martyrs in the form of filled glass cabinets and the encased heads of cows,³ are but two examples.

This brief overview of two quite different ways of understanding time illustrates how the 'sacred' employs symbolic modes of expression to convey something of our higher or spiritual apprehensions. By contrast, the ‘secular', concerned as it is with those things that are worldly and prosaic, is expressed through the utilitarian. If our endeavours are to be more meaningful and enduring, both these facets of human understanding have to be acknowledged. However, over the past century it is clear that in the field of product design and manufacturing the overwhelming emphasis has been on the utilitarian priorities of business expansion and economic growth. This lack of balance has resulted in the unprecedented levels of production and has contributed to our contemporary experiences of environmental and sociocultural degradation.

All physical artefacts will sooner or later decay and be discarded, but their meaning nd value can remain relevant by ensuring that they are founded on more holistic approaches that somehow bring together the utilitarian with the poetic and the symbolic. Of course, one could argue that this is precisely what industrial designers have always endeavoured to do – to combine utility with aesthetic sensitivity. But, it can also be argued that in contemporary product design, aesthetics, symbolism and poetry are merely exploited to meet the functional and commercial priorities of business. The purity of the aesthetic is cheapened, becoming a seductive and ultimately tawdry façade that belies, on the one hand, the scientific genius and technological brilliance of the modern product and, on the other, the ugly and damaging world of human exploitation and environmental violation that frequently accompanies its production.

The wonder of our modern world is not that we can purchase a music system in hi-tech style, retro style or wood veneer but that we can purchase such an extraordinary thing as a music system at all. Choices of styles are not only trivial compared to the marvel of the product itself, they also detract and distract one from the beauty, ingenuity and sheer inventiveness (and also from the true costs) of manufactured products. This devaluing of our material world is only too evident today. The eye that has seen too much becomes the tired, bored and inattentive Postmodern eye, the cynical, discontented eye that takes momentary interest in the idea of being able to own a powerful, multimedia computer in strawberry, blueberry or lime, but fails to see the wonder in being able to own a computer. This state of affairs would seem to call for a fundamental reassessment of product design. It suggests a direction forward that would seek to re-enchant the world of our material productions – rather than continuing to offer irrelevant choice to a distracted eye that is already saturated with excess. At the same time, it suggests a direction that would responsibly acknowledge the costs of our endeavours and the transient nature of many of our solutions. And it seems that an appreciation of 'sacred time' and ‘sacred space', terms that encapsulate the mystery and wonder of life, the poetic and the spiritual, and so many things that are omitted from our efficient, rationalized, business world, would be the way to do this – a way of counterbalancing and enriching our industrial, economic and utilitarian prowess.

However, while efforts can be made to pursue such a direction, any attempt to fully integrate the sacred with the secular might be misplaced. Eliade has explained that there exists an unbreachable barrier between the sacred and the profane, describing the division as an abyss; and Malevich held that the scientific, technological and utilitarian were totally different from, and irreconcilable with, artistic endeavour. Whether these two expressions of human experience are quite so divided and incompatible is, of course, a matter of debate. Nevertheless, our modern attempts to combine them within the design of manufactured products would suggest that an effective integration remains problematic. The many environmental and socio-cultural consequences of our production activities make this only too clear.

In order to take the ideas discussed here as a point of departure for the development of products, it will be useful to reiterate some of the main points:

Secular time is chronological and temporal, it is congruent with particular understandings of progress, it emphasizes the future, and its expressions are utilitarian.

Sacred time concerns the eternal, recurrences and the present, and its modes of expression are symbolic.

Traces of the sacred are never completely eliminated even in ostensibly secular settings.

In western societies, white is a common convention used to indicate a sacred or quasi-sacred space – a space set apart.

The integration of sacred, artistic and poetic expressions with the secular, utilitarian and temporal appears to be problematic.

It is now necessary to illustrate how these considerations can affect our approaches to the design of functional objects. I have made some attempts to do this, and the resulting propositional designs are presented in the next chapter, together with further thoughts that inform the design process.