# 15 INTELLECTUAL AND AESTHETIC JNDERSTANDINGS OF DESIGN the considered gaze

Theory and practice, two quite different but intimately related aspects of design, will be explored in this chapter to provide a more complete basis for the design and critique of sustainable products. I will describe the relationship between theory and practice and, more particularly, the relationship between an intellectual understanding of ethics and the aesthetics of sustainable objects. To demonstrate this relationship, I consider the aesthetic qualities of one particular design, the digital clock introduced in Chapter 14 (Figure 14.7).

This chapter is intended to move the discussion from the broad overview of sustainable product design, which began the book, and the general design principles and design process of later chapters, to the specific details of one particular object and their relationship to sustainable design. This is necessary because an essential aspect of the designer's work is the aesthetic definition of an object; and aesthetics are dependent upon specifics.

Theoretical inquiry is concerned with the development of a system of ideas to explain something. It is ´based on general principles independent of the specific thing to be explained’ and is progressed through intellectual activity, that is, through reasoning and objective understanding. Design practice and aesthetic definition, on the other hand, require attention to specifics within the holistic development of a particular product, and not ‘general principles independent of the thing to be explained’. Critique is an integral part of this designing process, and is also applied to the final object.

The intellectual and aesthetic issues of design, and their relationship, provide the basis for creating, understanding and critiquing products. In terms of sustainability, the relationship between theory and practice is such that the ethical and environmental imperatives of the sustainable rationale can inform the design process and affect the intrinsic properties of the product. In turn, this will affect one's aesthetic experience of the product and suggest a basis for sustainable aesthetics I will discuss and illustrate these issues in terms of both the designer's intentions and creative aesthetic sensibility, and the user's a priori knowledge and the aesthetic experience.

When we set out to design a functional object, a clear understanding of intentions and a set of design criteria have to be established. The object will have to function effectively, it must be designed for a particular market and manufactured at a certain cost, and it must be safe, comprehensible and attractive to the intended user. These factors are established before the design work begins and so they represent a set of ideas about the object that are extrinsic to any particular design outcome. In this sense, the design intentions and criteria are based on general ideas and principles and, as such, they are theoretical or abstract, they do not have physical or concrete existence. They include a broad set of assumptions, knowledge and information about the context of production, the types of materials, forms and assembly techniques suited to modern mass production and knowledge about similar products already on the market. These theoretical ideas, intentions and criteria help define an object in terms of its extrinsic properties. It then becomes the responsibility of the designer, during the design process, to create concepts that bring together and attend to these factors, and this eventually results in a specific design. Hence, while intentions and design criteria are determined prior to, and independent of, the activity of designing, they find their resolution in the final design outcome. They are critical to the designer's decision making, and influence the way the final design is established, understood and judged.

Designing involves satisfying intentions and criteria in an holistic manner - and this is usually achieved by generating various design concepts. These will be developed to meet most or all the criteria and some will be judged better than others. This creative process, however, is concerned not with intellectual pursuits but with aesthetic discernment. The aesthetic sensibility requires attention to the precise properties of a particular design concept. It calis for sensational acuity, emotional spontaneity, attentiveness and contemplation, an holistic appreciation and, during the process of designing, a setting aside of the intellectual self.² It is in the practical process of designing the specific content and intrinsic properties of an object are made manifest: intrinsic properties being the base properties fixed within an object which constitute its essential nature.3

Thus, the design of a functional object involves theory and practice and, while each represents a different mode of thinking and a quite distinct way of engaging with the world, they are, nevertheless, intimately connected. Some of the extrinsic properties of an object will be strongly related to its intrinsic properties and, because of this, the extrinsic properties can have a bearing on one's aesthetic experience of the object. As Eaton has made clear, information about intentions is an integral part of our experience of artefacts, and intellectual information about an object can be aesthetically relevant if it draws attention to those intrinsic properties that are relevant to the aesthetic experience.4 An example here may be useful. The musical composition The Freeman Etudes by John Cage is a difficult work to listen to – being a series of unrelated, independent, randomly generated events for violin.⁵ However, knowing something of the composer's oeuvre, his intentions and the method he adopted to compose the piece, enables the listener to understand the work and appreciate the serious intent behind its form, which, in turn, can inform and enhance one's aesthetic experience. With this clarification of the theoretical and practice-based aspects of design, and the relationship between the two, we can move on to consider the link between ethics, aesthetics and sustainable design.

Design can be understood in terms of the added value it brings to manufacturers and consumers and the role it plays in the market system of supply and demand. However, this economic evaluation provides only a limited grasp of the meaning of functional objects. It does not

account for those desires, needs and consumer preferences that cannot be expressed in economic terms. Similarly, our aesthetic appreciation of an object cannot be reduced to quantitative criteria, but is based on an holistic contemplation of the intrinsic properties of the object and is informed by a host of other information, knowledge and values we bring to the experience of an artefact, which Wollheim has called our 'cognitive stock'.7 The aesthetic experience of an object is not simply an experience of sensuous pleasure but is, in part, a reasoned response that draws upon, or refers to, values; as Scruton has suggested, the products of design must be desirable and not just desired.8

Product designers have extensive knowledge of the manufacturing sector and the processes, materials and practices of design and production, so their cognitive stock in this particular area will be considerable. Reference to this cognitive stock may result in one concept being selected over another, perhaps because the manufacturing stage would be easier or less expensive, or because it takes advantage of a particular technology. Significantly, such decisions can affect those intrinsic properties that are relevant to the aesthetic experience. Furthermore, there will be some, perhaps many, aspects of the design and manufacturing system that raise ethical questions. For example, the designer may be aware of practices that he or she regards as morally questionable or morally exemplary. Here again, this will be part of the background information that is brought to the design process. In other words, knowledge of the ethical aspects of product design and production, and how these affect the designer's decisions, can be linked to the aesthetic definition of the artefact.

Today, sustainability raises many issues that, in previous times, may have gone unnoticed. As I have discussed earlier, there are questions about ethical work practices, economic inequities, environmentally damaging practices and the expanding numbers of short-lived products that are unrepairable and non-recyclable. Designers who are concerned and knowledgeable about these issues will have this information as part of their cognitive stock and, as such, it can affect their design decisions. Thus, sustainable intentions can lead to designs that reflect, through their intrinsic properties and aesthetic qualities, ethical and environmental considerations. This link between the intellectual arguments surrounding sustainability and the aesthetics of a product is central to our understanding of the sustainable object and the way it is created. In this regard, a barrier to the progress of sustainable product design is that conventional industrial design practice tends to constrain the intellectual understanding of what a product is or could be within extremely narrow limits, that is, those set by the assumptions, intentions and requirements of the predominant existing condition. With such a narrow intellectual basis, new and radically different conceptions of objects are often eliminated even before the design process begins. Sustainability demands a wider view of material culture and its possibilities, and a much broader intellectual base.

I mentioned above that the value of functional objects is usually considered in terms of their economic value to the manufacturer and the consumer, and the desires, preferences and needs of the consumer. However, there are other ways of thinking about and understanding objects and attributing value. It is possible to imagine a functional object that is not economically viable in normal market terms, that is not desirable in terms of the consumer's wish to possess it, and that is not needed in any practical sense, either personally or as a community ('community' here could refer to the wider community or, perhaps in the flrst instance, the design community). It is possible to imagine an object that performs a function, but which stands outside these conventional ways of ascribing value. While such an object may, in fact, be appreciated and valued by the community, this is not essential for it to be of value to the community. If it is true, as Eric Gill once asserted, that everyone is a special kind of artist, then the designer of products is also a special kind of artist, and as such is able to offer ‘something to the community which the community does not want to accept, which the community at first finds unpalatable’.9

While this way of thinking about functional objects may seem rather paradoxical, we must recognize that significant progress in tackling sustainability requires a considerable change in assumptions, understandings of functional ġoods, and approaches to product manufacture. It becomes incumbent upon designers and design academics to offer to the community renditions of functional objects that are not economic, demanded, needed, desired or even appreciated and valued, but which nevertheless are of value and worth offering, at least from the designer's perspective or in terms of the thesis being explored. If the approach is based on a substantive cognitive stock, if the arguments are sound and the aesthetic sensibility is well developed, then the designer can justifiably hold the view that the work is of value, even if this is not acknowledged by the present community. Indeed, the history of art and design bears this out. The works of artists trom Van Gogh to Duchamp have frequently been rejected or dismissed by the community that pays attention to art – including academics, critics, curators and commentators. Similarly, there are many examples of functional objects that have not been recognized as design by the design community. Many artefacts traditionally designed and made by women, such as quilts, needlework and knitted garments, have not been acknowledged in the histories of art and design, nor have they featured in university design courses or been exhibited in museums and galleries. Happily, in recent years this has begun to change, with dedicated books and exhibitions. For example, Amish Art of Quilt by Hughes and Silber (1994)1º and, more recently, the Knit 2 Together: Concepts and Knitting exhibition at The Crafts Council, London (2005).

There are, of course, inherent risks in taking such an approach and some caution is needed. It is all too easy for designers to become enamoured with their own creative work and to regard it favourably and uncritically. While this must always be borne in mind, it should not prevent them from attempting to challenge the established conventions of design and production, to cast the net wider and explore alternatives that address sustainable issues, and in so doing develop designs that illustrate a different direction. In fact, the very process of doing this, and publishing and exhibiting the resulting work, can be a positive step in creating change; as Orwell once wrote, 'The consequences of every act are included in the act itself.’12 Indeed, there are many designers who have already done this.13,14 Through this process, experimental or polemical designs start to become part of the common cognitive stock about the nature and potential of functional objects and, as such, they begin to affect one's understanding and aesthetic experience.

In the next part of this discussion I would like to illustrate the relationship between theory and practice in the context of sustainability. To do'so, I will describe the intentions and outcome of a design exercise from firsthand knowledge. The primary aim of this exercise was to use a simple functional requirement as a starting point for exploring the design of sustainable objects; the actual function was not so important; in this case, it was to display time in a digital format. This is a relatively simple function and therefore useful for exploring ideas about the nature

of utilitarian objects. I felt that the exercise would benefit from such simplicity because the ideas about objects that were being explored would not be overly constrained or become confused by having to deal with more complex functional requirements. An additional consideration was that a digital display of some form is used in many small electronic products and so, potentially, the exercise could have wider implications. Focusing on sustainable concerns, the main design criteria were developed as follows:

The design should make minimal, if any, use of new resources, and cause minimal detriment to the environment.

It should make use of readily available materials and components; these could include materials or components distinctive to a locality, locally available mass-produced components for general usage, and mass-produced elements from former applications.

Constituent parts should be modified as little as possible so that any future reuse is not compromised by their inclusion in this design.

It should be capable of being economically made, maintained, repaired, upgraded and 're-dispersed' or decommissioned, at the local level. This reduces the need for shipping and packaging and provides opportunities either for local employment or for users to create the object themselves, thereby offering the possibility for greater ’ownership' of their material environment.

The overall notion, which I described in Chapter 14, was to see this design as a temporary concentration of components lhat would enable a functional benefit for a finite period. As with any design exercise, aesthetic value was to be derived from decisions made during the designing process, especially the specific selection of components, with attention to their intrinsic properties and their relationships within the composition. The final design is shown in Figure 14.7.

We can now consider the relationship between intentions and the way these intentions have been manifested. This will provide a basis for judging the merits of the design. To do this we must look at the artefact in a considered manner. It is through this process of looking that we can contemplate the design in relation to the intentions, as well as the aesthetic qualities of the artefact and the potential attributes or

weaknesses of its composition. We will then be in a position to recognize how the intentions and the outcome are related and, more importantly, how knowledge of this relationship affects the aesthetic experience.

The design can be viewed from a number of perspectives, all of which allow us to become aware of its aesthetic qualities and enable it to be understood or interpreted. Here, a systematic approach, a modified version of a proposition by Koren⁵ will be used to look at the design from twelve different points of view, each of which allows a different aspect to be brought to the fore. This'considered looking’ enables the viewer to thoroughly see the design and reflect upon it. This will be followed by a discussion of the overall aesthetic experience and how this can be affected by the intellectual aspects of the project.

Koren's proposition for looking at object arrangements, which he has called ’a rhetoric of object placement’, is derived from the application of rhetoric in other spheres. This provisional proposal for use with nonutilitarian arrangements is expanded here to include factors relevant to a functional composition.

Koren offers eight rhetorical elements under three major headings. Thus, physicality, the first impression of the physical arrangement, is subdivided into (1) hierarchy – the relative visual importance of the various elements, including the ground and background, (2) alignment – the relative position of the various elements, described by terms such as symmetrical, linear, parallel etc., and (3) sensoriality – the visual qualities of the components, including colour, texture and shape.16

The second general category, abstraction, relates to associations that the arrangement brings to mind. It is subdivided into (4) metaphor, which refers to symbolism beyond the arrangement itself, such as allusion and simile; (5) mystification – which includes paradoxes and ambiguities within the arrangement; and (6) narrative – the story the composition is understood to tell, or a description.17

The third general category is integration, the way in which the various elements contribute to the collective arrangement. It is subdivided into (7) coherence – the clarity or effectiveness of the composition in terms of what it is visually communicating, described by terms such as theme, rationality or logic, and homogeneity, and (8) resonance – the composition's ability to maintain visual interest and stimulate thoughts and feelings.18

Additional elements, not included in Koren's proposal, become important when considering functional arrangements. Hence, to Koren's three major subdivisions can be added a fourth, that of utility, under which we can include, at least provisionally, four more elements. These are: (9) purpose – the composition's intended or interpreted function and how this function is understood – it can be described as plainly identifiable, confusing, unclear or unknown; (10) connectivity – the manner in which the various primary objects are connected together to enable a given function. Connectivity can be achieved through object placement, by including additional elements in the composition, or it may be hidden. Connectivity and its relationship to purpose can be described as visually clear, implicit, puzzling, imperceptible etc.; (1 1) usability or the semiotics of use — the indications of how the object is to be used or operated. It might be described as intuitive, counter-intuitive, obvious, incomprehensible, ambiguous, etc.; (12) functional modality – the manner in which the function of the object occurs or is expressed. This is quite different from the function itself and how the function is understood. Functional modality can be described by terms such as pragmatic, logical, essential, fanciful, elaborate or sentimental.

This modified version of Koren's ´rhetoric', for use with a functional object arrangement, is summarized in Table 15.1. It will now be applied to the digital clock example.

Table 15.1 A rhetoric of functional object arrangement: A modified version of Koren's 'Rhetoric of Object Placement'
<table><tr><td rowspan="3">Physicality</td><td>1. Hierarchy</td></tr><tr><td>2. Alignment</td></tr><tr><td>3. Sensoriality</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Abstraction</td><td>4. Metaphor</td></tr><tr><td>5. Mystification</td></tr><tr><td>6. Narrative</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Integration</td><td>7. Coherence</td></tr><tr><td>8. Resonance</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Utility</td><td>9. Purpose</td></tr><tr><td>10. Connectivity</td></tr><tr><td>11. Usability</td></tr><tr><td>12. Functional modality</td></tr></table>