# BIBLIOGRAPHY Althusser, Louis (1992), L'avenir dure longtemps, Paris: Stock. Arendt, Hannah (1963), Eichmann in Jerusalem: A report on the banality of evil, New York: Viking Press. Augé, Marc (1975), Théorie des pouvoirs et idéologie, Paris: Hermann. Augé, Marc (1986), Un ethnologue dans le métro, Paris: Hachette. Authier, Michel (1989), ‘Archimède, le canon du savant', in Éléments d'histoire des sciences, ed. Michel Serres, pp. 101-28, Paris: Bordas. Bachelard, Gaston (1967), La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, Paris: Vrin. Barnes, Barry (1974), Scientific Knowledge and Sociological Theory, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Barnes, Barry and Steven Shapin, eds. (1979), Natural Order: Historical studies in scientific culture, London: Sage. Barthes, Roland ([1970] 1982), The Empire of Signs, New York: Hill &Wang. Barthes, Roland ([1985] 1988), The Semiotic Challenge, New York: Hill & Wang. Bastide, Françoise (In press) Oeuvres de sémiotique des textes scientifiques, Forthcoming, 1994. Baudrillard, Jean (1992), L'illusion de la fin, la grève des événements, Paris: Galilée. Bensaude-Vincent, Bernadette (1989), 'Lavoisier: une révolution scientifique', in Éléments d’histoire des sciences, ed. Michel Serres, pp. 363–86, Paris: Bordas. Bijker, Wiebe E., Thomas P. Hughes and Trevor Pinch, eds. (1987), The Social Construction of Technological Systems: New directions in the sociology and history of technology, Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Bloor, David ([1976] 1991), Knowledge and Social Imagery (2nd edn. with a new foreword), Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Boltanski, Luc. (1990), L'amour et la justice comme compétences, Paris: A.-M. Métailié. Boltanski, Luc and Laurent Thévenot (1991), De la justification. Les économies de la grandeur, Paris: Gallimard. Bourdieu, Pierre and Loic Wacquant (1992), Réponses: Pour une anthropologie réflexive, Paris: Le Seuil. Bowker, Geoffrey and Bruno Latour (1987), 'A booming discipline short of discipline: social studies of science in France', Social Studies of Science, 17: 715-48. Braudel, Fernand (1985), The Perspective of the World: 15th to 18th century, New York: Harper & Row. Callon, Michel (1986), ‘Some elements of a sociology of translation: domestication of the scallops and the fishermen of St Brieux Bay', in Power, Action and Belief: A new sociology of Knowledge?, ed. John Law, pp. 196–229, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Callon, Michel, ed. (1989), La science et ses réseaux: Genèse et circulation des faits scientifiques, Paris: La Découverte. Callon, Michel (1992), ‘Techno-economic networks and irreversibility', in A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on power, technology and domination, ed. John Law, vol. 38, pp. 132–64. 38. London: Routledge Sociological Review Monograph. Callon, Michel and Bruno Latour (1981), 'Unscrewing the Big Leviathans: how do actors macrostructure reality?', in Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Toward an integration of micro and macro sociologies, ed. Karin Knorr and Aron Cicourel, pp. 277–303, London: Routledge. Callon, Michel and Bruno Latour (1992), 'Don't throw the baby out with the Bath school! A reply to Collins and Yearley', in Science as Practice and Culture, ed. Andy Pickering, pp. 343–68. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Callon, Michel, John Law and Arie Rip, eds. (1986), Mapping the Dynamics of Science and Technology, London: Macmillan. Cambrosio, Alberto, Camille Limoges and Denyse Pronovost (1990), Representing biotechnology: an ethnography of Quebec science policy', Social Studies of Science 20: 195-227. Canguilhem, Georges ([1968] 1988), Ideology and Rationality in the History of the Life Sciences, transl. A. Goldhammer, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chandler, Alfred D. (1977) The Visible Hand: The managerial revolution in American business, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Chandler, Alfred D. (1990), Scale and Scope: The dynamics of industrial capitalism, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Chateauraynaud, Francis (1990), Les affaires de faute professionnelle: Des figures de défaillance et des formes de jugement dans les situations de travail et devant les tribunaux, doctoral thesis, Paris: École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales. Clastres, Pierre (1974), La société contre l'Etat, Paris: Minuit. Cohen, I. Bernard (1985), Revolution in Science, Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press. Collins, Harry, M. (1985), Changing Order: Replication and induction in scientific practice, London and Los Angeles: Sage. Collins, Harry M. and Steven Yearley (1992), 'Epistemological chicken', in Science as Practice and Culture, ed. Andy Pickering, pp.301-26, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Collins, Harry M. and Trevor Pinch (1982), Frames of Meaning: The social construction of extraordinary science, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Conklin, Harold (1983), Ethnographic Atlas of the Ifugao: A study of environment, New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press. Copans, J. and J. Jamin (1978), Aux origines de l'anthropologie française, Paris: Le Sycomore. Cunningham, Andrew and Perry Williams, eds. (1992) The Laboratory Revolution in Medicine, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Cussins, Adrian (1992). 'Content, embodiment and objectivity: the theory of cognitive trails,'Mind, 104.404: 651–88. Dagognet, François (1989), Éloge de l'objet: Pour une philosophie de la marchandise, Paris: Vrin. Deleuze, Gilles (1968), Différence et répétition, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari ([1972] 1983), Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and schizophrenia, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Descola, Philippe ([1986] 1993), In the Society of Nature, Native Cosmology in Amazonia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Desrosières, Alain (1990), 'How to make things which hold together: social science, statistics and the state', in Discourses on Society, P. Wagner, B. Wittcocq and R. Whittley, eds., Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 195-218. Douglas, Mary (1983), Risk and Culture: An essay in the selection of technical and environmental dangers, Berkeley: University of California Press. Durkheim, Emile ([1915] 1965), The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, New York: Free Press. Durkheim, Emile and Marcel Mauss ([1903] 1967), Primitive Classifications, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Eco, Umberto (1979), The Role of the Reader: Explorations in the semiotics of texts, London: Hutchinson. Eisenstein, Elizabeth (1979), The Printing Press as an Agent of Change, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Ellul, Jacques (1967), Technological Society, New York: Random House. Fabian, Johannes (1983), Time and the other: How anthropology makes its object, New York: Columbia University Press. Favret-Saada, Jeanne (1980), Deadly Words: Witchcraft in the bocage, trans. Catherine Cullen, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Funkenstein, A. (1986), Theology and the Scientific Imagination from the Middle Ages, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Furet, François ([1978] 1981), Interpreting the French Revolution, transl. Elborg Forsher, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Garfinkel, Harry (1967), Studies in Ethnomethodology, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. Geertz, Clifford (1971), The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected essays, New York: Basic Books. Girard, René (1983), 'La danse de Salomé', in L’auto-organisation de la physique au politique, ed. Paul Dumouchel and Jean-Pierre Dupuy, pp. 336-52, Paris: Le Seuil. Girard, René ([1978] 1987), Things Hidden Since the Foundation of the World, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Girard, René (1989), The Scapegoat, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Goody, Jack (1977), The Domestication of the Savage Mind, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Goody, Jack (1986), The Logic of Writing and the Organization of Society, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Greimas, Algirdas Julien (1976), On Meaning: Selected writings in semiotic theory, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Greimas, A.J. and J. Courtès, eds. (1982), Semiotics and Language: An analytical dictionary, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Habermas, Jürgen ([1981] 1989), The Theory of Communicative Action, Boston, MA: Beacon Press. Habermas, Jürgen ([1985] 1987), The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity: Twelve lectures, transl. Frederick Lawrence, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Hacking, Ian (1983), Representing and Intervening, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Haraway, Donna (1989), Primate Visions: Gender, race and nature in the world, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Haraway, Donna (1991), Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The reinvention of nature, New York: Chapman & Hall. Haudricourt, A.G. (1962), 'Domestication des animaux, culture des plantes et traitement d'autrui', L'Homme 2: 40–50. Heidegger, Martin (1977a), 'Letter on Humanism', in Basic Writings, ed. David Farrell Krell, pp. 189–242, New York: Harper & Row. Heidegger, Martin (1977b), The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays, New York: Harper Torch Books. Hennion, Antoine (1991), 'La médiation musicale', doctoral thesis, Paris: École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales. Hobbes, Thomas ([1914] 1947), Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme and Power of a Commonwealth Ecclesiastical and Civil, London: J. M. Dent. Hollis, Martin and Stephen Lukes, eds. (1982), Rationality and Relativism, Oxford: Blackwell. Horton, Robin (1967), 'African traditional thought and Western science,' Africa 37: 50-71, 155-87. Horton, Robin (1982), 'Tradition and modernity revisited' in Rationality and Relativism, ed. Martin Hollis and Stephen Lukes, pp. 201–60, Oxford: Blackwell. Hughes, Thomas P. (1983), Networks of Power: Electric supply systems in the US., England and Germany, 1880-1930, Baltimore, MD.: Johns Hopkins University Press. Hull, David L. (1988), Science as a Process: An evolutionary account of the social and conceptual development of science, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hutcheon, Linda (1989), The Politics of Postmodernism, London: Routledge. Hutchins, Edward (1980), Culture and Inference. A Trobriand case study, Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press. Jameson, Frederic (1991), Postmodernism or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, New Brunswick: Duke University Press. Jonsen, Albert R. and Stephen Toulmin (1988), The Abuse of Casuistry. A history of moral reasoning, Berkeley: University of California Press. Kidder, Tracy (1981), The Soul of a New Machine, London: Allen Lane. Knorr, Karin (1981), The Manufacture of Knowledge: An essay on the constructivist and contextual nature of science, Oxford: Pergamon Press. Knorr-Cetina, Karin (1992) ‘The couch, the cathedral and the laboratory: on the relationships between experiment and laboratory in science', in Science as Practice and Culture, ed. Andrew Pickering, pp. 113-38, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Lagrange, Pierre (1990), ‘Enquête sur les soucoupes volantes', Terrain 14: 76–91. Latour, Bruno (1977), 'La répétition de Charles Péguy', in Péguy écrivain. Colloque du centenaire, ed. Centre Charles Péguy, pp.75-100, Paris: Klincksieck. Latour, Bruno (1983), 'Give me a laboratory and I will raise the world', in Science Observed, ed. Karin Knorr-Cetina and Michael Mulkay, Pp. 141-70, London: Sage. Latour, Bruno (1987), Science In Action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society, Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press. Latour, Bruno (1988a), Irreductions. Part II of The Pasteurization of France, Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press. Latour, Bruno (1988b), The Pasteurization of France, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Latour, Bruno (1988c), 'The prince for machines as well as for machinations', in Technology and Social Change, ed. Brian Elliott, pp. 20-43, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. Latour, Bruno, (1988d), 'A relativist account of Einstein's relativity', Social Studies ofScience 18: 3-44. Latour, Bruno (1990a), 'Drawing things together', in Representation in Scientific Practice, ed. Michael Lynch and Steve Woolgar, Pp. 19–68, Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Latour, Bruno (1990b), 'The force and reason of experiment', in Experimental Inquiries: Historical, philosophical and social studies of experimentation in science, ed. Homer Le Grand, pp.49–80, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Latour, Bruno (1992a), Aramis, ou l’amour des techniques, Paris: La Découverte. Latour, Bruno (1992b), 'One more turn after the social turn: easing science studies into the non-modern world', in The Social Dimensions of Science, ed. Ernan McMullin, pp. 272–92, Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press. Latour, Bruno and Jocelyn De Noblet, eds. (1985), Les "Vues" de l'esprit. Visualisation et Connaissance Scientifique, Paris: Culture Technique. Latour, Bruno and Steve Woolgar ([1979] 1986), Laboratory Life: The construction of scientific facts (2nd edn with a new postword), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Law, John (1986), 'On the methods of long-distance control vessels navigation and the Portuguese route to India', in Power, Action and Belief: A new sociology of knowledge?, ed. John Law, pp. 234–63, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Law, John, ed. (1992), A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on power, technology and domination, vol. 38, London: Routledge Sociological Review Monograph. Law, John and Gordon Fyfe, eds. (1988), Picturing Power: Visual depictions and social relations, London: Routledge. Lévi-Strauss, Claude ([1952] 1987), Race and History, Paris: UNESCO. Lévi-Strauss, Claude ([1962] 1966), The Savage Mind, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Lévy, Pierre (1990), Les technologies de l’intelligence: L'avenir de la pensée à l'ère informatique, Paris: La Découverte. Lynch, Michael and Steve Woolgar, eds. (1990), Representation in Scientific Practice, Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Lyotard, Jean-François (1979), The Postmodern Condition: A report on knowledge, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Lyotard, Jean-François (15 April 1988), 'Dialogue pour un temps de crise (interview collective)', Le Monde, p. xxxviii. MacKenzie Donald A. (1981), Statistics in Britain. 1865-1930, Edinburgh: The Edinburgh University Press. MacKenzie, Donald A. (1990), Inventing Accuracy: A historical sociology of nuclear missile guidance systems, Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Mauss, Marcel ([1923] 1967), The Gift: Forms and functions of exchange in archaic societies (with a foreword by E. Evans-Pritchard), New York: W.W. Norton. Mayer, Arno (1982), The Persistence of the Old Regime: Europe to the Great War, transl. Jonathan Mandelbaum, New York: Pantheon. Mayer, Arno (1988), Why Did the Heavens not Darken? The Final Solution' in History, New York: Pantheon. Moscovici, Serge (1977), Essai sur l'histoire humaine de la nature, Paris: Flammarion. Pavel, Thomas (1986), Fictional Worlds, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Pavel, Thomas (1989), The Feud of Language: A history of structuralist thought, New York: Blackwell. Péguy, Charles (1961a), 'Clio. Dialogue de l’histoire et de l'âme paienne', in Oeuvres en prose, pp. 93-309, Paris: Gallimard, Éditions de La Pléïade. Péguy, Charles (1961b), Oeuvres en Prose 1909-1914, Paris: Gallimard, Éditions de la Pléïade. Pickering, Andrew (1980), 'The role of interests in high-energy physics: the choice between charm and colour', Sociology of the Sciences 4: 107–38. Pickering, Andrew, ed. (1992), Science as Practice and Culture, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Pinch, Trevor (1986), Confronting Nature: The sociology of neutrino detection, Dordrecht: Reidel. Rogoff, Barbara and Jean Lave, eds (1984), Everyday Cognition: Its development in social context, Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press. Schaffer, Simon (1988), 'Astronomers mark time: discipline and the personal equation', Science In Context 2,1: 115-45. Schaffer, Simon (1991), 'A manufactory of OHMS: Victorian metrology and its instrumentation', in Invisible Connections, eds, S. Cozzes and R. Bud, pp. 25– 54, Bellingham Washington State: Spi Press. Serres, Michel (1974), La Traduction (Hermès III), Paris: Minuit. Serres, Michel (1987), Statues, Paris: François Bourin. Serres, Michel (1989), ‘Gnomon: les débuts de la géométrie en Grêce', in Éléments d’histoire des sciences, pp. 63–100, Paris: Bordas. Serres, Michel (1991), Le tiers instruit, Paris: Bourin. Serres, Michel and Bruno Latour (1992), Éclaircissements: Cinq entretiens avec Bruno Latour, Paris: Bourin. Shapin, Steven (1990), "The Mind is its own Place": Science and Solitude in seventeenth-century England', Science in Context, 4, 1: 191-218. Shapin, Steven (1992), History of science and its sociological reconstruction', History of Science 20: 157–211. Shapin, Steven (1984), Pump and circumstance: Robert Boyle's literary technology', Social Studies of Science 14: pp. 481–520. Shapin, Steven (1989), 'The invisible technician', American Scientist 77: 5S3–63. Shapin, Steven and Simon Schaffer (1985), Leviathan and the Air-Pump: Hobbes, Boyle and the experimental life, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Smith, Crosbie and Norton Wise (1989), Energy and Empire: A biographical study of Lord Kelvin, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Stengers, Isabelle (1983), États et processus, doctoral thesis, Brussels: Université Libre de Bruxelles. Stocking, G.W., (ed.). (1983), Observers Observed. Essays on ethnographic fieldwork, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Stocking, G.W., ed. (1986), Objects and Others: Essays on museums and material cultures, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Strum, Shirley and Bruno Latour (1987), 'The meanings of social: from baboons to humans', Information sur les Sciences Sociales/Social Science Information 26:783-802. Thévenot, Laurent (1989), ‘Équilibre et rationalité dans un univers complexe', Revue Économique 2: 147–97. Thévenot, Laurent (1990), 'L’action qui convient: Les formes de l’action', Raison pratique 1: 39–69. Tile, Mary (1984), Bachelard. Science and Objectivity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Traweek, Sharon (1988), Beam Times and Life Times: The world of high energy physicists, Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press. Trevor-Roper, Hugh (1983), 'The Highland tradition of Scotland', in The Invention of Tradition, ed. Eric Hobsbawm, pp. 15-41, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Tuzin, Donald F. (1980), The Voice of the Tambaran: Truth and illusion in the Iharita Arapesh religion, Berkeley: University of California Press. ## BIBLIOGRAPHY Vatimo, Gianni (1987), La fin de la modernité: Nihilisme et herméneutique dans la culture postmoderne, Paris: Le Seuil. Warwick, Andrew (1992), 'Cambridge mathematics and Cavendish physics: Cunningham Campbell and Einstein's relativity 1905-1911'. Part 1: The uses of theory', Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 23: 625–56. Weber, Max ([1920] 1958), The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (with an introduction by Antony Giddens), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. Wilson, Bryan R., ed. (1970), Rationality, Oxford: Blackwell. Woolgar, Steve (1988), Science: The very idea, London: Tavistock. Zimmerman, Michael E. (1990), Heidegger's Confrontation with Modernity: Technology, politics and art, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Zonabend, Françoise (1989), La presqu'île au nucléaire, Paris: Odile Jacob.