“to devote your time and efforts to technical problems on fire control and their application to radar."40

Getting now acquired the long-sought authority to delineate the role of the Radiation Lab. He formalized the Rad Lab's job of system integrator, which had previously been merely informal. Now the Rad Lab would

1. Make all technical information available to GE and the navy

2. Check and criticize designs at all stages of development

3. Send skilled representatives to participate in conferences

4. Report to the BuOrd on the progress of the project

5. Participate in testing of prototypes

6. Test preproduction models

7. Assist in establishing test and alignment procedures for manufacturing and acceptance tests

## 8. Assist in training programs

Engineering, production, testing, alignment, training: these activities comprised Getting's systems vision as much as time constants and signal spectra. To carry out these functions, the lab would have the following privileges:

1. To receive copies of correspondence between the navy and contractors

2. To receive copies of drawings and specifications prepared by contractors

3. To be notified when significant tests are carried out so representatives of the laboratory may participate

4. To be notified of technical conferences and conferences where technical decisions are to be made so that representatives of the laboratory may be present

5. To be given the opportunity to examine and criticize production designs or models before final design specifications are frozen

6. To have access to the establishments of the contractor and subcontractor by appointment, to confer with engineers, or to inspect equipment

7. To receive one of the first production models for test and study if directed by the navy⁴1

Correspondence, drawings, specifications, tests, conferences, inspections: these embodied the relations between institutions. Getting needed to control them as much as the signal flows between components.

These remarkable lists reflect the experience Getting had acquired in a few years of doing research and managing contracts for the NDRC.

Each point seems to correspond to a particular episode where he lacked necessary authority: being excluded from meetings, not receiving correspondence, not having access to factory facilities. Getting redefined control engineering as an organizational as well as a technical task, and he vehemently argued BuOrd by itself was not up to it. Rather, Getting argued, the Radiation Laboratory had the best overall view of automatic control.

Where Getting appropriated authority from contractors, designers, and manufacturers, he also appropriated the work of human operators. Unlike system integrators who organized and collated different types of data, Getting's operators functioned purely mechanically, like "human servomechanisms." In 1945, while fighting for his project's priority, Getting wrote to Admiral Furer, the navy's Coordinator of Research and Development, connecting his ideas for designing new integrated systems with the principle of “automatic operation." Getting argued wartime experience had demonstrated the value of automation:

1. Human judgment introduced wrong guesses.

2. Human operators succumbed to battle fever.

3. The human mind reacts slowly compared to modern servo equipment.

4. The intellectual processes were incapable of utilizing most efficiently all the observable data.42

Radar burdened rather than relieved the operator by radically increasing the amount of information he had to sort through. Radar brought such complexity to military control that it strained human attention to hold the system together. Getting's automation would rein in that human involvement—a strategy that resonated with plans for demobilization, when men left the services but the machines remained.

To make his point, Getting invoked the success of the army's automated antiaircraft fire control. The M-9/SCR-584 system he helped design had entered the field, and Getting used the authority he gained by its success to sharply criticize the Navy's lack of automation: “In short the navy is an order of magnitude behind the army in heavy antiaircraft fire control and radar." The solution, of course, was to grant highest priority to Getting's Mark 56, “a wholly integrated operational system." But to what experience did he refer? How did automatic control perform in combat? What had been the experience of the human operators, whose behavior Getting now used to make his claim for automation? The M-9/SCR-584 combination did see service in the war. What were its successes? Where were its limitations?

## AUTOMATIC CONTROL's FINEST HOUR

As Getting promoted and composed his new project, the first automated antiaircraft system, the Radiation Lab's SCR-584 combined with Bell Labs' M-9 gun director, made its way off the production line and onto the battlefield. It was first successful at the beachhead in Anzio, Italy, in March 1944, when two of the radars and sixteen directors systems were deployed on the beach to cover the landing force. Together the SCR-584 and the M-9, combined with Sperry power drives to move the 90mm guns, shot down enemy aircraft that had been harassing the stalled landings.⁴3

The M-9 still maintained the “constant altitude assumption" of the prewar Sperry directors. Rushed into production in 1942, it did not incorporate the latest results on predicting curved flight from work at BTL and MIT (being done by Norbert Wiener and others). The M-9 worked best, then, against attackers that flew straight and level—a tactic enemy bombers quickly learned to avoid. In June 1944, however, a new threat emerged from Nazi engineers, which perfectly matched the constant altitude assumption, exactly because it had no human operator. This threat itself relied on an automatic control system to fly, and hence was the perfect target for the automatic antiaircraft gun: the first operational robot bomb, the V-1.

Germany unleashed the “V-1 blitz" against London in mid-1944, and launched almost 7,500 “buzz bombs" against the English capital during the following eighty days. In the words of the British commander of the Antiaircraft Command, “It seemed to us that the obvious answer to the robot target of the flying bomb .. . was a robot defense."44Here the M-9/SCR-584 combination, to paraphrase Churchill, saw its finest hour. In anticipation of the V-1 blitz, and in response to a special request by Churchill, Radiation Lab engineers rushed systems out of production, onto ships and accompanied them to England. Members from the original SCR-584 design group (Davenport, Abajian, and Harris) and other Rad Lab staff members traveled along the English coast from battery to battery, aligning equipment, training crews, and tuning the radars—conveying tacit laboratory knowledge to crews in the field.4⁵

One other technology completed the system: the proximity fuze, developed by Merle Tuve's Division T before their own foray into fire control. The proximity fuze (known as VT or variable-time fuze) placed a miniature radar in each shell which sensed when it neared the target airplane and set off the explosion.46Until then, antiaircraft, with all its feedbacks and controls, remained an open-loop system once the shell left the gun. The proximity fuze closed the loop—making each shell a one-dimensional guided missile, capable of reacting to its environment.

Buzz bombs posed no easy targets. Smaller than a typical airplane, they flew faster than bombers of the day (380 mph), and at low altitudes, averaging about 2,000 feet (indeed fast and low would become the classic radar-evading strategy). And they proved remarkably robust to shellfire, sometimes taking several hits before falling. Still, between 18 June and 17 July 1944, the automated guns shot down 343 V-1's, or 10 percent of the total attack, and 22 percent of those shot down (the others were hit by aircraft, barrage balloons, and ships). During this period the AA batteries were deployed in a ring south of London; and their ability to fire was limited to avoid hitting fighters that also pursued the buzz bombs. The guns could fire only on positive identification of the target and if no fighter were in pursuit, giving aircraft the first chance to shoot down the missiles. In mid-July, the AA batteries moved to the coast, where they could fire without limit over the channel. From 17 July to 31 August, the automated guns accounted for 1,286 V-1 kills, or 34 percent of the attack, 55 percent of those shot down (the improved success rate probably also reflects the effects of the Rad Lab members' assistance).47 That October, the M-9/SCR-584/ VT-Fuze combination defended Antwerp from the V-1 with similar success. In this tense confrontation of robot weapons, the automated battlefield, which even today remains a dream of military technologists, began to take shape.

Despite its success, the system had seams in its automation. Radar's new way of seeing did not immediately replace ocular vision. Throughout the war, automatic and manual perception had an uneasy coexistence—translating between the two proved difficult, error-prone, and fatiguing. A detailed assessment of these issues came not from Ivan Getting but from his rivals and former collaborators at Bell Labs. In July and August of 1944, a group of four army officers and two BTL employees, including Clarence A. Lovell (who headed the T-10/M-9 design team), traveled to Europe to tour antiaircraft batteries and observe their operation against the V-1's. This group's report set out requirements for future antiaircraft systems. Unsurprisingly, the BTL report criticized the Rad Lab radar because the SCR-584 could not search and track simultaneously (BTL's rival SCR-545 could).48 BTL