A biographical index of designers important to typographic history, and of all those doing important work in the present day, would be a book in itself. The following list is little more than a cross-reference to important designers whose work is mentioned elsewhere in this book. LUDOVICO DEGLI ARRIGHI (c.1480-1527) Italian calligrapher and designer of at least six chancery italic fonts. Frederic Warde's Vicenza and Arrighi (the italic companion to Centaur) are based on one of his faces. Monotype Blado (the italic companion to Poliphilus) is a rough approximation of another. ANTOINE AUGEREAU (c.1490-1534) Parisian punchcutter and printer. Author of several text romans and at least one Greek. Along with his contemporary Simon de Colines, Augereau defined the style of French typography later identified with the name of his most famous apprentice, Claude Garamond. This activity came to an end when he was hanged and his corpse was publicly burnt, on Christmas Eve of 1534, for printing a psalm without permission. RICHARD AUSTIN (c. 1765-1830) English punchcutter producing Neoclassical and Romantic faces. He cut the original Bell type, the first Scotch Roman, and the original version of Porson Greek. W. A. Dwiggins's Caledonia is based primarily on Austin's work. JOHN BASKERVILLE (1706-1775) English calligrapher, printer and businessman. Designer of a series of Neoclassical romans, italics and one Greek. Most of the faces sold in his name are based on his work and some resemble it closely His punches are now at the University Library, Cambridge, and the St Bride Printing Library, London. A set of original matrices, formerly in Paris, is now in the Frutiger Foundry, Münchenstein, Switzerland. LUCIAN BERNHARD (1885-1972) German immigrant to the usA. Painter, poet, industrial designer and typographer. Author of a large number of roman faces, distinguished by their long extenders. These were cut and cast primarily by ATF and Bauer. CHARLES BIGELOw (1945-) American typographer and scholar. Codesigner, with Kris Holmes, of the Lucida family. ARCHIBALD BINNEY (1762-1838) Scottish immigrant to the USA. He was trained as a punchcutter in Edinburgh. With James Ronaldson, another Scottish immigrant, he established the Binney & Ronaldson Foundry in Philadelphia, where he cut Baroque, Neoclassical and Romantic type. FRANK BLOKLAND (1959-) Dutch type designer and founder of the Dutch Type Library in's-Hertogenbosch. His faces include Berenice and Documenta. His historical revivals include DTL Van den Keere and its companion, Guyot italic. GIAMBATTISTA BODONI (1740-1813) Italian punchcutter, printer and prolific designer of type, working at Rome and Parma. Bodoni is best known for his dark and razor-sharp Romantic romans, italics and sometimes wildly ornamental Greeks, but he also designed and cut a large number of Neoclassical fonts. Bauer Bodoni, Berthold Bodoni, and some of the other faces now sold in his name are based on his work. His punches are in the Museo Bodoniano, Parma. LUDOLF BORCHTORP (c.1470-C. 151O) Polish mathematician and engraver. Author of the first fonts of Cyrillic type, which he evidently cut in Kraków about 149o, for the printer Szwajpolt Fiol. CHRIS BRAND (1921-1999) Dutch calligrapher, the designer of the Albertina family. Some of his finest work – including the Hebrew face Zippora, the Elsschot family and the Denise italic – has yet to be released. DAN CARR (1951- ) American punchcutter, poet, typographer and printer. Proprietor, with Julia Ferrari, of the Golgonooza Letter Foundry, Ashuelot, New Hampshire. Carr is one of the few active punchcutters now living. Designer and cutter of Regulus foundry roman and Parmenides foundry Greek; designer of the digital family Chêneau. MATTHEW CARTER(1937-) English-born American type designer, punchcutter and scholar, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts. His text faces include Auriga, Charter, Galliard and Manutius; his titling faces include Mantinia and Sophia. His historical revivals include Wilson Greek. WILLIAM CASLON (1692-1766) English engraver, punchcutter and typefounder; author of many Baroque romans, italics, Greeks and other non-Latin faces. ATF Caslon, Monotype Caslon, and Carol Twombly's Adobe Caslon are closely based on his work. A collection of his punches is now in the St Bride Printing Library, London. WARREN CHAPPELL (1904-1991) American book artist, trained in Germany, where he studied with Rudolf Koch. His typefaces include Trajanus, Lydian and the still unmanufactured Eichenauer. sIMON DE COLINES (c. 1480-1547) French master printer, typographer and punchcutter. Author of a dozen or more roman fonts, several italics, several blackletters and a fine cursive Greek. Colines as much as any single person appears to be responsible for creating the typographic style of the French golden age. Garamond and Augereau were part of the same circle. None of Colines's faces has evidently yet been translated to digital form. CARL DAIR (1912-1967) Canadian book designer and typographer, working chiefly in Toronto. Designer of the Cartier family, which was left incomplete at Dair's death and later improved and completed by Rod McDonald. GERARD DANIËLs (1966- ) Dutch type designer and typographer, trained under Gerrit Noordzij in The Hague. Designer of Caspari. ISMAR DAVID (1910-1996) German-born American book designer, architect, graphic artist and type designer. His faces include David Hebrew, released by Intertype in 1954, and a number of photolettering faces still awaiting digital revival. GIOVANNI DEFACCIO (1966- ) Italian calligrapher. With Lui Karner, he is codesigner of the Rialto family, produced by their digital foundry dfType. FRANÇOIS-AMBROISE DIDOT (173O-1804) Parisian printer and publisher. Designer of several Neoclassical romans and italics, cut under his supervision by Pierre-Louis Vafflard. Father of Firmin Didot and founder of the Didot dynasty in printing and typography. FIRMIN DIDOT (1764-1836) Parisian printer and punchcutter; son of F.-A. Didot and student of Pierre-Louis Vafflard; father of Ambroise Firmin-Didot. Author of several Neoclassical faces as well as the Romantic fonts for which he is posthumously known. Monotype Didot and Linotype's digital Didot (drawn by Adrian Frutiger) are based on his work. BRAM DE DOES (1934-) Dutch typographer, formerly chief designer at Joh. Enschedé en Zonen, Haarlem. Designer of the Trinité and Lexicon families. WILLIAM ADDISON DWIGGINS (1880-1956) American designer and typographer. Dwiggins designed typefaces exclusively for the Linotype machine. In the 193os and 194os, he also created the typographic house style at Alfred Knopf, New York. His serifed faces include Caledonia, Eldorado, Electra and Falcon. His only completed sanserif is Metro. His one uncial face is Winchester. Many of his type drawings are now in the Boston Public Library. ALFRED FAIRBANK (1895-1982) English calligrapher and designer of Fairbank italic. AMBROISE FIRMIN-DIDOT (1790-1876) French scholar, typecutter and printer. He was the son of Firmin Didot (whose full name he took as his own surname) and grandson of François-Ambroise Didot. Author of the first Didot Greek fonts. JOHANN MICHAEL FLEISCHMAN(1701-1768)German-born punchcutter and founder working in the Netherlands. A prolific and skilled cutter of romans, italics and ornamental blackletters. Also the author of several Arabic and Greek fonts. His early romans and italics are Baroque, but in the 173os he cut a series of text fonts idiosyncratic and self-conscious enough to be called Rococo. Most of his surviving material is now at the Enschedé Museum in Haarlem. KARL-ERIK FORSBERG (1914-1995) Swedish calligrapher and typographer, designer of the Berling text roman. His titling faces include Carolus, Ericus and Lunda. PIERRE SIMON FOURNIER (1712-1768) French printer and punchcutter. Author of many French Neoclassical fonts and typographic ornaments. Nearly all of his original material has been damaged or lost. Monotype Fournier and Barbou are based on his work, and W. A. Dwiggins's Electra owes much to the study of it. HENRI FRIEDLAENDER (1904-1996) Israeli book and type designer, born in France of a Dutch father and English mother, and trained primarily in Germany. In 1950, after twenty years on the drawing table, a trial casting of his Hadassah Hebrew family was made by the Amsterdam Foundry. After further revision, working versions were issued beginning in 1958. ADRIAN FRUTIGER (1928- ) Swiss immigrant to France. A prolific and versatile designer of type and signage. He was involved in the early transition from metal type to phototype. His serifed faces include Apollo, Breughel, Glypha, Iridium and Méridien. His sanserifs include Avenir, Frutiger, and Univers. His titling and script types include Herculanum, Ondine, Pompeijana and Rusticana. CLAUDE GARAMOND (c. 1490-1561) French punchcutter, working chiefly in Paris. Author of many roman fonts, at least two italics, and a full set of chancery Greeks. His surviving punches and matrices are now at the Plantin-Moretus Museum in Antwerp and at the Imprimerie Nationale, Paris. Stempel Garamond roman and italic, Linotype Granjon roman, Günter Gerhard Lange's Berthold Garamond roman, Robert Slimbach's Adobe Garamond roman, and Ronald Arnholm's Legacy italic are all based on his designs. Monotype Garamond is not. (See also pp 23o-32.) ERIC GILL (1882-1940) English engraver and stonecutter, working in England and Wales. His serifed faces include Joanna, Perpetua and Pilgrim. His one unserifed face is Gill Sans. Perpetua Greek is also his, but Gill Sans Greek is by other hands. Gill's type drawings are now in the St Bride Library, London. Some of the matrices and punches for his types are now at the University Library, Cambridge; others are in the Clark Library, Los Angeles – but none of these punches were cut by Gill himself. FREDERIC GOUDY (1865-1947) American type designer and founder. His serifed faces include University of California Old Style (later adapted for machine composition as Californian), Deepdene, Italian Old Style, Kaatskill, Kennerley, Village Nº 1 and Village Nº 2. His blackletters include Franciscan, Goudy Text and Goudy Thirty. His titling faces include Forum, Goudy Old Style and Hadriano. Goudy Sans is his only unserifed face. His only uncial is Friar. Most of Goudy's original material was destroyed by fire in 1939. What survives is at the Rochester Institute of Technology. ROBERT GRANJON (c. 1513-1590) French typecutter working at Paris, Lyon, Antwerp, Frankfurt and Rome. Author of many Renaissance and Mannerist romans, italics, scripts, several Greeks, a Cyrillic, some Hebrews, and the first successful fonts of Arabic type. Some of his punches and matrices survive at the Plantin-Moretus Museum, Antwerp and the Nordiska Museet, Stockholm. Matthew Carter's Galliard is based primarily on Granjon's Ascendonica roman and italic. FRANCESCO GRIFFO (c. 1450-1518) Bolognese punchcutter, working in Venice, Bologna and elsewhere in Italy. Author of at least seven romans, three italics, four Greeks and a Hebrew. None of Griffo's actual punches or matrices are known to survive, and the house of Aldus Manutius in Venice, where he did most of his work, has vanished. (The site is now occupied by a bank.) Griffo's letterforms have nonetheless been patiently reconstructed from the printed books in which his type appears. Giovanni Mardersteig's Griffo type is an exacting replica of one of Griffo's fonts. Monotype Bembo roman is based more loosely on the same font. Monotype Poliphilus is a rough reproduction of the same lower case with different caps. Mardersteig's Dante roman and italic are also based on a close study of Griffo's work. The italics, overall, have received far less attention than the romans. ARNALDO GUILLÉN DE BROCAR (c.146O-1524) Spanish master printer and typographer working at Alcalá de Henares, which is now a suburb of Madrid. Author of several romans and at least two Greek fonts. The most notable of these is the Complutensian Greek type, cut about 151o. FRANÇOIS GUYOT (c. 1510-1570) Punchcutter and typefounder, born at Paris. He moved to Antwerp in the 153os and spent most of the rest of his life there, cutting type for the printer Christophe Plantin and others. VICTOR HAMMER (1882-1967) Austrian-born printer working chiefly in Italy and the usA. All of Hammer's types are uncials. These include American Uncial, Andromache, Hammer Uncial, Pindar and Samson. His type drawings and punches are now at the University of Kentucky, Lexington. JONATHAN HOEFLER (197O- ) American type designer and digital founder. He established the Hoefler Type Foundry, New York, in 1989. Designer of Hoefler Text, Hoefler Titling, Gestalt, the Requiem family, and other faces. KRIS HOLMES (1950– ) American calligrapher. Designer of Isadora and Sierra; codesigner with Janice Fishman of Shannon, and with Charles Bigelow of the Lucida family. JOHN HUDsON (1968- ) English/Canadian type designer and expert in multilingual digital encoding. Designer of Aeneas and Manticore. Cofounder, with Ross Mills, of Tiro Typeworks in Vancouver. MARKJAMRA (1956-) American typographer and graphic artist, trained in Switzerland. Designer of several artful postmodern faces, including Jamille, Latienne and Kinesis. JEAN JANNON (1580-1658) French punchcutter and printer. His romans and italics, cut at Paris and Sedan, appear to be the first Baroque types ever made. Much of his material survives at the Imprimerie Nationale, Paris, where his type is known as the caractères de l’université. MonotypeGaramond, Linotype Garamond'3, ATF 'Garamond, LanstonGaramont' and SimonciniGaramond' are based on his work. (See pp 23o-32.) NICOLAs JENsON (c. 1420-148o) French punchcutter and printer, working in Venice. Author of at least one roman, one Greek and five rotundas. Jenson's punches and matrices have long vanished, but his type has often been copied from his printed books. Bruce Rogers's Centaur, Ronald Arnholm's Legacy roman and Robert Slimbach's Adobe Jenson roman are based on his. Karlgeorg Hoefer's San Marco is based in large part on Jenson's rotundas. GEORGE WILLIAM JONES (1860-1942) English printer and type designer. Author of Linotype Estienne, Linotype Granjon, and the Venezia roman, which was later mated with an italic by Frederic Goudy. All Jones's faces are historical reconstructions. Linotype Granjon was the first commercial adaptation of a Garamond roman, mated with a Granjon italic. LUI KARNER (1948- ) Austrian typographer and letterpress printer. Codesigner, with Giovanni DeFaccio, of the Rialto family and partner in the digital foundry dfType. MIKLÓS TÓTFALUSI KIS (1650-1702) Hungarian scholar, printer and typecutter. Kis was trained in Amsterdam and worked there and in Kolozsvár (now Cluj, Romania). Stempel Janson is struck and cast primarily from his surviving punches. Linotype Janson Text (both the metal and digital versions) and Monotype Erhardt are based on his work. RUDOLF KOCH (1876-1934) German calligrapher and artist. His titling faces include Koch Antiqua and Neuland. His blackletters include Claudius, Jessen, Wallau and Wilhelm Klingspor Schrift. Kabel is his only sanserif. Much of his material, formerly in the Klingspor Archive, Offenbach, is now in the Haus für Industriekultur, Darmstadt. HENK KRIJGER (1914-1979) Dutch typographer and visual artist, born and raised in Sumba, Indonesia. His Indonesian name is Senggih. Designer of several titling faces, the most important of which is Raffia. JOOS LAMBRECHT (c. 1510-1556) Flemish punchcutter, typefounder and printer. Author of several fine romans, one italic and at least one textura. All of his original material has perished, but printed specimens survive. In addition to his 16 pt roman, Jenson cut at least the caps for a 12 pt font. In addition to his five rotundas (ranging from 12 to 21 pt), he also cut at least the lower case for a sixth and smaller font. VADIM VLADIMIROVICH LAZURSKI(1909-1994) Russian Calligrapher and book designer. His Lazurski family includes both Cyrillic and Latin alphabets. The Cyrillic also exists in a proprietary foundry version known as Pushkin. GUILLAUME LE BÉ the elder (1525-1598) French punchcutter working in Paris, Florence, Venice and Rome. Author of many Hebrew fonts, some fine romans and music types. HENRIC PIETERSZOON LETTERSNIDER (fl. 1492-1511) Dutch punchcutter working at Gouda, Antwerp, Rotterdam and Delft. Author of a substantial number of blackletter types and fonts of large initials. zUZANA LIčKO (1961- ) Slovakian immigrant to the USA. Cofounder of Emigre magazine and its offshoot, the Emigre digital foundry. Designer of Journal, Electrix, Modula and other faces. With John Downer, codesigner of Triplex. RICHARD LIPTON (1953- ) American graphic artist. Designer of Arrus. Codesigner, with Jacqueline Sakwa, of the script face Cataneo. MARTIN MAJOOR (196o- ) Dutch graphic artist trained at the Arnhem Academy. Designer of the Scala and Seria families. GIOVANNI MARDERSTEIG (1892-1977) German imimigrant to Italy. A master printer, scholar, typographer and type designer. Author of Dante, Fontana, Griffo and Zeno. His material is at the Officina Bodoni, Verona. GABRIEL MARTÍNEZ MEAVE (1972- ) Mexican type designer, working near Mexico City. His faces include Organica, Integra, Neocodex and Mexica. ROD MCDONALD (1947- ) Canadian graphic artist and type designer working in Toronto and, since 2oo2, in Halifax. His work includes the Laurentian family and Cartier Book, a family of type begun by Carl Dair. HANS EDUARD MEIER (1922- ) Swiss typographer. Designer of Barbedor, Syndor and the several versions of Syntax. JOSÉ MENDOZA Y ALMEIDA (1926- ) French graphic artist and type designer, working in Paris. His faces include Mendoza, Photina, Pascal, Fidelio (a chancery script), Sully Jonquières (an upright italic) and Convention. OLDŘICH MENHART (1897-1962) Czech type designer and calligrapher. His serifed Latin faces include Figural, Menhart and Parliament. His Manuscript family includes both Latin and Cyrillic faces. His titling faces include Czech Uncial and Monument. WILLIAM ROSS MILLS (197O- ) Canadian type designer. Cofounder with John Hudson of Tiro Typeworks in Vancouver. Author of the Plantagenet Novus family (Latin, Greek and Cherokee) and two families of Canadian Syllabic type, Uqammaq and Pigiarniq, for setting Inuktitut. His historical revivals include the 152o Garamond Roman. ANTONIO DI BARTOLOMEO MISCOMINI(c.1445-C.1495)Italian punchcutter and printer, probably born in Bologna. He did most of his work in Venice, Modena and Florence, where he printed during the early 149os and brought his roman and orthotic Greek types to final form. GERRIT NOORDZIJ (195O- ) Dutch typographer and teacher. From 196o to 199o he was responsible for training type designers at KABκ (Koninklijke Academie van Beeldende Kunsten: The Royal Academy of Fine Arts) in The Hague, and thereby profoundly affected the course of modern type design in the Netherlands and elsewhere. Only one of his own designs is publicly available at present: the Ruse family, issued in digital form by the Enschedé Font Foundry. PETER MATTHIAS NOORDZIJ (1961- ) Dutch typographer and digital founder. Designer of PMN Caecilia and proprietor of the Enschedé Font Foundry. FRIEDRICH PETER (1933- ) Canadian calligrapher and visual artist, born in Dresden and trained in Berlin. Designer of the script faces Vivaldi and Magnificat. ALEXANDER PHEMISTER (1829-1894) Scottish punchcutter. Author of the Old Style Antique issued by Miller Richard, Edinburgh, beginning in 1858. In 1861 he moved to Boston where he worked for the Dickenson Foundry. FRIEDRICH POPPL (1923-1982) German calligrapher. His serifed faces include Pontifex and Poppl Antiqua. His sanserif is Laudatio. His titling faces include Nero and Saladin. His script types include Poppl Exquisit and Residenz. JEAN-FRANÇOIS PORCHEZ (1964- ) French type designer; founder and proprietor of Porchez Typofonderie in Malakoff, near Paris. Designer of Angie, Apolline, Parisine, and the extensive Le Monde family, created for the Paris newspaper Le Monde. RICHARD PORSON (1759-18o8) English classical scholar. He designed the original Porson Greek, which was cut in steel by Richard Austin. Monotype Porson and the digital GFs Porson are based closely on his work. EUDALD PRADELL (1721-1788) Catalan punchcutter and typefounder, working in Barcelona and Madrid. Some of the best eighteenth-century Spanish books are printed in his types. vOJTÉCH PREIsSIG (1873-1944) Czech artist, typographer and teacher, working in Czechoslovakia and in New York City Preissig designed several text and titling faces, including the one that bears his name. His surviving drawings are in the Strahov Abbey, Prague. ERHARD RATDOLT (1447-1528) German punchcutter and printer working at Augsburg and Venice. Author of at least ten blackletters, three romans and one Greek. In 1486 he issued the first known type specimen. (The one surviving copy is in the Munich State Library.) IMRE REINER (1900-1987) Hungarian artist and designer working in Germany, the usA and Switzerland. He was a skilled wood engraver and book illustrator. Author of several Expressionist script faces. PAUL RENNER (1878-1956) German typographer, type designer and teacher. Designer of Futura, Renner Antiqua, Renner Grotesk and the blackletter Ballade. His drawings for Futura are now in the Fundición Tipográfica Bauer, Barcelona. JIM RIMMER (1934-) Canadian punchcutter and type designer. He has produced digital revivals of several of Frederic Goudy's faces and made new text faces – notably Amethyst and Albertan – in similar spirit. His titling faces include Credo, a revival of Robert Foster's Pericles. BRUCE ROGERS (1870-1957) American typographer, working chiefly in Boston, London and Oxford. Designer of Montaigne and Centaur. The original drawings for Centaur are now in the Newberry Library, Chicago. SJOERD HENDRIK DE ROOS (1877-1962) Dutch designer, typographer and printer. Author of the uncials Libra and Simplex, the Nobel sanserif, and De Roos roman and italic. RUDOLPH RžıčKA (1883-1978) Czech-born American typographer. Designer of Linotype Fairfield and Primer. JACQUES DE SANLECQUE the elder (1558-1648) French punchcutter, student of Guillaume Le Bé the elder. Author of several fine romans and italics, music type, and a number of non-Latin faces, including Armenian, Samaritan and Syriac. JACQUES DE SANLECQUE the younger (1613-1659) Son of the preceding. French punchcutter and founder revered for his technical finesse in cutting small sizes. VICTOR SCHOLDERER (1880-1971) English classical scholar and librarian. Designer of the New Hellenic Greek. FRANTSYSK HEORHII SKARYNA (c.1488-C.154O) Belarusian physician, translator and printer, educated at Kraków and Padova. Author of several fonts of Cyrillic type, with which he printed at Prague and Vilnius. ROBERT SLIMBACH (1956- ) American type designer, on staff at Adobe since 1987. His faces include Cronos, Adobe Garamond, Giovanni, Minion, Poetica, Slimbach, Utopia, Kepler and Warnock. His script faces include Sanvito and Caflisch. The Myriad family is a joint design by Slimbach and Carol Twombly. FRED sMEIJERS (1961– ) Dutch typographer and type designer. Author of the Quadraat family, Reynard, and the useful book Counterpunch. ERIK SPIEKERMANN (1947- ) German graphic artist and one of the founders of the FontShop digital foundry. Designer of the Meta and Officina families. sUMNER STONE (1945- ) American type designer and first director of the type department at Adobe Systems. Author of Silica, Cycles, Stone Print, and of the Stone typeface family, which includes serifed, unserifed andinformal' series. KONRAD SWEYNHEYM (c.1415-1477) German monk and letterpress printer, working in central Italy. He is probably the author of the two romans and one Greek which he and his partner Arnold Pannartz used at Subiaco and Rome between 1464 and 1473. GIOVANANTONIO TAGLIENTE (fl.150O-1525) Italian Calligrapher and designer of at least one chancery italic type. Monotype Bembo italic is derived from this font. AMEET TAVERNIER (c. 1522-1570) Flemish typecutter and printer working primarily at Antwerp. Author of many romans, italics, blackletters and civilité script types. GEORG TRUMP (1896-1985) German artist and type designer, initially a pupil of Ernst Schneidler. His serifed text faces include Mauritius, Schadow and Trump Mediäval. His blackletters include Trump Deutsch. His titling faces and scripts include Codex, Delphin, Jaguar and Time. JAN TSCHICHOLD (1902-1974) German immigrant to Switzerland. Designer of the Sabon family and the Saskia script. Several of Tschichold's unproduced phototype designs were destroyed in the Second World War. CAROL TwOM BLY (1959- ) American type designer and visual artist. From 1988 to 1999 she was one of two type designers on staff at Adobe Systems. Her work includes the text family Chaparral and the titling faces Charlemagne, Lithos, Nueva, Trajan and Viva. Adobe Caslon is her digital revival of the work of William Caslon. With Robert Slimbach, she is the codesigner of the Myriad family. GERARD UNGER (1942- ) Dutch type designer and teacher. His serifed faces include Amerigo, Demos, Hollander, Oranda, Paradox and Swift. His unserifed faces include Argo, Flora and Praxis. HENDRIK VAN DEN KEERE (c.1540-1580) Belgian typecutter, working at Ghent and Antwerp. He cut many romans and blackletters, at least one script type (a civilité) and several fonts of music type. DTL Van den Keere roman is based on his work. CHRISTOFFEL VAN DIJCK (1606-1669) Dutch punchcutter. Author of several Baroque romans, italics and blackletters. Monotype Van Dijck and DTL Elzevir are based on his work. Jan van Krimpen's Romanée and Gerard Unger's Hollander echo it in various ways. Most of Van Dijck's material has perished. The few surviving punches and matrices are at the Enschedé Museum, Haarlem. JAN VAN KRIMPEN (1892-1958) Dutch typographer, for many years chief designer at Joh. Enschedé en Zonen, Haarlem. His type designs include Lutetia, Romanée, Romulus, Sheldon, Spectrum, Haarlemmer, Cancelleresca Bastarda (a chancery italic), Romulus Sans, Antigone Greek, Double Augustin Open Capitals, Lutetia Open Capitals and Romulus Open Capitals. Except for Haarlemmer and Sheldon, all these faces were first cut at Enschedé by Paul Helmuth Rädisch. Much of his work is still awaiting digital revival. JOvICA VELJOVIć (1954-) Calligrapher and type designer born in Kosovo, trained in Belgrade, now working in Germany. His types include Gamma, Esprit, Ex Ponto, Silentium and Veljović. JUSTUS ERICH WALBAUM (1768-1837) German typefounder and printer, author of several Neoclassical and Romantic faces. Both Berthold Walbaum and Monotype Walbaum are based on his surviving punches and matrices. FREDERIC WARDE (1894-1939) American typographer, working chiefly in France, Italy and England. Designer of the Vicenza and Arrighi italics. Some of Warde's drawings are in the Newberry Library, Chicago. Punches and matrices for the early (handcut) Arrighi are now at the Rochester Institute of Technology. EMIL RUDOLF WEISS (1875-1942) German poet, painter, calligrapher and type designer. Author of a fraktur, a textura (Weiss Gotisch), a rotunda (Weiss Rundgotisch), Weiss Antiqua roman and italic, a suite of typographic ornaments, and three series of titling caps or initials. All these were cut by Louis Hoell and issued by the Bauer Foundry, Frankfurt. ALEXANDER WILSON (1714-1786) Scottish punchcutter, typefounder and astronomer, working at Camlachie, near Glasgow. Author of the best romans, italics and Greeks produced in the Scottish Enlightenment. BERTHOLD wOLPE (1905-1989) German calligrapher and typographer who spent his later life in England. Pegasus is his text face. His titling faces include Albertus and Hyperion. HERMANN ZAPF (1918–) German master calligrapher, type designer, artist and teacher. His types include the roman and italic faces Aldus, Comenius, Euler, Hunt Roman, Marconi, Melior, Optima, Orion, Palatino, Zapf Book and Zapf Renaissance; the blackletters Gilgengart, Winchester and Stratford; the titling faces Kompakt, Michelangelo, Sistina and Zapf International; the Greeks Attika, Euler, Heraklit, Optima, Palatino Greek and Phidias; and the script faces Venture, Zapf Chancery, Zapf Civilité and Zapfino. GUDRUN ZAPF-VON HESSE (1918- ) German calligrapher and book artist. Her text and titling faces include Alcuin, Carmina, Diotima, Nofret, Ariadne and Smaragd.