A reliable encyclopedia of the world's typefoundries – metal, photographic and digital; present and past – would be a very useful document. It would also be a thick one. This brief list is limited to metal and digital foundries and matrix engravers that have issued or preserved original designs that seem to me of lasting value for setting text in Latin, Greek or Cyrillic. Many of the type designers listed in appendix D (Robert Granjon, William Caslon, Hendrik van den Keere, for instance) also cast and sold their own type. Their foundries are listed again here only if (1) the foundries outlived their founders and developed into independent entities or (2) they are currently active. The phone numbers, fax numbers and physical locations of foundries are subject to frequent change. Under present conditions, so is their financial health and consequent legal status. Current information is obtainable through the internet and the trade press. Other useful references include the consolidated catalogues of vendors such as Precision Type, in Commack, New York, and FontShop in Berlin, and the websites of on-line retailers such as MyFonts and Identifont. Adobe Systems, San Jose, Calif. Fundamentally a software company, founded in 1982 by John Warnock and Charles Geschke. Adobe was the original developer of the PostScript computer language – one of the foundation stones of digital typography. It is also, with Microsoft, co-creator of the OpenType font format. In the early 198os it established a digital foundry and an ambitious type development program directed by Sumner Stone. Adobe has issued digital versions of many historical types as well as original designs by Robert Slimbach, Carol Twombly, Jovica Veljović and many others. Agfa, Wilmington, Mass. In 1988 Agfa-Gevaert absorbed the Compugraphic Corporation, a manufacturer of photosetting machines and film matrices. A digital foundry known as Agfa-Compugraphic was then formed and passed from hand to hand (e.g., it was for a time part of the Bayer Corporation). In 1997, Agfa acquired the remains of Monotype, and in 1998 a new firm, Agfa Monotype, was formed. Agfa per se issued new designs by Otl Aicher, David Siegel and others. Amsterdam Foundry, Amsterdam. A metal foundry established in Rotterdam in 1851 by Nicolaas Tetterode with stock from the Broese Foundry in Breda. The firm moved to Amsterdam in 1856 and in 1892 changed its name from Lettergieterij N. Tetterode to Lettergieterij Amsterdam. Typecasting operations waned in the 197os and ceased altogether in 1988. During the twentieth century it issued new designs by Sjoerd de Roos and Dick Dooijes. The surviving matrices and other materials are now at the library of the University of Amsterdam. ATF (American Type Founders), Elizabeth, New Jersey. This was the largest metal typefoundry in North America, formed in 1892 by amalgamating a number of smaller firms. In its best days, it issued original designs by M.F. Benton, Lucian Bernhard, Frederic Goudy and many others. Though the company began to falter in the 192os, it clung to life until 1993. Its library is now at Columbia University, New York. Much of the older typographic material is in the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC. Bauer Foundry, Frankfurt. A metal foundry established in 1837 by Johann Christian Bauer. It expanded into an international network toward the end of the nineteenth century. The Bauer Foundry as such ceased to exist in 1972, but one branch of the old empire – the Fundición Tipografica Bauer (FTB) in Barcelona – has survived. (It is separately described in this list.) Bauer issued original faces by its founder and later by Lucian Bernhard, Imre Reiner, Paul Renner, Emil Rudolf Weiss and others. The surviving punches and matrices are now at FTB in Barcelona and at wMD in Leipzig. Berlingska Stilgjuteriet, Lund, Sweden. A metal typefoundry and printing house important for its castings, during the twentieth century, of original faces by Karl-Erik Forsberg. H. Berthold, Berlin. Hermann Berthold's metalworks entered the typefounding business in 1893. It acquired the original punches and matrices of J. E. Walbaum and later issued original faces by Günter Gerhard Lange, Herbert Post, Imre Reiner and others. Berthold was involved in the creation of phototype as early as 1935. It ceased casting metal type in 1978 and turned to producing digital fonts in the 198os. This activity all but ceased in 1993, but the company has resumed selling its own digital fonts. The foundry's collection of punches and matrices is now in the care of the Museum für Verkehr und Technik, Berlin. Bitstream, Cambridge, Mass. A digital foundry established in 1981 by Matthew Carter and Mike Parker, both of whom later left the company. Bitstream has issued digital revivals of many earlier faces and new designs by Carter, John Downer, Richard Lipton, Gerard Unger, Gudrun Zapf-von Hesse and others. Carter & Cone, Cambridge, Mass. A digital foundry established in 1992 by Matthew Carter and Cherie Cone. It issues original designs and historical revivals by Carter. Caslon Foundry, London. A metal typefoundry established by William Caslon about 1723 and maintained as a family business for four generations. It survived as the firm of H.W. [Henry William] Caslon until 1936. Most of the older surviving punches are now in the St Bride Printing Library, London. The newer material passed to Stephenson, Blake. In 1998, Justin Howes acquired rights to the name H.W. Caslon & Co. Under this name, his digital foundry in Northamptonshire issues the series known as Founder's Caslon. Deberny Peignot, Paris. Joseph Gaspard Gillé the elder, one of Fournier's apprentices, opened his own foundry in Paris in 1748 and left the business to his son in 1789. In 1827, the novelist Honoré de Balzac acquired this foundry as part of his intended writing, printing and publishing empire. The scheme failed at once, but the foundry was rescued by its manager and bought by Alexandre de Berny. Gustave Peignot entered separately into the typefounding business in 1865. His own foundry entered its first creative phase under his son and grandson Georges and Charles Peignot, who issued historical revivals of the work of Jean Jannon and created a series of types based on the lettering of the eighteenth-century engraver Nicolas Cochin. The De Berny and Peignot foundries merged in 1923. Under the guidance of Charles Peignot, the enlarged firm issued new designs by Adolphe Cassandre, Adrian Frutiger and others. When D&P ceased production in 1975, the type drawings and company library went to the Bibliothèque Forney, Paris, and most of the typographic material – including a set of original Baskerville matrices – to the Haas (now Fruttiger) Foundry, Münchenstein. Baskerville's punches, also formerly held by D&P, are now at the University Library, Cambridge. df Type, Texing, Austria. A digital foundry established in 1999 by the Venetian calligrapher Giovanni DeFaccio and the Austrian printer-typographer Lui Karner. The foundry issues the Rialto family and other text and titling faces, rooted in DeFaccio's calligraphy. DTL (Dutch Type Library),'s-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands. A digital foundry established by Frank Blokland in 199o. It has issued original faces by Blokland, Chris Brand, Gerard Daniëls, Sjoerd de Roos, Gerard Unger and others, and historical revivals of types by Christoffel van Dijck, Jan van Krimpen, J.M. Fleischman and Hendrik van den Keere. s (Eταιρεα Eλληνικν Tυπογραφικν Στοιχεων). Listed here under its English name, GFs: Greek Font Society. Elsner & Flake, Hamburg. A digital foundry established in 1989 by Günther Flake and Veronika Elsner. The firm has produced a large number of digital revivals and made the original digital versions of a number of iTC faces. Emigre, Sacramento. A digital foundry established in Berkeley in 1985 by Rudy VanderLans and Zuzana Ličko. In 1992, the office moved to Sacramento. The firm issues original faces by Ličko,VanderLans, John Downer and others. Joh. Enschedé en Zonen (Johann Enschedé & Sons), Haarlem, Netherlands. A printing plant and typefoundry operating from 1743 to 199o. In two and a half centuries of operation, the firm acquired material from many sources, including some of the punches and matrices of J.M. Fleischman and Christoffel van Dijck. During the early twentieth century, it issued in foundry form the types of its chief designer, Jan van Krimpen. In 199o, its stock of matrices and punches was transferred to the Enschedé Museum. The Enschedé Font Foundry, Hurwenen, Netherlands. A digital foundry established in 1991 under the direction of Peter Matthias Noordzij. It has issued original designs by Bram de Does, Gerrit Noordzij, Christoph Noordzij, and Fred Smeijers. Esselte Letraset, London. Letraset Ltd. was founded in 1959 as a manufacturer of dry transfer lettering. It was acquired by the Swiss firm Esselte in 1981 and a few years later began to issue its faces in digital form. The digital library now includes both historical revivals and original designs by Michael Gills, Michael Neugebauer and others. Fann Street Foundry, London. A metal foundry established in 18o2 by Robert Thorne. Its creative period came in the 185os, when it was owned by Robert Besley and issued original designs cut by Benjamin Fox. The surviving material was acquired by Stephenson, Blake in 1905. Font Bureau, Boston. A digital foundry established in 1989 by David Berlow and Roger Black. It has issued both historical revivals and original designs by John Downer, Tobias Frere-Jones, Richard Lipton, Greg Thompson and others. FontShop International, Berlin. A digital foundry established in 1989 by Erik Spiekermann. It has issued original designs by Spiekermann, Erik van Blokland, Martin Majoor, Just van Rossum, Fred Smeijers and many others. Walter Fruttiger, Münchenstein, Switzerland. The Fruttiger Foundry, operating under this name since 1989, traces its roots to an operation founded by Jean Exertier in 158o. For more than two centuries it was known as the Haas Foundry, after Johann Wilhelm Haas, who acquired the company in 174o. It now possesses little material from before the eighteenth century, and in its long life has not been the source of many original faces. In the first half of the twentieth century, however, Haas issued new designs by Walter Diethelm and, in 1951, the first versions of Max Miedinger's Helvetica. It does possess some original Baskerville matrices, acquired by Haas from D&p. FTB (Fundición Tipográfica Bauer), Barcelona. A metal foundry established in 1885. It is the last surviving branch of the old Bauer network and now holds much of the Bauer Foundry's surviving typographic material. From 1922 to 1995 it was known as FTN, the Fundición Tipográfica Neufville – a name still used by the digital arm of the company. Genzsch & Heyse, Hamburg. A metal foundry established in 1833 and absorbed by Linotype in 1963. It issued both blackletter and whiteletter types designed by Friedrich Bauer, Otto Hupp and others. Golgonooza Letter Foundry, Ashuelot, New Hampshire. Established in 198o by Dan Carr and Julia Ferrari, who cast type from Monotype matrices and issue Carr's own faces, some cut by hand in steel and others created in digital form. Grafotechna, Prague. A metal typefoundry important for its castings of the work of Miloslav Fulín, Oldřich Menhart, Vojtěch Preissig and other Czech designers. GFs (Greek Font Society), Athens. A digital foundry established in 1992. It has issued digital versions of historically important Greek types designed by Ambroise Firmin-Didot, Richard Porson and Victor Scholderer, as well as new Greek designs by Takis Katsoulides and George Matthiopoulos. Haas Foundry. See Walter Fruttiger. Hoefler & Frere-Jones, New York. Jonathan Hoefler established his own digital foundry in Manhatten in 1989. In 2004 the name was changed to reflect the increased role of his associate Tobias Frere-Jones. The firm has produced important designs by Hoefler and useful digital revivals of the Fell types. Dr-Ing. Rudolf Hell. See Linotype. Imprimerie Nationale, Paris. A printing house and foundry established by Louis x111 in 164o as the Imprimerie Royale. With the French Revolution (1789), the Imprimerie Royale became first l'Imprimerie Nationale and then l'Imprimerie de la République. With the coronation of Napoleon I in 18o4, it became l'Imprimerie Impériale. After the Restoration of 1815, it was again l'Imprimerie Royale. In 1848, after two more revolutions, it was l'Imprimerie Nationale once more. It has retained this name ever since – except for the hiatus, 1852–1870, under Napoleon 111, when it reverted to l’Imprimerie Impériale. It owns the surviving punches and matrices of Jean Jannon (the source of most of the world's ‘Garamonds') and a large quantity of historically important material for the typography of Asian languages. Over the years it has sponsored new designs by many hands, including Firmin Didot, Philippe Grandjean, Marcellin Legrand, Louis-René Luce and José Mendoza y Almeida. It is the one surviving institution with punchcutters on salary. Intertype (International Typesetting Machine Co.), New York. When the basic Mergenthaler Linotype patents expired in 1912, a group of investors had assembled in New York, ready to build a competing, and very similar, machine. Its matrices included new adaptations of foundry faces designed by Dick Dooijes and S.H. de Roos. The firm was involved in phototypesetting as early as 1947. After a merger in the 195os, it was known as the Harris Intertype Corporation and became a principal manufacturer of photographic matrices. ITC (International Typeface Corporation), New York. Founded by Aaron Burns and Herb Lubalin in 1969 as a typeface licensing and distribution agency. The original domain was limited to phototype. In the 198os, ITC began to license digital designs as well. Not until 1994 did it start to produce and market its faces directly. For more than a decade, there was a readily identifiable iTC style: a standardized large torso with interchangeable serifs that reduced the alphabet and its history to superficial costume. This Procrustean approach to type design faded in the 198os. Coincidentally, the company was bought in 1986 by Esselte Letraset. The list includes original designs by Ronald Arnholm, Matthew Carter, Erik Spiekermann, Hermann Zapf and many others. Klingspor Brothers, Offenbach. A metal foundry established in 1842 and operated under several different names before its acquisition in 1892 by Karl Klingspor. It issued original faces by Peter Behrens, Rudolf Koch and Walter Tiemann. After its closure in 1953, the library and drawings were transferred to the Klingspor Museum, Offenbach, and most of the matrices to the Stempel Foundry, Frankfurt. Lanston Monotype Machine Co., Philadelphia. The Monotype machine as we know it was devised by John Sellers Bancroft of Philadelphia in 19oo. It grew, however, from a series of earlier machines invented by Tolbert Lanston of Washington, DC, beginning in 1887. The American company created to manufacture and sell these devices started slowly and was soon outdistanced by its English counterpart, formed a decade later with the same objective and almost the same name (see below: The Monotype Corporation). The American firm nevertheless remained in business, moving to Philadelphia in 1901 and pursuing on a smaller scale its own design agenda. This included cutting mats for historical revivals and original designs by Frederic Goudy, Sol Hess and others. The surviving material was dispersed in 1983. Lanston Type Co., Mt Stewart, Prince Edward Island. In 1983 Gerald Giampa acquired a collection of patterns and drawings from the Lanston Monotype Company of Philadelphia. With this foundation, he established a digital foundry in Vancouver, moving to PEI in 1994. The library consists almost entirely of digitized versions of American Monotype faces, especially work by Frederic Goudy. LetterPerfect, Seattle & New York. A digital foundry established in 1986 by Paul Shaw and Garret Boge. It has specialized in titling faces, including many with carefully researched inscriptional pedigrees. Linotype Library, Bad Homburg. In Brooklyn in 1886, Ottmar Mergenthaler began to sell his newly invented Linotype machine. This led to the founding of the Mergenthaler Linotype Co., Brooklyn, and Mergenthaler Linotype & Machinery Ltd., Manchester, both in 189o. Their German ally, Mergenthaler Setzmaschinen-Fabrik, Berlin, was created in 1896. Many of the early matrices were produced under contract by the Stempel Foundry, Frankfurt, from designs by artists such as Warren Chappell, Georg Trump and Hermann Zapf. Others were produced in England from the designs of George W. Jones, and in the UsA from designs by W. A. Dwiggins, Rudolph Růžička and others. Linotype began producing photosetting equipment in the 195os, CRT (cathode ray tube) photosetters in the 196os, and high-resolution laser setters in the 198os. The German firm, which had relocated to Frankfurt in 1948, merged in 199o with Dr.-Ing. Rudolf Hell Gmbí of Kiel. In 1997, Linotype's digital foundry was spun off under the name the Linotype Library, which relocated to Bad Homburg, north of Frankfurt, in 1998. It has issued many of the old Linotype faces in digital form, and new designs by Adrian Frutiger, Hermann Zapf and many others. A large collection of early material from the American branch of the company is now at the Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York, and the University of Kentucky, Lexington. The Ludlow Typograph Co., Chicago. Washington Ludlow of Chicago began making typecasting machinery in 19o6, but the Ludlow caster which his company sold throughout the early twentieth century was a later device, designed and built by William Reade in 19o9. The machine casts slugs from handset proprietary matrices and was therefore used for little except display type, but several Ludlow faces have been successfully adapted for digital text composition. The company issued both historical revivals and original designs, chiefly by its director of typography, R.H. Middleton. It ceased operation in North America in 1986. The English arm, founded in the early 197os, closed in 199o. Ludwig & Mayer, Frankfurt. A metal foundry established circa 1920 and closed in 1985. The surviving material was transferred to FTB in Barcelona. During its heyday, the firm issued original designs by Jakob Erbar, Helmut Matheis, Ilse Schüle and others. Mergenthaler. See Linotype. Miller & Richard, Edinburgh. A metal foundry established in 1809 by George Miller, joined by Walter Richard in 1832. The foundry issued original designs by Richard Austin, Alexander Phemister and others. When it ceased operation in 1952, the surviving material went to Stephenson, Blake. The Monotype Corporation, Redhill, Surrey, England. An entity called the Lanston Monotype Company was first formed in the usA in 1887. Another, called the Lanston Monotype Corporation (later simply the Monotype Corporation) was formed in England a decade later. For the American firm, see Lanston Monotype. The typographically creative phase of the English firm began in 1922 with the appointment of Stanley Morison as typographic advisor. Over the next few decades, English Monotype cut a number of meticulously researched historical revivals as well as new designs by Eric Gill, Giovanni Mardersteig, José Mendoza y Almeida, Victor Scholderer, Jan van Krimpen, Berthold Wolpe and others. The firm began producing photosetting equipment and photographic matrices in the 195os, and laser typesetting machines in the 197os. In the early 199os a new and smaller company, Monotype Typography, was spun off to produce and market digital type, including digital reincarnations of the faces originally cut in metal for the Monotype machine. This firm merged with Agfa in 1999, becoming Agfa Monotype. Metal matrices are still made on demand in England by the Monotype Trust. Nebiolo Foundry, Torino. A metal typefoundry established in 1878 by Giovanni Nebiolo through the amalgamation of several older and smaller firms. It is important for its castings of original designs by Alessandro Butti and Aldo Novarese. Nebiolo ceased operation about 199o. Neufville Foundry, Barcelona. See FTB. Norstedt Foundry, Stockholm. A metal foundry, formerly supplied with matrices by Robert Granjon, François Guyot, Ameet Tavernier and others. The surviving material is now in the Nordiska Museet, Stockholm. Fonderie Olive, Marseilles. A metal foundry which ceased operation in 1978. It issued a number of original designs by Roger Excoffon, François Ganeau and others. The surviving material is now at the Fruttiger Foundry, Münchenstein. ParaType, Moscow. Successor (as of 1998) to the ParaGraph (or Parallel Graphics) digital foundry, which was founded in 1989. It issues original designs and historical revivals of Cyrillic, Latin, Georgian, Arabic, Hebrew and Greek faces. Pie Tree Press & Foundry, New Westminster, British Columbia. Jim Rimmer's press and foundry, started in 196o, now produces both metal and digital type by Rimmer and others. Plantin-Moretus Museum, Antwerp. The printing house and foundry established by Christophe Plantin about 1555 was conserved for nearly three centuries by descendants of Plantin's son-in-law, Jan Moretus. It was converted to a museum in 1877. It includes a rich collection of original material by Claude Garamond, Robert Granjon, Hendrik van den Keere, Ameet Tavernier and other early artists. Polygraphmash (HΠO Πorurpaφmaı), Moscow. The Institute for Machine Printing. Its drawing office, active from 1938 to 1992, issued type designs by Galina Bannikova, Nikolai Kudryashev, Pavel Kuzanyan, Vadim Lazurski, Anatoli Shchukin and others. Scangraphic, Hamburg. Formerly Mannesmann Scangraphic, a manufacturer of photosetting equipment. In the 198os it began to issue digital fonts. These were poorly finished but included one important design by Hermann Zapf. Schelter Giesecke, Leipzig. Johann Gottfried Schelter and Christian Friedrich Giesecke established this foundry in 1819. Many of the early faces were designed by Schelter himself. In 1946 the firm was nationalized as Typoart. D. Stempel, Frankfurt. After its foundation by David Stempel in 1895, this firm absorbed the holdings of many other German foundries. It also issued many original faces by Hermann Zapf, Gudrun Zapf-von Hesse and others, and sold type cast from the original matrices of Miklós Kis. After the foundry closed in 1986, the typographic material was transferred to a museum known as the Haus für Industriekultur in Darmstadt. The tools of Stempel's last master punchcutter, August Rosenberger (who cut the original versions of Zapf's Palatino) are now in the Gutenberg Museum, Mainz. Stephenson, Blake & Co., Sheffield, England. A metal foundry established in 1819 by John Stephenson, James Blake and William Garnet, using materials acquired chiefly from William Caslon iv. Over time, the firm has added further material from the Fann Street Foundry, the original Caslon Foundry, and other operations. Much of the inherited typographic material is now in the fledgling London Type Museum, though the company still casts and sells some type. Stone Type Foundry, Palo Alto. A digital foundry established in 1991 by Sumner Stone. It issues Cycles, Silica and other faces designed by its proprietor. Tetterode. See Amsterdam Foundry. Tiro Typeworks, Vancouver. A digital foundry established in 1994 by John Hudson and William Ross Mills. It is named for Marcus Tullius Tiro, the Roman slave (freed in 53 BC) who served as Cicero's scribe. Tiro has developed extensive expertise in the design and encoding of non-Latin faces, especially those involving many contextual alternates. Typoart, Dresden & Leipzig. A metal foundry formed in 1946 by nationalizing the existing operations of Schelter Giesecke and Schriftguss. From 1964 until 1995, when operations ceased, the head of design was Albert Kapr. The surviving typographic material is now at wMD, Leipzig. URw (Unternehmensberatung Karow Rubow Weber), Hamburg. Established as a software firm in 1971, URw was diverted into digital typography by Peter Karow, a physicist excited by typography, who joined it in 1972. It was the original developer of the Ikarus system for digitizing type and of the Hz system for paragraph-based justification. It issued a large number of historical revivals as well as original faces by Hermann Zapf, Gudrun Zapf-von Hesse and others. The firm entered receivership in 1995. Its library has since been distributed by a corporate successor known asuRw + +. Johannes Wagner, Ingolstadt. Established at Leipzig in 19o2 by Ludwig Wagner and relocated to Ingolstadt in 1949 by his son Johannes. It has acquired matrices from Berthold, Johns, Weber and other foundries, and continues to cast type. C.E. Weber Foundry, Stuttgart. A metal foundry established in 1827. It issued original faces by Georg Trump and others before it closed in 1971. The surviving material was bought by the Stempel and by Wagner foundries. wMD (Werkstätten und Museum für Druckkunst), Leipzig. A working typographic museum founded in 1994 by Eckehart Schumacher-Gebler. Its large stock of typographic material includes original punches and matrices by Johann Christian Bauer, Lucian Bernhard, Jakob Erbar, Albert Kapr, Paul Renner, Jacques Sabon and many others. Y& Y, Carlisle, Mass. A digital foundry specializing in fonts and system software for the setting of mathematics and scientific texts. It has issued original designs by Charles Bigelow, Kris Holmes and Hermann Zapf.