The items flagged by small caps seem to me essential works of reference or benchmark publications in the field. ## 1. BOOKS ARTICLES Adobe Systems Inc. PostScript Language Reference Manual. 3rd ed. Reading, Mass. 1999. Amert, Kay."Origins of the French Old Style: The Types of Simon de Colines," Printing History 26/27 (1992): 17–40. Anderson, Donald M. The Art of Written Forms. New York. 1969. Avrin, Leila. Scribes, Script and Books: The Book Arts from Antiquity to the Renaissance. Chicago & London. 1991. Barker, Nicolas. Aldus Manutius and the Development of Greek Script and Type in the Fifteenth Century. 2nd ed. New York 1992. Benjamin, Walter."The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction," in Benjamin, Illuminations. London. 197o. Bennett, Paul A., ed. Books and Printing: A Treasury for Typophiles. Cleveland. 1951. Berry, John, ed. Language Culture Type: International Type Design in the Age of Unicode. New York. 2002. BIGELOW, Charles, Donald DAY."Digital Typography." Scientific American 249.2 (August 1983): 106–119. Bloomfield, Leonard. Language. New York. 1933. Blumenthal, Joseph. Art of the Printed Book, 1455–1955. New York. 1973. Bringhurst, Robert."On the Classification of Letterforms" et seq. Parts 1-5. Claremont, Calif.: Serif 1-5 (1994-97). -. The Solid Form of Language: An Essay on Writing and Meaning. Kentville, Nova Scotia. 2004. Burke, Christopher. Paul Renner. New York. 1998. CARTER, Harry. A View of Early Typography. Oxford. 1969. Carter, Sebastian. Twentieth-Century Type Designers. London & New York. 1987. Carter, Thomas F. The Invention of Printing in China and Its Spread Westward. 2nd ed, revised by L. Carrington Goodrich. New York. 1955. Catalogue of Books Printed in the xvth Century Now in the British Museum. 12 vols. London. 1908–85. Chappell, Warren, & Robert Bringhurst. A Short History of the Printed Word. 2nd ed. Vancouver. 1999. Chiang Yee. Chinese Calligraphy: An Introduction to Its Aesthetic and Technique. 3rd ed. Cambridge, Mass. 1973. Chicago Manual of Style. 15th ed. Chicago. 2003. Consuegra, David. American Type Design and Designers. New York. 2004. Coulmas, Florian. The Writing Systems of the World. Oxford. 1989. Dair, Carl. Design with Type. 2nd ed. Toronto. 1967. DANIELS, Peter T., & William BRIGHT, ed. The World's Writing Systems. New York. 1996. Davids, Betsy, & Jim Petrillo."The Artist as Book Printer." In Joan Lyons, ed., Artists' Books. New York. 1985. Day, Kenneth, ed. Book Typography 1815–1965. London. 1966. DeFrancis, John. Visible Speech: The Diverse Oneness of Writing Systems. Honolulu. 1989. Degering, Hermann. Lettering. New York. 1965. Diringer, David. The Hand-Produced Book. London. 1953. Reprinted as The Book Before Printing, New York. 1982. Dowding, Geoffrey. Finer Points in the Spacing and Arrangement of Type. 3rd ed. London. 1966. Dreyfus, John, ed. Type Specimen Facsimiles. 2 vols. London. 1963-72. —. The Work of Jan van Krimpen. The Hague. 1952. Duncan, Harry. Doors of Perception. Austin, Texas. 1987. EISENSTEIN, Elizabeth L. The Printing Press as an Agent of Change: Communications and Cultural Transformations in Early-Modern Europe. 2 vols. Cambridge, UK. 1979. -. The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe.Cambridge, UK. 1983. Enschedé, Charles. Typefoundries in the Netherlands, translated with revisions and notes by Harry Carter. Haarlem, Netherlands. 1978. Fairbank, Alfred, Berthold Wolpe. Renaissance Handwriting London. 1960. Felici, James. The Complete Manual of Typography. Berkeley. 2003. Fine Print on Type: The Best of Fine Print Magazine on Type and Typography. San Francisco. 1988. Fournier, Pierre Simon. Fournier on Typefounding, translated & edited by Harry Carter. London. 193o. Friedlaender, Henri. Typographische ABC: Een beknopt overzicht der grondbeginselen van degelijke typographie. Den Haag. 1939. Gaur, Albertine. A History of Writing. London. 1984. Gelb, Ignace J. A Study of Writing. 2nd ed. Chicago. 1963. GILL, Eric. An Essay on Typography. 2nd ed. London. 1936. Goudy, Frederic W. Goudy's Type Designs. 2nd ed. New Rochelle, NY. 1978. -. Typologia: Studies in Type Design and Type Making. Berkeley & Los Angeles. 1940. GRAY, Nicolete. A History of Lettering. Oxford. 1986. -. Lettering as Drawing. 2 vols. Oxford. 197o. Reprinted as one vol., 1971. Grimes, Barbara F., ed. Ethnologue: Languages of the World. 14th ed. 2 vols. Dallas. 2000. [Grinevald, Paul-Marie.] Les Caractères de l'Imprimerie nationale. Paris. 1990. Handbook of the International Phonetic Association.Cambridge, UK. 1999. [HART, Horace, et al.] Hart's Rules for Compositors and Readers. 39th ed. Oxford. 1983. Hlavsa, Oldřich. A Book of Type and Design. New York. 1961. Huntley, H.E. The Divine Proportion: A Study in Mathematical Beauty. New York. 1970. Huss, Richard E. The Development of Printers' Mechanical Typesetting Methods 1822–1925. Charlottesville, Virginia. 1973. Hutner, Martin, & Jerry Kelly, ed. A Century for the Century: Fine Printed Books from 1900 to 1999. New York. 1999. International Organization for Standardization. Information Processing: Eight-bit Single-byte Coded Graphic Character Sets. 1so 8859. Parts 1–9. Geneva. 1987–89. -. Information Technology: Universal Multiple Octet Coded Character Set. 1so 10646. Parts 1-3. [Rev. ed.] Geneva.2000-2003. : . . 1977. Itten, Johannes. The Art of Color, translated by Ernst von Haagen. New York. 1961. JAsPERT, W. Pincus, et al. Encyclopedia of Typefaces. 5th ed. London. 1983. Jeffery, Lilian H. The Local Scripts of Archaic Greece. 2nd ed. Oxford. 1990. Jensen, Hans. Sign, Symbol, Script, translated by George Unwin. London. 1970. JOHNsoN, Alfred F. Selected Essays on Books and Printing. Amsterdam. 1970. . Type Designs. 3rd ed. London. 1966. Johnston, Edward. Formal Penmanship and Other Papers, edited by Heather Child. New York. 1971. -. Writing and Illuminating and Lettering. Rev. ed. London. 1944. Kapr, Albert. The Art of Lettering. Munich/New York. 1983. -. Fraktur: Form und Geschichte der gebrochenen Schriften. Mainz. 1993. . Johann Gutenberg. Aldershot, Hants. 1996. Karow, Peter. Digital Typefaces: Description and Formats. 2nd ed. Berlin. 1994. Kenney, Edward J. The Classical Text: Aspects of Editing in the Age of the Printed Book. Berkeley. 1974. Kinross, Robin. Modern Typography: An Essay in Critical History. London. 1992. Knight, Stan. Historical Scripts. 2nd ed. New Castle, Delaware. 1998. KNUTTEL, Gerard. The Letter as a Work of Art. Amsterdam. 1951. Koch, Peter, et al. Carving the Elements. Berkeley. 2004. Lange, Gerald. Printing Digital Type on the Hand-Operated Flatbed Cylinder Press. 2nd ed. Marina del Rey, Calif. 2oo1 Lawson, Alexander. Anatomy of a Typeface. Boston. 199o. Layton, Evro. The Sixteenth Century Greek Book in Italy. Venice. 1994. Le Bé, Guillaume [le jeune]. Sixteenth-Century French Typefounders, edited by Harry Carter. Paris. 1967. Le Corbusier. The Modulor. 2nd ed. Cambridge, Mass. 1954. Legros, Lucien A., & John C. Grant. Typographical Printing Surfaces. London. 1916. Lommen, Mathieu, Peter Verheul, ed. Haagse letters. [Amsterdam.] 1996. Lunde, Ken. CJKV Information Processing. Sebastopol, California. 1999. McGrew, Mac. American Metal Typefaces of the Twentieth Century. New Castle, Delaware. 1993. McLean, Ruari. Jan Tschichold: Typographer. London. 1975. —. Thames and Hudson Manual of Typography. London. 1980. Macrakis, Michael S., ed. Greek Letters: From Tablets to Pixels. New Castle, Delaware. [1997.] MARDERSTEIG, Giovanni. Scritti di Giovanni Mardersteig sulla storia dei caratteri e della tipografia. Milano. 1988. Martin, Douglas. Book Design: A Practical Introduction. New York. 1989. Massin, [Robert]. Letter and Image. London. 1970. Meggs, Philip B. A History of Graphic Design. New York. 1983. Middendorp, Jan. Dutch Type. Rotterdam. 2004. Millington, Roy. Stephenson Blake: The Last of the Old English Typefounders. London. 2002. MORIsON, Stanley. First Principles of Typography. New York. 1936. -. Letter Forms: Typographic and Scriptorial. New York. 1968. . Politics and Script. Oxford. 1972. -. Selected Essays on the History of Letter-forms. 2 vols. Cambridge, U K. 1981. Morison, Stanley, & Kenneth Day. The Typographic Book, 1450-1935. London.1963. Morison, Stanley, et al. A Tally of Types. 2nd ed. Cambridge, Uκ. 1973. Mumford, Lewis. Art and Technics. New York. 1952. NOORDZIJ, Gerrit. The Stroke of the Pen. The Hague. 1982. -. De Streek: Theorie van het schrift. Zaltbommel, Netherlands. 1985. . Letterletter. Vancouver. 2001. Pankow, David, ed. American Proprietary Typefaces. [Rochester, NY.] 1998. Panofsky, Erwin. Perspective as Symbolic Form. New York. 1991. Paput, Christian. La Gravure du poinçon typographique. Paris. 1990. Parkes, M.B. Pause and Effect. Berkeley. 1993. Prestianni, John, ed. Calligraphic Type Design in the Digital Age. San Francisco. 2001. Pullum, Geoffrey K., & William A. Ladusaw. Phonetic Symbol Guide. 2nd ed. Chicago. 1996. Pye, David. The Nature and Art of Workmanship. Cambridge, UK.1968. Tschichold, Jan. Asymmetric Typography. New York. 1967. 1scnıcnoıα, jan. Asymmeırıc 1ypograpny. New rork. 1907. Re, Margaret, et al. Typographically Speaking: The Art of Matthew Carter. Baltimore. 2002. Ritter, Robert M. The Oxford Guide to Style. Oxford. 2002. ROGERs, Bruce. Report on the Typography of the Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, UK. 1950. Ryder, John. Flowers and Flourishes. London. 1976. Sampson, Geoffrey. Writing Systems: A Linguistic Introduction. Stanford, Calif. 1985. Scholderer, Victor. Greek Printing Types 1465-1927. London. 1927. Senner, Wayne M., ed. The Origins of Writing. Lincoln, Nebraska. 1989. , .. . . 1985. Smeijers, Fred. Counterpunch. London. 1996. Snyder, Gertrude, Alan Peckolick. Herb Lubalin. New York. 1985. Spencer, Herbert. Pioneers of Modern Typography. Rev. ed. Cambridge, Mass. 1982. STEINBERG, S.H. Five Hundred Years of Printing. 3rd ed., rev. by James Moran. London. 1974. 4th ed., rev. by John Trevitt. New Castle, Delaware. 1996. STEVENS, Peter S. Patterns in Nature. Boston. 1974. Stevick, Robert D. The Earliest Irish and English Bookarts Philadelphia. 1994. sUTTON, James, & Alan BARTRAM. An Atlas of Typeforms. London. 1968. Thompson, Bradbury. The Art of Graphic Design. New Haven, Connecticut. 1988. THoMPsoN, D'Arcy. On Growth and Form. Cambridge, Uκ. 1917. Rev. ed., 1942; abridged by J.T. Bonner, 1961. Tracy, Walter. Letters of Credit. London. 1986. -. The Form of the Book, edited by Robert Bringhurst. Vancouver. 1991. TUFTE, Edward R. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, Connecticut. 1990. -. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. 2nd ed. Cheshire, Connecticut. 2001. -. Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities, Evidence and Narrative. Cheshire, Connecticut. 2001. Twitchett, Denis. Printing and Publishing in Medieval China. London. 1983. Type and Typography: Highlights from Matrix. West New York, NJ. 2003. UNICoDE Consortium. The Unicode Standard. Version 4.0.o. Boston. 2003. [Online at www.unicode.org.] UPDIKE, Daniel Berkeley. Printing Types: Their History, Forms and Use. 2nd ed. 2 vols. Cambridge, Mass. 1937. Vervliet, H.D.L. Cyrillic and Oriental Typography in Rome at the End of the Sixteenth Century: An Inquiry into the Work of Robert Granjon. Berkeley. 1981. —. Sixteenth-Century Printing Types of the Low , ed. The Book through Five Thousand Years. London. 1972. Veyrin-Forrer, Jeanne. La Lettre et la texte. Paris. 1987. Warde, Beatrice. The Crystal Goblet. London. 1955. wARDROP, James. The Script of Humanism. Oxford. 1963. WASHBURN, Dorothy K., & Donald W. CROWE. Symmetries of Culture: Theory and Practice of Plane Pattern Analysis. Seattle. 1988. West, Martin L. Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique Applicable to Greek and Latin Texts. Stuttgart. 1973. Wick, Karl. Rules for Typesetting Mathematics. Prague. 1965. Williamson, Hugh. Methods of Book Design. London. 1983. Wilson, Adrian. The Design of Books. New York. 1967. Yardeni, Ada. The Book of Hebrew Script. Jerusalem. 1991. ZAPF, Hermann. The Fine Art of Letters. New York. 2ooo. -. Hermann Zapf and His Design Philosophy. Chicago. 1987. –. Manuale Typographicum. Frankfurt. 1954. Rev. ed., Cambridge, Mass. 1970. -. Manuale Typographicum 1968. Frankfurt & New York. 1968. -. Typographic Variations. New York. 1963. Reissued, New Rochelle, NY. 1978. Zimmer, Szczepan K. The Beginning of Cyrillic Printing. New York. 1983. ## 2. PERIODICALS Fine Print. San Francisco. Quarterly. 16 vols, 1975–90. [Complete index published as issue 16.4, 2003. See also Fine Print on Type (1988).] The Fleuron. Cambridge, UK. Annual. 7 vols, 1923-30. Journal of the Printing Historical Society. London. Annual, 1965-. Letter Arts Review. Published 1982-93 as Calligraphy Review. Norman, Oklahoma. Quarterly, 1982- . Letterletter. Journal of the Association Typographique Internationale. Münchenstein, Switzerland. Semiannual through 1990, then biennial. 15 issues in all, 1985–96. [See also Gerrit Noordzij, Letterletter (2oo1).] Matrix. Andoversford, Glos. Irregular, 1981– . [See also Type and Typography: Highlights from Matrix (2oo3).] Parenthesis. Journal of the Fine Press Book Association. London, San Francisco, etc. Irregular, then semiannual, 1993- . Printing History. Journal of the American Printing History Association. New York. Semiannual, 1979– . Serif. Claremont, California. Irregular. 6 issues, 1994–98. Typografische Monatsblätter. St Gallen, Switzerland. Monthly, then bimonthly, 1881– . Typographica. London. Irregular, then semiannual. 13 + 16 issues. 1949–59; new series, 1960–67. Typography Papers. Reading, Berks. Annual, 1996– . Visible Language. Published 1967-70 as the Journal of Typographic Research. Cleveland. Quarterly, 1967– . ## 3. A SAMPLING OF WEB RESOURCES Alphabets of Europe: www.evertype.com/alphabets Ethnologue: www.ethnologue.com/web.asp International Phonetic Association: www.arts.gla.ac.uk/IPA/ ipa.html Omniglot: www.omniglot.com/writing/atoz.htm Type Libraries Museums: www.tug.org/museums.html Unicode: www.unicode.org