Typography, like language, is more important to me for what it allows to happen than for anything it accomplishes on its own. I hope that in writing a book on the subject I have not given the impression that either typography or design is an end in itself. A few old friends and typographic mentors are mentioned in the foreword. I owe thanks to many others. These include Christian Axel-Nilsson, Charles Bigelow, Frank Blokland, Fred Brady, Dan Carr, Matthew Carter, Sebastiano Cossia Castiglioni, Bur Davis, James Đð Bá Phưc, Bram de Does, the late John Dreyfus, Paul Hayden Duensing, Richard Eckersley, Peter Enneson, Christer Hellmark, Richard Hendel, Sjaak Hubregtse, John Hudson, Peter Karow, Peter Koch, John Lane, Ken Lunde, Linnea Lundquist, Jim Lyles, Rod McDonald, the late Michael Macrakis, George Matthiopoulos, William Ross Mills, Thomas Milo, Gerrit Noordzij, Peter Matthias Noordzij, Thomas Phinney, Will Powers, Jim Rimmer, Richard Seibert, Robert Slimbach, Jack Stauffacher, Sumner Stone, Adam Twardoch, Carol Twombly, Gerard Unger, Ken Whistler, Glenda Wilshire, Vladimir Yefimov, Doyald Young and Maxim Zhukov – who have made this a much better book, and its author a less ignorant human being, in a variety of ways. Translations of the work – especially those into Russian and Greek – have put me increasingly in touch with typographers far more at home than I with Greek, Cyrillic and other non-Latin type. Their careful reading and engagement with the text has taught me many things. In this regard, I'm especially grateful to Vladimir Yefimov and Maxim Zhukov. Most of the drawings were made by hand for the original edition and recreated for the second in digital form by Glenn Woodsworth. For those concerned about such things, I might record that the first edition of this book was set in Ventura Publisher software, the second edition in Quark, and the third in InDesign. With each such shift has come a marked increase in technical capability. I have still, in every case, been obliged at times to subvert the software, forcing it to do things its makers didn't foresee, or things they did foresee and expressly excluded. The book has involved the close testing of many fonts of type, most of them digital, some of them metal. These have come from nearly all the active foundries listed in appendix E, and from some whose operations have now ceased. It remains the case that I have never yet tested a perfect font, no matter whether it came in the form of foundry metal, a matrix case, a strip of film or digital information. I have tested very beautiful and powerful designs, and extraordinary feats of hardware and software engineering, but no font has crossed my path that could not be improved by sensitive editing. One reason is, the task is never done: no designer can foresee the inner logic of all possible texts and languages, nor all the other uses to which type is rightly put. Another reason is that setting type is a collaborative exercise, like acting from a script or playing from a score. The editing of type, like the editing of music, and the tuning of fonts, like the tuning of instruments, never ends. There are those who dream of a perfect world in which copyrighted text is translated into copyrighted glyphs through copyrighted rules with no more human intervention than it takes to feed a tape to a machine, while money flows in perpetuity to everyone involved. There are also those who think that putting chairs and air-conditioners in hell will make it just as good as heaven. Actually, working with type is an earthly task, much less like sitting down and turning on Tv than like walking on your hands across an ever-varied, never-ending landscape that is otherwise too far away to see.