# Introduction to the Readings in Part I

Design, history and economics were the three key themes that John Heskett tackled in his work between the late 1960s and 2010. The texts below offer introductions to how Heskett understood the interaction of these terms.

Design was the subject matter of all of his work from 1967 onwards and the more he pursued it the broader became his understanding. From a professional field in the 1970s and1980s, by the end of his life he was seeing it as a fundamental human capacity. His broadening understanding of design is introduced here, appropriately, by the short chapter from 2002 which opens the successful (and still in print) Design: A Very Short Introduction. The question mark in the title of this reading indicates that no definitive answer to this question can – or even perhaps should – be given.

But Heskett was trained as, and for forty years professionally acted as, a historian. The second reading, Commerce or Culture: Industrialization and Design opens to history and specifically the history of the industrial epoch and of design’s roles in that history – the fundamental subject matter of most of Heskett’s work. But precisely because one is dealing with design, and hence necessarily as Heskett says, with the future, then history cannot be simply history per se, antiquarianism, the past thought of as simply ‘past,’ but rather history as a way of looking at, and holding together, past, present and future; history as understanding, with a normative cast and a view to action. The pairs, ‘Commerce or Culture’/‘Industrialization and Design’, stand for the tensions inescapable in design. The historian’s function, Heskett implies, is to be articulate concerning them, to tease out their nature and their implications.

Finally, the seminar extract ‘Design considered from Standpoint of Economics/Economics from the Standpoint of Design,’ comes from the notes to the extended but unpublished seminar ‘Design and the Creation of Value,’ given to graduate students in Chicago and Hong Kong from the late 1990s to 2010. The essay stands for the central role that economics and economic thought had in his work. Economics and economic history were after all the general subject matter of Heskett’s education at the LSE in the 1950s. They were the underlying theme or content of his historical work across the 1980s and after 1990 they become the increasing focus of his teaching and writing. By the end of his life Heskett is adamant that design cannot be understood without economics – since if nothing else it occurs, professionally at least, only very largely within, and as an integral part of, economic life. But he was equally clear that an economics that could not grasp the contribution of design to the creation of value was inadequate as economics. This dialectical play between these positions is caught in this extract.

It should be noted that it is not an accident that this paper formed part of a seminar. If there was a fourth key theme in Heskett’s work and life, it was pedagogy: teaching in the high sense of the word, with the necessity of clarity and precision of language that that entails. This sense enters all of his works. Heskett was an academic, but like all those who think about design, he could not but also be concerned with outcomes and by implication with futures. This double concern animates these opening readings. The texts below are, of course, not the only pieces that might be used to illuminate the key themes of his thought, but they are indicative of his life-long struggles to articulate his understandings of ‘design, history and economics’ across a variety of audiences, from the general public to academics and students, and to create bridges between the study of design and its policy and practice. They provide, therefore, in their diversity a suitable introduction to John Heskett’s work and thought.