# Introduction to the Readings in Part I

As has already been noted in the introduction, in the first half of his academic life John Heskett was primarily a historian. Indeed, even towards the end of his last decade or so of work, in Chicago and Hong Kong, when he was pursuing most strongly the relation between design and economics and design and business, he was drafting a ms. Crafts, Commerce and Industry on the global history of design from earliest times. So history is central to Heskett’s project – and he was, after all, as noted in the introduction, one of the first serious historians of design in the United Kingdom. Trained as an economic historian, he never made the mistake of collapsing design into an a-historical entity (which by a miracle is modelled on design as it exists as a professional activity in that precise moment the designer or design scholar gets to work). Heskett was a historian of design and was so in three principal registers – the history of designing and making in the pre-industrial world; the history of design and designing in the industrial period; and the history and role of design in Germany from c. 1870 to c. 1945. The readings in Part II are organized on this basis.

The readings in Part II are divided into three sections: (a) the history of pre-industrial design, (b) the history of designing in the industrial period and (c) Heskett’s work on design in Germany from c.1870 to c. 1945.

## a) Designing and making in the pre-industrial world

The readings begin, chronologically, with some fragments on pre-industrial design, although, as the introduction has already noted, these actually came late in his career. It was only in the late 1990s, when he began the research for the project on the ‘global history of design’ that he turned to looking in-depth at pre-industrial artefacts. One virtue of this material in his eyes was that it allowed him to break out of the limits of professional design and to begin to explore the history of design both as an integral moment of making (such that in many cases one cannot really speak of a distinct ‘design’ process) and as an anthropological capacity and capability, that is, one endemic to human life in the wise sense. This sense comes across in the short talk which constitutes reading #4, ‘Some lessons of design history,’ but it is even more apparent in reading #5, which reproduces the opening and closing sections of his project on the global history of design Crafts, Commerce and Industry. Reading #6 then, in turn, takes up the general sense of ‘designing in the context of life’ through a telling case study of the ‘uses’ of history for designing today developed via a short but effective study of the history of methods of Chinese cookery. Reading #7 then extends the historical range of the exploration of pre-industrial ‘design’ through three fragments taken from the Crafts … ms., first on the material culture of nomads, second on the roles of trade in designed goods and third on the craftsmanship of slaves. As noted already, the Crafts, Commerce and Industry project remained unfinished at his death. Nonetheless, the issues that the ms. deals with begin to open out, and in that way challenge, some of the norms of our more recent history.

## b) Designing in the industrial world

But John Heskett began in the 1970s as a historian of industrial design and of design in the industrial period. This is the double subject matter of his first book, Industrial Design, published in 1980 and this sense that there were two histories of design at work in this period (a history of a profession or field and a history of a wider practice or capacity) pervades his work, extending into how he conceived of the history of the profession and more generally of the history of design in the industrial epoch as a field of study (see reading #9 (i)). His stance is graphically illustrated in the contrasting book reviews also given in reading #9 where Heskett shows his impatience with those who he regards as myth-makers in the field of design (see #9(ii)), whilst supporting strongly, the more contextual and integrated study of the intertwining of objects, subjects and economy in the industrial period (see #9 (iii)). His own approach is methodologically encapsulated in the extract from Industrial Design published below (as reading #8). Indebted neither to art or architectural history (Pevsner) nor to the history of technology (Giedion), this is one of the first histories of design to focus on the context of production.

The chapter from Industrial Design looks at the very largest scale of industrial production. (In its largely US focus, it complements reading #2 which looked at parallel developments in industrial production but almost wholly in the context of the British industrial revolution.) In similar vein, the chapter on the growth and developing roles of industrial design in Japan (reading #10) is not simply an account of Japanese designers ‘by name’ as it were, but rather an exploration of the development of the structural role of industrial design in relation to Japanese industry and government policy in the post-war period. This chapter looks forward to, and gives historical perspective on, some of his later work on design policy and design and business relations in Asia.

As a critical commentary on these readings, it might be observed just how ambiguous an entity the history of design in the industrial period is as a field of study. Heskett saw this history in at least two ways: a history of industrial design [readings #8, #9 and #10] and as a history of design[ing] in the industrial period [largely reading #2 – and also the chapters on the industrial period in the Craft … ms]. This ambiguity carries through the field, but it is also clearly a question of where the history of designing in this period ends and begins. Almost no conventional histories of the period mention design in any significant way (take for example Eric Hobsbawm’s magisterial series of books from Age of Revolution through Age of Capital to Age of Extremes – and including also Industrialization and Empire on the economic history of the nineteenth century). From the stance of ‘history’, design is all but irrelevant. Yet, design as a professional activity is brought into being by the Industrial Revolution. That there is ‘design’ in any professional sense is a consequence of industrialization. For the latter, it is an objective requirement – if it were not it would not exist. Yet from the side of the ‘history of design’ this relationship is uneasily thought. Economics is almost by definition excluded from history. Very often technologies and modes of production, and even consumption, are not far behind. The ‘natural’ focus on the quasi-autonomy of the profession, of the story of design’s coming-to-be as a quasi-autonomous activity becomes, almost without reflection, a default stance. Heskett was writing at time when these contending impulses were both present (they could not quite be denied) and yet often tacit (How does the history of capitalism fit into the Victoria and Albert museum?) The answer is that, except for superficial consideration, it does not. One consequence of this, however, is that in many ways the history of design[ing] in the industrial period remains underdeveloped. Part, and in fact a very significant part, of why this is so is institutional, in terms of both educational institutions and publishing. The ‘history of design’ as a pedagogical adjunct to the study of practice ‘naturally’ focuses on the rise of the profession. Publishing too focuses here. The profession itself, while sometimes welcoming histories of itself, has scant interest in wider issues, while from their side, economic history, economics, even the history of technology (until recently), have evidenced little interest in the history of the intersections of the coming into being of ‘designing’ (in the modern sense) and wider social and economic histories. All of this plays into what we can feel as the ambiguities and limits of this field, limits that extend quite beyond the remit of Heskett (particularly given the institutions he worked in, especially after 1989 – neither the Institute of Design in IIT in Chicago nor the School of Design in Hong Kong Polytechnic University had the slightest institutional interest in wider historical study).

## c) Design in Germany 1870–1945

If the histories of design in industrialization already raise questions of policy and action, it is important to keep in mind that across the 1970s, Heskett was predominantly a researcher in the history of design, specifically in relation to Germany. As noted earlier, he never undertook a PhD. Had he done so, it would have been on German design. The third sub-section of the readings in history deals with his interest in German culture and design. Three texts are offered. The first is a chapter from his 1989 book German Design 1870–1918 (the first of a planned three volumes – the collapse of the publisher ended the project) which, in an echo of what was just noted above in relation to the work on the rise of design in Japan, focuses on the interaction of design and government policy in the years either side of 1900. The chapter is a relatively early example of Heskett’s insistence that in the history of design questions of policy and institution matter in terms of how they bear on the forms that design takes both as an activity and in terms of things made. The value of the piece lies in how Heskett shows us, with commendable clarity, how policies on state support for design, on design education and on infrastructural investment in cities – above all, the S-Bahn and U-Bahn urban rail systems in the largest German cities, especially Berlin – bore on both the general practices and particular instances of German design in the period around 1900.

The second piece (#12) is a short chapter on ‘the industrial applications of tubular steel’. This deals briefly but concisely with how this characteristic material of the ‘modern’ 1920s was not only used in iconic designed furniture (the Breuer chair et al.) but in no less significant industrial applications. It is essentially a brief study of how a particular development of the material enabled the re-configuration of a far wider range of products and systems.

Finally, reading #13 is one of three papers he published in English on art and design in Nazi Germany. Heskett spent time in Germany in the late 1970s on a study grant looking at the question of Nazi design. This was at a time when there was considerable social and political ferment, not least around the questions of how the art and design of the Nazi period should be evaluated. Across the 1950s and 1960s, a very simple model had dominated. Obvious in its predictability, it had maintained that all Nazi art and design was ‘bad’, that is, retrograde, kitsch and anti-modern. It followed that 1933 had marked the end of all ‘good’ (i.e. modern, progressive, rational) design – whereas the onset of new democratic (West) Germany in 1949 marked the return to the principles of ‘good’ design. By the 1970s this simplistic view was under challenge. One of Heskett’s first published articles, ‘Art and Design in Nazi Germany’ (History Workshop Journal #6, 1978, pp. 139–53) explored in some depth the exhibitions and scholarship that were beginning to challenge the prevailing post-war orthodoxy. His own contribution to the field, originally for a German publication (‘Archaismus und Modernismus im Design im dritten Reich’ in B. Hinz et al. (eds), Anabas Verlag, Giessen, 1979) was a paper he published in 1980, in Block Magazine as ‘Modernism and Archaism in Design in the Third Reich’.<sup>1</sup> It is this paper that is reproduced below as reading #13. The chapter comprehensively rethinks the relation of modernity and design in the Third Reich, teasing out a more complex relation to the ‘modern’ in Nazi ideology and the everyday material practices of the regime.

## Note

1 This paper was reprinted in 1990 in The Nazification of Art, ed. Brandon Taylor and Wilfried van der Will (Winchester: Winchester press) and then re-presented again, but in a quite different form, in 1995, as ‘Design in Interwar Germany’, as an essay for the exhibition catalogue of the opening show of the Wolfsonian Foundation in Miami, Designing Modernity: The Arts of Reform and Persuasion. This last version is beautifully illustrated using artefacts from the Wolfsonian collection.

(A) Designing and Making in the Pre-Industrial World