# Crafts, Commerce, Industry: A Global History of Design: Introduction and Conclusion

Reading #5 contains the opening section and the concluding paragraphs to the unpublished ms. “Crafts, Commerce, Industry: A Global History of Design,” which Heskett drafted between the late 1990s and around 2004. The text is in fact perhaps better read as an attempt at a history of making in which the entanglement of commerce and culture, and production and design, are explored across global history. Reproduced here are the opening and concluding paragraphs to the ms. These short fragments cannot do justice to the scope of the text as a whole but they do in many ways contain the essence of Heskett’s underlying vision and understanding of design as a human capacity deeper and more extensive than its merely professional instantiation.

## Introduction

Let a man pull himself away from the comfort of the academies and go down into the workshops, to collect information about the arts and set it out in a book which will persuade artisans to read, philosophers to think usefully, and the great to make at last some beneficial use of their authority and wealth …

Denis Diderot, 1751<sup>1</sup>

I write these words on a computer in my room at home. The table at which I sit was custom-made to accommodate all the ancillary items needed in my work: machines such as modem, printer, scanner and copier, and stacks of documents. Shelves above hold a clutter of objects: computer disks, reference books, books to be read, numerous family photographs, a Braun clock, a head of a Chinese goddess some 1500 years old, a bone-carved Buddhist amulet from Tibet, a small metal model of a bus that carried me as a child to visit my grandparents, and so on.

Two observations emerge from this partial inventory: firstly, all the objects mentioned were designed and made by other human beings at various times, in widely differing contexts using a broad spectrum of materials wrought by very different means: hand techniques, simple mechanized processes or mass production assembly lines. Secondly, while some might potentially have monetary value, it is not the reason they are there. Instead, all have personal meaning, in terms of people, places and experiences with which they are connected. Although this particular array of objects is specific to my life, in innumerable variations other people around the world similarly construct environments great and small that serve their purposes and have meaning for them. The simple point is that objects, communications and spaces of one kind or another are extraordinarily important in people’s lives, yet they remain a largely underestimated aspect of our culture. As Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Eugene Rochberg-Halton have written: “Psychologists in general have followed the lead of Freud and Jung by ignoring the place of things in the daily commerce of existence.” <sup>2</sup> Neither is it only psychologists who have done so.

Such ignorance in a materialistic age in which the role of things becomes more continually more widespread is curious. In 44 AD, the Roman statesman Cicero could write, in contrast, of:

l the obvious fact that it is only the labour of man’s hands that places the profits and advantages from inanimate objects at our disposal.

l if mankind did not possess these skills, there would be no healing of the sick, no pleasure for the healthy, no food, no comforts at all. And these are just the things that make a human being’s civilized life different from the existence of a beast.<sup>3</sup>

This book is an attempt to explain the evolution of the human capacity to design—the skills of shaping and making objects, communications, environments and systems—that serve our practical needs and gives meaning to our lives. As such, it is one of the fundamental characteristics of what it is to be human, as Cicero was aware, and the root of both great achievements and, increasingly in our age, of acute tensions and threatening dilemmas.

The ability to design initially depends upon a capacity for abstraction, the ability to separate a concept of the essence of something from the reality itself. We also have the capacity to express these abstractions in terms of symbols, such as words or drawings. These symbolic representations might refer to forms in external reality but can in turn take on a reality of their own. In this process of abstraction from life and reference back to it, there is the possibility of change, of altering innumerable aspects of the original concept.

Abstract thought not only enables us to comprehend and record such symbols, therefore, but also to think in terms of them, to envisage modifications and variations, which can lead to contemplating something substantially different, such as new or modified forms that are believed to be better in some respect. “Everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones,” wrote Herbert Simon.<sup>4</sup>

Ideas of possibility thus embody intentionality and are the generative mainspring of the ability to design. His conception of design, however, was of a conceptual process that was common to many professional disciplines. Simon continues:

The intellectual activity that produces material artefacts is no different fundamentally from the one that prescribes remedies for a sick patient or the one that devises a new sales plan for a company or a social welfare policy for a state. Design, so construed, is the core of all professional training; it is the principal mark that distinguishes the professions from the sciences.<sup>5</sup>

In addition to this general process, however, every discipline has skills and methods specific to it that are essential for it to function practically. In a more specific sense, human beings are equipped with the ability to mould and transform physical reality through the knowledge, tools and processes that constitute technology, enabling concepts to be turned into tangible realities. In other words, from understanding external reality by means of abstraction, through the ability to design in terms of concepts and plans for change, we have the ability to creatively transform external reality to better suit our needs and aspirations. In so doing, we design a world of artifice that imposes human concepts of order and structure in contrast to the unpredictable and untrammelled forces of the natural world.

This underpins another critical factor, which is the difference between processes of change in nature and in human societies. Natural change is random and accidental through processes of evolution, of mutation and survival of the fittest. Human initiated change, in contrast, is capable by design of being rational, deliberate and goal-oriented, which, of course, does not mean it always is so – the role of subjective and emotional factors should never be underestimated. The capacity to design has reached a point, however, where few aspects of life on our planet are totally unaffected by or invulnerable to it. Indeed, it can be argued that the scale and reach of this capacity for transformation is at a stage where the dangers of our collective ability to implement change are far outrunning our ability to comprehend or control its full effects.

The contrast of the world of artifice with the world of nature is not restricted to external reality, but also mirrors a basic dichotomy in all human beings. We are simultaneously the products of both nature and nurture: the inheritors of a vast process of natural evolution reflected in our genetic structure, and of a cultural inheritance embodied in the societies and value systems into which we are born and subsequently live. The natural latent capacity to design in all human beings will depend, in the extent to which it is realized and the form in which this occurs, on the cultural context—the inherited accumulation of tools, forms, procedures, organizations and values of any society, which condition the attitudes and activities of its members as to what is “normal” or “right” and the range of forms considered appropriate for any purpose.

Culture is not immutable, but is also susceptible to change. A characteristic of almost all other species than Homo sapiens in the natural world, whether plants or animals, is they must physically change to adapt to different contexts. In other words, their nature is inseparable from a particular set of conditions. Remove or drastically alter the natural environment of particular flora or fauna and the threat of extinction becomes very real. Human beings, in contrast, respond either to changes in an environment, or to changes of environment, by means of cultural adaptation. They do this on two levels: firstly, by modifying cultural behaviour to acknowledge change; secondly, by radically altering or modifying a physical environment to suit pre-existing cultural values. The influence of culture on the capacity to create an environment of artifice, by design, is the variable separating the condition of human beings from both their own innate natural constitution and the rest of the natural world.

There are many problems in studying how this ability to design has evolved. Above all, since it has been a constant feature of the life of Homo sapiens, its manifestations have evolved in innumerable ways and variations at particular times and places. Attempting to write a history of the whole range of activity grouped under this rubric would be an exceedingly difficult undertaking. Even focusing on a segment of the whole to illustrate the overall pattern of evolution in design—the approach adopted here— involves daunting problems.

The particular focus in this book is on three-dimensional design as used in everyday life, not just in terms of the objects and appliances found in homes, but also at work, in public places, in the forms of transportation in which goods and people are carried and objects used as instruments of status or weapons of war. Reference will be made to other forms of design when necessary or relevant. The intention is to trace how design has evolved from early beginnings in nomadic societies, through the evolution of various phases of craft activity linked to agriculture and settlement, in which handwork has been the dominant factor, into larger-scale commercial organizations, often with a truly global reach in trade, from which emerged modern industrial systems still evolving new variants. It is concerned not only with the utilitarian aspects of such objects but also with their meaning and significance in the lives of the peoples who made and used them, in other words, both how they came to be made and what they meant in use.

The approach will necessarily be broad and synoptic. Within a chronological framework there will be a focus on major themes. The chapters are thus more essays on these themes and how they evolved and developed within a general chronological framework, with considerable overlaps and backtracking, rather than attempting a sequential account of seemingly inevitable progress.

If the capacity to design, the kinds of ends it serves and how it is understood depends upon material, social, political, economic and cultural factors, then these will need to be an integral element of the study of design. A basic difference exists, for example, between human societies at different levels of complexity. As they have evolved from tribal, nomadic units to settled groups in ever-larger agglomerations, so there is a perceptible change of emphasis in the roles of artefacts, from personal use to exchange by barter and gift, to the evolution of markets, the commercialization of production and exchange, and the spread of industrialisation and globalisation

Another level of difference is that between conditions of scarcity or abundance. Use and convenience tend to predominate as criteria in a condition of shortages, but as higher standards of living emerge, even to the point of superfluity, so symbolic meaning, understood in the modern age as fashion and life-style, become primary criteria. The geographical conditions determining the availability of materials or framing possibilities of access and trade are, of course, also important defining elements.

## Concluding thoughts

Mass production is not going to disappear, indeed in some important aspects it is moving into what could be called a “super-mass” phase, with some categories of production being organized on a truly global level. As has happened repeatedly in the past, however, new layers of activity are becoming superimposed upon past patterns and in the last quarter of the twentieth century new tendencies have appeared to signal yet another wave of change.

The deepest element in this transformation has been the rapid expansion of electronic technology, bringing change on the same fundamental scale earlier wrought by steam and electrical power. The incredible computing capacity of the silicon chip has made possible a degree of miniaturization in innumerable devices at increasingly lower cost, bringing hitherto undreamed of access to information and computing power. In its early stages, analogous to the concept of the horseless carriage before it evolved into the automobile, the desktop computer took the form of a television screen and a typewriter keyboard with a format dating from 1873, before the more mobile laptop configuration began to take over. It has rapidly evolved into other forms linking various technologies in ever-new combinations and there is clearly still much experiment in search of defining standards. Embedding computer chips in a wide variety of products is still in the early stages but has huge potential, such as chairs or sports shoes that can configure to the dimensions and posture of a user, or clothing that can monitor vital health functions.

One of the most important results of the electronic revolution has been to reduce the monolithic nature of some aspects of mass production. Computerized numerical control of manufacturing machinery means what is made on a production line can be reconfigured in minutes, simply by changing inputs to the computer program instead of having to physically reconstruct the line. Flexible manufacturing is thus becoming an alternative to mass production, enabling markets to be broken down into ever smaller segments with production oriented to the needs of groups and even individuals. Together with information technology enabling close contact to be maintained between producer and user, this creates the possibility of items being made to the specific dimension of particular people rather than them having to conform to standard specifications. The flexibility of both product and on-line information systems can therefore recreate some aspects of older concepts of craft practice, of smaller scale operations and personal interaction typical of pre-industrial methods, with an emphasis on accessibility for greater numbers of people.

Several design approaches to incorporate possibilities of flexibility are already in widespread use, including concepts such as platform products and modular systems, some with deep historical roots. In platform approaches a basic configuration is designed to which additional components can be added to make products appropriate for a specific market. The Ford Motor Company, for example, has reorganized its operations on a global basis, rather than in geographical units all producing their own designs. The global platform concept enables a vehicle in a particular category to be basically designed using components sourced around the world at lowest cost, and then detailed to suit the needs of geographical markets.

The use of modular systems is similar in principle, in that they depend upon a series of standard units and accessories, all compatible that can be configured to the needs of particular customers. Dell attained market leadership in the sale of personal computers by offering modular components that customers could configure to their requirements and order on-line.

Both platform and modular concepts have in common that they are not conceived primarily in terms of the final product, but of a system capable of being adapted to personal needs. Computers and the Internet have opened up possibilities for users to be involved in decisions about what kind of products they want and how they can be adapted to their needs. This tilting of the balance from production-centred approaches to design, as typified in mass production, to more user-centred concepts is likely to increase. A consequence is a change of emphasis in the role of designers from that of creating a final form, to one of acting as an enabler, creating systems that best allow users to take vital decisions. The computer on which these words are written is a good example. Although the physical form is highly standardized, the software allows anyone to configure the machine and adapt how it is used to the most highly personal and individualistic needs. This, with the small scale and low cost in which all this constantly increasing power is concentrated, opens up enormous possibilities, but inevitably, as the economist Joseph Schumpeter observed, innovation on that scale involves a process of Creative Destruction. The new destroys not just product concepts, but invested capital and worker’s skills. There is a deadly dance at the heart of capitalism in which design plays a leading role. Apple’s iPod is an example. A brilliant exploitation of new miniaturised technology, it also allowed users to download music in terms appropriate to them, with a high degree of personal choice, which places into question many products and procedures in the music industry, who naturally enough wish to avoid seeing their companies rapidly disappear like the stagecoaches between Liverpool and Manchester.

Another aspect of growth is in the scale of many design projects, large, complex networks being conceived as a totality. Designing a hospital in these terms, for example, requires that the needs of users be met on multiple levels— doctors, nurses, technicians, administrators, patients and their visitors— rather than a piecemeal assembly with each aspect considered separately and no-ones’ needs adequately met. Transport systems and airports are other examples of such approaches. Just as in the past, new roles have opened up for designers in response to new demands, so designers increasingly need to work in teams with a spectrum of both other specialist designers and other disciplines, with appropriate methodologies to cope with the vast range of information and applications necessary to meet the demands of structuring complex systems. Individual subjectivity is hardly likely to be capable of understanding such patterns of complexity, instead large-scale computer programs and structured knowledge will be a necessary underpinning for creativity. Large-scale projects also imply a move to a more strategic role, in which as much emphasis will be placed on design as a planning process as on the execution in detail of various visual forms. In other words, a new layer will be added to those that already exist, concerned above all with how technology and systems are humanized, configured to better meet the needs of people, while at the same time meeting financial and temporal targets. The layering that has characterized its historical evolution, therefore, is still an emphatic feature of the contemporary design landscape.

We have reached a point where in innumerable ways design determines the environments of the future in all their aspects, playing a primary role in how technology is harnessed for human purposes. History can help us understand how it functions but the choices needing to be made for the future often have no precedent. Design functions overwhelmingly in the arena of business where the major decisions about how and why it is applied are made. Whether this can result in design being used wisely as well as profitably is open to question—the two are often seen as polar opposites but need not necessarily conflict.

If history is one of the major means we have of understanding the present and considering possibilities of what could or should emerge, it is difficult to be sanguine about the future. The evidence is that while our abilities in technology and design have increased exponentially, the purposes to which we apply this vast potential show little advance.

One thing seems to me clear. If we fail to understand that the environment we inhabit is increasingly of human design and accept responsibility for the consequences, the outlook is indeed fraught with danger of our own making. A starting point is to comprehend this ability to design as one of the central capabilities of human existence and a vital determinant of that elusive concept of quality of life.

The objects, the physical evidence that has survived and constitute much of the evidence in the history of design, demonstrate the unbounded creative ability that exists in human beings. From the earliest manifestations of design onwards there is a rich material legacy filled with magnificent achievements and inspiration. This leads to questions about what the legacy of present generations will be to those who follow. In looking at how this human creative capacity called design is being applied in contemporary life and society any conclusions must be more guarded.

We now have an ability to intervene in the most basic aspects of life and the structure of our planet. In terms of how we use this ability, however, we seem to have learned little. Designers have begun to think more systematically in many respects, but the concept of human life being part of an intricate web, with a high degree of interdependence among the component parts, has made little headway. The profligate manner in which finite resources are plundered for short-term financial benefit shows scant concern for the future and designers actively involved these processes are part of the problem.

Neither does the behaviour of human beings one to another provide much reassurance. The number of people killed as a result of deliberate human decisions and actions in the twentieth century has exceeded all great disasters of any kind whether human or natural in the history of the world. As Cicero put it almost two thousand years ago, “there is not a shadow of doubt that man has the power to be the greatest agent both of benefit and of harm towards his fellow-men.”

Design in its forms—artefacts, communications, structures and systems— played an instrumental role in these destructive acts. Ironically, the finest contemporary examples of how objects can be consistently designed in superb detail to fit human physical dimensions in order to increase comfort and effectiveness in use are provided by firearms. It is therefore impossible to depict design as an innately benign activity. Instead it is caught in the endemic dilemma of what it is to be human beings: simultaneously creative titans and moral pygmies. We have learnt to control innumerable aspects of our environment and existence, but seem incapable or unwilling to control ourselves. Designers alone, therefore, cannot provide a solution to all the proliferating problems caused by human actions in our time. They could do more, but only if the desire for them to do so exists in societies around the globe.

We have in the history of design an astonishingly rich inheritance. What is even more amazing is that with every new-born child the latent potential for similar achievement exists in this incredibly fertile human capability. It is the greatest renewable resource we possess and to acknowledge its creative potential could be the finest legacy we leave for our children and grandchildren.

## References

1 Diderot, Denis, (translated and edited by John Hope Mason and Robert Wokler). “Article on ‘Art’ from Volume 1 of the Encyclopédie.” Political Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992, p. 5.

2 Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly and Eugene Rochberg-Halton. The Meaning of Things. Cambridge University Press, 1981, p. 25.

3 Cicero. “On Duties (II)”, in Cicero: On the Good Life. (Translated and Introduced by Michael Grant). London: Penguin Books, 1971, p. 126.

4 Simon, Herbert A. The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, (3rd edition), June 1981, p. 129.

5 Simon, p. 129.