# (A) Corporate Design Strategies: Design between Economics and Practice

# by Sharon Helmer Poggenpohl

In the nineteenth century, Victorian historian Thomas Carlyle coined the phrase ‘the dismal science’ with reference to economics. As twentieth- and twenty-first-century life is driven increasingly by seemingly imperative financial issues framed by quantitative metrics, it is foolhardy for design to downplay or ignore entirely its relationship to this unavoidable reality. But who among us has tried to understand this linkage?

Thoughtful and soft-spoken, John Heskett brought his background from the London School of Economics and his interest in history together, creating a new lens through which to examine design. He respected the quantitative, but was equally concerned with the more elusive qualitative aspects. His focus was to uncover and frame two essential ideas: how design delivered value to both business concerns and product users and how design might be better integrated in business and more fully incorporate its fundamental value – design thinking. He approached these two ideas through practical histories of design and business that went well beyond typical design histories that follow an art historical trajectory or celebrate short-term visual and material trends, and through scholarship based on his understanding of economic theory and business practice.

Design in its myriad realizations was hard to pin down in simple terms, but Heskett persevered, coming to the understanding that design was layered in multiple ways within business, culture and user experience. His investigations brought him to an international perspective regarding governmental policy as it influenced business and design. He was critical always, looking for the edge where improvement or newer ideas could flourish. No one’s pawn, he worked from his own perspective and sought to help design better understand the integrity of product development and realization that made for business success through user satisfaction.

Heskett was critical of the state of design education. Design thinking could provide much more than superficial styling and technical expertise. He understood that difficult problems and emerging opportunities required collaborative effort from diverse people; that human-centred design approaches helped to eliminate some of the uncertainties that design necessarily faces; that business and design were partners in change; and that the pursuit of design history was more than objects, images and dates, but a search for effective patterns that pointed to an improved life environment.

His work provides a foundation that others may build upon. The lens he created for understanding and positioning design practice within business with quality-of-life improvement as the goal can sustain lively historical approaches to design in which we can learn from both successes and failures. Further, it suggests both a deeper look into economic theory and the practical integration of such theory with business and design. He was constantly interested in the question of what a case study in design might be. Compared with business or medical case histories, design is nowhere. Unfortunately, none of his students picked up this important investigation, but someone may yet establish a framework that could invite broad participation and provide for comparison among cases that could grow into a practical database. He leaves a legacy of critical thinking and research – opening design in a new and vital way.