# Teaching an Old Dog New Tricks: How RCA Is Using Design as a Strategic Tool

Like the afterglow of a brilliant sunset, images remain potent long after the substance behind them has disappeared. In innumerable antique shops in the 1980s, large sums of money were being asked for plaster images of Nipper the Dog, a Jack Russell terrier that once listened with cocked head to a phonograph loudspeaker in electrical goods stores across the nation. The mascot of the Radio Corporation of America, Nipper was the best known terrier in history, according to an illustrated history of American business from 1972. A decade later, RCA had become the dog of the consumer electronics industry. Acid comments were made about it being easier to buy the company than it was to acquire one of the pricey plaster canines from the nostalgia emporia.

How did this happen? The history of RCA in the last twenty years is a depressing chronicle typical of numerous American businesses that have crumbled under the competitive pressures of companies from around the world. Yet there are signs that RCA could be making a comeback, using design as the spearhead of recovery in every aspect of its business. In this, too, could Nipper be a symbol for a broader movement in U.S. industry in the 1990s?

Nipper was originally a dog inherited by painter Francis Barraud when his brother died. The dog’s interest in listening to his phonograph inspired a painting that Barraud sold to The Gramophone Company. Following mergers, it later passed to the Victor Talking Machine Company and, in

1929, to the Radio Corporation of America. Together with the trademark of Nipper, the painting’s original title, “His Master’s Voice,” helped to create an inimitable brand identity. It represented a company that, in the age of mass production, was a leader in radio, phonograph and, later, television technologies.

RCA’s success continued after 1945, satisfying the demands pent up by the war and tapping into the expansion of television broadcasting. In the 1960s, key indicators, including figures for market leadership, product innovation, quality and cost, revealed that RCA still led the field. Japanese products were beginning to appear but did not yet have a high reputation. Here, as in many other sectors, however, the Japanese were learning fast.

Like many American companies that prospered on the basis of the large domestic market, RCA became complacent at precisely the time when Japanese and European competitors were starting to compete on a global basis. These overseas competitors had restructured in the post war period, introducing refined technology and new standards of manufacturing quality. Led by the Sony Trinitron, a revolution in consumer expectations took place in the 1970s, as import penetration increased to respond, RCA was forced into the lower end of the market to compete on cost alone.

By 1986, the company was in deep trouble, leading to what was officially termed a merger with General Electric. The reality, however, was an ignominious take-over and the dismemberment of the old RCA business.

No prospects of revival emerged from these wrenching changes. Investment was desperately needed, but GE was unwilling to make it. In fact, GE management considered RCA to be “outside the circle,” lacking the profit potential that would warrant investment. By 1987, RCA had lost market share for eight years in a row. The company was sold that year for cash to Thomson, a French state-owned electronics company, and another round of reorganization and cuts ensued.

For long-time employees of RCA like Joseph R Clayton, these events were deeply painful. Reflecting on the merger, he shakes his head and says, “GE was too financially oriented. They simply wrote us off.” Clayton was appointed senior vice-president for RCA’s American television division in 1989; in other words, he was made responsible for the substance of RCAs TV business, based in Indianapolis with manufacturing plants in Canada and Mexico as well as the U.S. He came to his new position with the conviction that an entrepreneurial approach could revive the company, now officially known as Thomson Consumer Electronics, or TCE (although the RCA brand name was maintained). In terms of personnel, location and attitude, Clayton asserts, this is still an American company. “We created the market for consumer electronics in the U.S.,” he says proudly. “No one owes us a living but we have a right to a place in that market. My aim is make sure we stay in it.”

## An entrepreneurial approach to design

Joe Clayton began his RCA career in sales, and something of that background is evident in the actions he took early on to revive staff morale. People still talk about the big meeting that he organized soon after his appointment as senior vice-president. Clayton drove into the packed gath-ering atop a vintage WWII tank on loan from a local collector. Dressed as General Patton, complete with a brace of pearl-handled revolvers, he blasted blank rounds at a large portrait of Akio Morita, then chairman of market leader Sony, to wild cheers from his staff.

Behind the razzmatazz, however, lay a serious purpose: Clayton was committed to conducting a sweeping reappraisal of RCA’s business practices. Realizing that the old procedures were moribund, he became instrumental in bridging the gap between entrenched habits and new approaches. Above all, Clayton understood the importance of design, and the need to offer young talent the scope to create vital new products.

Clayton was assisted in his task by the fresh attitude Thomson brought to ownership of RCA. The French government wanted to enter the consumer electronics industry, viewing it as one engine driving the world economy. Buying RCA made sense in this strategic plan, providing the French with a substantial presence in the American market and a well established indigenous brand-name. Their willingness to make long-term investments was demonstrated in Thomson’s decision to equip RCA with state-of-theart facilities. Over \$80 million was spent, for example, to upgrade a picture tube facility in Indiana for production of 31” and 35” television tubes, giving RCA control over its sources and quality. This type of investment was important, but Joe Clayton was convinced that techno logical competence alone was not enough. “Design,” he says, “was the one area in which we could establish our own standards in a distinctive way.”

Prior to his arrival, design at RCA had fulfilled what was essentially a cosmetic function, operating as a sub section of product planning. Clayton recognized that if its function was to be redefined, new leadership was an obvious priority, and so, after a lengthy search, Louis (Lou) E. Lenzi, Jr. was appointed manager of industrial design. Lenzi came to RCA in the late eighties with eight years of experience at IBM. As a condition of appointment, he had insisted on what he called “a place at the table” in order to function effectively. “I wanted to be able to talk directly to colleagues in planning, engineering and other areas, he explains. Too often, the problem with industrial design in companies is that more time is spent in negotiation than in meeting the competition.” Clayton understood the logic of Lenzi’s argument and positioned him on a level of functional parity with other senior management.

A group of like-minded executives quickly coalesced around Lenzi. Bruce Hutchinson, who had joined RCA in late 1986 at the time of the GE merger, was vice-president for national advertising, with previous experience working for D’Arcy, MacManus and Masius in Detroit. In early 1987, Sunil Mehrotra had come to RCA as a strategist after working for Chase Manhattan Bank; in 1990, he became brand manager for RCA. These two established a close working relationship with Lenzi and began to make decisions that brought immediate benefits. For example, RCA had traditionally offered over 200 color TV models, most of them only differentiated by such superficial details as oak, walnut or knotty pine finishes. An immediate cost reduction and a better definition of the range was made possible by streamlining the number of models to around one hundred.

The cooperation of Mehrotra, Hutchison and Lenzi was leading, however, to a more ambitious plan. With RCA having put its financial house in order thanks to Thomson’s investments, the team saw the challenge of the nineties as cutting into the Japanese domination of the consumer electronics industry. There had to be some substance behind Joe Clayton’s capers with the pearl-handled revolvers.

At the time of his appointment to brand manager, Mehrotra had already completed a wide-ranging analysis of the consumer electronics business which showed that the television and video markets in the U.S. were still huge. Annually, around 20 million color TVs, 10 million VCRs, and 3 million camcorders were sold, totaling some 33 million units. RCA’s share was in the region of 3 million TVs, 1 million VCRs and half a million camcorders. Mehrotra also examined RCA’s competitive position on the basis of consumer image, retailer support, product leadership, features and cost, market share, and whether the company could control its own destiny by manufacturing, sourcing and selling its own products.

The conclusion that emerged from his analysis was a surprise after all the traumas of recent years. Surveys revealed the consumer brand awareness of RCA ranked equal to that of Sony. There still existed a healthy customer base for the company, with nearly 25 percent of households in America owning an RCA color TV and 12 percent owning an RCA VCR. But RCA had a low-end market segment—it did not have much strength at the highend or in consumer opinion as a trendsetter. Nevertheless, the results revealed a platform on which to build.

In anticipating market development in the 1990s, four key changes were pinpointed. Industry output has tripled in the past decade but maintaining that rate of growth, even with the introduction of new technologies such as High Definition TV (HDTV), will be difficult. Secondly, the cost of a color TV has declined in real terms over the last decade hy almost 100 percent. Yet because major cost take-outs and price-slashing are no longer feasible, the cost gap between TVs and other products and services is unlikely to continue. A third factor for change lies in the growth of global alliances. With the Thomson/RCA and Philips/Magnavox link-ups, a new pattern of American-European alliances is emerging as a competitive response to Asian manufacturers. Finally, census data show the U.S. population profile changing in the next decade, as “boomers” move into the 35 to 45 year-old age range, the group with the greatest discretionary purchasing power.

The industry thus seems poised on the threshold of major changes. For Sunil Mehrotra, the implications were clear. “A door has closed on the past,” he says. “The future will be completely different, and the rules that applied five to ten years ago are no longer valid. What emerged from his analysis was that to remain competitive, a new approach had to be adopted. It was a choice between radical change or nothing. The shared vision of Mehrotra, Hutchinson and Lenzi that change was necessary built into a compelling argument. But they faced not only the problems of the external market; the challenge was an internal one as well. The long-standing perception of design at RCA as something essentially trivial had to be overcome.

Before 1988, the company’s products had revealed a limited exploration of form; traditional cabinets had dominated. This appearance standard had emerged from the styling exercises of engineers, who encased the chassis with front and back covers that were treated as separate entities. Designs had to take into account manufacturing capabilities, but the prime constituency to be satisfied was the network of distributors and dealers, whose viewpoint could be summarized as “If it’s wood, it’s good.” Development cycles tended to be long, with endless presentations of renderings and realistic models, during which hours were spent picking over details.

There are, of course, problems inherent to the design of televisions: their screens are so dominant and their working parts must be shielded for safety reasons. The margin for variations on a box with a screen has been further diminished by the virtually uniform finish imposed in recent years by the larger retail purchasers, who demand vinyl imitation veneers. Commenting on this, Lenzi says simply, “We had to get rid of the wood grain.”

The problem is a familiar one for designers: how to introduce change to signal a new approach without frightening customers away. The method adopted at RCA was an integrated approach to design, with all aspects of a product treated holistically. This meant changing the very notion, both within the company and among the dealerships, of what a television should look like. The risks of design statements that had no constituency had to be faced if a fresh product identity was to emerge. And since even the smallest details could contribute to the whole, Lenzi stressed human factors in improving hardware ergonomics and software interfaces.

## The cold war with engineers

An example of this approach can be seen in the company’s remote control units for VCRs, the operation of which has become a consumer nightmare. On one hand, the devices have become more complex. Therefore, one solution that Lenzi introduced is a remote control known as “Master Touch,” compatible with all major brands of VCRs and cable boxes, and capable of controlling two VCRs, a cable box and TV set functions. Soft-touch, colorcoded buttons, a simple grouping of functions, the use of shapes in controls as a guide to function, and clear graphics, both for controls and on-screen information, are some of the design details used to make its complexity more comprehensible. On the other hand, there also exists a need for greater simplicity. This is provided by another control, a hand-held wand known as “Simple Touch” with six buttons for the most frequently used functions. Further developments include an interesting example of how software can open up new possibilities in product design: using a technology exclusive to RCA called VCR-plus, three-digit codes that are published in TV program guides identify broadcasts, enabling users to pre-set VCRs by simply keying in the numerical codes.

Lenzi’s group also identified a trend towards “media rooms” and integrated systems. To meet this interest, the concept of a “home theater” was developed, based on improvements in RCA’s integrated audio/visual systems. The company’s designers had to create consistency for customers from the splintered product and marketing approach that had prevailed. The implications here for design were profound: no longer a superficial afterthought, it was now crucial to realizing the company’s brand strategy.

Lenzi’s total approach had the further advantage of positioning industrial design to contribute to both technological innovation and cost reduction. Significantly new forms could be created and manufacturing costs could be cut by reducing the number of parts and assembly operations. For example, a new chassis design oriented front-to-back, instead of side-to-side, reduces overall mass, and combines an elegantly compact form with a reduction of materials and parts. The industrial design team now also tracks costs from the point of initial concept, providing convincing support for the effectiveness of design.

Perhaps most importantly, the integration of design in RCA’s product strategy and its contribution to reducing costs have led to attitudinal changes in other departments. This comes from involving people in a common achievement, rather than from publicizing design as such. Lenzi says, “Design is in here, but the word is not used.”

Whether articulated or not, the design process at RCA is a model of crossdisciplinary cooperation. As director of industrial design, Lenzi heads a staff of 28, fully half of whom work in RCA’s extensive model shop; the rest are broken out into groups of principal designers and com-puter specialists with design backgrounds. The unusual emphasis on model makers is indicative of the physical approach to design taken by Lenzi’s staff, but it also directly relates to his primary strategic design goal: to create a distinctive visual identity for RCA.

Prior to his arrival, the relationship between the design and engineering departments at RCA was marked by what Lenzi terms a “cold war” mentality. “Previously, there really wasn’t any interaction between designers and engineers,” he says, “and each department had its own objectives.” When the inevitable conflicts arose, it fell to senior management to resolve the problem. Now, however, principal designers head up product development teams composed of representatives from design, marketing, engineering and purchasing—these groups even include the designers of the integrated circuit chips. “Design has an obligation to solve problems; we’re not simply involved with cosmetic issues,” Lenzi explains.

That designers can have so much impact stems in part from the unusual control RCA has over the basic components that go into its sets. The company is vertically integrated to an extraordinary degree, producing everything from the sand used to make the glass for picture tubes on up. But with the high profile of design within Thomson America’s television division comes added responsibilities. The 10,000-employee television division accounts for a full 25 percent of Thomson’s global revenue, so there is a lot riding on the success of its design strategy.

In order to remain responsive to current consumer needs and desires, the company’s designers now conduct their own research into the changing role of television in the home; this information helps them to anticipate new opportunities in the marketplace. But to explore future technology and design innovations, Lenzi also initiated the practice of contracting outside consultants—among them, Design Logic, Fitch Richardson Smith and Metaphase—to create conceptual designs. “Sitting here in Indianapolis, we simply don’t know everything there is to know about the future of the television business,” he says. “I try to use people who are going to challenge our way of thinking and hopefully enable us to create a superior product down the road.”

## From concept to production

A case in point is the design of a conceptual projection television commissioned from Chicago-based Design Logic. The brief was simple and wide open: here’s what this product looks like now; what are the possibilities for this type of product in ten years’ time? Lenzi is quick to stress that these conceptual designs are not vanity exercises, since many of the concepts do find their way into production. In the case of Design Logic’s project, the firm proposed innovative approaches to the format of the chassis kits and the way in which the lenses and mirrors fit inside the unit that were later incorporated into some of RCA’s own production designs. “Developing these concepts is a useful tool for us,” Lenzi says. “It’s invaluable in terms of opening up new ways of looking at our own products.”

The fact that the design group is able to move quickly from concept proposals into production stems, in part, from the model makers that constitute half of the design staff. In fact, a quick look around the design studio might lead a visitor to wonder if RCA remains in the dark ages of design technology: extensive work is still done in clay. The design process always begins with a quick sketch and then moves directly into clay or foam models. The models are scanned with a laser digitizer and the data is down loaded to computer-aided design systems for technical refinements. This approach makes the most efficient use of time, because the laborious process of inputing data to form the CAD database is handled by the digitizer. The CAD information, when complete, is then sent directly to engineering.

This emphasis on tactile design is also revealed in some of RCA’s recent products, which challenge traditional thinking about televisions. A few, in fact, are radical departures. For example, the first in a line of what can be described as “biomorphic televisions” is due out later this year, with the rest on the market in 1993. “Tastes are changing in this country,” Lenzi asserts, “and when these new televisions hit the market, RCA will be making a very strong statement about what a TV can and should be. It will take some people a while to adjust to, but others, I think, will just say, ‘Well, it’s about time.’”

Whether or not biomorphic televisions mean that the future is now, the future of the industry is a subject that RCA’s designers take very seriously. With the onset of cable providers that can bring over 150 different channels into a consumer’s home, televisions, remotes and on-screen menus will need to be entirely rethought. “And it’s not going to be simply ISO channels offering MTV,” says Lenzi. “You have to think in terms of 150 different channels of information. The information revolution is really coming home to the consumer, and we have to be ready to address these issues now.”

One step taken to this end has been to hire a full-time human factors consultant to help define the usability issues that will arise in designing the complex, multifunction televisions of the future. Another measure has been to concentrate on reducing the cycle time of RCA’s products from concept to production, a capability that is absolutely necessary if RCA is to be a fierce competitor. For most products, the cycle time is currently at around 18 months, but the hope is to bring it down to 12 or 14 months in time.

Mark Fleischmann, a freelance writer on consumer electronics for magazines such as Rolling Stone, Premier and Audio/video Interiors, has already noticed the differences. “Lou Lenzi is hardly a greybeard,” he says, “and it’s nice to see a big corporation give a young design staff creative freedom.” He points out that the first of a new generation of what are now really video monitors with much improved technology first appeared with the Proton 600M in 1983, followed by the Sony XBR Pro. “It seems that all these companies had to have ‘Pro’ somewhere in their product names,” he notes, “so I was sceptical when I heard RCA was launching the ‘ProScan.’ But in fact, RCA’s design is very original—this is no ‘me-too’ product. The company took its time to respond but did so extremely well with a handsome and distinctive line.”

Fleischmann is particularly impressed by the attention to detail obvious in RCA’s product. “The user interface goes one step beyond the on-screen menus that everyone is developing. It is more readable, with well-chosen fonts and shadowing.” He also points out that the features added to make products more attractive generally result in simply more buttons, creating a barrier between product and consumer. “The remote control is the item closest to people,” he observes, “and RCA’s Master Touch is well thought out in its detailing of shapes, colors and graphics. Above all, it has a really nice feel.”

## A new corporate culture

Market implementation of these new designs also required a significant in-house realignment for RCA. As Sunil Mehrotra says, “We’re no longer involved in technology for its own sake, we are in the business of technology for human entertainment. We’ve redefined our own business.” To effect this change, a three-pronged strategy was needed: sales people had to understand the strategy and sell it to retailers; retailers had to support it and sell it to customers; customers had to hear it and believe it.

Here, too, design had a vital contribution to make. For example, the concept of the “home theater” is predicated upon making technology easier to understand. Selling the concept begins with a basic step-by-step training of sales people. A pocket-size sales and training guide, created by the graphic design firm Pentagram, then outlines for retailers the building blocks that constitute the home theater concept. To address the final link, RCA’s potential customers, interactive laser-disc sequences at the point of sale are used to communicate directly between producer and user. A home theater kit gives more detail, with a toll-free number to answer queries and brochures serving as follow-up material. These take customers through a series of stages in which they can determine which elements are suitable for them, using a simple matrix based on suggested screen sizes and viewing distances.

The benefits of this approach are noticeable, according to Dave Lauchenbruch, editorial director of Television Digest, a weekly publication for the industry. He says, “Many retailers were losing interest in RCA because of all the turmoil at the company. Now it seems to have got its act together and looks like it’s here to stay. Market share is improving and goodwill among the dealers has been regained, in part because of this educational process.”

A coordinated message was also launched in national advertising, promotional programs, catalogues, spread sheets, point-of-sale materials, sales training and interactive display materials—in short, in everything the company designs. Previously, these functions had all been parcelled out to various departments. “Bringing the planning and design of these materials together not only works externally, but it can be used to motivate our own people in creating a new culture,” notes Mehrotra. “Everything must be synergistic, everything must say exactly the same thing inside and outside the company.”

For Bruce Hutchison, the key feature in giving focus to RCAs brand identity, both externally and internally, was an advertising campaign revolving around the image of Nipper the Dog. Research studies had revealed an enormous brand equity accumulated by RCA from this image over the years. It is still RCA’s most recognizable contribution to the American collective memory, with broad appeal running across different generations. The return of the venerable Nipper, accompanied now by a little puppy as a symbol of renewal, was to signal a major change “We wanted to shake up the consumer, but we really also wanted to shake ourselves up internally,” explains Hutchison. He had first thought of bringing back the image four years ago, recognizing its positive connotations He had worried, however, that Nipper might be perceived as old-fashioned—the kiss of death in a volatile industry. The solution: the puppy, named Chipper as a result of a promotional competition, to personify the new generation of RCAs products. But the critical focus of the campaign, emphasizes Hutchison, still had to be on product quality. The new advertisements that appeared last year were thus deliberately humorous but featured, along with the dogs, the product as hero.

Any assessment of RCA’s course over the last three years has to be suspended because of the long-term nature of all these decisions. In November of 1991, Sunil Mehrotra left RCA to become executive vicepresident of JBL Consumer Electronics. The ultimate test of his ideas will be the extent to which they survive his departure. Yet the new strategy has already begun to make an impact. Dave Lauchenbruch comments, “RCA has decided to take the high road of design rather than simply compete on price. The products have steadily improved and the company is assuming the mantle of leadership in the industry. This means taking on companies like Sony and Mitsubishi at the high end of the market, where RCA never had a presence, with some beautiful designs that show a lot of imagination.”

Similarly, it will take time to form a comprehensive judgement of the French government’s industrial policy and the decisions taken by Thomson. Stuart Malin, a partner at The Doblin Group, a Chicago-based strategic planning organization, agrees that Thomson’s acquisition of RCA makes good long-term sense, but questions the wisdom of large investments in current technology. “Looking at television technology,” he says, “we could be right on the fulcrum of significant changes. Maybe picture tubes are at the end of their life-cycle; maybe the future belongs to flat-screen technology. Infact, televisions and computers may be about to fuse into some new kind of product.”

Despite such caution, Mehrotra, Hutchison and Lenzi have undoubtedly achieved a great deal in three years. “Shifting a juggernaut is never easy,” says Mehrotra, while Lenzi uses the metaphor of teaching an elephant to dance. Yet the team set their sights high, intent on matching RCA’s performance with their leading competitor, Sony, as an indicator of achievement. There was pressure to achieve results, with many structural problems that could not be solved easily. Nevertheless, Thomson’s corporate strategy allowed them to take a “medium-term” perspective, without the constant pressure for immediate results that often chokes off initiative in America.

Ultimately, of course, the design team’s efforts will be judged by results in the harsh spotlight of the marketplace, but preliminary figures give encouraging signs of a positive turnaround. In the latest annual market share survey of U.S. color television sales by Television Digest, RCA remained the top brand. Although the industry showed little overall change, there was real encouragement for RCA’s strategy in that its share of the high-price segment increased in the last year. The average selling price of units increased by 10 percent in 1990 to 1991, and so RCA is increasing its proportion of the 15 percent of sales at the top of the market, where 50 percent of the industry’s profits are made.

Some other numbers are worth pondering. When appointed to their positions in Thomson’s new structure, Joe Clayton was 39 years old, Mehrotra and Hutchison were also in their late 30s, and Lou Lenzi was 31. At a time of widespread and well-merited criticism of American business for its aversion to risk, it is heartening to discover a team of young managers who, even if under French patronage, are developing new approaches, using design intelligently, and taking on the world’s best.