## 25

# Cultural Human Factors

## Abstract

Cultural human factors, recognition of a society’s learned behavior regarding social organization, patterns of object use and values in relation to design and global business, are the focus of this paper. Problem areas regarding respect for cultural difference or the imposition of cultural change are explored with diverse specific examples from Euro Disney to British Telecom. Elements of communication and identity as well as organization and pattern of use are cited as the possible loci for conflict. The connection between human factors and business strategy is examined as a competitive tool in the global marketplace.

The concept underlying this discussion is that culture encompasses the fabric of everyday life and how it is lived in all its aspects. Yet of the four categories of human factors (physical, cognitive, social, cultural), cultural factors are the most vague and unspecific, the least known, the most difficult to codify, but perhaps, for precisely these reasons, the most To begin with, a definition of culture, as it will be used in this presentation is, at this stage, a important very simple one: Culture is the distinctive way of life of social groups, the learned behavior patterns expressed through language, values, organizations and artifacts.

How does this relate to design? Design is concerned with products, communications, environments, services and systems. All can be considered artifacts, they use language and manifest values, and most originate from organizations of one kind or another. The connections are therefore close.

## Respecting cultural difference

So how can cultural issues be defined as relevant to business? The answers are on two levels, the simple and the complex. On the simple level, sensitivity to cultural difference can avoid obvious mistakes made by companies. All it requires is a clear understanding that the cultural context in which products or services originate may be very different from the cultural context in which they are used or applied. It is surprising, however, how often this is overlooked. Some of the more obvious aspects are

l Language and meaning

l Sensitivity to context

l Visual imagery

l Cultural mistakes in market forecasting

l Destruction of cultural identity.

Language and meaning. Differences in language and meaning are obvious examples. A widespread approach is to ignore them, as did Rolls-Royce, the epitome of social status, which had a series of models with names such as the Silver Wraith, Silver Cloud and Silver Mist, which sold around the world. Trouble occurred when the company put a model on the German market under its English name of “Silver Mist.” A perfunctory check in a German/ English dictionary would have saved the company considerable embarrassment. The Schoffler-Weiss dictionary gives the following translations (which are hardly suitable to describe the epitome of automobile elegance!): Mist: dung, manure; (Animals) droppings; (maritime) fog; dirt, trash, rubbish, junk.

Sensitivity to context. This is also problematic, as in an example of a huge Marlboro cigarette advertisement, a block long and five stories high, brightly illuminated at night, that used to sit high on a wall of the main public mortuary of Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Visual imagery. Visual imagery can also be a minefield. One of the stranger illustrations of the cultural perils of buying an overseas company was a leading brand of toothpaste in Hong Kong, marketed for decades under the brand name of Darkie, with an illustration of caricatured, stereotyped, black-face minstrel, teeth gleaming pearly white. No one in its market of origin found this troublesome. When Colgate-Palmolive bought the Hong Kong manufacturer of this product in 1989, however, the illustration rapidly rebounded on the company when placed in this new American context. A rumor spread in the United States that Colgate was selling a racist product in Asia. Banner-carrying pickets appeared outside its New York headquarters.

To appease its American critics without destroying a well-known brand in Asia, where people were generally oblivious to the racist implications,

Colgate-Palmolive sought to redefine the brand name as Darlie, with a visual redesign that changed in stages. By 1992, through adjusting the illustrative conventions, the image became that of an elegant man-abouttown of indeterminate ethnic origin. Colgate-Palmolive could have saved itself considerable expense and bad publicity, however, had it foreseen the situation, rather than belatedly react to it.

Cultural miscalculation. A more serious illustration of cultural miscalculation in market forecasting is the performance of Electrolux in Europe in recent years. In 1983, the management of Electrolux made a comparison of large domestic appliance manufacturing and found that whereas the United States had only four major manufacturers, Europe had one hundred. They became convinced that Europe would become a single market like the American and embarked on a program of acquisitions to make it a major player in large domestic appliances, with the intention of providing a limited range of designs to supply all of Europe.

Ten years later, the policy proved costly, as the divergent cultures of Europe intransigently failed to inevitably follow the American pattern. In northern Europe, people shop weekly and need equal freezer and refrigerator space. Southern Europeans shop daily in small local markets and need smaller units. The British eat more frozen vegetables than anywhere in the world and need sixty percent freezer space. Some want the freezer on top, some on the bottom. Electrolux attempted to streamline operations, but seven years later, the company still operated six refrigerator factories in Europe (it closed two), sold products under forty brand names and produced one hundred-twenty basic designs with fifteen-thousand variants. In fact, it found it necessary to launch new specialty refrigerators to appeal to certain market niches. By 1989, profits were down forty percent from 1988, and in 1992 dividends were slashed.

Destruction of cultural identity. Problems exist not only between cultures. Even within a culture, enormous offense can be generated when a corporation acts without adequate regard for context. In Britain, under Mrs. Thatcher’s government, the telephone services were separated from the Post Office and privatized as British Telecom (BT), which wanted to impress its independent status on the populace. It decided to replace the long-established and famous red telephone kiosks across the country with a new version, bought off-theshelf from an American manufacturer. On the face of it, this hardly seems to have the makings of a cultural crisis. The old kiosks, however, had been around since 1936 and had assumed the role of an icon of British identity, widely used on travel posters and tourist postcards. The proposal generated public outrage and an appalling press, fueled by an arrogant response from BT, which insisted the new kiosk was cheaper and more functional, claims that were hotly disputed, even at the annual general meeting of BT.

The battle was renewed with BT’s introduction in 1991 of a new corporate identity which drew heavy criticism. It’s a strange situation: one of the more successful and profitable businesses of the United Kingdom, which has become a world player in the field of telecommunications, is viewed with derision in its home country because it removed a familiar, unique element of the landscape.

Problems of this nature can be handled adequately with sensitivity, some research and a willingness to adapt. Coca-Cola, for example, found when entering the Chinese market that the phonetics of the famous brand name translated into Chinese as “Bite the wax tadpole.” The characters were modified to mean “Tasty, evoking happiness.” Another example of fitting into an environment is provided by MacDonalds’ advertising in Switzerland, which stresses the contribution of the Swiss agricultural economy in maintaining the food chain’s standards of quality.

On the level of market projections, Whirlpool avoided the problems of Electrolux by introducing in 1992 a lightweight “world washer” for India, Brazil and Mexico, designed to accommodate the different manufacturing capabilities and conditions of use in each country, such as washing eighteenfoot-long saris without tangling in India and adding a soak cycle for Brazil to cater to a local belief that only pre-soaking yields a really clean wash.

## Changing cultural patterns

So far, I’ve talked about the simple level of cultural factors. Two main levels of problem occur. The first arises from the need to conform to existing cultural patterns, to integrate or assimilate in ways that cause no disruption. The second level involves changes in that pattern, and this level is infinitely more complex and problematic. Whirlpool adapted to the market as it exists; Electrolux sought to move down a path of inevitable change; Colgate-Palmolive sought to adapt in two different contexts without serious change in either; but British Telecom walked into a storm by stimulating change. The argument would seem to tend towards the less problematic approach of assimilation, but change cannot always be avoided—the opportunities opened up by global manufacturing and marketing frequently require it on a considerable scale. It can be a condition of success in terms of competitiveness and opening up markets, but it also involves substantial risk and therefore needs to be planned consciously and sensitively.

It is important to emphasize the cultural dimension of globalization, which is not just about widening markets or the production base. There is a strong possibility that the trends in technology and communications currently linking the globe together will result in a radical reconfiguration of our notions of culture.

Globalization means moving from culture being dependent on a specific environment, to having a culture different from those around us; in other words, cultural multiplicity rather than homogeneity; and culture creation rather than cultural derivation. That sounds very abstract, but to put it on a personal level: in cultural terms, how does one categorize an Englishman who speaks fluent German, teaches in Chicago and consults for a Japanese design company?

Another example is the film industry. Not long ago we could rightly speak of a Hollywood film, in the sense of it being a product of that particular location in America. A current success, Schindler’s List, is based on a novel by an Australian of Irish origin. The subject is a German living in Czechoslovakia who helps Jewish people in Poland. The director is American, most leading actors are British and it was made in various European locations. The technical staff and financing were similarly drawn from an international spectrum. On another level, examine a source list of the parts that go into any so-called American or Detroit automobile. They are also drawn from a similarly cosmopolitan and diverse range of sources around the globe.

If I am right concerning the direction of the pattern of cultural change, the consequences are huge. However, it will involve considerable friction, as is evident by the many current reactions to globalization and its consequences. French nationalism, Russian fascism or Islamic fundamentalism are very different in origin and rationale, but a characteristic of all of them is the attempt to resist new patterns of cosmopolitanism, and particularly the freer flow of trade and communications, in the name of protecting cultural identity.

We need a cultural answer to these reactions, to counter, in particular, the perception that trade is an aspect of so-called cultural imperialism, that trade follows the flag. One answer is provided by a line of people standing outside the Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant in Shanghai. They are not, I believe, voting for democracy, the free market or the American Way. They are opting, rather, for new experience and enjoyment, for eating in clean surroundings, at reasonable prices and a standard of service that contrasts with the locally found “service with a snarl.” Equally interesting is a local variant of KFC next door to the original, the Shanghai Rong Hua Chicken restaurant. It too has long lines outside, so something is being learned.

In other words, the answer of business to attempts to assert the local cultural status quo is powerful when focused on people’s needs in ways that improve their lives; by making products and services accessible, appropriate, understandable and pleasurable, in ways they can absorb into their pattern of life.

An important point to emphasize here is that culture is not fixed and immutable, but is capable of adaptation in many ways and on many levels. Throughout human history people have interacted with innovations that have created not just new tools, but also new choices, new options, new thoughts, new values. We need to be careful, however, because products may take on a different meaning as they cross cultural boundaries, as the Darkie/Darlie episode illustrated in a negative sense. A classic example of a more positive change was the Volkswagen Beetle, which originated in 1930s

Germany as a gleam in the eye of Adolf Hitler, a motoring enthusiast, and when produced in prototype in 1937 was widely promoted as an icon of the achievements of the Nazi Party. After production recommenced on a large scale after the Second World War, the VW appeared in the United States in the 1950s and became a raging economic success. The design was virtually identical across this period of time, but the image of the product and its cultural value showed a remarkable transformation from an icon of fascism in the 1930s—the “Strength through Joy car”—to the lovable “Bug” and hero of Walt Disney’s Herbie films in 1960s America.

Another example, but on a very complex and problematic level, is that of Disney’s recent experience in attempting cultural transfer. How do we explain the different reception of the two Disneylands built overseas, those in Japan and France? The approach brought to each was basically similar. The Disney organization has a unique product, impressive technology, a formidable organization and an impressive record of success.

In Japan, the Tokyo Disneyland has been embraced and absorbed unreservedly by the Japanese population. Indeed, it is so successful that a marine-theme Disney park is being planned adjacent to the original. On the other hand, the disastrous start for Euro Disney, located outside Paris, not only cost a huge initial investment of four billion dollars, but had considerable losses in its first year of operation on a scale that places its continued existence in question.

The answer, let me emphasize, does not lie in ignorance of cultural factors by Disney staff. Disney’s Imagineers went to great lengths to accommodate plans to what they perceived as European requirements and culture. For example, observing the French habit of taking dogs everywhere with them, Disney built a kennel that “is more like a hotel than a kennel.” The reason might lie more in a strategic decision that was culturally askew, if a story in Newsweek is accurate. Apparently, when a question was raised at a strategic planning meeting about whether the French would line up in February to visit Euro Disney, the reply was, “Well, the Japanese do.” Differences between the Japanese and French were ignored, despite financial projections of attendance and income based on this assumption being crucial to the viability of the project.

Other cultural factors were important. First, the success of Tokyo Disneyland is due in part to the consistency and efficiency of the operation— it fits the way Japanese people think such an operation should function. The high degree of organization of visitors also fits—watch the behavior of any Japanese tour group anywhere in the world. Another factor, a ubiquitous feature of Japanese life, is the widespread use of cartoon figures and comics, which makes them amenable to Disneyland.

Most important, however, is the Japanese capacity for role-playing in new settings as a way of escaping the pressures of a conformist society. But, paradoxically, escapist fantasies must also be clearly structured and signposted.

Above all, they are fascinated by America. So with the Tokyo Disneyland, the Japanese wanted pure Disney without concessions to Japanese culture. In other words, the product was accepted unconditionally and the processes involved happened to fit perfectly, so little substantial change was required for the Disney operation to culturally fit in Japan.

In comparison, France, in many of these key characteristics, is the diametrical opposite. French culture is not conformist, but highly individualistic and verges on the anarchic. There are reports of Euro Disney staff resenting being made to conform to dress and presentation codes; of public resentment that wine and beer were initially not available with food; with the press constantly sniping at how the project was run. Above all, rather than fantasy and role playing, French culture is more notable for rationality and logic. And it is not noted for being receptive to cultural imports.

In other words, two decisive differences emerge. Disney emphasizes behavioral characteristics that place value on conformity, the presence or absence of which will determine whether the tendency in a culture is to cluster in patterns of group behavior or its opposite, non-conformity, to break out in individual patterns of behavior. Secondly, in behavioral terms, the process of exporting this particular product requires a willingness on the part of the receiver to understand and accept it. Another basic characteristic of cultures that I call cultural permeability—the ability of a culture to accept ideas or products from a variety of sources, to absorb them and make them its own—is also critical.

Plotted on a scale of behavioral conformity, the Japanese would be positioned at one end in terms of strong group consciousness and conformity. The French would be at the other end, with an almost anarchic disdain for rules that inconvenience them. In terms of cultural permeability, the two countries are also at polar opposites. For example, over forty percent of Japanese vocabulary consists of imported words. In contrast, in the 1960s, the French head of state, President Charles de Gaulle, initiated a campaign to remove such Anglicisms as “le weekend” from everyday usage in the country (a demand that periodically recurs); while a book by leading politician, Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber, La Defi Americaine, published in 1972, warning against the cultural take-over of Europe by America, became a best-seller. In the recent GATT negotiations concluding the Uruguay Round, a major stumbling block was an attempt to restrict imports of American films and television programs in France and limit their showing to no more than fifteen percent of total broadcast time.

A senior vice-president of Walt Disney Imagineering said in 1992 that he wanted visitors to feel they were discovering dreams of what they imagined America and an American theme park to be. Yet, interestingly, an employee of Tokyo Disneyland visiting Euro Disney in 1993 found it “too European.” Maybe Disney fell into a trap, therefore, when it diluted its product without modifying its own behavior, or what it expected of staff and visitors, and got the worst of both worlds. Its present response to staunch the flow of losses is to cut costs and advertise heavily. If this doesn’t work, what then? Whether it is possible at this stage to reverse cultural priorities, that is, asserting the integrity of the product, while adapting behavior, and whether this would improve the situation, is open to debate. More importantly for Disney are the implications for future strategy: are these huge blockbuster theme parks a viable proposition any more?

Connections between cultural factors and business management. The case of Euro Disney demonstrates the importance of cultural factors, but also their difficulties and complexities in practice, and how they are intertwined with other aspects of business management. How then can design contribute in specific terms to identifying problems such as those Disney encountered, before they become critical? It can do so on several levels.

The trend in many product and service sectors towards parity in terms of technical quality and functional performance, makes effective differentiation among competitors’ offerings increasingly difficult. In existing markets where cost is not the determining factor, four factors can be identified as critical to decisive competitive advantage:

1. Innovation

2. Value

3. User focus

4. Speed.

To be effective, all involve, at least, understanding existing cultural values. To the extent they involve change, it is important for us to understand the consequences of change. In both cases, whether that of cultural integration or change, design is a vital instrument. To talk of cultural human factors in design being a pro-active tool in this way requires defining markets in cultural terms—which is not easy. I began with a simple definition of culture, but in fact it is highly complex and capable of many interpretations. Without getting into detail, in addition to national culture, we can talk of tribal, ethnic or regional culture; of high and low culture; elite culture, popular culture, mass culture, street culture; urban culture, folk culture or sub-culture; last but not least, professional and corporate culture.

All are useful, but none provide an adequate working methodology. Some are capable of bridging the whole globe, such as youth culture with its icons of rock music, jeans and MacDonalds; or for hthat matter, the professional global culture of designers. Others, such as preferences for color of a particular ethnic group, or the particular class composition of the sub-culture of British or German skinheads, are highly localized in place or social structure. Frequently, global, regional and local all overlap. The tools available to handle this diversity are still limited, varying in sophistication and reliability and needing much greater development. They are summarized in the following list:

1. Language analysis

2. Artifact analysis

3. Behavioral analysis

4. Cultural characteristic mapping

5. Extrapolation and projection

6. Scenario building.

—Language analysis means a precise and detailed analysis of meaning in the use of language, not just translation.

—Another means is analysis of artifacts, not just for an understanding of form, but for an understanding of behavior and attitudes, which can also yield valuable information and insights. Even the smallest item can be important in this process. Artifact analysis can reveal attitudes to such factors as detail, scale or space. If we are talking of more people in the future working from home, these kinds of factors will obviously take on very different significance in America, Britain and Japan—but exactly how? Techniques for identifying and mapping existing cultural characteristics are possible on many scales. Although it has the limitation of being primarily descriptive, it can provide data useful for other, more analytical exercises.

—Extrapolation and projection of existing characteristics, trend spotting, is another possibility, but it is a fragile tool since all too often it is based more on biased enthusiasms of the present rather than the realities of the future. (Electrolux is a case in point.) How does one avoid such blunders? A key in all this, it seems to me, is core characteristic analysis, identifying and cross-referencing the characteristics of vital players in any process of change. This means not only understanding the cultural context of a market, but also a rigorous understanding of one’s own organization and cultural values—the real problem is the dynamics of interaction between the two. The characteristics analyzed will obviously vary according to context, but a constant element should be a comparison of images of the future between whoever is initiating change and the people affected by change.

—Another tool used in the early stages of design definition as a means of projecting into the future is scenario building—initial visualizations that are complete cultural stories: narratives of the landscape in which products are intended to exist and be used. In the development of the Mazda Miata, for example, the design team wrote short stories featuring the car they envisaged as a means of establishing a common vision. Techniques of this kind were so successful that Mazda abandoned conventional market research on products intended for emerging rather than existing markets.

Challenging accepted assumptions, whether of a market, a cultural group or a corporate strategy, and using design as a culture creating instrument, can allow a company to move a culture, including its own, in new directions, or at least to understand directions in which it may inevitably be moving. To evolve and use scenarios to the extent suggested here requires that the strategy of a company’s future be defined not only in terms of technology and economics, but also with respect to the cultural ramifications of new products and services. If done comprehensively and executed creatively, they can help customers visualize the future and negotiate change more assuredly, even to the extent of becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.

This is what really should be meant by customer focus. Working to make technological change as fluid as possible (which also involves ensuring continuity by building on established cultural norms) requires that change be evolutionary where possible, rather than in conflict or dependent on the imposition of a new culture. The magnitude of the change may require the latter, but the former is undeniably less stressful.

To conclude: navigating cultural change smoothly is more than a concession to customers, for whom uncertain futures provoke anxiety. It should be a corporate goal formulated in strategy as a key competitive tool.