# The ‘American System’ and Mass-Production / Writing the History of Design in the Industrial World: An Overview and Two Review Essays / The Growth of Industrial Design in Japan

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》\auto\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》.md

# The ‘American System’ and Mass-Production

As we have seen, the European response to industrialization was conditioned by a continuity of social and economic structures and attitudes. Craft techniques and processes were widely adapted and developed to produce large quantities of goods that, in form and design, reflected a conscious, if sometimes confused, recognition of past traditions. The significant and fundamental changes were mainly in the scale of commercial organization and production, rather than in the manufacturing methods by which goods were produced.

By the middle of the nineteenth century, however, largely as a result of the Great Exhibition of 1851, the rest of the world became aware of new methods of manufacture in the United States that established the fundamental patterns and processes of modern industrial mass-production. These were characterized by large-scale manufacture of standardized products, with interchangeable parts, using powered machine-tools in a sequence of simplified mechanical operations. The implications of this approach, which became widely known as the ‘American system’ of manufacture, were not confined to production methods, but also affected the whole organization and co-ordination of production, the nature of the work-process, the methods by which goods were marketed, and, not least, the type and form of the goods produced.

As with many developments in the United States, there were European precursors and influences. Around 1729, in Sweden, Christopher Pohlem had applied water-power to simple machine processes and precision measurement to produce interchangeable gears for clocks, at a factory in Stjarnsund. Later in the eighteenth century, a French armourer, known only as Le Blanc, applied similar methods to the production of muskets. After visiting Le Blanc’s workshops in 1782, Thomas Jefferson, then American Minister to France, noted in a letter: ‘An improvement is here made in construction of muskets. ... It consists in making every part of them so exactly alike, that what belongs to any one, may be used for every other musket in the magazine. . . . The advantages of this when arms need repair are evident.’ Le Blanc’s work met with considerable obstruction, however, from the official bureaucracy that administered government arsenals, and from craftsmen who saw their livelihood threatened.

French ideas were linked to English developments by one Marc Brunel, a Royalist refugee from the French Revolution, who designed machinery for the mass-production of pulley blocks for the Royal Navy, for Sir Samuel Bentham, then Inspector General of Naval Works and himself a pioneer inventor of many types of woodworking machinery. Once the exigencies of the Napoleonic Wars were past, however, the system was abandoned. The basic approach was taken up in the United States around 1800, and was developed on a scale that thoroughly justifies its being called the ‘American system’. Eli Whitney is often cited as its founder, largely on the basis of a proposal he made to the American government in 1798 for the manufacture of ten thousand muskets in two years (though in fact the contract was not completed until eleven years later). Research on surviving Whitney muskets indicates that the number of interchangeable parts was limited, and their precision, and thus the extent to which they were interchangeable, was variable. Other armourers in the United States, such as Simeon North and John Hancock Hall, were at least as advanced in their thinking, and probably more advanced in production methods. The truth would seem to be that, rather than any one person possessing a unique claim to having invented the system, it was an idea that had general currency at the time, emerging in a continuous series of improvements, each being eagerly seized on by competitors.

Hall, in particular, emphasized and developed the decisive elements permitting interchangeability, namely, precision measurement and accuracy in production. This work culminated in a simplified breech-loading flintlock introduced in 1824 and produced for twenty years. His stated intention was to ‘make every similar part of every gun so much alike that it will suit every gun, so that if a thousand guns were taken apart and the links thrown together promiscuously on a heap, they may be taken promiscuously from the heap and will come right’. In order to do this, Hall had to simplify each part as far as possible, and his products are a marked utilitarian contrast to the elegant, decorated products of master gunsmiths. His methods were later refined by firms that were to have international reputations in arms production, such as Sharp, Henry, Winchester and Remington.

The American system reached a high point of development by the midnineteenth century in another area of arms production—revolvers—with the establishment of Samuel Colt’s armoury at Hartford, Connecticut. Colt was typical of this generation of American innovators, taking principles and inventions that were widely available, and combining them with a form that was distinctive and totally effective. Other contemporary armourers produced excellent weapons, but it was Colt’s thoroughgoing application of mass-production methods, and an exceptional flair for salesmanship and promotion, that made him so successful. His factory contained over fourteen hundred machine-tools, and under the leadership of Elisha K. Root, a technical genius, was a magnet for anyone interested in the most advanced methods of manufacture. The United States Secretary for War referred to it as having ‘the status of a national work.’ Colt’s Navy .36 Revolver of 1851 is typical of his products. Like Hall’s flintlock, it was reduced to an essential simplicity, and the precision of its interchangeable parts defined standards for the form of hand-weapons for many years.

The fact that the American system developed in relation to the production of firearms is, in retrospect, hardly surprising. The supply of large quantities of reliable and inexpensive weapons was a corollary of the general expansion of the size of military forces, and the constant series of wars against neighbouring states and native inhabitants of the West in which the United States was involved. The only significant application of the American system abroad was also in armaments, the British government establishing the Enfield manufactory with American machine-tools in 1853, and American equipment also being supplied to Prussia and France. Government contracts were necessary in order to pay for the plant and equipment initially required to set up the new system.

What was unique to the United States, however, was the adaptation of the system to other areas of manufacture unsupported by government funds. In part, this was due to a lack of skilled labour and the absence of an entrenched craft tradition. Samuel Colt, in discussions with British engineers, stated that uneducated workers were best suited to the new massproduction methods since they had so little to unlearn. Innovation was not a challenge to established institutions and habits in the young Republic, and in an open, expanding society the commercial opportunities for wealth and advancement were a strong inducement. A British commission investigating the American system in 1853 noted ‘the dissatisfaction frequently expressed in America with regard to present attainment in the manufacture and application of labour-saving machinery, and the avidity with which any new idea is laid hold of, and improved upon . . .’

By 1850 the American system had spread to other industries in New England, the centre of arms production, and later appeared in other districts. It was introduced to the manufacture of clocks in the 1830s by Eli Terry, who produced a clock movement from wooden parts, and in the following decade Chauncey Jerome took the process a step further by introducing metal gears stamped from thin, rolled-brass sheet, instead of brass castings. This resulted in a less bulky movement, and the clocks produced were very slim, suitable for wall-hanging without undue protuberance. The cases of plain wood were also mass-produced.

By 1838 the first attempt had been made to mass-produce watches, though with little success, the finer movements presenting greater difficulties. It was not until 1850 that sustained production began, started by the American Horologe Company of Roxbury, Massachusetts. Aaron L. Dennison, one of its founders, had visited the Springfield Armoury and decided that watches, as well as guns, could be made by mass-production methods. His pocketwatches with movement plates die-punched from rolled brass by steampowered machinery had circular metal frames that could be hand-engraved for more expensive models, and printed metal dials with numerals in various typographic styles. By the end of the century the manufacture of watches was a major industry, the Waterbury company producing half a million a year, and the Ingersoll company marketing a watch that cost only one dollar. They were accessible to the whole population.

Some of the most dramatic effects resulted from the mass-production of agricultural machinery, an area that the Americans constantly improved and refined. In 1819 Jethro Wood of Scipio, New York, patented a castiron plough built from separated standardized and interchangeable parts. The most spectacular developments, however, radically influenced grain production. In 1833–4 both Obed Hussey and Cyrus McCormick produced practical reaping machines. By the 1850s these machines were mass-produced and being sold as fast as they could be manufactured. McCormick’s was the most successful, selling about four thousand a year, a high figure for a relatively complicated mechanism.

American products were often criticized by European observers for their lack of finish and solidarity, their use of substitute materials, and their cheapness. The Great Exhibition of 1851 in London, however, marked a turning-point in attitudes. The exhibits for the American stand were assembled hastily and late, and were inadequate to fill the large space booked, causing considerable derision in the London press. The opportunity to study the products on show over a long period of time, however, enabled them to be taken more seriously, and by the end of the exhibition some had earned considerable respect, in particular Goodyear’s rubber products, Colt’s revolvers and the McCormick reaper. The rest of the world began to sit up and take notice, and the British Commission that subsequently visited the United States was to warn: ‘the Americans display an amount of ingenuity, combined with undaunted energy, which as a nation we would do well to imitate, if we mean to hold our present position in the great market of the world.’

The difference between Europe and America was not limited, however, to production systems, but applied in a much wider sense to general cultural and social values. This was remarked on in the Official Catalogue of the Great Exhibition: ‘The expenditure of months or years of labour upon a single article, not to increase its intrinsic value, but solely to augment its cost or its estimation as an object of virtue, is not common in the United States. On the contrary, both manual and mechanical labour are applied with direct reference to increasing the number or the quantity of articles suited to the wants of a whole people, and adapted to promote the enjoyment of that moderate competency which prevails upon them.’ The comparison was between European attitudes, based on craft traditions, in which the value of a product, both economically and aesthetically, resided in the extent of skilled work it embodied, and the American approach, based on industrial methods, which emphasized quantity and utility for wider sections of the population. But was it true to say, as the catalogue asserted, that this difference gave ‘the productions of American industry a character distinct from that of other countries’? In the opinion of George Wallis, a member of the British Commission of 1853, and head of the Birmingham School of Art and Design, a clear distinction had to be drawn between the means of production, in which he recognized the unique American achievement, and the goods produced, which he regarded as a reflection of prevailing European taste. The types of manufacture upon which he concentrated, however, were all traditional areas of European decorative art—furniture, metalware, ceramics, glassware and jewellery—in which American producers had to compete with European imports. In such areas of production, technical and commercial innovation did not inevitably lead to new forms. Wallis’ judgment of the industries he considered was accurate and perceptive. At the time he made his report, however, the results of American ingenuity were beginning to be manifested in completely new products that did not fit comfortably into the European concept of decorative art,” and these products were to proliferate to an extent that demanded attention. A crucial example was the sewing machine.

The process of sewing by hand requires a constant and subtle interplay of material, hand and eye. Many attempts had been made to replicate this manual dexterity by mechanical means, but it was not until 1844 when Elias Howe, a skilled mechanic from Boston, developed a needle with the eye placed at the point, using two to make an interlocking stitch below the surface of the material, that a mechanical sewing machine became feasible. After many vicissitudes, Howe finally managed to put his machine into production with considerable success. The idea was also taken up by Isaac Merrit Singer, who refined Howe’s design, and by placing the sewing action on a vertical axis gave the machine its definitive form. Like Samuel Colt, Singer combined mechanical ingenuity with commercial flair. Realizing the potential of sewing machines, he marketed them with unflagging vigour, introducing what now seems an inevitable feature of modern life: hire purchase. The mass-production and sales generated by Singer also brought formal changes in his products. His first machine of 1851 was a very plain, functional mechanism, but an appreciation of the importance of appearance led to the mechanism being shrouded in a pressed, japanned-metal casing, decorated with stencilled floral patterns. The stand and foot-treadle drive, produced as optional extras, also had patterns of scrolls and latticework, designed to make them more acceptable in a domestic setting. The basic form of Singer’s machines was dictated by mechanical function, but presentation conformed to conceptions of what was aesthetically appropriate to the social context in which the machines were used.

An interesting contrast is presented by another contemporary machine that radically altered working patterns: the typewriter. Like the sewing machine, it was the result of a long process of invention and refinement. In 1873 a machine built by Sholes and Glidden, which resolved many outstanding problems, was demonstrated to Philo Remington, whose family firm was well established as manufacturers of weapons, sewing machines and agricultural machinery. With the post-Civil-War slump in arms production, Remington was seeking new products, and signed a contract to produce the typewriter. Two of his best mechanics, William K. Jenne and Jefferson M. Clough, were assigned to the task of redesigning the machine for mass-production. They had been working on sewing machines, and the influence of that work is evident in the form and decoration of the casing, stand, and the treadle that operated the carriage change. The success of the typewriter was less immediate than that of the sewing machine, but eventually it came to be used extensively in the different visual context of business premises. As a result it evolved into a starker, non-decorated form, such as the Remington No. 10 of 1907, which reverted to a more emphatically functional appearance.

By 1870 the American system was well established in over twenty industries, including, in addition to the examples already cited, precision instruments and tools; machine-tools, especially woodworking machinery; railroad cars of the type discussed in the previous chapter; cutlery, using rollers to press out the form in a continuous process instead of stamping; musical instruments such as pianos and melodium, and domestic hardware. It was to spread even further as the pace of industrial growth in the United States increased at an explosive rate. The expansion of business stimulated the mass-production of simple, efficient office-furniture: desks, bureaux, filing cupboards, swivel chairs and adjustable typists’ chairs. New inventions were avidly adopted. Some, such as bicycles, were produced by firms with existing and appropriate experience and equipment; others, such as telephones and phonographs, were to form the basis of new industries.

Photography, for example, was first popularized by George Eastman with his lightweight Kodak camera of 1888 incorporating a ready-loaded film. This feature had the disadvantage, however, of requiring the camera to be returned to the manufacturer for processing. A new method of loading, using roll-film, enabled a mass-produced camera, the Folding Pocket Kodak, to be produced in 1895. It was followed in 1900 by the Brownie, intended by its designer, Frank Brownell, to be suitable for children. The plain black box was an appropriate expression of the total simplicity and inexpensiveness of the apparatus, which de-mystified photography and made it accessible to the amateur.

Not all mass-produced goods were so utilitarian, however; many of them catered equally for the fashionable taste for ornamentation and decoration. This decorative tendency has often been criticized as a degeneration in taste, though dismissive judgments do little to provide an understanding of why it occurred in America.

In part it was due to the growth of the United States into a complex and diverse society, conscious of its standing in the world, and seeking a sense of cultural identity. An aesthetic eclecticism was capable of reflecting these diversities and aspirations, and if European examples were followed, it was hardly surprising. Disparaging comments by European visitors on the cultural deficiencies and alleged materialism of Americans did much to create a sense of inferiority, a feeling that ‘culture’ was something extraneous, and a desirable acquisition. Participation in international exhibitions with the inevitable comparisons these provoked, importation of goods, publications and pattern books, and the large numbers of European immigrants, were all influential factors. The European suspicion of machine products was also implanted in Americans through the writings of John Ruskin and William Morris. Simple and utilitarian products were regarded as evidence of the ‘mere materialism’ of which Americans were often accused. As in Europe, however, aesthetic symbols and allusion did not necessarily restrict efficiency. Frank Leslie in his Historical Register of the Centennial Exposition of 1876 in Philadelphia, commended the ‘application of art ideas’ to gas implements and processes in the Mitchell Vance Company’s exhibit. Much decoration remained just that, impairing neither the function of products nor the American enthusiasm for, and pursuit of, innovation.

The ability to combine efficiency and embellishment was clearly demonstrated in the furniture designs of firms clustered around the city of Grand Rapids, Michigan, which became the major centre of American furniture production in the late nineteenth century. The industry was based on a high degree of mechanization, with considerable technical and organizational ingenuity evident in the production process. In a study of its development Kenneth L. Ames has pointed out two special requirements in the design of Grand Rapids furniture, that were also characteristic of many other products: it had to appear familiar yet embody some unique feature, and have an appearance of quality without being expensive to make. Mechanization, he argued, was the key to satisfying these requirements. ‘If an elaborate piece of furniture could be made primarily by machine, with a minimum of hand labor, it could be offered to, the public at a modest price.’ In the competitive mass-market for furniture created by Grand Rapids firms close attention to public taste was necessary and design was correspondingly given great emphasis. Ames quotes a writer of 1887 on this subject: ‘Each establishment maintains its own staff of designers and they are busy the whole year round planning articles of furniture as comfortable, unique and beautiful as the art of man can compass.’ Typical of the eclectic use of Renaissance forms that dominated fashion in the 1870s was a chamber suite by the Phoenix Furniture Company, made in walnut. The pieces were sturdy and solid, and the height of the headboard and mirror-stand created an impression of stateliness. Decorative effect was achieved by jig-saw cut outlines, with turned roundels and cut panels glued to the basic structure. Innumerable designs for furniture of all kinds were produced in variations of the style, and became exceedingly popular.

A unified aesthetic in relation to mass-production did not, therefore, exist; in fact, the American system of manufacture catered for and encouraged diversity and eclecticism by the new modes of commercial organization and sales technique that it stimulated. Mass-production required massconsumption, and there followed the establishment of department stores in cities, and later, mail order firms such as Montgomery Ward, founded in 1872, and Sears, Roebuck, founded in 1886. Both were established in Chicago at the hub of the railway system, and sold a vast range of products that catered for all a family’s needs, across a wide geographical area.

With such highly competitive methods of selling, aesthetic appearance became a vital means of attracting interest. All tastes had to be catered for, and ever more complex and detailed effects became technically possible. The Montgomery Ward catalogue of 1895 offered fifty-six different kinds of clocks, many by leading manufacturers such as Seth Thomas and the Waterbury company, ranging from simple alarm clocks to extravagantly decorated wall and mantel models, the casing finishes including oak, walnut, enamelled iron and gilt. Different exterior forms often housed the same movement, as with the ‘Dakota’ and ‘Cato’ models. Sears, Roebuck followed a similar policy. The 1906 catalogue section on sewing machines contained a paragraph under the heading ‘Design’ for each machine and cabinet, commenting on the ‘Minnesota B’ model that it was ‘extremely handsome and pleasing in appearance, the general design being worked out in easy curves and rounded corners so as to avoid any suggestions of harshness or angularity’. The cabinet was described as a ‘model of beauty and artistic design.’

Towards the end of the century, the full consciousness of the extent to which mechanization and the American system were effecting a transformation of the environment led to attempts to arrive at a machine-aesthetic. An important figure in formulating and disseminating this aesthetic was the architect Frank Lloyd Wright. He had worked under Louis Sullivan, whose famous dictum ‘form follows function’ was to become one of the great polemical slogans of modern architecture and design. Often misinterpreted as expressing a somewhat crude structural and aesthetic determinism, Sullivan’s phrase, in the context of his argument, was an attempt to formulate a concept of organic unity in architecture in which function, structure and appropriate decoration could be fused to give an artistic expression appropriate to the modern age. Wright adopted and developed this organic concept, and his early independent work included designs for furniture and fittings intended to be an integral part of the houses he designed. These, like his buildings, were based on the massing of simple elements. The chair built for his studio around 1895 by a Milwaukee cabinet maker was an expression of Wright’s interest at that time in the Arts and Crafts movement and in handicraft. He came to realize, however, that the clean, straight lines of his furniture could be better achieved by the precision of machines than by hand. In a famous lecture given in Chicago in 1901, ‘The Art and Craft of the Machine’, Wright expressed his positive attitude to mechanization and its potential for aesthetic expression, mounting a scathing attack on the misuse of machines to produce ‘butchered forms’ from past cultures. The machine, argued Wright, was ‘the creature, not the Creator of this iniquity’. It was a tool whose potential effect was to emancipate the modern mind. Through its tendency to simplify, the machine could reveal the true nature and beauty of materials. Taking wood as an instance, ‘machines have undoubtedly placed within reach of the designer a technique enabling him to realize the true nature of wood in his designs harmoniously with man’s sense of beauty, satisfying his material needs with such economy as to put this beauty of wood in use within the reach of everyone.’

For Wright, there was no contradiction between individual values and mass-production. He argued that the provision of a better life for everyone and a diminution of human drudgery were essential for the flowering of a democratic culture. ‘What limits do we dare imagine to an Art that is organic fruit of an adequate life for the individual?’ But for this potential to be realized, it was necessary that artists grasp and utilize creatively the power of the machine. Wright’s romantic view of the artist’s role took little account, however, of the realities of the industrial context in which mechanization was applied; and his success in building up a practice dependent largely on private commissions meant that an opportunity never arose for him to attempt to realize his ideals in terms of industrial production.

Nevertheless his ideas, particularly those relating to mechanization, had wide currency in the United States and Europe, and anticipated many of the central tenets of the Modern Movement of the 1920s. There were, however, several contradictions in Wright’s arguments, as in those of the Modern Movement. The assertion that simple, geometric forms were alone appropriate to machine production took little account of the wide potential of modern mechanical technology. Wright’s inflexible application of his aesthetic principles to some of his later designs resulted in some exceedingly uncomfortable geometric furniture. More fundamentally, although he appreciated the potential benefits of the products of modern industry in contributing to better conditions of life, he failed to perceive the human cost that the new methods of production entailed. In 1812 Eli Whitney had clearly stated the objective of the American System of manufacture as, to ‘substitute correct and effective operations of machinery for that skill of the artist which is acquired only by long practice and experience’. At the same time as Wright was formulating his arguments, the American system was reaching a culminating point in the fulfilment of that objective.

Throughout most of the nineteenth century the progress of the American system had emphasized the analysis of objects and mechanisms, breaking them down into interchangeable constituent parts and designing them for mechanized mass-production. Between 1880 and 1900 an engineer, Frederick W. Taylor, began a series of studies of work-processes in which he sought to find ‘the one best way’ of performing tasks; in other words, to achieve a standardization of working methods in order to maximize production. By timing the most efficient workers by stop-watch and seeking to eliminate superfluous movements, he was in fact seeking to integrate human capacities into the sequence of machine operations. This marked a complete rejection of the craft concept of work, which depends upon the skill, judgment and responsibility of individuals. Taylor’s methods became widely known in the early years of the twentieth century under the title ‘scientific management’, and were widely adopted. The adverse reaction they frequently aroused among workers, however, was to lead to an important modification, discussed in the following chapter, to take account of the harm to efficiency caused by fatigue depending not only on physical but also on psychological factors.

Co-ordination of all work-processes in pursuit of improved efficiency and production was first fully developed in the production of motor cars. The United States came late in the field of automobile manufacture, most of the initial development taking place in Europe, but it was in America that the low-priced mass-produced car emerged with astonishing rapidity. Early vehicles were individually craft-built in limited quantities. In 1901, however, Ransome E. Olds began to produce a small, lightweight car on a mass-production basis in Detroit. The machine was very basic and designed for non-mechanically minded customers, with a curved dashboard and folding hood clearly derived from horse-drawn carriage forms, and tiller steering. Six hundred were sold in 1901, rising to 6,500 in 1905. It was a staggering achievement at the time, and opened up motoring to a broad public.

Olds’ achievement was, however, to be dwarfed by Henry Ford’s. The ‘Oldsmobilc’ was only suitable for urban conditions and good roads; Ford set out to design a car to cater specifically for a mass-market and the most rugged conditions. The outcome, in 1908, was the ‘Model T’. From the first it was tremendously popular, and Ford and his team set out to produce it as cheaply as possible. As a result, in 1914 they brought together the constituent parts of the modern mass-production system: quantity production of a standard design with interchangeable parts, on a moving assembly line, to the pace and nature of which the workers were compelled to adapt.

The formula was decisive in increasing the volume of production and decreasing unit cost: in 1910 almost twenty thousand Model Ts were produced at a cost of \$850 each; in 1916, nearly six hundred thousand at \$360 each; before production ceased in 1927, nearly fifteen million had rolled off the production lines.

In design terms the Model T belonged to an interim stage: the influence of carriage design was still strong, for instance, in the spoked wheels and tonneau body with its folding hood; the body sat high on the chassis, in order to provide adequate clearance on poor rural roads; the bonnet was small, and the connecting panel to the body appeared ill-co-ordinated. But if the Model T was not the most beautiful car of its age, it was the most powerful symbol; the harbinger of a transformation in industrial work and industrial products that was to exceed anything previously experienced.

# Writing the History of Design in the Industrial World: An Overview and Two Review Essays

The text of this chapter is not available in this edition

# The Growth of Industrial Design in Japan

The arrival of Commodore Perry’s Black Ships in 1854 marked the end of Japan’s self-imposed isolation from the outside world and the point at which a process of modernization began to take place. Under government leadership, the most successful forms of government, administration, defense, and industry were carefully observed, absorbed and then implemented in a distinctly Japanese manner. Although modem Japanese industrial design is largely a phenomenon of the post-World War II period, it was still characterized by this pattern of assimilation.

Classifying Japanese industrial products in terms of their national characteristics is problematic given the pressures of globalization and the ubiquity of products. For these reasons, it is difficult to associate ‘Japanese design’ with a specific national aesthetic or particular trends in product forms. Nevertheless, design in Japan remains distinctive in terms of processes and values, both of which are heavily influenced by national cultural characteristics. For example, individuality is generally submerged in group identity. Consequently, industrial designers are rarely identified and the origins of products tend to be cloaked in the anonymity of group consensus. Linked to this is the belief that creativity is not only defined by originality, but can also manifest itself in sensitive renditions of past forms— a kind of creative recycling of past ideas. In other words, it is not necessarily what the Japanese design, but how they design it, that is distinctive.

Early industrialization, based on Western models, was primarily preoccupied with developing an industrial infrastructure and military capability. By the early twentieth century, Japan demonstrated technological know-how in such areas as shipbuilding, armaments, and locomotive building. As in other countries, the forms produced by early engineering designers often evinced a strong functional aesthetic. Honed by combat in Manchuria and China in the 1930s, Japanese ships and aircraft performed well against the United States in the early stage of the Pacific war.

The industrial design expertise that existed before World War II derived from European artistic or craft-based concepts, and was centered on the Industrial Arts Institute of Tokyo, a promotional body founded in 1928. The main emphasis was on adapting craft practices to serial production in traditional product categories, such as furniture, ceramics, and packaging. The consumer goods industry also emerged during this period, though the products were generally copied from Western models.

Defeat in World War II brought occupation by U. S. troops and enormous change, also in industrial design. For Atsuko Kamo-shida, later president of the Japan Industrial Designers’ Association, the origins of Japanese industrial design lie in the powerful influence of the American life-style:

Industrial design was to be seen in all the appliances and facilities at the service of US military personnel and their dependents. Although the concept was not part of the Japanese vocabulary yet, US life style was held in high esteem and was considered as being clean, efficient, and one that afforded comfort and was within the reach of anyone living within a democratic society.<sup>1</sup>

At the time, such a life-style was only an aspiration. Japan’s industrial facilities lay largely in ruins but, again, the government took the initiative, by assigning the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) the task of devising plans for reconstruction and economic expansion based on exports. Its early policies had two main planks: introducing the latest foreign technology and protecting domestic industry while it was being rebuilt. The home market was viewed as a developmental springboard for exports.

Realizing that industrial design had emerged in America between the wars as a field concerned with the marketability of manufactured products, MITI began vigorously to promote it. An advisory group, invited from the Art Center College of Design in Pasadena in 1956, recommended improving design standards in Japanese products and packaging, encouraged the development of design education, and urged long-term goals in developing markets for new products.<sup>2</sup> It was deeply ironic, of course, that just as the example of American design was playing a seminal role in stimulating Japanese design, new methods of financial control and marketing emerging from business schools were already displacing design in domestic American business strategy.

The dilemma for MITI in its advocacy of design, however, was a dire shortage of practitioners. It therefore set out to create a cadre of qualified designers by sending talented young men overseas to be trained. In 1955– 56, small groups were sent to the United States, to the Art Center College of Design, the Pratt Institute in New York, the Institute of Design at the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, and to European schools as well. The need was urgent, so by special arrangement the customary fouryear undergraduate courses were compressed into one year. The students faced acute pressures and enormous cultural differences.<sup>3</sup> Nevertheless, they learned rapidly and, on returning to Japan, were sent by MITI on tours around the country to speak about their experiences. Moreover, leading foreign designers were invited to Japan so that their experience and knowledge could be tapped.

Although it generally refrains from direct action, MITI has taken some decisive initiatives. In 1957, “to promote design activities to produce commodities of legitimate originality,”<sup>4</sup> i.e., original Japanese designs, and also to stimulate public awareness, “The Good Design Products Selection System,” popularly known as the “G-Mark” competition, which is still held today, was established. Appointed judges select from between 1,000 and 1,200 products each year. Awards are given for the best product of a given category in each field and one Grand Prize is presented to the overall winner. The award criteria are much broader than those of most other competitions, and emphasize not only appearance, but also function, safety, value or cost, and after-sales service. Consequently, the award has become a respected guarantee of product quality in the Japanese market. Originally restricted to domestic goods, the competition was opened to foreign products in 1984.

To organize the competition, and provide for design promotion on a regular basis, the Japan Industrial Design Promotion Organization (JIDPO), a branch of MITI, was established and has subsequently organized a wide range of national and international design events. Further, to raise the profile of Japanese export products and discourage copying, the “Export Commodities Design Law” of 1959 gave MITI the power to control exports “from Japan in terms of the industrial property rights ... both domestic and international…”<sup>5</sup>

No laws or regulations required companies to employ designers, but the influence of innumerable, informal contacts between bureaucrats and businessmen through which ideas are channeled in Japan cannot be underestimated, and by the mid-1950s, many large Japanese companies had begun to establish design departments. While some new designers returning from overseas were so employed, others set up independent consultancies, such as Kenji Ekuan, who established GK Associates, and Takuo Hirano, who set up Hirano & Associates, which were leading organizations in creating awareness and acceptance of design in the business community. Soon, through new educational courses and on-the-job training, the number of qualified designers began to grow. MITI has continued over the years to view design as a strategic resource for Japan’s economy, with ongoing policy reviews providing a framework of ideas and responses to new developments.

Not all initiatives were the result of government action, however, and already in the 1950s the first signs of typical Japanese approaches to product development were evident in the industrial sector, into which designers were hastily integrated. In areas of early industrial resurgence, such as motorcycles, consumer electrical goods, and photographic and optical equipment, a pattern emerged: variations on product themes were rapidly produced by means of sophisticated manufacturing techniques. Constant, incremental improvement, instead of radical solutions, were encouraged. This was not only a means of reducing risk; cumulatively, it represented a formidable competitive strategy.

It took time for the effects of these developments to become evident to the outside world, but the 1964 Olympic Games in Tokyo clearly signaled a change in perceptions of Japan, with advertising and television programs about the country featuring dramatic images of high-speed “bullet-trains” on the first Shin-kansen line between Tokyo and Osaka, opened in 1963 (Figs. 1, 2). These images must have astonished those who still thought that Japanese industry produced only cheap imitations.

Two main factors have marked the subsequent evolution of Japanese industrial design: firstly, the marketing strategies and policies used to implement design in business operations; secondly, designers’ views about their trade and its relative merits.

The following are the salient characteristics of Japanese businesses use of design:

—strong top-management support for the design department in major companies a survey published in the journal Nikkei Design in 1989 revealed that 80 percent of top executives affirmed the importance of design;

—collaboration between designers, engineers, and marketers as flexible development teams involved in both long-term product planning and short-term product development;

—use of off-the-shelf components rather than having everything designed anew this reduces costs and speeds up development, enabling designers to concentrate on the overall function of the products;

—a continuous flow of information between manufacturers and suppliers, enabling the latter to become involved in the design process, and thereby further reducing costs and development time;

—long-term investments in new technology and manufacturing and their continual development;

—continual investment in design education the japan industrial designers’ association was founded in 1952 with twenty-five members, by 1992, the number of industrial design practitioners had reached 21,000.

The strategies for using design to penetrate both domestic and foreign markets also follow typical patterns, whether the products are automobiles, pocket radios, or ball bearings. From an initial market position, expansion follows four basic strategies, singly or in combination, in an effort to increase market share. Each strategy requires different design attributes.

—Product covering is essentially a process of duplicating what is already on the market with minor variations, requiring little more than superficial changes to the product’s form and the packaging.

—Product churning, especially in consumer electronic products, is a uniquely Japanese approach. In contrast to “rifle-shot” product development in other countries, where efforts focus at an early stage on one specific concept, product churning employs a “shotgun” approach, with designers in parallel teams developing numerous variations of product concepts. The results are then marketed and the public is left to decide which is more appropriate. The central Tokyo district of Akihabara—with its densely packed retail stores in an area of a few blocks accounting for some 10 percent of Japan’s annual sales of consumer electronic devices—is where this outpouring of products is put to the test. A typical example is a range of some fifty vacuum cleaners offered by a single company at one time. Once a market preference becomes clear, unsuccessful variants are eliminated, and production is increased for national distribution and, later, for export. Product covering and product churning both require a substantial number of designers, although not necessarily highly skilled, and account for the large size of some corporate design departments.

There are occasions when product churning coupled with the flexibility to respond quickly can be a formidable competitive weapon. In a famous case, Yamaha decided to challenge Honda’s lead in the domestic motorcycle market at a time when it was already flooded. To counter this move Honda, which like Yamaha normally produced about twenty-seven new models a year, promptly sent its car designers to the motorcycle division, and in 1982 produced forty-five new designs, almost one a week, most targeted at Yamaha’s strongest market areas. Yamaha suffered losses that year estimated at some \$150 million.<sup>6</sup>

The “inch-up” approach, in contrast, is more sharply focused, with design assuming a strategic role in breaking into higher levels of the market, where quality, distinctive forms, and exceptional service are fundamental requirements. Toyota, for example, entered international markets with small cars developed for Japanese conditions. Gradually, their models penetrated higher-value sectors, a process culminating in the “Lexus” range, which, following its introduction into the American market in 1989, immediately became a best-seller. A key to the success of Lexus was its systemic design approach, with a meticulous design not only of the automobile itself, but also of every visible aspect of the showrooms, sales offices, and service centers.

If Japanese designers have a particular forte, however, it is in “scaledown” strategies, with which they have continually redefined markets. An early example is the Honda “Supercub” of 1958—still in production today—which reduced motorcycles from the powerful machines that leather-clad males bestrode to a lightweight, small-engined, step-through model, offering inexpensive transportation to people of either sex in regular clothing. The tiny calculators of today derive from a Sharp “desktop,” solid-state calculator, weighing 55 pounds and introduced in 1965. Ten years later, Sony introduced the first VCR for consumer markets, after spending eighteen years developing them from broadcasting equipment, and the famous “Walkman,” a miniaturized tapeplayer for portable use. In the early 1980s, Canon similarly scaled-down photocopiers from models affordable only to large businesses, to tabletop models appropriate to small businesses and home use.

It is not only the well-known giant corporations that employ this strategy. In the last four years, a medium-sized firm, Tanita Corporation, which earned its reputation manufacturing bathroom scales, has extended its product line by reducing the size and cost of body-fat analyzers from professional models costing \$5,000 to consumer models priced at \$200. The examples are innumerable, but the result of such ingenuity has been a profusion of products that has continually raised customers’ expectations of design and quality.

At the same time, designers themselves have evolved new ideas about their role. Three major trends are discernible: the first concerns expanded ideas on design’s role in society as exemplified in an MITI policy review of 1988, formulated by heads of design organizations and leading designers. Four key points were emphasized:

—going beyond material levels and contributing substantially to Japan’s future quality of life;

—adapting to the latest information technology which introduces new opportunities in industry and in society and makes new demands on design;

—enhancing human and technical potential by combining hard-and software to meet new needs, as inherent, for example, in the changing demographic profile of Japan, with the proportion of elderly people growing rapidly;

—promoting the understanding of design at all levels if its potential contribution to society is to be realized.<sup>7</sup>

Both pragmatic and idealistic, the report combines economic with technological factors, and envisions design redefining Japan’s cultural identity in the modern world.

A second trend is the emergence of multi-disciplinary consulting groups offering a wide range of design and planning services. They do not simply execute corporate briefs or design single products, but instead play a longterm strategic role in determining the future of a corporation, its products, services, and systems. An example is the relationship between Hirano & Associates and the CKD Corporation, a manufacturer of packaging machinery. Over a period of thirty years, the firm has emerged from being dependent on overseas licenses to being a world leader in the industry, based on a design policy that shapes every single aspect of corporate activities.

Thirdly, in sharp contrast, is the phenomenon of “star” designers, who project the image of innovative, lateral thinkers. They are independent trendsetters seeking to transcend the boundaries of product concepts and often cultivate a rebel image—and in the context of Japanese culture they are indeed rebels. One such designer, Naoki Sakai, explains: “My product is imagination, dreams, fantasies, desires… I make human desires.”<sup>8</sup> Sakai does not always design products in detail, sometimes suggesting key images and features for others to execute, as in the Nissan “Pao” of 1988. Manufactured only for the Japanese market, this automobile was an example of so-called “retro-design,” evoking the forms of the 1950s, and sparked an international trend in creating product forms derived from and recalling designs of the past.

The work of such designers is not strategic but open-ended, exploratory, and symbolic in nature, and the scale on which it has been manifested is yet another distinctive Japanese approach to design. Groups have also been established by major corporations to fulfill a similar function of generating new concepts, as with the “outside” group set up by Nissan in 1991 in Tokyo “to connect more closely user and maker,”<sup>9</sup> or Sony’s design laboratory, which currently employs a staff of forty.<sup>10</sup>

Underlying all these developments, however, is the recurrent theme of how to humanize technology, as summed up by architect and designer Masayuki Kurokawa: “The next era is about the relation between humans and objects. Designers have to make things humans can love and that fit in with their life-style.”<sup>11</sup>

Few people in the world remain unaffected by the shift in Japan from producing imitation goods to generating technically superior, well-designed products. In the process, Japan’s economic standing in the world and its own standard of living have changed dramatically.

Yet, although the achievements of Japanese designers are substantial, a perceptible crisis of confidence among them has become evident in recent times. As in other areas of Japanese life, this stems from the collapse of the “bubble” economy in 1992, largely owing to speculative policies by major financial institutions, that sent shock waves through Japanese society. The annual growth rate of design services of nearly 9 percent prior to 1992 has fallen drastically, resulting in serious cutbacks and some design consultancies going bankrupt. Widespread soul-searching is evident on several levels. There are efforts to develop sophisticated design methodologies capable of handling the complexities of modern technology. In commercial contexts, there are problems with foreign competition in today’s global market. Conversely, there is the desire to move beyond the uniformity of global products and to evolve forms truly expressive of Japanese culture and tradition. Another persistent note calls for more “emotional” approaches to design, free of commercial pressures.

5 Ibid.

The future evolution of Japanese industrial design seems likely to follow multiple paths, but it is precisely the vigor and diversity of debate and the new roles they envisage for themselves in Japanese society that is perhaps the best evidence of the distance Japanese designers have traveled since the 1950s. Design, however, is innately focused on the future and, if current aspirations to humanize technology are realized, Japanese designers could exceed their past achievements and make an even greater contribution to the lives of people across the globe.

