# Chinese Design: What Can We Learn from the Past? / Three Moments in the Global History of Making: Nomads, Traders, Slaves / (i) N omads / (ii) T rade / (iii) Craftsmanship in slavery

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》\auto\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》.md

# Chinese Design: What Can We Learn from the Past?

In all the varied processes of change taking place in China at the present time it is relevant to ask not only what is being gained, but also: what is being lost? The material forms inherited from the past represent the accumulated wisdom of a culture, which developed over a long period of time and was constantly refined to meet the needs of its people and express their sense of identity. With the intense loss of forms and processes and their replacement by substitutes developed in other parts of the world there is inevitably an effect on the structure of values and beliefs that constitute a culture. It is therefore worth asking whether the past can be a continuing source of inspiration in the processes of modernization that are sweeping over China, which also raises questions about the extent to which design is a source of continuity as well as change.

I have to emphasise that I am not an expert on Chinese design history and do not speak or read Chinese, so my observations are restricted to an interpretation of forms that exist in museum collections and publications. In discussing this process, however, it seems to me there are two levels of understanding that are open to us as a result of this process of visual analysis. The first is to represent the forms and materials of the past as being in their construction and expression icons of a culture, a unique representation signalling a quality of “Chineseness”. The second is a more subtle quality, of what I would call the underlying principles of design, which are more to do with the consciousness and purpose informing works.

An example is the horseshoe-arm chair typical of the Ming dynasty that has been widely taken as an iconic Chinese form and reproduced in innumerable ways at home and abroad. In formal terms the back and arm support that curves in two dimensions is certainly visually distinctive and subtle, but sitting in it brings into play other senses, that reveals it is more than an attractive form. The chair is in fact based upon a very careful and detailed understanding of comfort and posture in seating. The curve of the horseshoe form is beautifully designed to support both the back and the arms of anyone sitting and working in the chair and potentially using it for reading or writing – basically it supports a good posture. The stretcher bar between the front legs parallel to the floor are a foot-rest enabling the underside of the thighs to be raised above the sharp edge of the seat and so avoids a potential source of cramp and discomfort.

It is therefore not just an aesthetic form to be admired as historically, visually distinctive, but embodies notions that today would be included and calculated under the heading of ergonomics, which of course did not exist in the Ming dynasty. What did exist at that time, however, was an understanding the posture of the human body and an emphasis on designing a form appropriate to it.

There are innumerable imitations of Ming chair forms available, but how many of them show any understanding of or respect for these underlying principles? This is part of a widespread phenomenon in which the forms of the past are reproduced in ways that adopt aesthetic superficialities as a route to a quick profit.

The example on which I want to mainly focus is one of the glories of Chinese culture, its cuisine. For me it is one of the best in the world (the other outstanding one is Italian). What I find remarkable about the Chinese approach to food is that relatively simple means are used to produce it, yet the quality at all levels, from the simplest meal to the most elaborate banquet, is generally very high. Another observation is that the Chinese approach to how food is bought, stored, prepared, cooked, presented and eaten represents a very different approach in many fundamental aspects to how these activities are thought of and practised in the rest of the world. The implications of a detailed study of implements used in cooking are very wide-ranging, requiring acknowledgement of regional and ethnic variations and needing to take into account many aspects of Chinese culture, such as the connection between food and health, enabling people to take responsibility for their own well-being instead of being heavily dependent upon a separate profession who “own” medical knowledge.

Historically, a crucial question is: how and why did this pattern of cooking and the values associated with it evolve? Are there underlying principles that can be discerned and if so, are they still capable of being reinterpreted and forming a vital part of the present and future?

Some tentative suggestions about answers to these questions can be provided by examining a series of Chinese cooking stoves found in museum collections around the world. These do not represent a properly organized research project, but result from a random gathering of images that together suggest some preliminary approaches to larger questions. Rather than give specific answers my intention is to suggest possibilities.

What stimulated my interest in this subject of cooking was a small stove that is between five and six thousand years old, produced in the Yangshao culture of the Yellow River region. The stove is crudely made of coarse earthenware, set on small feet, with an opening at the front to insert fuel and with a cooking vessel set in a circular opening on the stove top. Its height measures 10.9cm and with the vessel, 15.8cm.

The use of earthenware as material is inevitable since the stove predates the development of metals. The only other fire-resistant material available would have been stone and carving a shape of this kind would have been extremely difficult. On the other hand the plastic qualities of earthenware for both the stove and the cooking vessel indicate the very remarkable possibilities opened up by the use of the simplest and most widely available ceramic materials. The finish of the stove is crude, with little attempt at smoothness and fingerprints are visible around the front aperture. It suggests an object made by a person for their own use without any attempt to give it a fine finish, but despite this, the form is assured and well-defined and rather than an individual concept, would seem to be an expression of a widelyaccepted form within the context of Yangshao culture of what this kind of implement should be and do.

How is it possible to explain the shape of the stove and vessel in relation to their purpose? If design knowledge is embodied in a form, what does this stove tell us? First of all, why is it so small? The size is only capable of burning a small amount of fuel at any one time and if we assume this is a deliberate choice, we have to ask why? One answer might be that in rural areas reliant on gathering wood for fuel from the local environment a process sets in, and it is still widely observable in many parts of the world, where readily available supplies become scarcer and longer journeys are needed to gather fuel. If this explanation has any validity, we would expect to see fuel used carefully and economically, obtaining the maximum value from it for purposes of cooking, and that is precisely what the shape of the stove suggests. The base of the stove flares out towards the top, diffusing the heat upwards. The aperture at the front, in contrast, is wider at the base to allow fuel to be easily inserted, but narrows towards the top, possibly to conserve heat.

Another question concerns the cooking vessel that sits in a circular opening on the top of the stove. The shape is a shallow inverted-cone and this can be explained both in terms of giving stability during the cooking process – the shape fits in the hole tightly instead of just resting on it – and in presenting a greater surface area to the available heat. In other words, fuel efficiency comes into the equation again. The small amount of fuel would, moreover, give a high heat for a short duration with a lower level of residual heat for some time after as the earthenware material retained and diffused heating energy. The partial cover of the top of the vessel could also be explained by a need to conserve heat during the cooking process and possibly could also serve as a support for a steamer to be inserted.

The short cooking time at high heat would also tend to encourage a process of cutting meat and vegetables into small sizes that could be cooked very quickly. It is no accident, it seems to me, that the shape of this 5000-year-old cooking vessel is still the basic inverted-cone shape of the famous Chinese wok and this physical evidence from the past suggests this very characteristic approach to cooking has roots deep in Chinese history.

If we ask, therefore, about the underlying principles of this stove, the emphasis appears to be focussed on the efficient use of limited amounts of fuel with methods of cooking adapted to making the most effective use of a limited amount of high heat.

This supposition is supported by comparison with another survival from the Neolithic past, a small stove from the Hemudu culture in the lower Yangtze Valley. It has a different form to the Yangshao example, but there also are some striking similarities. The Hemudu stove is also made of earthenware and is small, but in this case the cooking vessel is supported on three small protruding lugs on the inside surface, that would keep the vessel above the heat to diffuse it more easily. However, the underlying principles remain the same, again emphasizing efficient use of fuel within a limited space.

A further example of how the underlying principles endured, despite changes in materials and contexts, is a cast-iron stove from the Spring and Autumn period, some two-and-a-half thousand years after the early examples discussed previously. Again, however, the basic concept is of a small stove, although now with a chimney to carry away smoke and provide a through draught to keep the fire burning with maximum effectiveness. Again, a container sits in a hole on top of the stove. In other words, there is an improvement in efficiency but the underlying principles differ little from the examples of the Yangshou and Hemudu cultures so long before.

Casting iron was a complex process for the time and therefore the stove must have been produced by some kind of early industrial foundry. China was at the cutting-edge of technological development in the ability to cast a product of this size and complexity (it was to be over a thousand years before Europe learned to cast iron on this scale). An even more complex example of casting on a large scale is the eroded remains of a stove found in Shensi province and now in the Field Museum, Chicago, in which the body of the stove is now lifted above ground level.

In addition to this kind of product, however, there was also evident a long continuity of other types of stoves not so reliant on advanced technology and capable of being built by people in their own homes for their own use. Certainly, during the Han dynasty of between 2200–1800 years ago, such simple forms seems to have predominated, with many museum collections having models from this period of what clearly became a dominant stove type constructed in courtyards from what appear to be brick and earthenware. These vary in size and capacity, yet all still are constructed on the same principles as the cast-iron example from the Spring and Autumn period, with a low aperture into which fuel could be inserted, and a chimney flue at the other end dispersing smoke and providing a through draught to keep the fire burning at maximum intensity.

The raised circular apertures on top of the stoves vary in number, but are still are based on using a limited, confined space to burn fuel and use it effectively, with cooking vessels placed in the apertures to concentrate the heat. The particular interest of the cast-iron example from the Han period is again the way in which the new material is used to construct the same basic structure, with the underlying principles remaining intact.

An important aspect of a functional structure such as a stove, of course, is not only its form but how it is used – and illustrations of this are not as frequently found as the objects themselves. One example, however, is a decorative brick from the Han dynasty, showing the process of cooking. Here another feature of Chinese stoves becomes evident in the height of the working surface, which is generally low enough to allow a cook to easily see into a cooking pot while food is being prepared. Again, there seems to be an innate understanding of what today would be the ergonomics of kitchen design. These traditional Chinese dimensions of stove height are certainly very different to the common ergonomic measures used to define standard heights and dimensions for kitchen units in Western countries, a difference that is vital if culinary traditions are taken into account in designing modern Chinese kitchens.

One final illustration is of a contemporary stove exhibited in late 2007. What is evident after another leap in time of two thousand years is a further shift in technology, this time not only in the materials used to construct the stove but in the fuel source, in this case, gas. It is a very basic appliance, yet the moulded frames to hold the cooking vessels, and the forms of many of the vessels themselves, still present a continuity of the underlying principles.

The examples and interpretations presented here are a preliminary and very personal examination of a few aspects of the history of Chinese cooking. My suggestions of meanings is intended to open up discussion, but obviously, a more detailed research programme would be needed to broaden the scope and examine a much wider range of cooking techniques, vessels and implements, how and why they evolved, and what values they embodied in the wider patterns of Chinese culture.

What can be stated with confidence, however, is that a most remarkable feature of the Chinese tradition of cooking is the way its principles, and even many predominant forms used, continue to be relevant. They have evolved and proven to be efficient and appropriate through long periods of time, while sustaining levels of quality in this most basic and repetitive human need, with their underlying principles capable of sustained evolution and adaptation.

I would also suggest that the characteristics of Chinese cooking are still highly relevant to our modern age. Compare the limited range of implements flexibly used to prepare a Chinese meal to the elaborate specialisation of

Western kitchens, loaded with a wide array of mechanisms and implements that are seldom used. The principles of economy and efficiency are evident in many ways, in the limited number of vessels and implements used and their flexibility of application. Consider, for example, what you need to eat a Chinese meal of the most elaborate kind: basically, a bowl, a small plate, a teacup, chopsticks and a spoon. Compare this with the array of a banquet table in a Western cultural context, similarly laid for an elaborate meal – with different kinds of knives, forks and spoons, numerous glasses, cups and plates, each for a specific purpose. The Chinese principle is a combination of simplicity and flexibility in both preparation and consumption of food that is of high quality; the Western principle is one of specialisation and increasing complexity, with standards of quality in food not always the main emphasis as cultural patterns turn more and more to commercially prepared food. Chinese meals do require more work in preparation, but is it really progress to sacrifice quality for convenience? Which is more appropriate in a world where the stampede towards unnecessary and elaborate over-consumption is an increasing threat to the fabric of our planet?

Design, I have suggested, is both concerned with change and also with continuity. Ransacking the past for easily copied decorative motifs shows little understanding of the cultures of earlier times, and no respect for them. On the other hand, concentrating more on the underlying principles that embody the true characteristics and strengths of past cultures makes it possible to incorporate these into contemporary designs that preserve and adapt the best of what the past has to offer. This, it seems to me, is a valid aspect of contemporary design practice and a worthy task for design historians: changes in forms, styles and materials reflecting social and political influences are certainly important aspects of what we study, but what is also of abiding importance are underlying principles that reflect continuities of defining importance to a culture.

What I am suggesting, therefore, is that design history should be the guardian of these principles. Instead of being a focus of nostalgia for a lost past that probably never existed, it can be a constant means of respecting and incorporating into our present and future lives all that is best in our inheritance. As China regains its rightful position as a leading nation in the world, this is important not just for Chinese people, but for everyone all around the globe. Great nations are respected not only for their economic and military power, but also for the cultural values they embody. The lessons of the continuity of its rich and unique cultural inheritance and its continuing relevance could be the most profound gift China has to offer the world.

# Three Moments in the Global History of Making: Nomads, Traders, Slaves

The texts below are three extracts from the unpublished ms. “Crafts, Commerce, Industry: A Global History of Design.” It is impossible to extract from a text well in excess of 160,000 words three fragments that in a few thousand words represent the range of issues with which the book deals. Any selection will of necessity be arbitrary. The principle used here was that of taking three emphases or moments of persons making and using that may not always be found in usual ways that we think the history of things. Nomads, the question of early trade, the craftsmanship of slaves are three vignettes that offer perspectives on material culture and on designing (in the broad sense)—the first from the perspective of limit and necessity, including the necessity for identity and elaboration, but in the context of ways of life distinguished by impermanent settlement; the second from the perspective of the complex commercial and cultural interactions established through trade (in this instance trade in desired goods occurring in Asia from the earliest times); the third from the standpoint of those who have nothing—slaves—where the preservation and cultivation of skills of making and craftsmanship are not the least effective means of maintaining dignity, and even a modicum of economic standing, in the face of everything in slave societies that must constantly seek to erode both.

## (i) N omads

… The last three chapters have focused upon the emergence of civilizations based on sedentary ways of life, agriculture and urbanization. Across the globe, however, numerous groups persisted in distinct ways of life that for long periods of human history presented a profound, repetitive and destabilizing challenge to civilizations. They lived for the most part on the periphery of geographical areas most suited for agriculture and urbanization, in a relationship that was part dependent and part predatory.

While nomadism was a widespread characteristic of societies living in marginal areas, under that umbrella term there were many variations. It encompassed small tribal groups which in essential aspects represent continuity with ancient foraging ways of life, continually moving from place to place in search of food and water. Other groups, however, where conditions permitted, made a transition to pastoral nomadism. This was an itinerant pattern based on herding large groups of animals, predominantly sheep and less frequently cattle. The capacity to control herds constantly on the move in search of pasture was limited until horses were tamed and methods and equipment for riding evolved to an effective level. Horses, however, transformed pastoral nomadism and the size of groups and their herds became very large.

Other peripheral societies used the sea as their means of communication, as with the Vikings of Scandinavia, who combined agriculture and settlement at home with raids upon vulnerable, richer neighbours. The Polynesian groups who navigated across the island groups of the Pacific can also be included under this category.

For long periods of history this created an uneasy balance between highly differentiated cultural systems. In most cases, close relationships, based on trade, existed between nomads and adjacent agricultural producers and sources of luxury products. The polarity has often been summarized by the terms: barbarism and civilization, inferring a polarity between chaos and order. Such labels are highly biased, however, the extant records of such confrontations being almost wholly written from the point of view of various civilizations. Indeed, the word “barbarian” stems from a Greek term for foreigners, with overtones of a disparaging sense of superiority over uncouth outsiders. Similarly, the Chinese appellation “Xiongnu” for the nomads who appeared in frontier areas of Northwest China can be interpreted as “slave bastard”.<sup>1</sup> A consistent feature of many such literary records is that frontier peoples came to represent a kind of alter ego, the enemy at the gate, a symbol of darkness against light, evil against good, by which the cultural self-identity of civilizations could be unequivocally defined in a favourable light.

In contrast, a scholar of Asian nomadic groups, Jaroslav Lebedynsky, comments on them in much more favourable terms:

The specificity of their cultures, the historical impact of their activities between the great Western, Middle Eastern, Indian and Chinese sedentary areas, justifies them being placed among the principal civilizations of the ancient world.<sup>2</sup>

Lebedynsky’s use of the term “civilization” is debatable, since sedentarism and urbanization are widely considered defining components, neither of which the nomads developed to any substantial degree. Describing their way of life as a culture is perhaps more appropriate. This, however, does not disprove his point, which is that the history of over two millennia in Eurasia, the focus of his work, is incomprehensible without including the impact of nomadic groups, which at times was enormous.

The most constant friction between cultures occurred in and around the open plains of Central Asia. If the great civilizations evolved in areas suitable for large-scale cultivation, close to waterways that acted as trade routes, the heart of the vast Eurasian landmass had soils and climate generally unsuitable for the settled agriculture that sustained urban development and centralized states. In fact, its conditions vary considerably, with four highly differentiated geographic zones running in bands north to south across the whole span of Eurasia: from frozen tundra with minimal vegetation; through heavily forested areas, or the taiga; to the steppe, vast open grasslands; and finally, arid semi-desert regions with occasional oases. The steppe region, above all, generated a way of life based on pastoral nomadism on a huge scale.

Describing all the many tribes—thirty-five major groups are described by Lebedynski, with many sub-groupings<sup>3</sup>—constituting the patchwork quilt of steppe societies, and even establishing an outline of how they evolved, is difficult. They were mobile, leaving a light footprint, their oral cultures yielding no written records and a transient life leaving limited tangible remains. Tribes frequently split into small groups that scattered to find grazing in difficult times. Little or nothing might survive of a way of life and what does is inevitably incomplete. Nevertheless, evidence of social customs and craft skills can be reconstructed to some extent from such artefacts as survive, which are often eloquent testimony to the ingenuity of steppe peoples.

Central Asia represented an alternative to agricultural settlement, where people adopted a mobile, semi-nomadic way of life, driving herds in search of fresh pasture, but with settlements as bases at oases, where some crops could be grown. A vigorous expansion of oasis cultures from around 3000 BC typified this kind of coexistence. Contacts with settled areas led to the spread of enhanced metal and transportation technology across the steppe, so that by c.2000 BC, farmer-herders used various alloys, particularly bronze, and carried their possessions in ox-drawn wheeled vehicles.

With the spread of the horse and developments in weaponry c. 1500 BC, differences in wealth opened up, leading to the emergence of a nomadic aristocracy, whose emphasis in material possessions changed, “from a notion of power and status symbolized by weapons and tools, to one in which wealth, accumulated in precious metals and stones, horses, and ornamental art, became its predominant pursuit.”<sup>4</sup> Although sheep remained the most numerous animals bred and raised, henceforward the horse had pride of place in the consciousness and values of the steppe tribes. It was domesticated around 3200 BC and first used to pull chariots, a form of transport rapidly adopted in civilizations. While many illustrations of early chariots survive, however, horse riders are less frequently depicted and are generally shown mounted on the animal’s rump.<sup>5</sup>

It took a long time for riding to evolve as a skill. Fully developed horseriding cultures, as indicated by archaeological finds of artefacts such as bridles and bits, did not emerge until sometime around the ninth century BC. From that time, however, the horse became the crucial factor in steppe culture and nomadism eventually superseded every other pattern of life there. Typically, every boy in the steppe tribes learned to ride at an early age and soon acquired the skills of firing a short bow from horseback.

There were, of course, limitations to what could be produced under nomadic conditions and possessions tended to emphasize utility and portability as primary criteria, with decoration integrated into utilitarian function, as in textiles, which were widely produced in colourful patterns. Wool was available from sheep or, less frequently, from yaks. Yarn could be spun by women with distaff and spindle as a constant activity and woven on simple, portable looms. Carpets could be rolled up and were easily carried to provide cover for floors and walls in cold regions. They, and woven cloth, were often valuable items of trade and, indeed, some of the most enduring textile traditions in the world originated with the nomads of Central Asia. Small stone, bone or wooden implements and decorative objects could also be carved and easily carried.

The artefacts of the steppe tribes reflected their occupations as hunters and herders. They avidly adopted metal-working techniques for bronze tools and weapons, such as spears, swords, daggers and arrowheads vital for hunting and personal defence. Tools often had the handle and blade cast as one piece, such as adzes for working wood, knives for hunting and skinning animals, and awls for leather working. Most were small, light, and portable, easily made and capable of being carried and used as the need arose, often designed to hang from or be attached to a part of their clothing, through rings, loops, or similar devices.

Equipment for horses inevitably played a central role. To control draft animals and horses, harnesses, bridles, and cart or chariot fittings were produced in great numbers. Tribes continually on the move had little time, however, to make luxury goods. Although their way of life was self-sufficient in basic necessities, and small objects could be produced while on the move, numerous larger products and decorative objects were generated in oasis settlements or towns bordering the steppes.

Leather was a readily available material that must have played a prominent role in nomadic life. Little has survived, but a hint of the levels of quality attained are evident in a horn-shaped box from c.1000 BC. The component pieces are fastened by leather bindings and the surfaces are beautifully tooled in whorled patterns.

An early example of the potential of bronze working on a small scale in a nomadic society can be illustrated by the legacy of a group that emerged in the area known as Luristan in western Iran. Easily accessible mineral deposits, particularly copper, were mined there and by 2500 BC, bronze was widely worked, with a particularly rich spectrum of small artefacts dating from around 1300–500 BC found in graves. Not much is known about the people and their society, other than that they were nomads who migrated from Central Asia and became pastoralists, with some settlements possibly predating their arrival.

The pieces are generally small, capable of manufacture by itinerant metal smiths, with decorated horse-fittings predominating. Stylized animal forms, often compressed into twisting patterns to fit small spaces, are highly typical. Personal items include pins to clip cloaks or wraps, and whetstones to keep edges sharp, which nomadic horsemen habitually hung from their belts

Weapons, such as daggers, swords and axes are another major category. Some of these are highly utilitarian, while others are more decorated in ways that could hamper their use in battle and so probably had a more ceremonial nature. An example is a sword handle with eagles, tigers and human figures interwoven into its surface in a manner that would make it difficult to grip firmly in a hand-to-hand fight.

Some necessary artefacts for nomadic groups were larger, requiring more substantial resources, in terms of materials and tools, which were not easily transported. Regular interaction between tribes in their extensive wanderings and settlements scattered around the steppes provided more stable conditions for the development of larger scale work. There is also the possibility that itinerant craftsmen might have been a source of supply as indicated by an early Chinese source:

Although the role of itinerant metal smiths, both Chinese and northern, has never been addressed, there is some evidence that they did exist, as passages in the Han Shu (History of the Former Han Dynasty) include references to itinerant Chinese armourers during the Han period.<sup>6</sup>

Similarities in patterns of life and regular interaction across large distances resulted from the livestock-raising common to all nomadic tribes, requiring them to habitually move great distances. Combined with the fact that the nomadic pattern of life was cyclic rather than evolutionary, this accounts to a large extent for recurrent common themes in imagery over large areas of Central Asian. The forms of steppe wildlife, in particular, were constantly used in dense, intricate patterns featuring animistic themes on small objects, such as belt-buckles, sword hilts and icons for the tips of standards. Larger forms have been found, but adapted in interesting ways to nomadic life. A bronze cooking vessel dating from c.200 BC, used for cooking meat over a fire, was 72 cm (over 28″) high, with walls cast of very thin bronze, compared to vessels used in settled regions, giving faster conduction of heat.

There were two ways, basically, in which the nomads could supplement their need for goods: firstly, by trading animals and other products at market centres in the frontier regions; secondly, by armed force—raiding expeditions with the intent of simply taking what they needed. The former was an activity dependent upon a market existing for what nomads could supply. When that market sagged for any reason, raiding would occur. What therefore emerged as a continual thread in frontier history was a symbiotic relationship between the nomads and the civilized states.

The balance of economic advantage lay with the latter when trading was based on goods crucial to the nomads. The civilized states possessed productive resources on a scale that nomadic societies could never match and there was often little they required from nomads. Governments of settled civilizations relied for income on appropriating the surplus production of lands under their control, primarily through taxes on agriculture and craft products that could be turned into long-term assets. The nomads’ role in enabling and protecting trade routes, such as the Silk Road, was substantial, bringing income from tolls, but these were often difficult to gather and in many cases were evaded. If the continuing power and vitality of nomadic culture dominated events in Eurasia for so long, the plain fact was it basically relied upon an extractive approach, whether in terms of pasture, extorting tribute or trading tolls, or looting. It had little capacity to accumulate knowledge or wealth of the kind that generated continually increasing productive capacity. In this respect, the long-term advantage undoubtedly lay with the civilized states.

## (ii) T rade

Agriculture, technology and political structures were vital elements in the evolution of human societies, but another factor of great significance was the emergence of commercial activity on a broad scale, epitomized by the early example of the Phoenician trading empire. The growth of trade meant that henceforward design functioned on two interacting levels: firstly, it continue to satisfy the specific needs and cultural values of particular localities; secondly, as long-distance trade in products grew it could extend to a global scale, which required coming to terms with cultural differences.

Such long-distance patterns of trade have their own cycles of rise and fall. New knowledge and discoveries, new technologies, changes in relationships or balance of power, and many other factors could stimulate new opportunities. These often involved substantial risk, which, if overcome, could translate into enduring commercial prosperity. As they grew and evolved, trading systems embodied accumulated knowledge and experience but were also vulnerable to disruption or fracture by same factors that created them. Trade routes could be attacked or blocked, conquest could destroy facilities or capabilities, tastes could change, new processes could make old skills outmoded, new discoveries could supersede old ones, changes in weather patterns could be disastrous, and so on.

A frequent accompaniment of trade was a widespread diffusion of religious beliefs. Conversion could be a matter of personal conviction, as it seems to have been with the enormous spread of Buddhism across East Asia and Hinduism in South-east Asia, or be imposed at sword point, as was the case in much of the rapid spread of Islam or the efforts of European Crusaders to regain possession of the lost Holy Land for Christendom. Religious belief, ritual and iconography also strongly determined what kind of forms and decorative motifs were suitable or tolerated in any society.

This chapter will therefore examine aspects of the growth of trading systems, patterns of conversion and cultural exchange and the influences they embodied and diffused in what can be called the Asian Triangle. Its geographical context can be envisaged in terms of an inverted triangle. Its horizontal axis was the Silk Road, one of the most fabled trading routes in the world. The other two sides were sea routes from China southwest to the apex of the triangle in Sri Lanka at the southern tip of the Indian sub-continent, and thence northwest to the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea. It encompassed lands with enormously rich and diverse cultures, including China, India and Arabia and from around 500AD, these regions were the most dynamic force for innovation in the world, generating enormous changes across Asia and in crucial aspects reaching far beyond.

As trading became more structured, markets were held in particular places at specified times, providing regular opportunities to buy and sell. When the scale and range of trade expanded beyond immediate localities, however, in addition to means of transportation, merchants increasingly required enabling systems to facilitate exchange, such as coinage, contracts and credit. If knowledge of distant places and people was tenuous, trusted institutions were needed to act as banks or agents, a function often provided by temples in trading centres. Facilities for travellers were also required, with chains of stations offering rest and succour for journeys. By such means trade came to be structured in patterns summarizing the knowledge and abilities of an age. Such routes established relationships based not only on exchange of desirable products, but the diffusion of ideas, of religious and social beliefs, technological and aesthetic concepts. Their existence was also intertwined with scientific and technical developments, such as cartography as an accurate representation of the known world and navigational instruments to more accurately locate oneself within it.

Early trading routes were simply tracks impressed by the repetitive movement of feet and hooves upon landscapes. Although roads were built comparatively early these were rare, primarily intended for administrative or military purposes. The first known road system of substantial size was the Royal Road in Persia, built c.3000BC and used until c.300BC. It extended from the Persian Gulf to the Aegean Sea in the north, a distance of almost 1800 miles. Other major systems were the Chinese Imperial Roads that extended for some 2,000 miles and Roman roads linking the empire. Most urban centres, however, had few paved roads and barely any worth the name connecting with their immediate hinterland, let alone with distant regions. Overland trade was often a necessity since not all regions had access to the sea or navigable rivers but it was slow, limited in capacity to packs carried by donkeys, (later camels and horses), and damaging to fragile articles, placing a premium on small, light and valuable goods. For bulky products, waterways, if accessible, were the best option.

The origins of long-range trading in Asia are difficult to pinpoint, although there are some indicators. Contact between Mesopotamia, Central Asia and India developed at least by the time the earliest urban settlements appeared and grew to substantial scale. “The network of overseas trade was impressively widespread: from the second half of the third millennium, ships made their way down the Arabian Gulf to Saudi Arabia and along the coasts of Iran and Pakistan as far as the north-west coast of India.”<sup>7</sup>

In the second century AD a huge demand for Chinese silk in the Roman Empire led to as many as 120 ships sailing annually from the Red Sea ports of Egypt to carry cargoes from India, where the silk was carried overland caravan from China. On arrival in Egypt, cargoes were trans- shipped overland to the Nile and the Mediterranean. By this time, navigators understood the regular patterns of monsoons that could carry them speedily across open seas, instead of slowly hugging the coast. An early sailing manual, the Periplus Maris Erythraei, a Greek text dating from the 1st century AD described routes from the Red Sea to ports at the mouth of the Ganges in the Bay of Bengal. It referred “to several navigational techniques adopted in the western Indian Ocean, such as identifying the approaching coast by means of changes in the colour of the water; and the presence of sea snakes.”<sup>8</sup> In the following century, the Greek geographer, Ptolemy, described an extension of this route to the Straits of Malacca and the Malayan peninsular. The relatively large capacity of cargo ships made it an enormously profitable trade, although the outflow of coin and bullion from Rome to pay for it substantially weakened the economy.<sup>9</sup>

Trading was not simply a matter of providing exotic materials for Europe, however, although much history has been written in such terms—patterns within Asia also became richly textured. Ships were sailing from Guangzhou in southern China from the second century BC, possibly as far as India. By 100BC, a shipyard near Guangzhou was building vessels capable of carrying 25–30 tons of cargo.<sup>10</sup>

Thereafter, growth in vessel size increased substantially: “One thirdcentury Chinese text speaks already of large ships, over 200 feet in length, capable of carrying 600 or 700 persons and 5,000 bushels of cargo.”<sup>11</sup> By the Tang dynasty, (618–906 AD) ceramics were the main cargo, being regularly dispatched westwards in large, well-built Chinese vessels as far as the Persian Gulf and Red Sea. From the second century AD these were constructed with transverse bulkheads, possibly based upon the structure of bamboo, creating a series of watertight compartments and substantially improving safety and seaworthiness.

Chinese shipping also created a dense regional network of trading relationships in South-east Asia and the island archipelagos of present-day Indonesia and the Philippines. Underwater archeology has been a vitally important source of invaluable information in this regard. One of the most dramatic discoveries is a wreck found off the Indonesian island of Belitung in 1998, the only example discovered of an ancient Arab or Indian vessel, with a hull that was stitched together, dating to the 8th century AD. Its cargo was over 50,000 pieces of ceramic wares from Changsha in China, thus providing solid evidence of direct trade between distant parts of Asia. Many of the ceramics were decorated with patterns echoing Islamic motifs and are evidently efforts by Chinese producers to adapt to the tastes of distant clients.

Another important discovery yielding detailed information on the evolution of junks and their cargoes was the discovery in 1973 near the port of Quanzhou, in Fukien province, of the remains of a merchant ship, dating to the Song dynasty (960–1279). The vessel is calculated to be about 110 feet in length, 34 feet across and weighing some 390 tons. It had a curved hull, to ride waves more easily, with a high stern and sails that were not totally raised and lowered, but had bamboo slats functioning more in the manner of louvres or Venetian blinds. Its cargo was predominantly aromatic woods imported “from Timor, Java and Champa; followed by pepper from Sunda, incense from Samatra, betal nuts from Tongking; amber, cinnamon and mercury.”<sup>12</sup> By the eighth century there were also many reports of Indian, Persian and Arab vessels in Chinese harbours—a scale of seaborne trade difficult to envisage being sustained solely by luxury goods.

## (iii) Craftsmanship in slavery

… An even greater source of wealth, however, based on an even greater degree of exploitation, stemmed from the exploration of the New World, subsequent colonization in the Americas and West Indies and, above all, the slave trade with Africa.

Slaves were taken from West Africa to Portugal in the early exchanges between the two regions, drawing on a long-existing slave trade in the Saharan regions. This was to satisfy a demand for domestic labour that had existed since mediaeval times in the Mediterranean region and it is sometimes overlooked how widespread slavery in Europe continued to be. There were substantial numbers of Asiatic slaves in Italy and, indeed, Venice gained considerable profits from selling Christian slaves to Egypt and other Islamic countries.<sup>13</sup> The difference in the Atlantic slave trade, however, was its enormous scale, the degrading conditions to which slaves were subjected, and the profound consequences for all involved. The origins of trade in human beings across the Atlantic can be traced to harsh conditions in Central and South America following the Spanish conquest, with populations decimated by epidemic diseases. New sources of labour had to be found and Africa was the answer. In 1518, slaves were first directly transported from Africa to Spanish colonies and as more countries acquired American lands the demand, going far beyond earlier requirements for household work. The primary use was now for fieldwork and with the establishment of sugar plantations by several European nations in the West Indies in the early seventeenth century, the trade expanded exponentially. The lowest estimates are that over the next three centuries some eleven million people were transported as slaves to the Americas.

Slavery was based on denying human identity and reducing people to basic labour functions. Rather than recognizing acquired or innate talents, slaves were defined solely by owners’ economic requirements. In the British West Indies and the North American colonies that later became the United States, muscle power in fieldwork was the initial requirement. As plantations expanded, however, products required processing, requiring slaves to acquire new skills in virtually every craft needed for life on a large holding. The expansion of West Indian sugar plantations into distilling rum and bringing it to market, for example, required coopers to construct the barrels in which to mature and transport the final product. It was slave carpenters and blacksmiths who were responsible for constructing the veneer of elegance that was a characteristic of plantation life and the source of much subsequent nostalgia.

Neither was it only on plantations that slave artisans became essential. Towns housed the most specialized skills among both free people and slaves: goldsmiths and watchmakers, printers and skilled carpenters. This sometimes required slaves to be educated. William Collins of Antigua, planning to establish a printing office, declared in 1819 that “I have for that purpose long since caused three young negro men named Tom, Charles and Cato belonging to me to be properly taught to read, write and spell”. Slaves living in ports acquired many skills in the shipping industry and were employed in repairing ships and making equipment as shipwrights, ships’ carpenters, sail-makers and caulkers.<sup>14</sup>

In Barbados, settled by the English in 1627, the transfer of the technology necessary for establishing and running plantations as viable economic units initially drew on artisans recruited from England as indentured servants. Dissatisfaction with this system rapidly became apparent. A contemporary account of the island economy published in 1657 stated: “The shortage of free artisans at Barbados, especially those who could draw a plan, and pursue the design they framed with great diligence” was severe.<sup>15</sup> The expectation that artisans should be capable of drawing plans is an interesting comment on changes in craft practice. The white artisans available, however, were often unreliable and constantly demanding higher wages. Using slaves as craftsmen therefore had many advantages once skills were learned. So assiduous was the learning process that by the 1680s, slaves on plantations were “employed in handicraft trades, as Coopers, Joiners, Carpenters, Smiths, Masons, and the like.”<sup>16</sup> In Barbados, the matter was raised in the representative council advising the Governor of the island.

Peter Colleton, planter and assemblyman, in 1675 noted that although he had no direct arguments against negro slavery, moral or otherwise, he was angered by its ruinous effects upon free artisans and craftsmen. Slavery, he said, had rendered disreputable the honorable occupations of artisans and created a sense of despair among them.<sup>17</sup>

By the mid-eighteenth century, it was estimated that slaves constituted ninety percent of the skilled craftsmen throughout the West Indies. From turning people into commodities, it was but a short step to regarding slave skills as marketable. They could be hired out by owners to provide additional income, further enhancing their economic value. This was reflected in slave market prices: “A good slave mechanic in the 1690s was valued at £150, compared to £20 to £40 for an unskilled slave.”<sup>18</sup> They rapidly formed what has been termed a “slave elite.” As a valued asset, the evidence is they received better treatment and a greater degree of unsupervised mobility.

We are so accustomed to thinking of black slavery in terms of its crude laboring form that we tend to overlook the ranks of skilled men and women whose crafts, experience and abilities enhanced the economic and social life of the slave colonies. But simply to look at the surviving artefacts of the former slave societies—the fields, the houses, the furnishings, the equipment—is to be confronted by the fruits of slave labours and skills. For among the ranks of those millions of Africans imported to labour in the fields of the slave colonies, there lurked some obviously remarkable people. ... But for all that ... they remained slaves; bought, sold, inherited, bequeathed and sought as other pieces of material property. Whatever his or her skill or talent, a slave was but a slave.<sup>19</sup>

A study of slave work in the American South estimated: “Skilled slaves like carpenters and blacksmiths represented ... about one in 50 slaves in Mississippi to about one in 20 in South Carolina.”<sup>20</sup> The difference between fieldwork and skilled artisanship was a significant one:

Unlike skilled slaves, field hands had few other opportunities in their work to express their autonomy. Carpenters, blacksmiths, and wheelwrights employed planning, judgement and initiative as they worked, which allowed them to take pride in their accomplishment, to attribute it to their own labor and skill.<sup>21</sup>

In his book Art and Technics, Lewis Mumford positioned aesthetic purpose as a central concern and a redeeming factor in otherwise harsh conditions:

... even the meanest slave, with a tool in his hand, would feel the impulse to give the object on which he was working something more that was required to make it work; he would linger over it, at the least, to heighten its finish, or he would modify the form in some degree to make it delight the eye as well as perform its function.<sup>22</sup>

For slave craftspeople, there is strong support for the argument that skilled work could be an assertion of identity, but it could hardly have been compensation for their condition. Aesthetic consolation, if it was indeed involved, was a means, not an end. Pride in achievement must instead have been a fierce affirmation of personal worth, of human value, in a system that at every point denied this recognition.

The role of crafts in historical memories orally handed down through generations are illustrated in an example of skills used on the coastal rice plantations in South Carolina, where slaves wove both large baskets for transporting rice to market and finer, smaller pieces for domestic use from coiled sweetgrass. The techniques originated in age-old forms from Senegal and the Ivory Coast, (and the influence of slave trading throughout history should never be underestimated as a major means of diffusing forms and techniques<sup>23</sup>). The work was sufficiently valued to relieve basket makers from fieldwork, which was a small consolation, however, conditions on the rice plantations being brutal. Slaves were in a permanent condition of simmering resentment, which at intervals exploded into open rebellion. The craft therefore became a subversive means of keeping alive a communal sense of identity separate from that assigned by slave owners. As a descendent of the slaves commented:

It reminded us of where we came from and that we came from someplace. The techniques were jealously guarded, and it was a cardinal sin to teach it to those outside the family structure, especially to whites.<sup>24</sup>

The sweetgrass basket makers also serve as an example of how crafts can adapt to new circumstances when their original function is superseded, with some three hundred families in and around the city of Charleston still making a living from weaving baskets for the tourist trade. Their livelihood is threatened from another direction, however, as the sea islands on which the sweetgrass was traditionally harvested are bought for holiday homes.

As occurred in antiquity, owners on the North American mainland, in the cotton-growing colonies of the Southeast—Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia—set up profitable businesses using slave artisans. These widely displaced white practitioners, which hampered a more general development of crafts in the region. Neither slave artisans, without any rights in the businesses in which they worked nor white artisans, unable to compete against low-cost slave work, could derive any benefit from such a system.

Efforts were made to protect white artisans, but to little avail. At Charles Town (present day Charleston), slave craftsmen were so dominant that in 1751, the Town Assembly prohibited any inhabitant from having more than two slaves to hire out as craftsmen. In 1755, a further edict forbade any master to allow his slaves “to carry on any handicraft trade in a shop by himself, in town, on pain of forfeiting five pounds every day. Nor to put any Negro or slave apprentice to any mechanic trade or other in town in forfeit of one hundred pounds.”<sup>25</sup>

The problems of white craftsmen in the Old South in earning a living were therefore compounded and few managed to obtain even a modest income. Their social standing was poor. In the aristocratic social structure with its values derived from a Classical education “... the English country gentleman’s tendency to look down a well-bred nose at tradesmen was more pronounced in the southern planting provinces.”<sup>26</sup>

When slaves were emancipated after the American Civil War, they constituted the overwhelming majority of artisans in the South. It has been estimated that in 1865, there were “100,000 black mechanics and artisans in the South as compared to 20,000 white artisans.”<sup>27</sup> A sample listing of occupations held by black artisans at that time includes ninety different skills. In a sad postscript to this history of exploitation, when black people were legally free after emancipation but effectively deprived of political rights, several southern states passed legislation to break the craft dominance of black artisans. Certain skills were specifically reserved for whites and former slave artisans were widely forced into unskilled occupations.

With the onset of industrialization, substantially financed by profits from slavery, other priorities emerged in Europe and by the early nineteenth century, the slave trade was in decline. Its legacy, however, has been bitter. In sub-Saharan Africa, war became endemic to supply the incessant demand for slaves in return for gold and firearms, destroying the social fabric in many areas, with widespread depopulation in coastal regions. To add insult to injury, in the late nineteenth century the justification for carving up Africa into European colonial possessions was the need to impose order and bring civilization to the “Dark Continent”.

The brutalities of the Atlantic passage and plantation work for the millions forced to endure it denied the humanity of slave and owner alike. By turning people into a cash commodity, Europe and the Americas derived economic benefit but became morally crippled by concepts of racial superiority, which, combined with religious exclusiveness and technological might, was and remains a heady, arrogant brew.

