# Notes on Contr ibutor s

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》\auto\Clive Dilnot：《A John Heskett Reader Design, History, Economics》.md

## Notes on Contr ibutor s

Clive Dilnot is currently professor of design studies at the Parsons School of Design and the New School in New York. Educated in Fine Arts and Social Theory, he has taught the history, theory and criticism of art and design in Britain, at Harvard University, in Hong Kong and at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, where he was also director of design initiatives. He has written extensively in these areas. Recent publications include Ethics? Design? (Archeworks, Chicago 2005) and the essay for Chris Killip: Pirelli Work (Steidl, London 2006; second edn. 2015). He is the editor of Design History Economics: A John Heskett Reader (2016) and John Heskett’s Design and the Creation of Value (2016) and is working on a four-volume series of essays under the overall title Thinking Design: On History; On Ethics; On Knowledge: On Configuration (forthcoming). Current concerns focus on the role of design capabilities in terms of understanding how we can contend with the implications of the anthropocene as the horizon and medium of our world.

Tore Kristensen is professor of strategic design at Copenhagen Business School. He is educated in business, has a PhD in product development and taught cross-disciplinary marketing and design. His research concerns strategic design, economic analyses of design, experimental methods and transformation economy. He has also been active in assessments works, committees and international research projects. Recent publications include ‘Is Product/Brand Familiarity a Moderator of the Country of Origin Cue in Consumer Choice? One More Look’ in Transnational Marketing Journal, October 2014 with Gorm Gabrielsen and Eugene Jaffe; ‘Whose design is it anyway? Priming designer and shifting preferences’ with Judy Zaichkowsky and Gorm Gabrielsen, International Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 52, No. 1 (2010); ‘The Micro- and Macro-levels of Co-creation: How Transformations Change preferences in Open Source Business Resource’ with T. Kristensen in Open Source Business Resource (2009): s. 25–9; ‘How Valuable is a Well-Crafted Design and Name Brand?: Recognition and Willingness to Pay’ with T. Kristensen, G. Gabrielsen and J. Zaichkowsky in Journal of Consumer Behaviour, Vol. 11, No. 1 (2012): s. 44–55. Currently, he is co-editing a work on Trans-visuality, a work covering global visual design expressions.

Sharon Helmer Poggenpohl has taught in notable design programmes: The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, the Institute of Design at the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago and the Rhode Island School of Design. Her focus over a long career has been postgraduate design education, both master and PhD, as well as design research. Taking a human-centred position with regard to design, she teaches to help students humanize technology, to learn to work creatively and collaboratively with each other and to prepare them to contribute to building a body of design knowledge. She was a colleague of John Heskett for fifteen years at two institutions. For twentysix years, she edited and published the international scholarly journal Visible Language. She co-edited with Keiichi Sato Design Integrations, Research and Collaboration (Intellect Books, 2009). Currently, she is working on a book tentatively titled Design Theory-to-go, while teaching occasionally in Hong Kong.

Carlos Teixeira was recently appointed to a position in the Institute of Design at Illinois Institute of Technology. Until 2015 he was an associate professor in Strategic Design and Management at the School of Design Strategies at Parsons The New School for Design. He has a PhD in design from the Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology. His expertise is revealing the operational logics that guide design practice. His academic research and teaching centres on the application of such logics to processes of open innovation. Carlos Teixeira was a doctoral student of John Heskett from 1998 to 2002 at the Institute of Design, which resulted in his doctoral dissertation ‘Design Knowledge and Business Opportunities’ in 2002. Under Heskett’s supervision and intellectual influence, Teixeira collaborated with Paola Bertola, PhD, currently associate professor at the Politecnico di Milano, but in 2001 a visiting scholar at the Institute of Design, resulting in an article titled ‘Design as a Knowledge Agent: How Design as a Knowledge Process is Embedded into Organizations to Foster Innovation,’ published in the journal Design Studies in 2003.

