# PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. THE rapid sale of the first edition of this translation satisfactorily proves how much such a work was needed. It may, indeed, be regarded as a national reproach that this subject of "the Harmony and Contrast of Colours " should have remained so long in a state of chaos, while a woik of the scientifc character and practical value like the present was extant. Long subsequent to its publication in France, after ample time had elapsed for M. Chevreul's discovery to have become known in this country, works of no practical value whatever, some indeed pernicious from their errors and obscurity, have issued from the English press, and usurped the place in our literature which this work only ought to occupy. These authors have discoursed glibly upon the"Laws of Harmonious Colouring" without even recognising the existence of the phenomena upon which these"laws" ure really basedwithout making a single rational observation or experiment on the optical effects resulting from the juxtaposition of coloured bodies— without regarding the physiological condition of the eye while this organ is excited by the sight of coloure,— in fact, without at all understanding the nature of the subject they, with so much complacency, suppose themselves to have fully elucidated. Others have added new testimony to the truth of the maxim"that a little knowledge is a dangerous thing;" for after superficially examining M. Chevreul's "law," they have rushed to impossible conclusions, which, not being verified, induced them to treat this "law "slightingly, as a thing of nought. By others, again, the "law " has been adopted without comprehension, and from the foolish attempt to ally it with the dogmatism of unscientific writers' hae resulted their own and their readers' confusion. To be thoroughly understood, this book must not merely be read but studied. The superficial reader will be constantly exposed to arriving at false conclusions, from too hasty generalisation, by which he will miss the author's aim — that of placing the subject of "contrast " upon a truly scientific basis. His reasoning and conclusions may be disputed by the empiric, but cannot be controverted, for they are based upon careful observation of natural phenomena and experiment, which every reader can easily repeat and verify for himself. The chief error fallen into in the applications of the law of contrast is, the overlooking the influence of contrast of tone, or intensity ; it is so important that this kind of contrast be fully recognised and appreciated, that the reader should keep his attention constantly directed to it. The nature of luminous and sombre colours should also be well understood, particularly with reference to their degree of intensity or tone. This book will amply repay any amount of study bestowed upon it; and not merely for the subject with which it is occupied, but as an excellent example of the method of scientific investigation; in this respect this treatisc is a model of its kind. The slightest inspection of the numerous books professing to treat of the subject which it elucidates, will serve to convince the reader that their authors are but drifting in an unknown sea, without chart or compass to guide thenn. Already, in the few months that have elapsed since the publication of the first edition of this book, we may perceive the fruit of its teachings. As we pass along the busy thoroughfares, the shops of the upholsterer, the paper-hanger, the draper, and the milliner, frequently display a recognition of the law of contrast; not always, it must be admitted, in entire conformitý with the principles laid down, but still a recognition, which it is to be hoped may in due time extend to a full understanding. The translator cannot dismiss this book from his hands, without making a few remarks upon the treatment it has received at the hande of the reviewers,—critics they may not be called. In most cases, in journals of high pretensions, it was flippantly "noticed," as the phrase goes: — a few sentences garbled from the Translator's Introduction, coupled with a few taking extracts, and the reviewer's work was "bravely done." Few seemed to be aware that they bad under their hands one of the most original and remarkable works that science has given to literature in the present generation, a work that owes its chief merit to its exhibition of the method of investigation enounced by our illustrious Bacon.' In one instance' the author was made to say exactly the reverse of what the book shows he really does say: this eerious and flagrant malversion arose apparently from the reviewer's desire to improve his author before he had made himself sufficiently acquainted with him. By another' the translator was supposed to be ignorant of the labours of our countrymen on the subject of "The Laws of Harmonious Colouring;" he was not ignorant, however, that there are many books with pompous titles, professing to explain the principles of harmony and contrast, but which exhibit nothing more clearly than the ignorance and egotism of their authors. They resemble nothing so much as portable backgammon boards, labelled with the titles of works of standard literature. Such books in fact belong to the "dark ages," before Galileo, Newton, Bacon, Cuvier had said "let light be;"and should be placed on our shelves beside Lilly's Astrology and Moore's almanacke. That they should have found recognition at all can only be attributed to the strong desire felt by the public for instruction on the subject of colour. That they failed to satisfy that desire is but too evident upon all occasions where a knowledge of principles was necessary to the euccessful result of great undertakings: it is only necessary to refer to the discussions raised upon the proper colouring for the Crystal Palace, in 1851. Art Jowrnal, Oct. 1854. 1Blackweood's Magazine, Nov. 1854.