# CONTENTS. ## PART I. ## THEORETICAL- Introdaction - ## SECTION L On the law of simultaneous contrast of coloun, and its demonstration by experiment Caarrex L— Method of oberving the phenomena of simultaneous contrast of colours Definition of simultaneous contras ib. Experimental demonstration of contrast of sone - ib. Experimental demonstration of contiast of colour - 9 CER IL. The law of simaltaneos contst of colours and the formula which represents it 11 CHAPEn IIL—The law of simaltaneous contrast demonstrated by the juxtaposition of a given number of coloured subetances 12 CHApz IV.—On the juxtaposition of coloured substances with white- 18 CH V.— On the juxtaposition of coloured substances with black 19 CHAPTER VL-On the juxtaposition of coloured substances with grey CHAPrER VIL—The chemical composition of coloured bodies has no influence on the phenomena of simaltaneous contrast CHarrn VIIL—On the jaxtaposition of coloured bodies belonging to the colours of the same group of coloured rays CHprE IX -On the application of the Law of contrast to the bypothesin that red, yellow, and biue are the only primary colours, and that orange, green, indigo, and violet are secondary or compound colours ## SECTION IL On the distinction between simultaneous, successivc, and mixed contrast of colours ; and an account of the connection between the experiments made by the author and thoee of other observers Cuarren I.—Distinction between simultanoous, successive, and mixed contrast of colours CHarzR II.—-On the connection between experiments of the author and those previously made by various natural philosophers 34 ## SECTION IIL On the physiological cause to which the phenomena of contrast of colours were referred proviously to the experiments of the author ## PART II. ## ON THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THE LAW OF SINUL-TANEOUS CONTRAST OF COLOURS. § 1.— Definition of the words tones, scales, and bues § 2. — Remarks upon certain graphic constructions proposed for the representatiou and defnition of colours and their modifications § 3. — Harmony of colours 61 Ist Care. — View of a single colour 62 2nd Case.— View of different tones of the same scale of colour ib. Srd Case.— View of different colours belonging to scales near to each other, assortod conformably to contrast ib 4th Care.—View of quite different colours belonging to scales very widely eeparated, arranged conformably to contrast 63 n. Ternary assortment of colours complementary to each other with white - c. Ternary asortment of non-complementary colours with whito a. Ternary assortment of complementary colours with black ## CONTENTS. . Binary sortments B. Ternary sortments of complementary colours with grey 74 c. Ternary asoortments of non-complementary colours with grej 75 Recapitulation of the preceding observations - 78 ## FIRST DIVISION. Imitation of coloured objecte, with coloured materials in a state of infinite division 87 Introduction ib. ## SECTION L Painting on the system of chiaro'scuro 90 CH L — On the colo of the model - - ib. Article 1.— Modifications produced by coloured lights · 91 Article 2.—Modifcations produced by two lights of different intensity 94 Article 3.— Modifications produced by diffused daylight, reflected by a surface, all tbe parts of which are not in the same position relatively to the spectator 97 ChAprER II.—On the difference existing between a coloured object and the imitation of it made by a painter, when the spectator observes it from a different point of view from his - 102 ## SECTION IIL. Paiuting on the system of flat tints - ## SECTION III. Colouring in painting 107 Caapre L — On thevarions siguifications of the word Colouring in painting, and in ordinary language Article I.— Of colouring, with regard to acrial perspective, relative to white light and to shade 108 Article 2.—Of colouring, with regard to serial perspective, relative to variously coloured light ib. Article 3. — Of colouring in respect to the harmony of local colours and to that of the colours of the different objects composing the picturo 110 CHapre IL Utility of the law of simultaneous contrast of coloure in the science of colouring Article 1.—— Utility of this law in enabling us to perceive promptly and rurely the modifications of light on tho modol Article 2. Uuility of this Law in order to imitate promptly and surely the modífications of light on the model 114 Article 3.—Utility of the law in order to harmonise the colours which enter into a composition, with reference to those which must be reproduced, becanse they are inberent in the nature of the object represented ## SECOND DIVISION. Imitation of coloured objects by coloured materials (threads, &c.) . 127 Introduction ib. ## SECTION L. Gobelins tapestry 129 CHATE I. — Of the elements of Gobelins tapestry - -130 CHapE I — On the principle of mixing coloured threade, in its relations with the art of weaving Gobelins tapeetry 131 CRapER II — On the principle of contras, in connection with the production of Góbelins tapestry 186 CHAprEx IV.— Qualities which patterns for Gobelins tapestry must posse- 140 ## SECTION IL Beauvais tapestry for furniture 142 CHaPEr I — Of the elements of Beauvais tapestry for farniture 143 CHapren .— On the subjects representel on the Beaavais tapestries for furniture ib. CrAPTER III. — Of the patterns of Beauvsis tapestry for furniture 144 ## SECTION IIL Savonnerie carpets -145 CHAPtER L — Of the clements of Savonnerie carpets - 146 CHartE IL.— On the principle of mixing colours in its connection with the manufacture of Savonnerie carpets 147 CHAPtR I — On the principle of contrast of colours in its connection with the fabrication of Savonnerie carpets 149 CuapteR IV. —Conditions which must be fuliled in the patterns of Savonnerie carpets 150 Article 1.— 1st Condition - respective size of the figured objects - ib. Article 2.—2nd Condition -- distinct view ib. Article 3. —Srd Condition — analogy with places or persons - 151 Article 4.— 4th Condition — distribution of colours - ib. Article 5. — 5th Condition — harmony of the carpet relatively to the objects which must concur with it in the decoration of an apartment ## CONTENTS. ## SECTION IV. Tapestries for hangings and carpets . - 154 Ca L.— On Lapestries for hangings 155 CHA IL— Cets 。 ib. Article l.— Carpets on the system of chiaro'scuro · ib. Article 2.— Carpets on the system of flat tints · 157 Article 3.-- Carpets on & system intermediate between chiaro'scuro and flat tints 158 ## SECTION V. Mosaics · 159 ## SECTION VI. Windows of coloured glass in large Gothic churches - 16r ## THIRD DIVISION. Colour-priuting upon textile fabrics and on paper 163 ## SECTION L. Calico-printiog -166 ## SECTION II. Paper-staining - 169 CHaPTER L— General Remarks -170 Cp IL— Ou the law of simultaneous contrast of colours, in relation to paper-hangings with fgures, landscapes, or large flowers of varied colours 171 CHprer IL— On the law of simultaneous contrast of colour, in relation to paper-hangings with designs in a single colour, or in colours but slightly varied 172 CHpTER IV.— Of the law of simultaneous contrast of colours, relatively to the borders of paper-hangings . 173 ## SECTION II. Printing or writing on papers of various colours - 185 Captz L.— Iniroduction - 186 Cp IL On the aortment of colours with respect to reading by diffused daylight - 187 Articke 1.—Reading of a few minutes' duration - - ib. Article 2.— Reading of some hours' duration · 189 CHAPrEE I.— On the assortmcnt of coloars with respect to reading by artificial light 190 ## FOURTH DIVISION. Flat tinting 191 ## SECTION L. On colouring geographical maps 192 ## SECTION IL On colouring engravings 193 ## FIFTH DIVISION. Arrangement of coloured objects of limited extent 197 ## SECTION L Employment of colours in architeoture - 198 Capter L— On the employment of colours in Egyptian architecture 199 CHapre II.— On the employment of colours in Greek architecture 200 CHApTE III.—On the employment of colours in Gothic architecture 202 ## SECTION II. Applications to interior decoration 205 Introduction 206 Caprer I.— On the assortment of stuffs with the wood of chairs ib. Capren IL— On tho selection of frames for pictures and cngrav ings 208 CHaprzr III.— On the general decoration of the interiors of churches 212 CHarrER IV.—On the decoration of museums and galleries 215 Article 1.— Pinacotheca, or picture galleries ib. Article 2.— Glyptotheca, or sculpture galleries 216 Article 3.— Maseums of natural history ib. CHaPTER V.— The choice of colours for s theatre 218 Article 1.— Interior of the boxes - ib. Article 2.—The fronts of the boxes 219 Article 3.— The ceiling of theatres ib. Article 4.— The drop-scene and the curtain ib. CHaptER VI.— On the decoration of the interiors of houscs and palaccs, with rexpect to the assortment of colours 220 §1.— On the assortment of colours in connection with the decoration of interiora, intended to receive tapestry or paper-hangings 221 ## CONTENTS. ## xxiii Pare Article 1.— The wainscoting 221 Article 2.— Hangings 222 Article 3. — Cornice af the ceiling 228 Articdle 4.— Chairs placed in front of the wainscoting ib. Article 5.— Window and bed-cartains 231 Article 6.— Doors 232 Article 7.— Windows 233 Artide 8.— Carpets ib. Article 9.— Pictares 234 ## SECTION II. Applications to clothing 238 Introduction 239 CHAPTR L -Men's clothing ib. § l.—Of the advantages of contrast considered with regard to the optical trengthening or purifying of the colour of cloths for clothing 240 Article 1.—Of uniforms, tBe coloars of which are complernentary ib. Article 2.—Uniforms of which the coloura, without being comple mentary, are nevertbelese very contrasting - 241 Article 3.— Of a uniform composed of a single colour and white- 242 Article 4.— Of a bi-coloured uniform, into which white erters - 243 Article 5.- Of a bi-coloured uniformn into which black enters ib. Articke 6.— Of a uniform in which there are more than two colours, not comprising eitber black or white 244 Article 7.— Of a uniform composed of different hues of the same colour ib. Article 8.—- Of uniforms composed of two tones of the same scale ib. Article 9.- Of a uniform of vne colour - 245 § 2.-On the influence of superficial proportions sccording to which cloths of different colours are associated in many-coloured aniforms ib. § 3— Of the advantages of contrast considered with regard to the apparent freshness of cloths for clothing 246 Cp IL-On female clothing 247 Introduction ib. § 1.-On the assortment of colours in the dress of women with white skins 248 Article l.-Distinction of the two extreme types of women with white skins ib. Article 2.—Of the hair and head-dress under the relation of their respective colours 249 Article 3.-Of the complexion and the contiguous drapery under the relation of their respective colours ib. Article 4.—Of the head-dress, in relation to the coloured rays which it may reflect upou the skin - 251 § 2.—On the assortment of colours in the dress of women with copper-coloured skins 256 § 3.—On the assortment of colours in the dreas of women with black or olive skins ib Ist Supparition.—The painter wishes to heighten the tint of a complexion 257 2nd Supposition.—The painter wishes to dissimulate a tint of the complexion 258 ## SECTION IV. Applications to borticulture - 260 Introduction 261 ## SUB-BECTION L Application of the law of contrast of colours to horticultare 262 ChaprE I.—On the art of arranging ornamental plants in gardcns, so as to derive the greatest possible advantage from the colours of their flowers - ib. Introduction - ib. § l.— Associations of flowers which relate to the harmonies of contrast 263 Article 1.—Associations of flowers which relate to the harmonies of contrast of colour ib. Article 2.— Associations of flowers which may be classed in relation to tho barmonies of contrast of scale 265 Article 3. — Associations of flowers which relate to the harmonics of contrast of hues 266 § 2 Associations of flowers which relate to the harmonies of analogy 267 Article l.— Associntions of flowers wbich relate to the harmonies of ocalo ib. Article 2.— Associations of flowers which relate to the barmonies of analogy of hucs ib.