sensible effect in altering its deep tones. Whence the colours which have most resisted the destructive action of time being more isolated from each other, deeper, and less blended, appear by that to have more brilliancy than if they were otherwise disposed. There are many pigments used by painters, particularly most of the lakes, which are in the same condition relatively to the others, as the changeable colours of the dyer ; such as ultramarine, the oxides of iron, the blacks, which are, so to speak, unalterable by atmospheric agents; but the alteration of the first may, in many cases, contribute to heighten the brilliancy of colours less changeable. # CHAPTER III. ON THE EFFECT OF CONTRAST UPON THE BROWNS AND THE LIGHTS OFMOST OF THE S0ALE8 or WOOL AND SILK EMPLOYED IN TAPESTRYAND CARPBT&. (839.) Wuen we look at the ensemble of tones of most of the scales made use of in the fabrication of tapestries and carpets, the phenomenon of contrast exaggerates the difference ofcolour which we remark between the extreme tones and the middle tones of the same scale. For instance, in the scale ofindigo-blue applied to silk, the lights are greenish, the browns are tinged violet, while the intermediate tones are blue; but the difference of green and violet at the two extremes is found augmented by the effect of contrast. It is the same in the scale of yellow ; the light tones appear greener and the browns redder than they really are. (840.) I cannot speak of a difference existing between the deep and the light tones of most of the scales of wool and silk which is exaggerated by contrast, without adding some remarks relative to the gradations the dyer produces by means of a colouring material which he applies upon a white fabric, supposed to be absolutely void of any material foreign to the nature of the coloured compound with which it is united. It is only very rarely that this gradation is perfect under this mode of viewing it, as the light tones are exactly represented to the eye by the colour taken at its normal tone reduced with white. Thus, a compound which at the normal tone is pure yellow or slightly tinged with orange, will, by reduction, produce light tones of a greenish yellow. An orange-red compound,