fixed upon silk or wool, will yield light tones tinged violet-red. To obtain a correct gradation, we must, in most cases, add to the weak tones a new coloured material, adapted to neutralise or weaken the defect spoken of. (841.) Many of the pigments used in painting produce the same result when reduced with white; and I do not speak here of changes which may be the result of chemical action. I allude only to those which result from an attenuation of the coloured material. For example, the normal tone of carmine is a much purer red than its light tones, which are evidently tinged with lilac. Ultramarine, so beautiful in itself, yields light tones, which, with respect to the blue rays, appear to reflect more violet rays than the normal tone. In consequence of these facts, it is difficult to colour the chromatic diagram, because many attempts must be made to foresee the modification of colour which yields the normal tone of a scale by the addition of coloured materials suited to render the gradation correct to the eye. # CHAPTER IV. ## MEANS AFTORDED BY CONTRAST BY WHICH WR MAY BECOME CERTAIN IF THE TONES OF A BCALE OF COLOUR ARE EQUIDIBTANT. (842.) CoNTRasT which augments the difference existing between two tones of the same colour, gives the means of appreciating with greater certainty than could otherwise be done, if the numerous tones of a scale are at the same distance from each other. Thus, if the tone 2 placed between 3 and 4 appears equal to the tone 1, it follows, if the tones are equidistant, that 3 placed between 4 and 5 will appear equal to 2 ; that 4 put between 5 and 6 will appear equal to 3, and so with the others. If the tones are too near together to yield this result, we must move them successively, not one degrec, but two or three. This means of judging of the equality of distance that separates the tones of the same scale is based upon the fact, that it is easier to establish an equality than to estimate a difference between patterns of the same colour.