# SECTION II. m

INTERFERENCE OF THE LAW OF 8IMULTANEOUS CON-TRAST OF COLOURS WITH OUR JUDGMENT ON THE PRODUCTION8 OF DIFFERENT ARTB WHICH ADDRESS THE EYES BY COLOURED MATERIALS. INTRODUCTION (843.). CHAPTER L— ON THE BINARY ASSOCLATIONB OF COLOURB IN A CRITI-CAL POLNT Or VIEW (844857.). CHAPTER IL— ON COMPLEX ASSOCIATION& OF COLOURS IN A CRITICAL PonNT or VIEw (858, 859.). CHAPTER IL— ON THE TWOFOLD INFLUENCE, CONSIDERED IN A CRITICAL POINT OF VIEW, THAT THE PHTBICAL CONDITION OF THE COLOURED MATERIALS EMPLOYED IN VARIOCS ART&, AND THE SPECIALITY OF THESE ARTS, EIER-CISE UPON THE PARTICULAR PRODUCTS OF RACH OF (860890.). ## INTRODUCTION. (843.) ArtER having applied criticism to the judgment we entertain of the colour of a material object, relatively either to its beauty and brilliancy, or to the place its tone assigns to it in the scale of which this object forms part, we must apply it to the judgment concerning the associations of different colours made with the intention of producing an agreeable effect. In order to give the judgment a solid basis beyond all dispute, I shall examine the association of two colours independently of material form, under which the works of nature or of art can offer them to view ; and on this occasion I shall sum up many general facts which are found in the Introduction to Part II. of this work (143., &c.), and in several of its divisions. This summary will permit the reader to follow the co-ordinate generalisation, so as to serve as a basis to a critical examination of the products of all the arts which employ coloured materials. After having drawn the principal important conclusions which flow from the binary associations of colours, then I shall occupy myself with their complex associations under the point of view of the harmonies of analogy and of contrast to which they give rise : finally, under a last point of view, I shall take into consideration the influence which the physical nature of the coloured materials the arts employ must speciaily exercise to attain the aim peculiar to each. ## CHAPTER L ## OF THE BINARY ABBOCIATIONS OF COLOURS CONSIDEBED CRITICALLY. (844.) In order to sum up in few words the generalities which must serve as the bases of our judgment, not only on one colour compared with another of the same sort, but on the associations of two colours which any object whatever presents to our eyes, for example, a stained paper, a stuff, a vestment, or which form part of a picture, I shall consider the case where associated colours are mutually complementary, and that where they are not. 1st Case.— Association of Complementary Colours. (845.) This is the only association where the colours mutually improve, strengthen, and purify each other without going out of their respective scales. This case is so advantageous to the associated colours, that the association is also satisfactory when the colours are not absolutely complementary. So it is also when they are tarnished with grey. Such is the motive which has made me prescribe the complementary association, when we have recourse to the harmonies of contrast in painting, in tapestry, in thearrangement of coloured glass windows, in the,assortment of hangings with their borders, in that of stuffs for furniture and clothing, and lastly, in the arrangement of flowers in our gardens. ## 2nd Case.— Association of Non-complementary Colours. (846.) The product of this association is distinguished from the preceding in this, the complementary of one of the juxtaposed colours differing from the other colour to which it is added, there must necessarily be a modification of Hce in the twoo colours, without speaking of the modification of tone, if they are not taken at the same height. Juxtaposed pon-complementary colours can certainly give rise to three different results : 1°. They mutually improve each otber. 2°. The one is improved, the other loses some of its beauty. 3°. They mutually injure each other. (847.) The greater the difference between the colours, the more the juxtaposition will be favourable to their mutual contrast, and consequently the more analogy they will have, and the more chances there are that the juxtaposition injures their beauty. ## 1°. Two non-complementary colours improve each other by juxtaposition. (848.) Yellow and blue are so dissimilar, that their contrast is always sufficiently great for their juxtaposition to be favourable, although the juxtaposed coiours belong to different scales of yellow and blue. 2. One colour, juxtaposed with another which is not its complementary, is improved, while the latter is injured. (849.) A blue which is improved by a yellow, being placed beside a violet (blue rather than red) may lose some of its beauty by becoming greenish, while the orange it adds to the violet, neutralising the excess of blue of this latter, improves rather than injures it. 3°. Two non-complementary colours mutually injure each other. (850.) A violet and a blue reciprocally injure each other, when the first greens the second, and the latter neutralises sufficient of the blue in the violet to make it appear faded. (851.) It might also happen that although the colours juxtaposed are modified, both neither gain nor lose in beauty; that the one gains without the other losing; lastly, that the one neither gains nor loses, while the other loses. (852.) In the association of two colours of equal tone, the height of the tone may have some influence on the beauty of the association. For example, a deep indigo-blue and a red of equal depth gain by the juxtaposition: the first, by losing some violet, will become a pure blue; the second, in acquiring orange, will become brighter. If we take light tones of these same scales, it may happen that the blue will become too green to be good as a blue, and that the red, acquiring orange, will be too yellow to be a pure red. (853.) In the association of two coloured objects of tones very distant from each other, belonging to the same scale, or to scales more or less allied, the contrast of tone may have a favourable influence upon the beauty of the light tone, because, in fact, if the latter is not a pure colour, its juxtaposition with the deep tone upon the whole brightening it, will purify what grey it may have. (854.) It is very necessary for the correction of our judgment of the principles I set up on the binary associntions of colours, not to lose sight of all which precedes from paragraph 846., inclusively, concerning colours flat (mat), or deprived of gloss, and that their association be considercd indepondently of the form of the object presenting them, for the twofold reason that the glossiness of the coloured surfaces and the form of the bodies which these surfaces limit in space, are two circumstances capable of modifying the effect of two associated colours : consequently the apalysis I have made of the optical effects of colours will be incomplete, if I do not now speak of the possible influence of these causes. ## Influence of Gloss taken into Consideration in the Effect of Contrast of two Colours. (855.) One of the results to which the observation of contrast of mat colours leads, is the explanation of how the association of one colour with another is favourable or injurious to the ensemble, or only to one of them, in making evident to tho eye that, in the most favourable case possible, the optical product of the juxtaposition is composed of two effects: — 1°. The effect arising from each of tbejuxtaposed colours, receiving the complementary of the colour contiguous to it, being strengthened or tinged agreeably by this addition, independently of any augmentation of gloss. 2°. The effect arising from an augmentation of gloss in the two juxtaposed coloura. Recalling these results, is to foresce an objection which might have been made to me, namely, that the associations which I have not prescribed, such as those of red with violet, blue with violet, for instance, bave a fine effect in the plumage of certain birds, and upon the wings of certain butterflies; for, according to the preceding distinction, it is evident that in these natural associations, the effect arising from the addition of the complementaries to each of the two colours which would injure the mat colours is entirely insensible in injuring colours which acquire metallic brightness from the organic structure of the feathers and scales upon which they are found. Finally, I shall add, that it would be necessary, before raising the objection, to demonstrate that the same red associated with green, the same violet associated with yellow, and, lastly, the same blue associated with orange equally glossy, will be less effoctive than the natural assortmenta I now take for examples. ## Influence of Form taken into Consideration in the Effect of Contrast of twoo Colours. (856.) If gloss has so much influence upon the effects of contrast of two juxtaposed colours, the form of the coloured parts presenting them has undoubtedly an influence also; thus the elegance of the form, the arrangement of the parts, their symmetry, the effects of light and shade upon the surfaces independent of all colour, finally the association of ideas which may connect this form with an agreeable recollection, will prevent the perception of the ill effect of two associated colours which are not at all glosey; it is thus, for example, that flowers impress us with associations which, without shocking us, yet, nevertheless, would not produce a good effect if we saw them upon two plain surfaces deprived of gloss. We may instance anew, for example, the flower of the sweet plea, which offers tho alliance of red and violet. It cannot be doubted that the red and the violet of this flower, being juxtaposed—the red to green and the violet to yellow—do not produce a finer effect than that resulting from their association in the flower mentioned above. (857.) The relation of the preceding facts to criticism is easily perceived when we procceed to judge of the association of two colours in themselves, or to compare together different binary associations. In the first case we can inquire if the association an artist has made of two colours has attained the end he proposed, that of improving both, or that of improving one and sacrificing the other. In the second case we can compare together the effects cf one colour of the same class,—reds for example,— each making part of a binary association, we can compare together the effects of binary associations of different colours, always under the optical point of view, and with the intention, if these associations are the product of art, of judging the artist who has made them. Then the critic must be directed by the considerations which are summed up as follows : 1°. The kind of association: the greater the difference between the colours, the more they mutually beautify each other; and inversely, the less difference there is, tho more they will tend to injure one another (845-851.). 2°. The equality in height of tone (852.). 3°. The difference of tone, the one being deep, the other light (853.). 4°. The glossiness of the surfaces which sends them to the eye (855.). 5°. The form of the body of which these surfaces limit the extent (856.). ## CHAPTER L ## OF THE COXPLEX ASBOCIATIONS OF COLOURS REVIEWED CRITICALLY. (858.) Ir is evident that the rules prescribed for judging colour and the associations of two colours in an absolute manner, must sorve for judging under the same relation the colours of an association, however complex it may be, when found in a picture, tapestry, carpet, stained-glass window, or in the decoration of a theatre, apartment, &c.; but to view the ensemble, we must proceed conformably to the distinctions we have established of the harmonies of analogy and the harmonies of contrast; for, otherwise, it would not be possible to express clearly a sound judgment concerning the specialities of the constitucnt assortments and the general effect of the ensemble of all these assortments; besides, before expressing this judgment, we must know how to see colours independently of all form or pattern ; in a word, independently of all which is not colour, even when it is necessary in a picture. (859.) In this manner we can see a complex association of colours, suppose such as are presented to us by a picture, thus taking the most complicated case. We shall consider the masses of colours which are upon the same plane, the extent which each occupies, the harmony that unites them togethcr. On submitting to a similar examination the colours on the other planes, we then can look at the colours in passing from those of the former plane to the colours of the latter. The critic who is well satisfied with seeing clearly at the same time only a very small number of the objects that a picture presents to him (748. 483.), and who is also accustomed to examine a coloured composition in the manner I have described, is, relatively to the things upon which he successively concentrates his attention, in the position of a person who reads in succession three kinds ot wiiting traced on the same side of a sheet of paper; one of them composed of lines across the width of the paper, the other composed of lines crossing the first at right angles, and the third composed of lines running diagonally across the paper. After giving himself up to this examination, the critic must review tbe ensemble of the picture under tho relation of its colours, and then, having fixed upon their particular and