the coloured material, far from being continuous in all its parts, is in separate particles ; and, consequently, if the naked eye does not perceive the intervals separating them, it is because these intervals are too small. This remark should be remembered, because it is the basis of the first distinction we must establish in this paragraph. In fact, the coloured threads (elements of tapestries and carpets), and rigid coloured prisms (elements of mosaics), which are visible to the naked eye, and which differ in that particular from the coloured materials employed by the painter, may, nevertheless, be roduced to such a state of division, and so mixed and combined, that at the distance from which we view them united, they appear a coloured surface continuous in all its parts, like a painted surface: whence we conceive the possibility of making with scales of these elements, sufficiently approximating and graduated, works which correspond to those painted in chiaro 'scuro; and, therefore, it will be easier to execute such as correspond with those painted in flat tints. This position granted, let us derive from the physical condition of the coloured materials and from the object which is essentially offered by the arts respectively employing them, conclusions adapted to serve as a basis to the judgment we bring to the qualities which the products of these arts must possess; and let us examine successively those which correspond to paintings in chiaro'scuro, and those which correspond to paintings in flat tints. # ARTICLE 1. Tapestries, Carpets, Mosaics, and Coloured Glass Windowos corresponding to Paintings in Chiaro 'scuro. ## A. Tapestries with Human Figures. (874.) Tapestries with human figures derive their origin from the taste of mankind for painting. They adorned churches, palaces, and castles, before they appeared in simple dwellings. From the flamentous condition of the elements constituting them, their size, the direction the weaver gives them in twisting the weft upon each thread of the warp, results a coloured image presenting two systems of lines cutting each other at right angles. From this structure it results—that a tapestry will not produce the effect of a painting (the surface of which is entirely uniform), if the spectator does not view it from point sufficiently distant, so that these lines ceasing to be visible, the delineation which separates each part of the design from the contiguous parts, will appear like the delineations ofa painting, as much so as tbo indentations of the outlines which are oblique to the weft will permit. (875.) From this double necessity for the furrows and indentations of the contours oblique to the warp to disappear from sight for the tapestry to produce the effect of a painting in chiaro 'scuro, it follows, that the objects represented by it must be large, of various colours forming hurmonies of contrast rather than harmonies of analogy. Such are the primary bases upon which the judgment of the critic must rest in the examination of questions concerning the art of the tapestry-weaver, whether it concerns models in the choice of whieh the weaver is stranger, or whether it concerns the execution of tho reproduction of those models, which exclusively concern the weaver. (876.) Every model which does not fulfl the previous conditions is bad; and, as it is difficult to meet with the union of pure outline with harmonies of colour sufficiently numerous and contrasted in pictures which have not been painted with the intention of being reproduced in tapestry, it follows, that what would be very advantageous to the art, is the execution of pictures intended to serve exclusively as models, painted broadly, so as to resemble, in a manner, painting in flat tints. (877.) The weaver not having, at least at present, models painted on the system alluded to, nor by artists who, imbued with the speciality of the art of tapestry, would have executed a painting susceptible of being copied as faithfully as can possibly be done with coloured threads,—the weaver, I aay, is almost always obliged, even wben his model is as suitably selected as possible, to make, not only, as we say, a translation, but also, I add, a free and not a literal iranslation, of the model; and it is this, in my opinion, which distinguishes the artist-weaver from the mere workman. For, it is not by a weaver's knowing how to mix the colours of the painter on his palette, and how to apply them skilfully to the canvas, according to the rules of chiaro 'scuro, that he will attain perfection in his art; on the contrary, it is in making the tapestry otherwise than in painting a picture according to this system; and, morcover, it is, because a servile imitation of this kind can only givo a bad result. Far from contending then with painting, the weaver, on the contrary, must study the circumstances where he should succumb in the contest, so that he may avoid the difficulties with the means at his disposal; and it is then, espocially, that he must deviate from his model. ## B. Tapestries for Furniture Hangings. (878.) The preceding consideration respecting the size of objects that figured tapestries should reproduce is not applicable to tapestries for hangings, secing that we have remarked that the threads of the warp produce lines which, far from being disagreeable, are often imitated by the paper-stainer. (879.) These fabrics being intended for chairs, couches, curtains, screens, &c., the painter charged with composing coloured designs suitable for models in this class of works, must never forget that tapestries may occupy dark places, where they are imperfectly and often indistinctly seen; consequently, he had best select simple and elegant forms, and with harmonies of colour adapted to the objects intended to combine with the tapestry in the decoration of an apartment. These models, even more than those which are intended for tapcstries with human figures, must assimilate with painting in flat tints. (880.) The weaver of hanginga for furniture must be impressed with the same ideas, to execute the model quickly and well, according to the preceding observatione, without seeking to rival painting in chiaro 'scuro: and in many cases he must depart from his model rather than servilely imitate it. Among the facts I could quote to support this opinion, I shall select the following : it was a deep-rose-red curtain, the centre representing a large bouquet of flowers of various colours, framed, as it were, in a garland of white roses. The artist had painted tho modelunder the idea of executing this garland with silver thread; but this metal being objectionable on account of its tarnishing through sulphurous exhalations, preference was given to white and grey silks imitating the tones yielded by a silver object in relief. An experiment showed that it could not he attained by employing these means, because the contrast of the ground made all the half-tints appcar green-grey, and these in their turn made the lights appear rusty-pink, in consequence of the greenish colour of their contrast. This inconvenience being communicated to me, I begged M. Deyrolle, in reproducing the model, to make use of only three light tones of the rose scale in silk, and a white linen thread. By this means I expected that the complementary of the ground, neutralising the rose, would produce a greyish half-tint, well adapted to set off the white: the result realised my anticipations. A second copy made with a mixture of the light tones of the pure rose scale, slightly broken, gave an image less white, less silvery than the preceding, or, in other terms, appearing a little greenish when compared with the first, and presenting more harmony; it recalled the effect obtained with rose red under lace or tulle, which permits us to see a little of the ground. This example shows how to imitate a model, and indicates the means of executing white designs upon any kind of ground; in fact, as a general rule, it is easy to arrive at it with light tones of the ground and a bright white. ## C. Savonnerie Carpets. (881.) Carpete are larger than tapestries for hangings: on the other hand, being liable from their position to be soiled by the feet, and to receive furniture on some part, they are in a less favourable condition for being distinctly seen than tapestries. This, then, is one reason why we should choose models of which the design and colour are adapted to the circumstances necessitated by custom ; and for a carpet to produce the best possible effect, it must be in harmony with what is around it. ## D. Mosaics. (882.) Mosaics being constructed with minute prisms, and, on the other hand, with materials susceptible of receiving polish, we can rigorously copy very small subjecta, and, consequently, approach much nearer to painting in chiaro 'scuro than by employing threads. But to arrive at this result, without being unfaithful to the speciality of the art, the materials must be sufficiently solid, and joineà together so intimately as to resist the agencies which destroy painting ; for if this end be not attained, we cannot see the use of copying a picture in mosaic. So that to justify the production of such works, we must make sure that, in the situations where they are placed they will resist the agents which would destroy the works of the painter. ## E. Windows of Coloured Glass. (883.) A work executed in small prisms of transparent coloured glass, in imitation of painting in chiaro 'scuro, would be a true transparent mosaic. I do not know that such an imitation has ever been executed. (884.) All the coloured glass windows wbich I have spoken of as decorations of Gothic churches, are composed exclusively of small pieces of glass of uniform colour, united by strips of lead or of iron ; or altogether of these small pieces of glass, and of glass upon which we have applied with a pencil matcrials which afterwards have been vitrified; we can only entertain e question of these latter in this article.