(885.) We may propose two different objects in the production of these windows; the coloured pieces are either altogether secondary in the work, that is to say, occupying a much smaller extent of surface than the others, they do not attain to the perfection of painting: such is the case with the greater part of the windows of large Gothic churches. Or rather, these pieces are the principal parts; then, predominating over the others, we attach great importance to the design and to the gradation of tints; such are several windows executed at the Royal Manufactory of Sévres. In rendering justice to tho undoubted merit of these works, I shall say nothing particular about them, only that the more they resemble the preceding windowa by the effect of variety, brilliancy, and opposition of colours, the more they attain the object they must essentially fulfl; for I regard these coloured windows not as pictures, but as much simpler works, which I believe are only well placed in large churches. # ARTICLE 2. Tapestries, Carpets, Mosaics, and Coloured Glass Windows, corresponding to Painting in Flat Tints. ## A. Tapestries with Human Figures. (886.) Although I have advised for tapestry models executed on the system of painting in chiaro'scuro to rcsemble painting in flat tinta, yet I shall not recommend taking the models entirely according to this latter system. ## B. Tapestries for Furniture Hangings. (887.) It is quite otherwise with patterns of tapestry for furniture: I believe that we can make some very beautiful works in copying patterns in flat tints; and that, in the decoration of large apartments, we may obtain an excellent effect from this kind of tapestry. I believe, also, that it would bo more suittable for forming part of a general system of decoration, than the kind of tapestry of which I have spoken in the preceding article. Finally, it is more favourable than this latter to the splendour of the colours. ## C. Carpets. (888.) The preceding observations (887.), are entirely applicable to the production of carpets. ## D. Mosaics. (889.) Mosaics being composed of more rigid and coherent coloured materials than the arts which combine coloured materials employ, I believe that it will be requisite, in judging works of this sort, to consider the resistance of the materials to friction, to water, and to atmospheric agents as essential qualities; the colour will follow afterwards. ## E. Windows of Coloured Glass. (890.) According to the manner of considering coloured glass windows under the threefold relation of transmitting light into large Gothic churches, of their accordance with the decoration of objects consecrated to the rites of the church, of transmitting a coloured light entirely in conformity with the religious sentiment, I only prescribe windows of uniform colour for rose windows and straight windows with circular or pointed tops, I prescribe the smallest possible number of colours in the glass; glass of uniform colour must predominate over the othcr to produce the best possible effects of colour.