# INTRODUCTION. (891.) Tuis book would have concluded with the preceding section, if I had not been forcibly struck in my own experience with the generality of certain principles relating to very distinct arts, at the time I was arranging objects differing either in colour, form, or size,—sometimes in two of these properties, occasionally in all three. It was chiefly when occupied with the arrangement of vegetable forms that I appreciated, more than ever, the aid which the architect had received in perfecting his art by the contemplation of these forms and their arrangements ; and numerous instances strengthened my opinion, that our senses can only be affected by a very small number of things at the same time, just as our reason can at once seize but. a few affinities in the ideas which occupy our attention at a given moment. (892.) It seemed to me not without use to show clearly bow experience leads to the observation of facts, which generalised, becomeprinciples adapted to establish common affinities between widely different compositions, and to serve as a basis to a deep and critical examination, as well for the progress of art as for the study of the faculties of man, when he experiences deep impressions on beholding works of nature and art. (893.) It is in this manner that I· have been led to distinguish the principles cxpressing either the intrinsic qualities of objects or the affinities of the parts of which these objects may be composed, or the affinities of subordination which many objects possess amongst themselves; and, finally, the affinities which these objects should have with their destination, and with whoevor contemplates them. In conformity with these ideas, I have cstablished the following principles:— 1°. The principle of volume. 2°. 99 99 form. 3°. 99 n stability. 4°. 99 colour. 5°. 99 variety. 6°. 39 symmetry. 7°. "9 repetition. 8° 99 19 general harmony. n fitness of the object for its destination. 10°. 39 19 distinct view. By the rational application of these principles, we are enabled to distinguishi the similitude of the affinities which exist in very different works, and how, when we have to judge of one which is complex, we do not at first see the product of any particular principle, but rather the product of many ; and thence how important it is, for the examination of the whole, that each part should be brought back to the principle which governs it. (894.) But in order to give our analysis the greatest possible precision in showing, on the one part, how we conceive its extension, and on the other part the limits in which we include it, we say that the language of the fine arts being addressed to the eye, is able to present the same object under two general conditions — one in which the object is in repose ; the other, in which it is in motion; and we add, that in both of them the object can be isolated, or made part of an association of objects identical, or at least more or less resembling each other. Let us cite some examples. (895.) 1sT CONDITION : IN REPOSE. ## First Example. A. Isolated.— An isolated tree may be presentod to the eye by the paintcr, or by the gardener. B. Part of an Association.— A tree may be presented to tho eye by the same artists, no longer isolated, but grouped with other trees of the same species, or of the same genus, or different genera, but having some affinity with it in form, size, or colour. ## Second Example. A. Isolated.— A human figure may be represented isolated by the painter or the sculptor. The isolation may be absolute, or the figure may be, as in a historical picture, associated with other figures, or it may also be made a portion of a sculptural group. B. Part of an Association.— A human figure making part of an association has no longer individuality, so tospeak ; it has no name, it becomes part of an aggregation of individuals resembling each other, but which, when the artist bas been desirous of avoiding monotony, are not identical Such are the soldiers who form a platoon in a picture representing a review or a battle; if the identity is not in the figures, it exists in the uniforms. 'Such are the statues which decorate the porch of a Gothic church; as we have before remarked(431.), these should not be judged as a Greek statue, but as a whole constituting an architectonic ornament. Such, moreover, are human figures sculptured in bas relief which do not form a picture, but serve as ornament in the decoration of an edifice. ## (896.) 2ND CONDITION: IN MOTION. A body produces very different impressions on us, according as we see it in repose or in action. It seems as if the arrow which cleaves the air, the bird which fies, invitod us to action. What difference is there not between the view of a calm lake and that of a river? The particles of water inccssantly renewed in a spot on which our eyes are fixed, produce in us ideas of succession which are not awakened by the sight of still water. To the child, the animal in repose sleeps; and if, after having touched it, no sign of motion is perceived, the child pronounces it dead. Military evolutions, bodily exercises, and dancing, which present to ue the human figure in motion, exhibit it in a condition very different from that when it is seen in repose. When the condition of the human figure in motion is offered to our view, we have to distinguish between the case in which it is isolated, and that in which it is associated with other figures of its species. A. Isolated.— The ballet master presents to us a dancer, isolated, or grouped with one or two others, that is to say, in conditions corresponding to the human figure which the painter and the sculptor represent to us absolutely isolated, or taking part in an action and so making part of a group. B. Part of a Association.—Finally, we see in an assemblage of dancers, in the manœuvres of a battalion, and the evolutions of the line, co-ordinate movements in which the individuais disappear, so to speak, to show themselves as parts of a whole. (897.) I have entered into these details in order that the extreme difference may be laid hold of which should exist between an object or an individual that the artist presents to us isolated, or making part of an aggregation of objects or of individuals which are more or less analogous to that object or to that individual. Thus, tho gardener should so employ his art that every plant intended to be seen in a state of isolation be large and beautiful, that it receives the light equally on every part;