moreover, it may happen that, after having seen many of these works, constructed so to speak on the same colossal scale, and having less merit than the work which struck us at first, we should be disposed to recur to figures life size. (899.) But if the volume of an object has undoubted influence in striking spectators forcibly, we must never forget the inconveniences that result from exaggerating a single object which ought to be associated with others; for in this case the exaggeration may have the serious objection of lessening these lattcr, and thus brcaking the harmony they would otherwise possess. # CHAPTER II. # PRINCIPLE OF FORM. (900.) Forx strikes us at the same time as size in objects which we look at; and the influence it exercises on our judgment is well known. The artist should always endeavour to present an object under that form which is most appropriate to the effect he wishes to produce, and criticism should distinguish betwcen the cases in which the object is isolated, and tbose in which it is associated. (901.) Certain objects of art being only intended to address the eye, form is their most essential quality; such are triumphal arches, obelisks, columns, or pyramids, erected either as memorials, or to ornament a city, public place, &c. Other objects, on the contrary, having a special destination, their form becomes an accessory, or at least it is not the ouly essential part. It is from this point of view that we must consider edifices, such as palaces, churches, museums, theatres, &c., in order to ascertain if the architect has attained the end which he proposed to himself. (902.) Wo have remarked elsewhere (856.) the infuence an agreeable form may have in the judgment we exercise upon objects whose colours have no affinity with an association suited to their reciprocal embellishment.