# CHAPTER IL ## PRINCIPLE OF STABILITY. (903.) WεNEvER any object is to be presented to the eye in a state of immobility or repose, we like to see it in a position of perfect stability, for we are affected by a disagreeable, and even painful impression, if we imagine that a slight effort would suffice to upset it ; thence follows the necessity of submitting the pose of the figures of a picture, or of a statue, and of architectural monuments, to the principle of equilibrium. The leaning of the tower of Pisa (il campanile torto), and of the two towers of Bologna (degli asinelli and de garisendi), is not an effect of art, but rather the result of the sinking of the soil, which has been greater on the one side than on the other. Tho remarks which Condamino has made in his Travels in Italy (p. 13), in relation to the first of these two towers, it seems to me, carry conviction to every mind. (904.) A case which has always appcared to me very suitable to show the inconvenience resulting from not observing the principle of stability, is the bad effect of a house built upon a small plane inclining towards a valley or a plain which it commands as an eminence; for a house so placed seems wanting in stability, and that the least effort would push it from the top to the bottom of the inclined plane. To remedy this evil, it is generally only necessary to elevate the earth in such a manner that the edifice stands on a horizontal planc, which should be extended as far as possible towards the valley. ## CHAPTER IV. ## PRINCIPLE OF COLOUR. (905.) CoLouR is seen at the same time as form. Itimparts a more agrceable aspect to a smooth body, augments the relief, rendering the parts of a whole more distinct than they