is very irregular, and the buildings upon it are not placed as thcy should be, in a symmetrical composition,— it is convenient to throw aside the principle, not to carry out a system of irregularity, but to attain a pleasing distribution of objects, and even to have parts which, considered in detail, will appear less irregular than they would have done as a whole, if confined to a single plane. (914.) It is in conformity with these ideas that we bave subordinated the planting of masses in landscape-gardening to principles which are very distinct from those absolute ideas of irregularity which some people maintain. # CHAPTER VII. ## PRINCIPLE OF REPETITION. (915.) Taε repetition of an objcct, or of a series of objects, produces greater pleasure than the sight of a single object, or of a single series; but it must be clearly understood that we are here speaking only of an object which addresses the eye by its form or its colour, and which is not intended, like a chesd'’œuvre of statuary, to be seen in a state of isolation (895, 896.); we are treating, then, of ornaments, or indeed more of plants and human figures, which are to make part of an association (895, 896.), and not to be presented to the spectator in an isolated state. (916.) The repetition of & well-assorted series of coloured circles is more agreeable than when only one series is seen; this is an experiment easily made. Tho repetition of the same ornament in a border, or in a cornice of a ceiling, is more agreeable than the sight of an ornament not repeated. The repetition of the human figure serving to decorate the portals of Gothic churches (431.) has a fine effect. (917.) The repetition of the human figure in a platoon, or in battalions performing evolutions of the lino, is an agreeable sight to every one. I shall cite, as a last example, the same movements executed by a number of dancers, because it is particularly well suited to exhibit the extremc difference between the sight of a single