# SECTION IV. ## OF THE DISPOSITION OF THE MIND OF THE SPECTA-TOR IN RESPECT TO THE JUDGMENT HE FORMS OF AN OBJECT OF ART WHICH ATTRACTS HIS EYE. (936.) Ir is not enough to have indicated the rules to be followed, and the principles to be observed in the production of effects, and the judgment of them in relation to art; we must also speak of the disposition of the spectator for receiving the impression of those effects in a manner more or less intense; to take no notice of this disposition, would be to display ignorance of human nature, and of the utility of the examination which should be impartially pursued also in the judgment of the critic, who may exaggerate blame as well as praise. Without examining the influence the passions exercise in opinions formed on works of art, I will say a few words upon a predisposition which may be remarked in a portion of the public, at least at certain epochs, and which has its source in man's vanity. Then I will point out the part which the association of certain ideas performs in the formation of opinions. (937.) When a body of painters, called a school, has produced some chefs-d'œuvre, it frequently happens that a great number of mediocre works executed under the pretence of continuing them, far from being favourable, are injurious to a portion of the public, on account of the monotony resulting from an imitation, more or less servile, of form, colour, and of the subjects themselves. The public, under these circumstances, is ready to applaud every innovation that will excite emotions which it has not for some time found in contemporary painting; and it is then that, amongst the public, voices are raised against great works which have nothing in common with the tame imitations of them produced by mediocrity. Truly, there comes an epoch when innovation losing the only advantage it possessed of presenting to the eye images differing from those which it had been a long time accustomed to see, the public returns to the chefs-d'œuvre, and forgets all the feeble works composed in imitation of them by feeble pupils; and, we will add, that if works professing to be of the new school, and endowed with undeniable merit, should exist, they would, in the estimation of connoisscurs, take the places they ought to occupy, whilst those which had arrcsted attention by innovation only, disappear for ever. (938.) Finally, I will notice the effect which certain associations of idcas may have on our opinions. For example, any one arriving at Versailles full of admiration for the age of Louis XIV., will repeople the gardens with all the great men that have frequented them, and, recurring in thought to the fetes giving by an elegant and polished court, the admiration of Europe, will judge the work of Lenôtre more favourably than he who, without being, however, hostile to tho grand riècle, sees nothing but a garden subordinated to a palace. There is no doubt, moreover, that the Christian who associates in his mind the architectural form of the Gothic church, the brilliancy of its coloured giass, and the religious ceremonies, which, when yet a child, he has seen celebrated in it, will be in a disposition of mind to prefer the Cathedral of Cologne to St. Peter's at Rome, or, what amounts to the same, will be more disposed to admire the first of these monuments than a Roman would be, whose mind would be filled with ideas of religious ceremonies linked with the idea of the church of St. Peter's.