# §3. ARE THE SENSKS OF HEARING, TASTE, AND BMKLL SUBMITTED TO CONTBABT? Distinction between the contrast of antagonism and the contrast of simple difference. (967.) If it is philosophical to seek out those properties which the organs of the senses possess in common in their structure and functions, if is no less philosophical to ascertain the special differences that distinguish them. Under this proposed relation I proceed to examine, in connection with the sense of sight, the senses of hearing, taste and smell in some one of their operations, after having distinguished as clearly as possible the difference arising from the antagonism of two things, from the difference that arises between two thinys of greater or less size or intensity in one of their properties. (968.) We say that there is antagonism between two properties or between two things each possessing one of these properties, when in virtue of a mutual action these properties disappear. Examples : — lst. Two discs of glass rubbed against each other, then separated, display electrical properties; but one has positive electricity, and the other negative. Upon re-uniting the discs these properties disappear, they mutually neutralise each other, and are consequently antagonistic. 2nd. The same result is obtained from two needles of equal magnetic power : on applying the one to the other, so that the different poles touch, there is a neutralization of their magnetic properties, and we call them two antagonistic magnetisms. 3rd. Sulphuric acid reddens tincture of violets, whilst potass changes it to green: here aro two actions differing in their results; now if we combine the sulphuric acid and the potass in proper proportions, we obtain a compound which bas no effect on the colour of the violets. In this case it is said, the acidity of the sulphuric acid and the alkaline properties of the potass are two forces or properties which are antagonistic, the one of which can only predominate at the expense of the other. 4th. In conformity with this manner of considering the acid and the alkaline properties in the preceding example, I regard two coloured lights which produce by their mutual combination an uncoloured or white light as being antagonistic: thus, for example;— Separate the red rays from a ray of white light, and the remaining rays appcar to us green, slightly tinged with blue; reunite the red rays and the green rays tinged with blue, white light is reformed. In this case I assert there is antagonism, because two things that affect us differently as colour, the red rays and the bluish green rays, when united no longer affect us as such, but as white. Materials coloured green, red, yellow, violet, blue, orange, &c., which by their mixture produce black or grey, also prcsent, on account of the disappearance of their colour, an example of antagonism. (969.) Further, I assert that antagonism exists whenever tuo activities, or in other words, two causes of different effects, being opposed to each other, are mutually balanced in such a manner that the effects they produced in an isolated state, are no longer manifested after their reaction. It is in this that two antagonistic things differ from two things we compare under the relation of size, or of intensity of a property, a comparison that gives for result, when there is no equality, a difference in the size or in the intensity of that property. (970.) From the distinction we have made, contrast of colour, considered under the most general point of view, that is to say, as presenting contrast of tone and contrast of colour properly so called (8.), is itself composed of two contrasts : 1°. Óf a contrast of simple difference; That of tone. In fact, the lightest object augments brightness, as the deepest destroys it. 2°. Of a contrast of antagonism. In' fact, the modification of two juxtaposed colours, arising from the addition of the complementary of the one to the colour of the otber, is really that which can make the two colours widely difforent, since this addition appears, according to the remarks already made, to take away from the one what it may contain of the other (8.). (971.) Finally, in successive contrast, simple difference of contrast and contrast of antagonism may exist, as in simultaneous contrast, because 1°. The eye which has first seen a light part o by the side of a dark part $^ { o , }$ sees at the second view when it has ceased to regard the whole of the two parts o and o', the image o darker $\bullet ^ { \prime } ,$ than the image $\smash { \pmb { o } } _ { \lambda } ^ { \prime }$