cations which the principal colours tend to induce in those which are contiguous to them. Take circular pieces of paper, or other material, coloured red, green, orange, blue, greenish-yellow, violet, indigo, and orangeyellow, of about one inch and a half in diameter; place each one separately on a sheet of white paper; then, with a thin wash of colour, tint the white paper around the circle, with its complementary colour, gradually weaker and weaker as the tint recedes from the coloured circle. These figures are principally intended to represent the effects of contrast in a palpable manner to those persons who, not having studied physics, yet have, nevertheless, an interest in knowing these effects. The Red circle tends to colour the surrounding space with its complementary Green. The Green circle tends to colour the surrounding space Red. <table><tr><td>The Orange</td><td>&quot;1</td><td>»</td><td>n</td><td>Blue.</td></tr><tr><td>The Blue</td><td>&quot;I</td><td>»</td><td>n</td><td>Orange.</td></tr><tr><td>The Greenish-Yellow</td><td>ni</td><td>»</td><td>&quot;</td><td>Violet</td></tr><tr><td>The Violet</td><td>»</td><td>n</td><td>»i</td><td>Greenish Yellow.</td></tr><tr><td>The Indigo</td><td>1</td><td>»9</td><td>&quot;9</td><td>Orange-Yellow.</td></tr><tr><td>The Orange-Yellow</td><td>&quot;1</td><td>”</td><td>19</td><td>Indigo. J</td></tr></table> # CHAPTER IV. ## ON THE JUITAPOSITION OF COLOUKED BUBSTANCES WITE WHITE (44.) WHIte substances contiguous to those which are coloured, appear sensibly modified when viewed simultaneously with the latter. I admit that the modification is too feeble to be determined with entire certainty, when we are ignorant of the law of contrast; but knowing that, and seeing the modification effected by the white upon certain coloured substances, it is impossible to avoid recognising this modification in its speciality if at the same time the colours opposed to the white are not too deop. ## Red and White. (45.) Green, the complementary of Red, is added to the White. The Red appears more brilliant and deeper. ## Orange and White. (46.) Blue, the complementary of Orange, is added to the White. The Orange appears brighter and deeper. ## Greenish-Yellow and White. (47.) Violet, the complementary of Greenish-Yellow, is added to the White. The Yellow appears brighter and deeper. ## Green and White. (48.) Red, the complementary of Green, is added to the White. T'he Green appears brighter and deeper. ## Blue and White. (49.) Orange, the complementary of Blue, is added to the White. The Blue appears brighter and deeper. ## Indigo and White. (50.) Orange-Yellow, the complementary of Indigo, is added to the White. The Indigo appears brighter and deeper. ## Violet and White. (51.) Greenish-Yellow, the complementary of Violet, is added to the White. The Violet appears brighter and deeper. ## Black and White. (52.) Black and White, which may in some respects be considered as complementary to each other, conformably to the law of Contrast of Tone, differ more from each other than when viewed separately : and tlis is owing to the effect of the white light reflected by the black (4) being destroyed more or less by the light of the white stripe; and it is by an analogous action that White heightens the tone of the colours with which it is placed in contact. ## CHAPTER V. ## ON THE JUXTAPOSITION OF COLOURED BUBSTANCKS WITH BLACK. (53.) Before stating the observations to which the juxtaposition of coloured and black substances has given rise, we must analyse the part the two contrasts—those of Tone and of Colour perform in the phenomenon considered in its general bearing. The black surface being deeper than the colour with which it is in juxtaposition, the Contrast of Tone must tend to deepen it still more, while it must tend to lower the tone of the contiguous colour, for the same reason, exactly, that White, on the other hand, if juxtaposed with it would heighten it. Thus much for Contrast of Tone. (54.) Black substances reflect a small quantity of white light (4), and this light arriving at the eye at the same time with the coloured light of the contiguous body, it is evident that the black substances must appear tinted with the complementary of the coloured light: but the tint will be very faint, because it is manifested upon a ground having but a feeble power for reflecting light. Thus much for Contrast of Colour. (55.) The lowering of the tone of a colour in contact with black is always perceptible; but a very remarkable fact is, the weakening of the black itself when the contiguous colour is sombre and of a nature that yields a luminous complementary, such as Orange, Orange-Yellow, Greenish-Yellow, &c. ## Red and Black. (56.) Green, the complementary of Red, uniting with the Black, causes it to appear less reddish. The Red appears lighter or less brown, less oranged. ## Orange and Black. (57:) The complementary of Orange (Blue), uniting with the Black, the latter appears less rusty, or bluer. The Orange appears brighter and yellower, or less brown. ## Greenish-Yellow and Black. (58.) The complementary of Greenish-Yellow (Violet), uniting with the Black, the Black appears tinted Violet. The Yellow is lighter,greener perhaps; and there are some samples of Yellow which appear weaker by their juxtaposition with Black. ## Green and Black. (59.) The complementary of Green (Red), uniting with the Black, the Black appears more Violet or reddish. The Green inclines slightly to Yellow. ## Blue and Black (60.) The complementary of Blue (Orange), uniting with the Black, the Black becomes brighter. The Blue is lighter,—greeñer perhaps.