2°. The eye looking first at a body of a certain colour, sees at a second glance, after having abstained from regarding it, an image which is of the complementary or antagonistic colour to that which is really the colour of the body. (972.) Having brought things to this point, it is evident that, in order to treat the question to which this paragraph is devoted with all the clearness in our power, it is necessary to find out if the hearing, taste, and smell are subject to a contrast of antagonism or to one of difference, and if the contrasts that may affect them are simultaneous and successive. By neglecting to subordinate the subject to these distinctions, I should certainly expose myself to the reproach of obscurity, which would have its cause in the confusion I have pointed out in tracing the critical résumé of the history of the works on accidental colours (80. and 941.). # OF HeariNG. (973.) Hearing is the sense which passes as having the greatest affinity with sight; for every one knows the comparison that has been instituted between sounds and colours, not only when considered as sensation, but also when it has been sought to explain their propagation by the wave theory. ## Comparison between Sounds and Colours. (974.) Although I am far from disregarding the relation of colours with sounds when it is a question of their acting on our organs, and of the infinite sensations resulting from their mixture and from their co-existence; although I feel great pleasure at the sight of beautiful colours even when by their delineation they do not recall any doterminate object, and when they only affect us by their beauty and splendour; although I have arranged them in various harmonies, and indicated the means of analysing by a sort of reading those which compose a picture, nevertheless I avow that I cannot perceive those close affinities that several authors, particularly Castel, have said they perceive between sounds and colours. I am ignorant what the future may bring forth, relative to the analogy the senses they respectively affect might present from the point of view of the different kinds of contrasts that take place in vision ; but at the present time the markcd differenco between sounds and colours strikes me much more than their generic resemblance. (975.) The first difference that I remark between the sensations of hearing and soeing, is the existence of sound as a special thing, whethor languago or music. It is not only in spoken language or in music executed by the voice or by instruments that this existence is evident, but it is, moreover, in the written sentence and in the notation of music; in fact, sounds expressing the words in conversation and sounds marked by musical signs fix themselves in the memory; the specch, the song and the instruments reproduce them, if not always identical, at least so as to preserve their principal relations. Finally, What is it that gives to these sounds a significance, a real value? In speech it is the succession of words composing the phrase; in music, melody is nothing more than a succession of varied sounds; and harmony prescnting the co-existence of several concords, signifying really somcthing like music only by the sounds that have preceded or by those that are to follow it; in a word, I find the essential charactcr of sounds significant in their succession, and in the taculty we possess of recalling and reproducing them according to that order of succession, either when they concern speech or music. (976.) Have colours a special existence similar to that remarked in sounds? I do not believe they bavc, at least for the generality of men : for if it is true that we can see colours without material forms, so to speak, for examplc thosc of a ray of solar light dispersed by the prism and reflected by a white surface, nevertheless, nearly every one confounds colours with the objects exhibiting them ; and it is correct to say that they only appear to them as dependent on a materiai form since, far from being seen exclusively of these objects, they are, on the contrary, fixed by them as one of thcir essential qualities, so that if their memory preserves the recollection of the colours, these latter are always connected with the form of some material object. (977.) If we now examine the impressions of colours under the relations of succession and simultaneity, the first of which relations corresponds to the melody and the second to the harmony of sounds, it will be evident that we shall not find in the sight of a succession of colours assorted according to the laws of simultaneóus, successive, or mixed contrasts, anything that can be justly compared to the pleasure we receive from a melodious succession of sounds; in fine, we are not possessed of the same faculty for retaining a succession of colours as for retaining a succession of sounds. If we consider the simultaneous view of colours assorted eonformably to the rules of contrast, it is evident, from what has been said, that it will be the case of the greatest analogy between colours and sounds, because in fact, in the pleasure caused by colours happily associated there is something comparable to what we call a concord of harmonious sounds; with this difference, however, that the former pleasure is of a nature to be more prolonged than the latter; for it is well known that the eye can contemplate the various colours of a picture, without experiencing a feeling of monotony, fora much longer time than the ear is capable of ssutaining the pleasure of an harmonious concord of the same sounds prolonged without variation. It must be remembered that in every case in which most persons are agreeably affected by the sight of associated colours, these colours address them through the form they have clothed. (978.) Finally, sounds, at least for the generality of men, have a special existence, which colours have not. Succession is particularly essential to the pleasure of musical sounds and to tho signification of the sounds of speech, as simultaneity in associated colours, which requires some time to be felt, is essential to the pleasure we receive through the medium of sight. ## Is there a Contrast of Difference in Sounds? (979.) Are there contrasts of difference in sounds? and, if there are, are they simultaneous? are they successive? I raise these questions less for resolving them, than with the intention of indicating the characteristics of these contrasts and the elements of knowledge we must possess in order to prove their existence. (980.) If it is true that a very loud sound prevents our bearing a weak sound which we should otherwise perceive were it alone to reach the ear, if this effect exactly corresponds to that produced by a strong light when it obstructs our perception of a weak light, which, however, we should see very distinctly, if it was isolated from the other ; finally, if these two effects may be observed without the loud sound, or the strong light offending the organ they respectively affect, nevertheless the first fact does not necessarily demonstrate the existence of a simultaneous contrast of difference between two sounds which would be analogous to the simultaneous contrast of tone in two colours. It is then only by the law of continuity that we can really deduce it, by admitting that the phenomenon is one of the extreme cases\* of a contrast of difference botween two effects, the lesser of which disappears before the greater, as that which occurs when a small object, placed near s greater, ceases to be perceptible from the fact of this very proximity (966.). (98l.) But to demonstrate the existence of a contrast of difference between simultaneous sounds, corresponding to the contrast we perceive at the sight of two colours of different tones, it is necessary to prove by experiment, that in the simultaneous perception of a flat sound and of a sharp sound, the former appears flatter, and the second sharper than they would appear if they differed less from each other. Now it is precisely this contrast betweon the two sounds that we are unable to prove by the fact quoted (980.), that a loud sound prevents us from hearing a weak one, since perceiving then only a single sound, we are unable to compare it with that which we do not perceive. (982.) If we pass to the question concerning the existence of a contrast of difference between two successive sounds, we shall still find that the weak sound succeeding a loud sound, is not heard, the same as a weak.light is not scnsible to the eye which has received the impression of a strong light. To absolutely establish the existence of a successive contrast of difference between two sounds, it is necessary to show by experiment that the difference is greater between two sounds perceived successively, than if the sounds were nearly simultaneous. ## Is there a Contrast of Antagonism in Sounds? (983.) We cannot now form any idea of a difference which would arise in sounds from an antagonism of some one of their individual properties, for, in reality, we know of nothing in them that corresponds to white light and to mutually complementary coloured lights. In the actual state of our know-