ledge we cannot then imagine the antagonism between two sounds arriving simultaneously at the ear, only in conceiving them to be mutually destroyed: in admitting this result, we should have a product corresponding not to the white arising from the mixture of coloured solar rays mutually complementary, but to the black which may result from the mixture of coloured complementary materials (968.), and hence we should not see that which in hearing corresponds to the successive contrast of antagonism, in virtue of which the sufficiently prolonged sight of a colour determines the tendency to see, on a second view, the complementary of that colour. # OF TASTE ANd SMELL. (984.) I cannot apply the question of the existence of contrasts of taste and smell, without remarking the extreme difference that exists between these senses on the one part, and seeing and hearing on the other. In all the perceptions of the two former there is the contact of savoury and odorous bodies with the organ; that is to say, always a physical, and frequently a chemical action; while in the perception of colours and of sounds, there is never a chemical action ; it is a simple impression that the eye receives from the light,—it is a simple vibration that the ear receives from the sonorous body. According to this I have arranged the properties we discover in bodies by the medium of taste and smell, amongst those that I call organoleptics\*, in order to distinguish the physical properties, amongst which I class all those that are not made known to us by the eye and the ear. (985.) It is necessary not to forget that all I say of taste and smell only concerns the sensations we perceive through their medium, when these organs are in contact either with a single kind of savoury or odorous bodies, as marine salt, sugar, camphor, &c., or with several of these sorts at the same time; but in this instance I shall always suppose that the mixed kinds have no mutual chemical action, and when savoury bodies are in question, these latter are not odorous. ↑ ## Is there a Contrast of Difference in Taste? (986.) If we accept as proof of the contrast of difference the non-perception of a weak light or a weak sound, resulting from thc effect of a strong light or an intense sound, either in the case of simultaneity or of succession, we shall bo led to admit of a contrast of differerce for taste, either simultaneous or successive; for it is well known that a strong flavour is opposed to the perception of a weak flavour, in the case of simultaneity, as in the case of succession; and in both cases the effect may take place without the organ leaving the normal state; for example, a strong salt flavour prevents the perception of a sweet flavour which would be perceived in the absence of the first; strongly sugared water renders insensible the flavour of a slightly sugared water drunk after it. (987.) But if the analogy of the preceding facts with those which relate to the senses of seeing and hearing is evident, we must own that in our day we know of none that correspond to the contrast of diffcrence, in virtue of which two tones of the same scale of colour appear to the eye more different than they really are. To establish this correspondence, it is necessary that we should demonstrate, in the case of simultaneity, that two flavours, proceeding from two matters differing in taste, placed on distinct parts of the tongue, differ more than they would. if they proceeded from matters differing less in taste. Finally, in the case of succession, it is necessary to show, that two favours perceived successively would present more difference than if they had been perceived separately, supposing that we are able to retain for some time the recollection of the first flavour. (988.) Experiments on the contrast of difference of flavours ought to be made : 1°. With the same kind of flavoured substance taken in different quantities; 2°. With two different bodies having the same generic favour, as cane-sugar, grape-sugar, manna; 3°. With bodies possessed of different flavours, such as sugar, marine salt, citric acid, &c. ## Is there a Contrast of Antagonism in Taste? (989.) Knowing nothing that bears a resemblance to antagonism in the sensations of taste, we cannot cite any fact suitable to exhibit either a simultaneous or successive contrast of antagonism in favours. ## OF SxEll. (990.) All that I have said on the contrast of taste is applicable to the contrasts of smell: we can, by analogy, admit of a contrast of difference, either simultaneous or successive, for odours, but nothing corresponds in the perceptions we receive from it to the contrast of antagonism. ## CONCLUSION OF THIS SECTION. (991.) It follows from what I have said in this section, 1°. That the senses of seeing, hearing, smell, and, I may add, the sense of touch, all present, as I have before remarked, the phenomenon of not recognising a weak impression which is received at the same time as a much stronger one. 2°. That the result is the same when the weak impression immediately, or almost immediately, succeeds the strong one. 3°. That the two preceding phenomena may be observed when the strongest impression does not sufficiently disturb the organ experiencing them, as to admit of our considering the latter as being in an abnormal state. 4°. That if we can deduce these phenomena of a contrast of difference, nevertheless we must own that it will be difficult to quote results from experiments adapted to show clearly that in the simultaneous or successive perception of two sounds, two flavours, and two odours, we remark between the two sensations a greater difference than we should detect if the two sounds, flavours, and odours were less different from each other. 5°. That at the present time we have no idea of what a coutrast of antagonism in the perception of sounds, flavours, and odours may be. (992.) We have seen how the study of the contrasts of sight diffuses a light on the history of the other senses. In insisting on the differences of sounds and colours, I believe them to be based on truth; but my readers deceive themselves if they think I believe that ulterior studies would add more to the differences I have remarked between sight on the one part, and hearing, smell, and taste on the other. In speaking of these differences, my intention has been to show clearly that in the present state of our knowiedge we have no actual experimental proof which establishes that hearing, smell, and taste, are submitted to simultaneous and successivo contrasts corresponding to the contrasts of difference and antagonism which exist in the phenomena of the sight of white, black, and coloured bodies; it does not signify if future researches cannot demonstrate the existence of these affinities: besides, if I did not fear to go in advance of the result of experiments which, although commenced more than twenty years since\*, are still far from being terminated, I would say that I should be more disposed to admit affinities than to reject them (974.). ## §4. LIGHT WHICH THE STUDY oF CONTRABT APPEARS TO ME 808- CEPTIBLE OF SHEDDING UPON SEVERAL OTHER PHENOMENA OF THE UNDERSTANDING. (993.) If it is difficult, at the present day, to experimentally demonstrate that in hearing, tasting, and smelling, there exist definite contrasts of as precise a nature as the various contrasts affecting us through the organ of sight,—yet the examination of these latter, in giving the first experimental proof of this fact, that two different objects, placed side by side, appear by the comparison more different than they really are, and in placing in its proper aspect a phenomenon generally spoken of under the name of contrast of colours, without knowing either its extent or its importance,—seoms to me adapted to throw a light on the study of several of the operations of the human mind. In fact, when certain persons regard two objects under a relation of difference, does it not happen that the difference exaggerates itself, so to speak, unknown to them, precisely as it happens in regarding two juxtaposed colours, in which all that is analogous between the two colours disappears in a greater or less degree? Does it not happen that these persons, but little accustomed to reflect on the operations of the mind, give themselves up to the judgment they first brought to bear, always retaining some inexact ideas which they would have been able to rectify, in considering objects under new relations adapted to control their first opinion? Are they not in the position of one who, having concluded, at first sight, that a difference of $1 _ { \top } \frac { \beta } { 0 } \textdegree$ yards exists between a measure of one yard placed beside & measure of two yards, preserves that opinion in his memory as correct, because, ignorant of the effect of contrast of size (965. 966.), nothing can make him feel the neccssity of baving recourse to a counter-proof to rectify his judgment, as he would have been led to make had he possessed that knowledge, and moreover, he had felt the necessity for some motive of having exactly the difference of length of the two measures, for then he would have had recourse to measurement. This example is very well adapted to the comprehension of my ideas respecting the inexactitude of a great number of opinions brought to bear upon certain objects which we compare in respect to qualities, properties, and attributes we have not measured. ## (a.) Operations of the Mind corresponding to the Contrast of simultaneous Difference. (994.) The inaccuracy of judgment in question, consisting in the exaggeration of a difference between two objects compared, enters into the contrast of simultaneous difference, whenever the qualities, properties, and attributes we compare, belong to objects before our eyes, or rather to objects more or less remote, in space or time, and then our opinions bear on the notions that memory recalls to us or tradition has transmitted. ## (b.) Operations of the Mind corresponding to the Contrast of successive Difference. (995.) I am about to examine those mental operations which appear to me to correspond to the contrast of successive difference, because they refer to a comparison established between two objects seen in succession, or between an opinion at present maintained, and a contrary opinion held at some prcvious period. (996.) A man easily susceptible of receiving impressions, who travels through a country for the first time, is much disposed to form exaggerated notions, because he is most struck with the differences between the objects he now sees and those which have been presented to him previously in the country where he has long resided. The best method of correcting his judgment, is to revisit in succession the objects compared, and to bestow particular attention upon those qualities which have struck him the most forcibly, that he may regulato his first impression by newly-formed opinions. (997.) Finally, is not our disposition of mind with regard to an opinion that is entirely abandoned for another, remarkable for this,—that wo almost always form an exaggerated judgment of the opinion we have abandoned in the sense least favourable to it, and that hence the mind gives way to an exaggeration of the difference? ## Influence exercised by the Condition of our Organs upon many Operations of the Understanding. (998.) In reflecting upon the condition of our organs under three circumstances, as follows,— 1°. When the difference produced by the simultaneous contrast of two tints is carried to its maximum ; 2°. When a small object ceases to be perceptible on account of its proximity with a larger ; 3°. When in looking at an object, which however is not very complex, we perceive in a given time, only a small number of relations under which it can be presented to the attention of most persons, I have been led to explain to myself clearly tho case in which our mind, when certain ideas have become more familiar to it than others, is led to regard the former to the exclusion of the latter. (a.) When the mind is at work in solitude upon a subject. (b.) When a discussion is entered into by two persona Let us examine these two conditions. ## (a.) Works executed in Solitude. (999.) A mind constantly occupied in seizing only upon the differences between objects, acquires by this very act à disposition, I will not say to set aside resemblances or analogies between one thing and another, but a disposition not to perceive them ; while, on the other hand, a man who sets up to establish a broad generality — a so-called universal principle, limiting the examination of the most complex things to a few relations only,seems not to perceive a variety of phenomena visible to all those who are moved by a desire to enter into a conscientious and satisfactory investigation of these things. If the first does not see that the brightest conquest of the human mind in its search after truth, is the discovery of generalities, the second is equally blind to the fact that it is after careful study of details, and consequently after the appreciation of facts widely differing, that we arrive at generalities and at principles, and that the quality of exactitude in these is found in the explanation itself of the variety of phenomena to which theso principles refer. (1000.) When certain ideas have so completely occupied the attention as to become familiar, the brain is so much the more strongly disposed to receive impressions from without which recall the thoughts to these ideas, according as they have been more profound and their mutual connection closer; that as soon as a matter which enters essentially into this system of ideas is presented to the mind under a familiar aspect, the new matter will forthwith be classed in the system; while, should it be presented under an unfamiliar aspect, its classification is delayed, because an ulterior operation is necessary to co-ordinate the new notion with the old ones. ## (b.) Discussion between two Persons. (1001.) The difficulty of inserting in a system of ideas certain matters presented for the first time to the mind, or which, having been previously presented, have not been considered of sufficient importance to be co-ordinated with others, which subsequently have composed a body of opinions, explains the following facts. (1002.) 1st Fact. Two able minds are occupied on a subject, but with this difference, that one applies a systom of ideas acquired after long meditation, while the only object of the other is simple inquiry. Now, suppose that in the course of a discussion betwcen them upon this subject, there is presented a new fact capable of being connected thereto by some relation,I say that it may happen, according to the aspect under which this fact is presented, that the former of the disputants may see its relation to the matter in question less promptly and easily than the latter; this is not going so far as to say, that later reflection may not produce changes in the impression the first mind received at the outset, and that it will not appreciate the importance of the new fact for throwing light upon the subject. (1003.) 2nd Fact. Two persons are discussing without auditors ; no passion excites them, they are animated solely by the desire of ascertaining the truth on a subject, be it scientific or literary, which is of a nature to divide opinions ; after a longer or shorter discussion they separate, neither having yielded a point to the other. I admit, in accordance with the common opinion, that such is the ordinary result of discussions; but under the supposition that I have raised, and provided the discussion has been sufficiently prolonged between two conscientious and enlightenod persons, 'I admit that there is in general a mutual reaction, and that sooner or later, the opinions held by each person before the discussion will be more or less modified. (1004.) 3rd Fact. It is possible for two superior minds, not only not to act upon each other in a prolonged discussion, but, moreover, for the reflection following upon the discussion not to produce any modifications in their opinions, because the ideas of each may be so co-ordinated that it is not possible to intercalate a fact capable of modifying that co-ordination; and more than this, a synthetic mind is less disposed to entertain a fact which forms part of a system of ideas different from its own, when the argument emanates from another synthetic mind, than if that fact was presented to it isolated, or if the argument emanated from some one who had no system to defend. (1005.) In all that precedes, I have presumed that pasrion exercises no influence; if it did, it is evident that the difficulty of arriving at a mutual understanding would be greater. tance it attaches to a newly-formed opinion relatively to one that has been abandoned (997.); this case, far from being opposed to my views, is only an extension of them. ## Inconveniences in oral or written Teaching which may arise from the Opposition established between two Facts. (1007.) 'I'here would be & void in the exposition of my views on the extension which the study of contrast appears to me to be susceptible of, if I did not add some remarks applicable to the result which may follow from a teaching in which, while proceeding specially by placing two facts in opposition, the differences only which they exhibit is insisted on without regard to their essential analogies. If such teaching is easier for the professor, and more accessible to most understandings, because it gives more saliency to a very small number of facts, it has, in my opinion, the objection of greatly exaggerating the differences which actually exist between the objects compared ; or, which comes to the same thing, of leading to a belief, or to a tendency to believe, that differences have an importance in the distinguishing of these objects which, in truth, they are far from possessing. When a professor in a lecture, or an author in a book, brings forward two different opinions, or two hypotheses, or advances two propositions, it may happen that they will, for the sake of greater clearness, insist upon an opposition, while they omit the analogies that may restrain within its true limits the two terme of the comparison. From this mode of proceeding may result not only an exaggeration of difference, but also a notion altogether incorrect, if, for example, the two terms of the comparison being two propositions, they should be presented to the auditor or reader as altogether opposed, so that if one be true, the other must of necessity be false; whilst to be exact, the boundary which circumscribes each circle within whose limits the truth is, should be traced. (1008.) When we study several object so as to know them thoroughly, there is every advantage in viewing them in the order of greatest mutual resemblance, instead of placing them in opposition to each other, for the purpose of distinguishing them. Perhaps we cannot insist too strongly upon declaring that, in the study of organised beings, the advantage of the natural method over classifications or methods called artificial belongs, in a great measure, to the exactness the former gives to the mind, in essentially presenting to it an ensemble of beings according to their mutual resemblances, whilst the artifical