## Indigo and Black. (61.) The complementary of Indigo (Orange- Yellow), uniting with the Black, brightens it considerably. The Indigo becomes brighter. ## Violet and Black. (62.) The complementary of Violet (Greenish-Yellow), uniting with the Black, brightens it. The Violet is more brilliant, —lighter, —redder, perhaps. # CHAPTER VL ## ON THE JUXTAPOSITION OF OOLOURED AND GREY SUBBTANCEAL (63.) LF one of the principal causes that prevent our seeing the modifications which coloured bodies tend to impart to white bodies juxtaposed with them is, the brightness of' the light reflected by the latter, on the other hand, if the feeble light reflected by black bodies, is on the contrary, less favourable to our perception of the kind of modification they experience from the proximity of coloured bodies, particularly in the case where the complementary of the body is itself not very luminous, we may imagine that Grey bodies, properly selected with respect to height of tone, will, when they are contiguous to coloured substancee, exhibit the phenomena of contrast of colour in a more striking manner than either black or white substances do. ## Red and Grey. (64.) The Grey appears greener by receiving the influence of the complementary of Red. The Rod appears purer, —less orange perhaps. ## Orange and Grey. (65.) The Grey appears bluer by receiving the influence of the complementary of Orange. The Örange appears purer, and brighter,—yellower perhaps. ## 1 Yellow and Grey. (66.) The Grey appears inclining to Violet by receiving the influence of the complementary of Yellow. The Yellow appears brighter, and less green. ## Green and Grey. (67.) The Grey appears inclining to Red by receiving the influence of the complementary of Green. The Green appears brighter,—more yellow perhaps. ## Blue and Grey. (68.) The Grey appears tinged with Orange, by receiving the influence of the complementary of Blue. The Blue appears brighter,—greener perhaps. Indigo and Grey. (69.) The sme s the above (68). ## Violet and Grey. (70.) The Grey appears tinged with Yellow, by receiving the influence of the complementary of Violet. The Violet appears purer, less tarnished. (70.b.) The Grey used in the proceding experiments was s free as possible from all colouring matter foreign to black. It belonged to the scale of normal black (see 2nd Part, 164.), that is to say, it resulted from a mixture of black and white substances as pure as could possibly be obtained: in contact with white it rendered it lighter and apparently brighter, while juxtaposed with black, it heightened it, and appeared lighter and more rusty. (70.ter.) One result of the complementaries of colours juxtaposed with grey being more apparent than when these colours are juxtaposed with white or even with black, is, that if instead of a normal grey we juxtapose s tinted grey, either red, orange, yellow, &c., these tints will be singularly heightened by the complementaries which will be added to them. For example, a bluish-grey will receive a very palpable exaltation of blue from its contiguity to orange, and a yellowish-grey will take a decided green tint from the same contiguity.