## CHAPTER VII. THE CHKMICAL NATURE OF OOLOURED SUBSTANCES HAS NO LNFLUENCE ON THE PHENOMENA OF BIMULTANEOUS CONTRAST. (71.) ALL the experiments I have made with the view of ascertaining if the chemical nature of bodies, when placed beside each other, has any influence on the modification of their colours, have, as I expected, led me to an absolutely negative conclusion. Whatever happened to be the chemical composition of the coloured substances, provided they were identical in colour, they gave the same results. I will cite the following examples: Indigo or prussian-blue, cobalt, ultramarine, as nearly alike a possible, gave the same kind of modification. Orange prepared with red lead, with annotto, or with tho mixture of woad and madder, gave the same modification to the colours with which they were juxtaposed. # CHAPTER VIIL. ON THE JUXTAPOSITION OF COLOURED BUBSTANCES BELONGING TO THE OOLOURS OF THR LAME GROUP OF CULOURED RAY&. (72.) WHenEvEr there is a great difference between two contiguous colours, the difference is rendered more appreciable by bringing the same colour successively in contact with different colours belonging to the same group. For example, ## Orange and Red. When we place near Orange a scarlet-red, a pure red, or a crimson-red, we shall see that the Red acquires a purple, and the Orange a yellow tint. ## Violet and Red. Analogous results are obtained with Violet placed in contact with scarlet-red, carmine-red, and crimson-red. The Violet always appears bluer, and the Red yellower, or less purple. (73.) These observations clearly explain the cause of our obtaining results conformable to the formuls, although we may have made use of coloured substances, such as stained papers or stuffs, which are far from presenting to the eye very pure colours. (74.) The juxtaposition of coloured bands is a means of demonstrating the difficulty of fixing the types of pure colours by our pigments, at least if we do not take into consideration the law of simultaneous contrast. For instance, 1. Take Red, and place it in contact with orange-red, the first will appear purple, and the second yellower, as I have before stated; but if we put the first Red in contact with a purple-red, this latter will appear bluer, and the other yellower, or orange; so that the same Red will appear purple in one case, and orange in the other. 2. Take Yellow, and place it near orange-yellow, it will appear greenish, and the second redder; but if we put the first Yellow in contact with a greenish-yellow, this latter will appear greener, and the former more orange; so that the same Yellow will incline to green in one case, and to orange in the other. 3. Take Blue, put it in contact with a greenish-blue; the first will incline to violet, and the second will appear yellower. Put the same Blue in contact with a violet-blue, the firat will incline to green, and the second will appear redder, so that the same Blue will in 'one case appear violet, and in the other greenish. (75.) Thus we perceive that the colours which painters term simple or primary, Red, Yellow, and Blue, pass insensibly by their juxtaposition to the state of secondary or compound colours. Since the same Red becomes purple or orange, the same Yellow is orange or green, and the same Blue is green or violet.