# CHAPTER IX. ON THE APPLICATION OF THE LAW OF CONTRAST TO THE HYPOTHESIS, THAT RED, YELLOW, AND BLUE ARE THE ONLY PRIMARY OOLOURS, AND THAT ORANGE, GRSEN, INDIGO, AND VIOLET ARE BECONDARY OR COM-POUND COLOURA (76.) Tí experiments to which I have applied the principle of the modification that colours undergo by their juxtaposition, and the explanation which results therefrom, according to the manner in which we consider the physical composition of white light, are also clearly explained in the language used by painters and dyers, who only admit of three primary colours red, yellow, and blue; and, as it may occur to many persons, who, partaking of the same opinion, will nevertheless desire to understand the phenomena resulting from the juxtaposition of colours, I will now proceed to explain them in conformity with their language; and, for greater perspicuity, I will take five groups of juxtaposed colours, commencing with those which include the observations to which the preceding law most readily applies. I will suppose, then, that Orange is formed of red and yellow, Green of blue and yellow, and Indigo and Violet of blue and red. ## FiRsT GRouP.—Two Compound Colours having ons Simple Colour for their Common Element. It is very easy to verify the law by observing two colours comprehended in this group. We see that by their reciprocal influence they lose more or less of the colour which is common to both. It is therefore evident that they will differ from each other in proportion to this loss. ## 1. Orange and Green.. These two colours having Yellowo for a common element, lose some by juxtaposition : the Orange will appear redder, and the Green bluer. ## 2. Orange and Indigo. These two colours having Red for a common element, lose some by juxtaposition : the Orange appearing yellower, and the Indigo bluer. ## 3. Orange and Violet. The same as the preceding. ## 4. Green and Indigo. These two colours having Blue as a common element, lose some by juxtaposition : the Green appears yellower, and the Indigo redder. ## 5. Green and Violet. As the preceding. SEconD GRouP.—A Compound Colour and a Simple Colour which is found in the Compound. ## 1. Orange and Red. The Orange loses its Red, and appears yellower; and the Red becomes more Blue, differing as much as possible from Orange. ## 2. Violet and Red. Violet loses its redness, and appears bluer; the Red becomes yellow, differing as much as possible from Violet. ## 3. Indigo and Red. The same as the preceding. ## 4. Orange and Yellow. Orange loses some yellow, and appears redder; the Yellow becomes bluer, differing as much as possible from Orange. ## 5. Green and Yellowo. Green loses some yellow, and appears bluer ; the Yellow becomes redder, and differs as much as possible from Green. ## 6. Green and Blue. The Green loses some blue, and appears yellower ; the Blue becomes redder, differing as much as possible from Green.