## 7. Violet and Blue. The Violet loses some blue, and appears redder; the Blue becomes yellow, and differs as much as possible from Violet. ## 8. Indigo and Blue. As the preceding. # THIRD GOUP.— To Simple Colours. ## 1. Red and Yellow. Red, in losing yellow, appears bluer ; and the Yellow, by losing red, appears bluer ; or, in other words, the Red inclines to purple, and the Yellowo to green ## 2. Red and Blue. Red, in losing blue, will appear yellower; and the Blue, in losing red, will appear yellower ; or, in other words, the Red inclines to orange, and the Blue to green. ## 3. Yellow and Blue. Yellow, in losing blue, will appear redder; and Blue, in losing yellow, will appear more violet; or, in other words, the Yellowo inclines to orange, and the Blue to violet. # FOUETH GROUP.— Two Compounds having the same Simple Colours. ## Indigo and Violet. As Indigo only differs from Violet in containing a larger proportion of blue in comparison to the red, it follows that the difference will be very considerably increased by the Indigo losing red and inclining to a greenish-blue, whilst the Violet, acquiring more red, will incline to this colour. It is evident that if the Violet loses its red, or the Indigo gains it, the two colours will approximate; but as they differ from each other, the frst-named effect will ensue. We may further explain the preceding phenomena by considering Indigo, relatively to the Violet, as blue; then it will lose its blue, that being common to both colour&, and incline to green, and the Violet, in also losing some blue, will appear redder. FirTH GrouP.—A Compound Colour and a Simple Colour which is not found in the Compound. 1. Orange and Blue. 2. Green and Red. 3. Violet and Greenish-Yellow. If we adopt the hypothesis that orange, green, indigo, and violet are compound, and red, blue, and yellow simple colours, it necessarily follows, that in opposing them in the order in which they are reciprocally complementary, and in supposing also that the colours thus in juxtaposition are perfectly free from any foreign colour, we cannot see any reason why the compound colour should lose one of its colours rather than the other, or why the simple colour should separate itself from one elementary colour rather than from the other. For example, in the juxtaposition of green and red, we can see no reason why the green should tend to blue rather than to yellow, or why the red should incline to blue rather than to yellow.