of judgment? It is that the eyes, having seen seven or eight red pieces in succession, are in the same condition as if they had regarded fixedly during the same period of time a single piece of red stuf; they have then a tendency to see the complementary of Red, that is to say, Green. This tendency goes of necessity to enfeeble the brilliancy of the red of the pieces seen later. In order that the merchant may not be the sufferer by this fatigue of the eyes of hie customer, he must take care, after having shown the latter seven pieces of red, to present to him some pieces of green stuff, to restore the eyes to their normal state. If the sight of the green be sufficiently prolonged to excoed the normal state, the eyes wilì aoquire a tendency to see red; then the last seven red pieces will appear more beautiful than the others. # CHAPTER IL ON THE CONNECTTON BETWEEN THE EXPERIMENTS OF THE AUTHOR AND THOSE PREVIOUSLY MADE BY VARIOUS NATURAL PHILOSOPHERA (120.) BurFoN was the frst who described, under the appellation of accidental colours •, several phenomena of vision, all of which he considered to have this analogy, that they result from too great vibration, or from fatigue of the eye; wherein they differ from the colours with which bodies appear to us usually coloured †, whether these bodies decompose light by acting upon it by reflection, by refraction, or by inflection. (121.) AccieNTaL CoLours may arise from various causes ; for example, they are perceivable under the following circumstances:— 1. When the eye is pressed in the dark. 2. In consequence o a blow on the eye. 3. When the eyes are closed after liaving looked at tho sun for a moment. 4. When the eyes are fixed upon a small square piece of coloured paper, placed upon a white ground; then the square, if red, will appear bordered with a faint green ; if it is yellow, by a blue ; if it is green, by a purplish white ; if it is blue, by a reddish white; and if it is black, by a vivid white. • Seo Mtmoires de lAcadtmie des Sciencer, 1743. † We must add, when vicwed separately. 5. If, after having observed these phenomena for a considerable time, we turn our eyes to the white ground in such manner s no longer to see the small square of coloured paper, we shall then perceive a square of an extent equal to the other, and of the same colour as that which bordered the little square in the preceding experiment (4.). (122.) I could mention several other circumstances in which Buffon observed accidental colours, but I should depart too widely from the principal object of this book, which is,—"the law of simaltaneous contrast of colours and its application;" remarking, that the fourth circumstance in which Buffon observed accidental colours appertains to simultaneous contrast, while the fifth relates to successive contrast. Buffon never established the law which connects the phenomena he has described. (123.) Scherffer, in 1754, gave great precision to the phenomena which relate to successive contrast, in demonstrating that a given colour produces an açcidental colour, the same we now call ITs CoPLEENTARY. He alsò corrccted some of the observations of Buffon; and, not content with that, he sought to explain the cause of the phenomenon, as I shall show in the following section. He only briefly touched upon simultaneous contrast. (See his memoir, § 15., Journal de Physique, tom. xxvi.). (124.) Epinus• and Darwin † also occupied themselves with successive contrast. (125.) Count Rumford † made simultaneous contrast an object of experiment and observation, which I must dwell upon, because, among the researches made on this subject, there is none which so much resemble mine. After observing that a shadow produced in a ray of coloured light, red for example, on being illuminated by a ray of white light equal in intensity to the red, the shadow did not appear white, but was tinted green, the complementary of the red ray, when it was near an equal shadow produced in the white ray, this latter shadow being lighted by the red ray, and appearing of that colour, he demonstrated:— 1. That the result is the same when the ray of coloured light is replaced by light transmitted through a glass or other coloured medium, or by coloured light reflected by an opaque coloured body. 2. That if in a circle of white paper, placed upon a large sheet of black paper laid upon the floor of a room, two bands of paper of six lines in width and two inches in length are laid side by side, one of which is covered with a powder coloured s, and the other with a grey powder composed of ceruse and lampblack, in such proportions that the light reflected by it is of equal intensity to the coloured light a, upon looking with one eye through the hand at the two bands, that which is covered with the grey powder will appear tinged with the complementary colour of A, and this complementary of A will appear as brilliant as A itself. (126.) The author remarks that, in order to ensure success in this experiment, we must take many precautions, not only to avoid the light reflected from surrounding objects, but also to obtain a grey capable of refecting a light equal in intensity to the coloured light. He adds that the difficulties are vcry great if we use pigments ground in oil, which gives their colours a brown tinge, as they never possess the purity of the colours of the spectrum. (127.) If it be true that the experiments of Rumford correspond with thosc which I have made with colours in connection with white, black, and grey, and that they form a particular instance of the law of simultaneous contrast, as I have established it, it is not less true that the law cannot be deduced without making the series of researches which I have uudertaken; for the experiments of Rumford exhibiting the maximum of the phenomenon, we cannot affirm that under ordinary circumstances there would be not only amodification of white, black, and grey by juxtaposed colours, but also a mutual modification of these latter. We have seen that colours become deeper by being placed in contact with white, and that they become fainter when in contact with black, the contrast, as I have demonstrated, embracing both the optical composition of the colour and the height of its tone. (128.) Struck by observing in lis experiments that a coloured ray developed its complementary, Rumford laid it down as a principle in the harmony of two colours that they must respectively present coloured light in the proportions necessary to form white light, and he advised ladies to choose their ribbons in accordance with this law. He also thought that painters might derive much benefit from an acquaintance with this principle ; but it is evident that Rumford's principle of the harmony of colours is nothing more than the production of an ingenious fancy, and that, as he has stated it, it would be difficult to make it throw any light upon the practice of painting. I shall return to this point, however, when treating of the applications of my theory. Meanwhile it is important to mention that Rumford never made an experiment suitable for demonstrating the infuence of two contiguous colours, or rather of two colours viewed simultaneously; he wae unacquainted with the generality of the phenomenon, of which he had observed one fact; and if it be true that there is a harmony between two colours complementary to each other, this proposition will be entirely incorrect, if, with Count Rumford, we only admit of harmony of colours in the single instance ofjuxtaposition. Ishall return to this subject (174, &c.). (129.) The last author who, as an observer, has treated of accidental colours is M. Prieur de la Côte-d'Or.• Under the term contrast, he has treated of phenomena which belong exclusively to simultaneous contrast. For example, a small band of orange-coloured paper when laid upon a yellow ground appears red; while it will appear yellow upon a red ground According to the principle laid down by M. Prieur, the accidental colour of the little band should be that which results from its own colour, minus that of the ground. It appears, says he, that a certain fatigue of the eye, produced instantaneousiy by the intensity of the light, or more slowly by prolonged virion, concurs in producing these appearances. But he recognised that excessive fatigue of the organ would cause a degeneration of the colours belonging to another scale. And he finally adda, that the colours named accidental by Buffon, and upon which Scherffer has given an interesting memoir, belong to the class of contrasts, or at least constantly follow the same lawo. It is plain that M. Prieur has not made that distinction between the classes of contrasts which I have established in the preceding chapter. (130.) Haüy, in his Traité de Physique, reviews the observations of Buffon, Scherffer, Rumford, and Prieur; but notwithstanding the lucid style of the illustrious founder of crystallography, there is an obscurity which arises from the fact that he has not observed the preceding distinction, and this obscurity is particularly evident when he relates the explanations previously given of these phenomena, as I shall show in the following section. (131.) According to what has been said, we see, Annales de Chimie, tom. liv. p. 5. 1. That the authors who have treated of contrast of colours have described two classes of phenomena, without distinguishing one from the other: 2. That Scherffer has given the law of successive contrast: 3. That Count Rumford has given the law of the modification experienced in a particular instance by grey band placed beside a coloured one: 4. That Scherffer first, and subsequently M. Prieur de la Côte-d'Or, with more precision, have given the law of the modification which a small white or coloured surface experiences from the different colour of the ground upon which it i8 placed (132.) But if it be true, that in this caso we perceive in the most striking manner the modification which the colour of the small extent of surface is susceptible of receiving from that of the ground, we cannot, on the other hand, appreciate the modification experienced in the colour of the ground from that of the small surface, because we see only half of the phenomena, and we should greatly err were weto think that a coloured object cannot be modified by the colour of another, unless it is much larger than the first. The manner in which I have arranged the coloured objects in my observations on simultaneous contrast has enabled me to show:— 1. That it is not indispensably necessary to the modification of one colour by another, that the first should be of greater extent than the second, since my observations have been made upon equal and merely contiguous bands. 2. That we may judge accurately of the modifications experienced by contiguous bands, by comparing them with those which are not contiguous; a condition which enables us to see the phenomenon of simultaneous contrast in the most perfect manner, and to establish its general law. 3. That in increasing the number of bands not in contact, or which are placed on each side of those which do touch, we see, when the eye is sufficiently distant from the two series of bands, that the infuence of one of the contiguous bands is not limited to the next band in contact with it, but that it extends also to the second, and to the third, &c., although fainter in each. Now, this influence of distance should be noted, in order to obtain a correct idea of the generality of the phenomenon, and of the applications which may be deduced from the law which comprehends every case.