# SECTION III. ON THE PHYSIOLOGIEAL CAUSE TO WHICH THE PHENO-MENA OF CONTRAST OF COLOURS WERE REFERRED, PREVIOUSLY TO THE EXPERIMENTS OF THE AUTHOR. (133.) ScHeRrrER has given a physiological explanation of successive contrast of colours, which appears satisfactory in the cases to which it has been applied. It is based upon the following proposition, that— If one of our senses receives a double impression, one of which is vivid and strong but the other feeble, we do not perceive the latter. This occurs particularly when they are both of the same kind, or when the powerful action of an object upon one of the senses Is FOLLowED by another of the same nature, but infinitely weaker or less violent. Let us now apply this principle to the three following experiments on Successive Contrast. ## FIRST EXPERIMENT. Look for some time at a small white square placed upon a black ground. Ceasing to look at this, and directing the eye upon the black ground, we there perceive the image of a square, equal in extent to the white square, but, instead of being brighter than the ground, it is, on the contrary, darker. ## Explanation. The portion of the retina upon which the white light of the square acted in the first part of the experiment, is more fatigued than the remainder of the retina, which has received only s feeble impression from the faint rays reflected by the black ground; the eye being then directed upon the black ground during the second part of the experiment, the feeble light of this ground acts more strongly upon that part of the retina which has not been fatigued, than upon that part which has been: hence the image of the black square seen by that portion of the eye. ## SECOND EXPERIMENT. Look for some time at a small blue square on a white ground Turn the eye away from this, and fix it upon the white ground, it then perceives the image of an orange square. ## Explanation. The portion of the retina on which the light of the blue square acted in the first part of the experiment being more fatigued by this colour than the rest of the retina, it happens, during the second portion of the experiment, that the portion of the retina fatigued by the blue is disposed thereby to receive a tronger impression of orange, the complementary of blue. ## THIRD EXPERIMENT. Look for some time at a red square on a yellow ground. Turning the eye away, fix it upon a white ground, it perceives the image of a green square on a blue-violet ground. ## Explanation. During the first part of the experiment that portion of the retina which sees red becomes fatigued by this colour, while the portion which sees yellow during the latter portion is equally fatigued; consequently, in the second part of the experiment, the portion of the retina which had seen red now sees green, its complementary, whilst that portion which had seen yellow, sees blue-violet, its complementary. (134.) These three experimenta, well their explanations, taken at random from the memoir by Scherffer, amongst a great many others analogous, will suffice, I think, to demonstrate that it was actually thc phenomenon of successive contrast which specially occupied that ingenious observer. Considering this, it is surprising that Haüy, in endeavouring to make known the explanation of Scherffer, should have spoken exclusively of a case of simultaneous contrast, a phenomenon which thelatter philosopher has only casually mentioned, as I remarked above (123.). Moreover, this is Haüy's mode of expressing himself on the subject, taking as an illustration the case in which a small band of white paper is placed upon red paper — "We may," says he, "consider the white of this band as being "composed of a bluish-green and red. But the impression of "the red colour, acting with much less force than that produced "by the surrounding colour of the same kind, is eclipsed by the "latter, so that the eye is only sensible of the impression of the green, which being, as it were, foreign to the colour of the ground, acts upon the organ with all its power." (135.) Although this explanation appears to be s natural consequence of the principle set forth by Scherffer, yet this philosopher does not appesr to me to have applied it to the explanation of simultaneous contrast, and the passage in his memoir, quoted above (133.), is very clear :— "This must principally take place when they (the impres-" sions) are both of the same kind, or when the powerful action "of an object on one sense is followed by another of the same "nature, but much weaker, and less violent." (136.) Now let us see what difference oxists between Scherffer's explanation of successive contrast, and that attributed to him by Haüy in the case of simultaneous contrast. All the observations on successive contrast explained by Scherffer exhibit this result, —that the portion of the retina, which in the first part of the experiment is impressed by a given colour, sees in the subsequent part of the observation, the complementary of the given colour, and this new impression is independent of the extent of the coloured object relatively to that of the ground on which it is placed, or rather, of the objects surrounding the former. (137.) This is not expressed in the explanation that Haüy attributes to Scherffer; in fact — 1. The portion of the retina that sees the white band placed on a red ground, sees it of a bluish-green, that is to say, of the complementary colour of the ground. Now, according to the experiments of Scherffer, this portion, fatigued by white light, has a tendency to see, not bluish-green, but black, which is, in a manner, the complementary of white. 2. For, to admit the explanation attributed to Scherffer, it would be necessary that the object whose colour is modifed by that of another, should in general be of much smaller extent than the latter, since it is only by this excess of extent in the modifying body that we can conceive in general this excess ofaction which neutralises a part of that of the first object; I say, in general, because there are cases where it may be said that a much brighter colour might modify another, although it occupied a very small space around \* Trailé de Phyrique, 8• éditiop, tom, ii. p. 272. it. To resume, we perccive the difference between the explanation Scherffer has given of succesrive contrast, and that of simultaneous contrast attributed to him (138.) If we revert to this last experiment in order to test its value-no longer under the circumstances related by these authors, of a small band appearing to be modified only when seen on a groundbut in those where two bands of equal extent are mutually modified, not only when in contact, but when at a distance, as is shown by the result of my experiments—we may readily appreciate the difficulty that presents itself, thus : — • 1. Let us suppose that the figure 4, Plate IIL, represents the image depicted on the retina of a red band , contiguous to a blue band B; the first will acquire orange or lose blue, and the second will scquire green or lose red. Now, it is the portion of the retina on which the image of the band R is impressed, that, sccording to the opinion of Scherffer, will lose its sensibility for red, as it is the portion of the retina on which is depicted the image of the band B that will lose its sensibility for blue: consequently, I do not perceive how it can be the part R which in reality loses its sensibility for blue, or how it can be the part B which loses its sensibility for red. 2. In my experiments, the coloured bands being of equal extent, there appears no reason in general (as in the case where a smali baad being placed upon a ground of large extent), that one of the bands should modify the other, by the greater fatigue it may occasion the retina. (139.) It was doubtless owing to the difficulties presented in the explanation we have examined, that the illustrious author of the Mécanique Céleste was led to suggest another, which Haüy inserted in his Traité de Physique after that which he attributes to Scherffer. The case is still that of a small white band placed upon a red ground. The illustrious geometrician supposed, says Haüy,"that there exists in the eye a certain " disposition, in virtue of whieh the red rays comprised in the "white of the small band are attracted, as it were, at the moment they reach this organ, by the rays forming the pre-"dominating red colour of the ground, so that the two impressions form only one, and that of the green colour is enabled to "act as if it were alone. According to this method of under-"standing the subject, the impression of the red decomposes "that of the white, and while. the actions of the homo-"geneous rays unite together, the action of the heterogenoous " rays, being disengaged from this combination, produces its " separate effect." (140) I shall not contest the accuracy of this explanation beyond remarking, that it admits implicitly, as a necessary consequence, that the modifying colour occupies a greater extent of surface than the colour modifed : but it is probable that such an opinion would not have been given if the illustrious author had been acquainted wth the true explanation of Scherffer on successive contrast, and instead of quoting a single experiment of simultaneous contrast, which does not include more than half the phenomenon, had quoted one in which differently coloured bands of equal extent were seen to modify each other, even when not in contact. (141.) After having shown the insufficiency of these explanations of simultaneous contrast, it only remains to speak of the relations which appear to me to exist between the organ of vision and this phenomenon observed in the circumstances under which I have studied it. Every author who has treated of accidental colours, agrees in considering them as being the result of fatigue of the eye. If this be incontestibly true in the case of ruccessive contrast, I do not believe it to be so of simultaneous contrast; for, in arranging the coloured bands in the manner I have done, as soon as we succeed in seeing all four together, the colours are observed to be modified before the eye becomes in the least degree fatigued; although I admit that it often requires several seconds to perceive these modifications. But is not this time necessary, as is that which is given to the exercise of each of our senses, whenever we wish to explain to ourselves a sensation that affects them? There is, also, one circumstance that explains the necessity of this time in many cases, viz.: the influence of the white light reflected by the surface modified - which is sometimes sufficiently strong to greatly weaken the result of the modification ; and the greater part of the precautions suggested for seeing the accidental colours of simultaneous contrast are therefore directed to the diminution of this white light. Moreover, it is owing to this cause that grey and black surfaces contiguous to surfaces of very pure colours, such as blue, red, yellow, are modified more by this contiguity than white surfaces are. The following experiment, accidentally presented to my notice. will give a good illustration of mv idea. A coloured paper, upon which letters of a pale grey had been traced, was presented to me one evening at twilight. On first 'looking at it, I could not distinguish a single letter; but in a few minutes I contrived to read the writing, which appeared to me to have been traced with an ink of a colour complementary to that of the ground. Now, I ask, if at the moment when my vision was distinct, were my eyes more fatigued than when I first looked at the paper without being able to distinguish the letters upon it, and which were soen to be of the colour complementary to that of the ground? (142.) Finally, I conclude from my observations, that whenever the eye sees two differently coloured objects simultaneously, the analogous character of the sensation of the two colours undergoes such a diminution, that the difference existing between them is rendered proportionably more sensible in the simultanoous impression of these two colours upon the retina. PART II. ON THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THE LAW OF SIMULTANEOUS CONTRAST OF COLOURS. PROLEGOMENA. FIRST DIVISION.—LHITATION OF COLOURED OBJECTS BY MRANs OF COLOURED MATERIALS IN A STATE OF INFINITE DIVISION. SECOND DIVISION. — IMITATION OF COLOURED OBJECTS BY COLOURED MATERIALB OF A CERTAIN SIZE. THIRD DIVISION.— COLOUR-PRINTING ON TEXTILE FABRICS, AND ON PAPER FOURTH DIVISION. EMPLOrMENT OF FLAT TINTS FOR COLOURING. FIFTH DIVISION.—ARRANGEMENT OF COLOURED OBJECTS OF A CERTAIN SIZE.