# INTRODUCTION. (143.) THe observations set forth in the First Part, together with the Law of Simultaneous Contrast, wbich simplifies by generalizing them, have doubtless suggested to the reader the numerous applications of which they are susceptible. This expectation, I hope, will not be disappointed by the details into which I am now about to enter-details which will prove that this work would not have attained to its aim of usefulness if I had neglected to exhibit them; for, to state them with the precision they possess, it is incumbent on me to give a series of obeervations altogether as precise as those which form the materials of the First Part. (144.) The following is a tabular arrangement of the applications I propose making :— ## FIRST DIVISION. ## Imitation of Coloured Objects by means of Coloured Materials in a State of Infinite Division. lst Section.—Painting in Chiar'oscuro. 2nd Section.—Painting in Flat Tints. 3rd Section.—Colouring. ## SECOND DIVISION. Imitation of Coloured Objects by Coloured Materials of a certain Site. 1st Section.—Gobelins Tapestry. 2nd Section.—Besuvais Tapestry. 3rd Section.—Savonnerie Tapestry. 4th Section.—Carpets. 5th Section.—Mosaics. 6th Section.—Stained Glass. ## THIRD DIVISION. ## Printing. 1st Section.-Printing Designs upon Textile Fabrics, Calico-Printing, &c. 2nd Section.—Printing Designs upon Paper, Paper-Hangings, Paper-staining. 3rd Section.—Printing with Types upon Coloured Paper. ## FOURTH DIVISION. ## Colouring with Flat Tints (Tinting). 1st Section.—Geographical Maps. 2nd Section.—Engravings. ## FIFTH DIVISION. ## Arrangement of Coloured Objects upon Surfaces of greater or less Extent. 1st Section.—In Architecture. 2nd Section.—In Decorating Interiors Dwellinge, Picture Galleriee, Churches, Theatres, &c. 3rd Section.—Clothing. 4th Section.—Horticulture.