# FIRST DIVISION. DUITATION OF COLOURED OBJECTS, WITH COLOURED MATERLALS IN A STATE OF INFINITE DIVIAION. mm # INTRODUCTION. (255.) CoLoubeD materials (pigments), such as Prussian Blue, Chrome-Yellow, Vermilion, &c., are infinitely divided, so to speak, when ground, either pure, or mixed with a white material, in a gummy or oily liquid The reproduction of the images of coloured objects with these pigments is called THE ART OF PAINTING. (256.) There are two systems of Painting, the one consists in repreaenting as accurately as possible, upon the flat surface of canva, wood, metal, walls, &c., an object in relief, in such manner that the image makes an impression upon the eye of the spectator similar to that produced by the object itself. (257.) From this we learn that we must manage the light, the vivacity of colour for every part of the image which in the model receives direct light, and which reflects it to the eye of him who regards the object from the point where the painter placed himself to imitate it; while the parts of the image corresponding to those which, in the same object, do not reflect to the spectator as much light as the first, — either because they reflect it,in another direction, or because the salient points protect them more or less from the daylight, - must appear in colours more or less dimmed with black, or, what is the same thing, by shade. It is, then, by the vivacity of White or coloured light, by the enfeebling of light by means of Black, that the painter managee, with the aid of a plane image, to attain all the illusion of an object in relief. The art of producing this effect by the distribution of light and sbade constitutes essentially what is termed the art of Chiaro'scuro. (258.) There exists a means of imitating coloured objects much simpler in its facility of execution than the preceding. It consists in tracing the outline of the different parts of the model, and in colouring them uniformly with their peculiar colours. There is no relief, no projections; it is the plane image of the objoct, since all the parts receive a uniform tint: this system of imitation is painting in fat tints.