# SECTION I. # PAINTING ON THE SYSTEM OF CHLARO'BCURO. sino # CHAPTER L ON THE COLOURS OF THE MODEL (259.) Are the modifications which we perceive in a single coloured object-for example, in a blue or red stuff, &c. indeterminabie when these stuffs are soen as the drapery of a vestment or as furniture, presenting folds more or less prominent, or are they determinable under given circumstances? This is a question which I shall undertake to resolve. First, let us distinguish three cases where these modifications of colours may be observed. 1st Case. Modificutions produced by coloured lights falling upon the model. 2nd Cask. Modifications produced by twoo different lights —as, for example, the light of the sun, and diffused daylight—each lighting distinct parts of the same object. 3rd Csse. Modifications produced by diffused daylight. (260.) To render these matters easier of comprehension, we will suppose that in the two first cases the lighted surfaces are plane, and that all their superficial parts are homogeneous, and in the same conditions, except that of lighting in the second case. In the third case we shall consider the position of the spectator viewing an object lighted by diffused daylight, the surface of which is so disposed as not to act equally in all its parts upon the light which it reflects to the eye of the spectator. ## ARTICLE 1. Modifications produced by Coloured Lights. (26l.) These modifications result from coloured rays emanating from any source whatever, falling upon a coloured surface, which is at the same time lighted by diffused daylight. (262.) The following observations have been made by partially exposing coloured stuffs to the sun's rays transmitted through coloured glass. 'The portion of stuff protected from these rays was lighted by the direct light of the sun. It is important to remark, that the portion of stuff which received the action of the coloured rays being exposed to diffused daylight, reflected aleo rays of that light which it would have reflected in case it had been protected from the influence of the rays transmitted to it through coloured glasses. ## (263.) 1. Modifications produced by Red Light. When Red rays fall upon a Black stuff, it appears of a Purple-Black, deeper than the rest, which is lighted directly by the sun. Red rays falling upon a White stuff, make it appear Red. Red rays falling upon a Red stuff, make it appear redder than upon that part lighted at the same time by the sun. Red rays falling npon an Orange-coloured stuff, make it appear redder than the part lighted at the same time by the sun. Red rays falling upon a Yellow stuff, make it appear Orange. Red rays falling upon a Green stuff, produce different effects, according to the tone of the Green: if it is deep, it produces a Red-Black; if it is light, there is a little Red reflected, which gives a reddish grey. Red rays falling upon a light Blue stuff, make it appear Violet. Red rays falling upon a Violet stuff, make it appear Purple. ## (264.) 2. Modifications produced by Orange Light. Orange rays falling upon a Black stuff, make it appear of a Marron or Carmelite-Brown colour. Orange rays falling upon & White stuff, make it appear Orange. Orange rays falling upon an Orange stuff, make it appear of an Orange more vivid, more intense than the part lighted at the same time by the sun. Orange rays falling upon a Red stuff, make it appear Scarlet. Orange rays falling upon a Yellow stuff, make it appear Yellow-Örange. Orange rays falling upon a Green stuff, make it appear of a Yellow-Green, if the Green is light; and of a Rusty-Green, if it is deep. Orange rays falling upon a Blue stuff, make it appear of an Orange-Grey, if the Blue is light ; and of a Grey in which the Orange is less vivid, if it is deep, which is not the colour given to a black stuff by the same Orsnge rays. Orange rays falling upon a dark Indigo-Blue stuff, appear of an Orange-Marron. Orange rays falling upon a Violet stuff, appear of a Red-Marron. ## 3. Modifications produced by Yellow Light. Yellow rays falling upon a Biack stuff, make it appear of a Yellow-Olive. Yellow rays falling upon a White stuff, make it appear of a light Yellow. Yellow rays falling upon a Yellow stuff, make it appear (relatively to the part lighted by the sun) of a Yellow-Orange colour. Yellow rays falling upon a Red stuff, make it appear Örange. Yellow rays faling upon an Orange stuff, make it appear more Yellow than the part lighted by the sun. Yellow rays falling upon a Green stuff, make it appear Yellow-Green. Yellow rays falling upon a Blue stuff, make it appear Yellow-Green, if it is light, and of a Ġreen-Slate if it is deep. Yellow rays falling upon a deep Indigo stuff, make it appear of an Orange-Yellow. Yellow rays falling upon a Violet stuff, make it appear of Yellow-Marron. ## (266.) 4. Modifications produced by Green Light. Groen rays falling upon a Black stuff, make it appear of a Green-Brown. Green rays falling upon s White stuff, make it appear Green. Green rays falling'upon a Green stuff, make it appear more intense and brilliant. Green rays falling upon a Red stuff, make it sppear of & Brown. Green rays falling upon an Orange stuff, make it appear of a faint Yellow, a little Green. Green rays falling upon a Yellow stuff, make it appear of a very brilliant Yellow-Green. Green rays falling upon a Blue stuff, make it appear Greener, according to its depth. Green rays falling upon a dark Indigo stuff, make it appear a dull Green. Green rays falling upon a Violet stuff, make it appear of a Bluish-Green-Brown. ## (267.) 5. Modifications produced by Blue Light. Blue rays falling upon a Black stuff, render it of a Blue-Black, deeper than the part lighted by the sun. Blue rays falling upon a White stuff, make it appear Blue. Blue rays falling upon a Blue stuff, render the colour more vivid than the part lighted by the sun. Blue rays falling upon a Red stuff, make it appear Violet. Blue rays falling upon an Orange stuff, make it appear of a Brown having an exceedingly pale tint of Violet, if the glass transmits Violet rays with the Blue. Blue rays falling upon a Yellow stuff, make it appear Green; if the rays are transmitted by a deep Blue glass, coloured with oxide of cobalt, the stuff will appear of a Brown, having a Violet tint, less apparent if the light is vivid. Blue rays falling upon a Green stuff, make it appear of a Blue-Green; but feebler than when they fall upon a White stuff. Blue rays falling upon a deep Indigo stuff, make it appear of a dark Blue-Indigo. Blue rays falling upon a Violet stuff, make it appear of a dark Blue-Violet. (268.) 6. Modifications produced by Violet Light. Violet rays falling upon a Black stuff, render it of a very faint Violet-Black. Violet rays falling upon a White stuff, make it appear Violet. Violet rays falling upon a Violet stuff, make it appear of a deeper Violet. Violet rays falling upon a Red stuff, make it appear of a Red-Violet-Purple. Violet rays falling upon an Orange stuff, make it appear of a light Red. Violet rays falling upon a Yellow stuff, make it appear Brown with an excessively pale tint of Red. Violet rays falling upon a Green stuf, make it appear light Purple. Violet rays falling upon a Blue stuff, make it appear of a fine Blue-Violet. Violet rays falling upon a dark Indigo stuff, make it appear of a very deep Blue-Violet. (269.) It is understood that to represent the preceding phenomena correctly we must take into account-the facility with which coloured light penetrates every kind of glasa-the colour more or less intense of the stuff upon which the coloured light falls—and the kind of scale to which the coloured stuff and that of the transmitted coloured light respectively belong. ## ARTICLE 2. ## Modifications produced by twoo Lights of different Intensity. (270.) I shall distinguish two modifications of this kind. 1. The modification by the light of the sun falling upon one part of the surface of a coloured body, while the other part is lighted by diffused daylight. 2. The modification produced when two parts of the same object are unequally illuminated by diffused light. ## I\*t MODIFICATION. ## An Object lighted partly by the Sun, and partly by diffused Daylight. (271.) To observe this kind of modification properly we must extend upon a table exposed to the sun a piece of stuff, A B, 2† inches square (Plate III. fig. 1.), and place in the middle a piece of Black wire, $f , f ^ { \prime }$ ; then put parallel to this thread, and in the middle, between A and B, two wires, $e , e ^ { \prime } ,$ and $g , g ,$ of about $\frac { 9 } { 1 0 } 0 0 .$ of an inch in width. The extremity, ${ \boldsymbol { g } } ^ { \prime } ,$ is fixed upon a perpendicular plane, $h , h ^ { \prime } ,$ of l and $\frac { 8 } { 1 0 } ^ { \textmu _ { 0 } }$ of an inch in length, and sufficiently high, so that $f , f ^ { \prime } ,$ being in the plane of the direction of the solar rays, the plane h, h, covers exactly with its shadow all the part B of the stuff. (272.) 1. If the stuff is Red, the lighted portion A is more Orange or less Blue than the part B, which is in shade; snd the portion a is more Orange than the portion $\alpha _ { 3 } ^ { \prime }$ as the portion b is Bluer or more Crimson than the portion b'. (273.) 2. If the stuff is Orange, the lighted part is more Orange or less Grey than the part which is in the shade, and the portion a is deeper, more vivid than the portion ${ \pmb a } _ { 3 } ^ { \prime }$ as the portion b is more Grey, and duller than $\delta ^ { \prime } .$ (274.) 3. If the stuff is Yellow, the lighted part is more vivid, more Orange than the part which is in the shade; a is more so than $\mathbf { \bar { \Pi } } _ { \mathbf { \Phi } } ( \mathbf { \bar { \Pi } } _ { \mathbf { \bar { \Pi } } } ^ { \prime } ,$ a8 b is duller than b'. (275.) 4. If the stuff is Green, the ligbted part is less Blue or more Yellow than the part which is in the shade; and the portion a is of a yellower Green than the portion ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ,$ as the portion b is Bluer than b'. (276.) 5. If the stuff is Blue, the lighted part is less Viole $\mathbf { t } _ { \mathbf { \rho } }$ and more Green than the part which is in shade; and the portion a is greener than the portion ${ \pmb a } _ { 3 } ^ { \prime }$ as b is more Violet or less Green than $\pmb { \nu } .$ (277.) 6. If the stuff is Indigo, the lighted part is rodder or less Blue than the part in the shade; and the portion a is redder than the portion ${ \pmb { a } } ^ { \prime } ,$ 88 the portion b is deeper or Bluer than the portion $\mathbf { \hat { \boldsymbol { \delta } } } \mathbf { \boldsymbol { \cdot } } \mathbf { \boldsymbol { \delta } } $ (278.) 7. If the stuff is Violet, the lighted part is less Blue than the part in the shade; and the portion a is redder than the portion ${ \pmb a } _ { 3 } ^ { \prime }$ ag $\delta ^ { \dagger }$ is bluer than $\delta ^ { \prime } .$ ## d MODIFICATION. Troo contiguous parts of the same object viewed simultaneously, when they are unequally lighted by the same diffused Light differ from each other not only in height of tone, but also in the optical composition of Colour. (279.) Although this modification cannot be essentially different to the preceding, nevertheless, seeing the disposition there has been hitherto to peglect it, it will, I believe, be useful to describe how we can observe it, and repeat in what direction are the modifications of Red, Orange, Yellow, Groen, Blue, and Violet. Place half-a-sheet of coloured paper (Plate III. fig. 2.) upon the partition, b, of a chamber, receiving diffused daylight by a window, f: place another half-sheet upon the partition a in such a manner that it will be lighted directly by the diffused light; while the other is only indirectly lighted by the light diffused from the walls, floor, and ceiling ; it being understood that the diffused light thus reflected must be only White light, then stand at c, so as to see both half-sheets at once. I shall designate that which is upon the partition a, and the most lighted, by A, and the other which is upon the partition b, and less lighted, by B, letters which in the plate indicate the respective positions of the half-sheets. ## EFFECT&. ## Red Colour. The half-sheet B is deeper and more of a Crimson-Red, or less Yellow, than the half-sheet A. ## Orange Colour. The half-sheet B is deeper, and of an Orange redder, or leas Yellow, than the half-sheet A. ## Yellow Colour. The half-sheet B is duller, and of a greener Yellow than the half-sheet . ## Green Colour. The half-sheet B is deeper, and of a Green less Yellow or more Blue than the half-sheet A. ## Blue Colour. The half-sheet B is deeper, and of a Blue, I shall not say more Violet, but less Green than the half-sheet A. ## Violet Colour. The half-sheet B is deeper, and of a Violet less Red, or more Blue, than the half-sheet (280.) The deduction from these observations is, that the colour of the same body varies not only in intensity or tone, but also in hue, according as it is lighted directly by the sun, by diffused daylight, or by diffused refiected light. This result must never be overlooked whenever we attempt to define the colours of material objecta. ## ARTICLE 3. Modifications produced by diffused Daylight, reflected by a surface, all the parts of which are not in the same position relatively to the spectator. (281.) Distant bodies are rendered sensible to the eye, only in proportion as they radiate, or reflect, or transmit the light which acts upon the retina. According to the laws of reflection (for it is useless, in the object I propose to myself, to treat of cascs where the light which penetrates the eye has been refracted), it happens that those portions of a surface which are in relief or intaglio, must reflect the light in such manner that the eye of a spectator, in a given position, will see these parts very diversely lighted, with respect to the intensity of reflected light, so that the parts of this surface will be, relatively to the eye, in the sane condition as the homogeneous parts of a plane surface, which are illuminated by lights of unequal intensity. There will be this difference nevertheless; that the parts of the surface of a body which appears to us in intaglio, or especially in relief, being but feebly varied in the greater number of contiguous parts, there will generally be a gradual diminution in the effects which were presented to us by the case where we have studied the modifications which appear when two plane homogeneous surfaces are lighted by diffused lights of unequal intensity. The sphere presents a remarkable example of tho manner in which light is distributed upon a convex surface relatively to the eye of an observer who views it from a given position. (282.) I shall not occupy myself with this gradation of white light between parts illuminated thereby and those which do not appear so, I only regard the principal modifications, and take for examples the cases whiere they are as evident as possible. These modifications can be reduced to the four following. 1st MoDrFiCATIoN, produced by the maximum of white light which the surface of a coloured body is capable of reflecting. (283.) Other things being equal, the more the surface of a body is polished the more it will reflect white and coloured light: thus, a stick of red sealing-wax when broken, presents in the fractured parts a duller and more tarnished colour than the outside. On the other hand, if we observe this same outside surface suitably placed, we shall perceive a white stripe parallel to the axis of the cylinder, produced by a quantity of colourless reflocted light, so considerable that the red light refected from this stripe is insensible to the eye which observes it. The white light reflected by a coloured body can then be of sufficient intensity to render the colour of the body insensible in some of its parts. 2nd MopIFiCATIoN, produced by those parts of a coloured surface which send to the eye, in proportion to the coloured light, less of white light than the other parts differently lighted, or differently placed in relation to the spectator. (284.) When the eye sees certain parts of the surface of a polished coloured object, or more or less emooth where not polished, which reflects to it, proportionally to the coloured light, less of the white light than the other parts differently illuminated, or differently placed, in relation to the spectator, the first parts will appear, in most cases, of a more intense tone of colour than the second. —We will cite the following ## Examples. 1. Example. A cylinder of red sealing-wax presente, starting from the white stripe mentioned above, a red colour, deeper in proportion as less white light reaches the eye. Thus, in a certain position where the white stripe appears to be in the middle of the cylinder, the part most lighted will appear coloured, reflecting a red inclining to scarlet, while that which is the least lighted reflects a red inclining to crimson. 2. Example. If the eye is directed into a gold vase of sufficient depth, the gold does not appear yellow, as on the exterior surface, but of a red-orange, because less white light in proportion to coloured light reaches the eye in the first case than in the second. It is for this reason that the concave parts of gold ornaments appear redder than the convex. 3. Example. The spiral thread of a piece of twisted silk or wool held perpendicularly before the eye, so that it can be viewed in a direction opposite to the light, appears of a colour much more decided than the rest of the surface. 4. Example. The folds of bright draperies present the same modification to an eye properly placed : the effect is particularly remarkable in yellow silk stuffs, and in sky-blue; for we can easily understand that it is less marked when the stuffs are not so bright, and of dark colours. 5. Example. There are some stuffs which appear to be of two tones of the same scale of colour, and sometimes also of two tones of two contiguous scales, although the weft and the warp of these stuffs aro of the same tone and the same colour. The cause of this appearance is very simple: the threads which, parallel to each other, form the design, are in a different direction to the threads which constitute the ground of the stuff. Thence, whatever may be the position of the spectator with regard to the stuff, the threads of the design will always reflect coloured and white light in a different proportion to the threads of the ground; and according to the position of the spectator, the design will appear to be now lighter, now darker, than the ground. 3rd MoDIrICATION, produced when one part of the surface of an object, coloured or not coloured, reflects little or no light to the eye of the spectator. (285.) When one part of the surface of a body which is in the field of vision of the spectator sends little or no light to his eyes, either because this part is not directly lighted, or because the light it reflects is not in a suitable direction, then it appears black, or more or less dark. 4th ModipiCATIoN. The colour complementary to that of a coloured object, developed in one of its parts in consequence of simultaneous contrast. (286.) One natural consequence of the law of simultaneous contrast in general, and of the effect of a colour upon grey and black in particular, is, that, since the same object presents some parts more or less obscure, contiguous to parts where we see the colour peculiar to the object, the first part will appear tinted of the complementary to this colour; but to observe this effect, it is necessary that the grey part reflects to the eye white light, and little or none of the coloured light which the object naturally reflecta. ## (a.) 4th Modification in a single-coloured stuff. (287.) For example, if the eye is directed from the back of a chamber towards a window which admits daylight, and a person clothed in a new blue coat, dyed with indigo or Prussian blue, looks through the window on the objects which are outside (Plate III. fig. 3.), the eye will see the part b of the coat different from the part a, because the nap of the cloth is disposed in a contrary direction to b in a : a appears of a fine blue, while b will be of an orange-grey, by the effect of contrast of the blue part with a part that reflects very little white light to the eye, witbout, or almost without, blue light. Besides, the pile of the nap loses its regular position ; in fact, as it wears, the cloth becomes dull and tarnished, the colourcd light is reflected irregularly from all points, and if the effect is not absolutely destroyed, it is at least much weakened. If the garment be of a deep green, the grey part will appear reddish: if it be of a violet-marron or claret, the grey part will appear yellow. (288.) The complementary is only developed upon cloths of dark and sombre colours; thus, red, scarlet, orange, yellow, and light-blue garments, do not exhibit it, because they have always too much f the essential colour which is reflected. Tho modification is limited to that where one of the parts is more strongly illuminated by diffused light than the other (279.). (289). It is superfluous to remark that in a drapery wherc the pile lies all in one direction, but which exhibits folds, these, in changing the direction of the nap, may determine the modification presented by blue and dark-green clothes, as also by violet-marron. (290.) 'There is still another circumstance where the fourth modification will appear evident; it is when we look upon a series of light tones, blues, rose, &c. (belonging to the same scale,) of a skein of silk or wool placed upon an easel in such manner that one half of the same skein presents to the eye the threads disposed in a contrary direction to those of the othcr half. The balf of the skein which does not reflect coloured light to the eye, appears tinted with the complementary of the other half which does reflect it. ## (b) 4th Modification in a stuff presenting a dark and a light tone belonging to the same scale. (291.) If we place in juxtaposition a dark tone and a light tone of the same scale well assorted, the light tone will appear of the colour complementary to the scale to which it belongs. This modification is too important in the explanation of certain phenomena often exhibited by the products of the calico-printcr to permit of my passing it over hastily. (292.) When we look for several seconds on a fabric dyed with a coloured ground, and on which we put patterns intended to be white, but which, owing to the imperfection of the procees employed, retain a light tone of the colour of the ground, the patterns will appear of the complementary to this latter. Thus upon a ground of yellow chromate of lead, they will appear violet; upon & ground of orange-chrome they willappear blue; rose upon & green ground, &c.: to dispel the illusion, and recognise the true tint of the pattern, it is only necessary to cover the ground with paper perforated with the design of' the pattern, which then permits us to see only the ttern coloured like the ground. The influence of the dark tone upou a feeble tone is then such that not only is the latter neutralised, but also the place it occupies upon the cloth appears tinted with its complementary colour. (293.) From the precoding observations, it may be deduced that we may have a printed cotton, the design of which, although coloured, will appear to most eyes white, and not of the complementary of the ground. For those eyes which see it thus, the perception of the phenomenon of contrast will correct the imperfection of the art of the calico-printer. (294.) In the lectures upon Contrast which I gave in 1836 at the Gobelins, I remarked that, in applying paper (cut for the purpose) upon the lights of a blue drapery of the Virgin, in a tapestry representing the Holy Family, after Raphael, we saw them of light blue, although, when they wére seen surrounded with darker blue tones, they appeared of an orange tint. (295.) In conclusion, the fourth modification is observed: 1. Every time that a monochromous object of a dark and not very vivid colour is seen in such manner that one portion reflects to the eye the colour which is peculiar to it, while the other portion reflects only a feeble light scarcely coloured. 2. Every time that a stuff presents two tones of the same colour at a suitable distance from each other. (296.) We can conceive, without difficulty, that if the modification is not manifested with monochromous objects of vivid colours, as yellow, scarlet, &c., it is because that part of the surface of these objects which reflects the least light to the eye reflecte, nevertheless, always sufficient of its peculiar colour to neutralise the complementary that the coloured light of the illuminated portion tends to develope. If I am not deceived, I believe that this effect tends to enfeeble the coloured light of the shaded part.