(297.) Although in this chapter I do not propose to treat of the modifications presented by coloured stuffs with white designs, yet, as it is a case which belongs to the developments in which I am engaged, I cannot avoid mentioning them in this place. If we observe a sky-blue silk with white flowers, the weft of which is in an opposite direction to the weft of the blue ground, we shall see the flowers white, if they are placed in the most favourable manner to receive the white light reflected by them ; while, in the contrary position, we shall see these flowers absolutelyprange. There is still much white light reflected; but it is not sufficiently vivid to neutralise the development of the complementary of the ground. (298.) In painting, we recognise two kinds of perspective, the linear and the aerial The first is the art of producing, upon a plane surface, the lineaments and contours of objects and their various parts in the relations of position and size in which the eye perceives them. The second is the art of distributing, in a painted imitation, light and shade, as the eye of the painter perceives them in objects placed in different planes, and in each particular object which he wishes to imitate upon a surface. It is evident that aerial perspective comprehends the observation and reproduction of the principal modifications of colours which I have just examined in succession, and that true and absolute colouring in painting can only be as faithful a reproduction of this as possible. # CHAPTER II. ON THE DIFFERENCE EXISTING BETWEEN A COLOURED OBJECT AND THE IMITATION OF IT MADE BY A PAINTER, WHKN THE BPECTATOR OBSERVES IT FROM A DIFFERENT POINT OF VIEW FROM HIS. (299.) THzRE is a vast difference between the most perfect imitation of a coloured object and the object itself, upon which we will now dwell a moment, because it is not sufficiently appreciated. Imitation is true, relative to delineation, the distribution of light and shade, and all the resulting modifications of colour, only in the same position where the painter stood in regard to his model : for out of this position, every thing relatively to the spoctator varies, more or less ; while in the imitation he sees the light, shadows, and lines which circumscribe them, and the modifications of colour, constantly in the same manner, whatever be the point of sight. For example; & spectator who, in a room opposite a window, obeerves the back of a person in a new blue coat (Pl. III. fig. 3.), which is placed between him and the window, the part a of the coat is blue, and the part b an orange-grey. Let the spectator advance in such manner as to see the profile of this person ; if, then, he looks at the parts a and b, they will appear to him different from what they were before he changed his position. If the painter had painted the coat from the point of view where the spectator was at first, he would have coloured the part a of a fine blue, and the part b probably of orange-grey. If, now, the spectator regards the imitation of the coat from the position where he was in the second place, when he saw the person in profile, he will always see the part a blue, and the part b of an orange-grey, although in this position the model coat no longer presents these modifications. Besides, I must insist upon demonstrating a thing which is really very simple. In fine, because lights, shades, and modifications of colours, and the outlines which circumscribe each part, preserve invariably the same relation in a picture made upon a plane, it evidently follows that this imitation produces the same impres. sion, although we observe it from very different points from that where the painter was placed to represent his model. (300.) It is for this reason, also, that person who looks at the painter while he is painting his portrait on the canvas, appears in this portrait to look at the spectator, whatever may be the position of the latter with regard to the picture.