# SECTION II. PAINTING ON THE SYSTEM OF FLAT TINTS. (301.) In painting in flat tinte, the colours are neither shaded nor blended together, nor modified by the coloured rays coming from objects near that which the painter has imitated. In pictures which belong to this kind of painting, the representation of the model is reduced to the observance of linear perspective, to the employment of vivid colours in the first planes, and to that of pale and grey colours in the more distant. If the choice of contiguous colours has been in conformity with the law of simultaneous contrast, the effect of the colour will be greater than if it had boen painted on the system of Chiaro'seuro. Wben, therefore, we admire the beauty of the colours of the paintings in flat tints which come from China we must, in comparing them exactly with oure, take into convideration the system followed in them, otberwise we should exercise a false judgment by comparing pictures painted on different systems. (302.) If it is indisputable that painting in flat tints preceded that in chiaro'scuro, it will, I think, be an error to believe that at the point we have arrived at in Europe, we must renounce the first to practise the second exclusively, for in every instance where painting is an accessory and not a principal feature, painting in flat tints is in every respect preferable to the other. (303.) The essential qualities of painting in flat tints necessarily reside in the perfection of the colours and outlines. These outlines contribute to render the impressions of colours stronger and more agreeable, when, circumscribing forms clothed in colours. they concur with them in suggesting to the mind a graceful object, although in fact, the imitation of it does not give a faithful representation. (304.) We may, in conformity with what has been said, consider that painting in flat tints will be advantageously employed, 1. When the objects represented are at such a distance that the finish of an elaborate picture would disappear. 2. When a picture is an accessory, decorating an object whose use would render it improper to finish it too highly, on account of its price—such are the paintings which ornament screens, work-boxes, tables, &c.—in this case, the objects preferable as models are those whose beauty of colours and simplicity of form are so remarkable, as to attract the eye by outlines easily traced, and by their vivid colours: as birds, insects, flowers, &c.