# CHAPTER II. ON THE PRINCIPLE OF MIXING COLOURED THREADS, IN ITS RELATIONS WITH THE ART OF WEAVING GOBELINS TAPESTRY. (376.) WitH a certain number of scales of different colours, pure and broken with black, we may by mixing them produce an infinite variety of colours. The mixtures are of two kinds ; (377.) Firstly, we mix & thread of the 4tht one of the scale of a colour A, with a thread of the 4th tone of the scale of a colour A', more or less analogous to A. ## This is mixture by Threads. It is not made upon figured silks. · (378.) Secondly, the weft is worked so as to interweave together either the threads of a scale of the colour A, or the threads of a scale of the colour A' mixed with the threads of a scale B, or with the threads of the scale B mixed with the threads of a scale B' more or less analogous to that of B. ## This is mixture by Hatchings. (379.) We can understand by this, how with these two kinds of mixture we can imitate all the tones and all the various colours of the pictures which serve as patterns for tapestry. (380.) In the mixtures by threads and by hatchings, it is always indispensable to take into consideration the facts of which I have spoken.(158.); and I am the more urgent on this subject, because M. Deyrolle, director at the Gobelins, perfectly understanding the processes of his art, has had the kindness to execute, at my request, different mixtures of coloured silk threads in a piece of tapestry, to enable me to prove the remarks I have made; they lie at the foundation of all the arts the palettes of which, so to speak, are composed of coloured threads, and have also the advantage of referring to the same rules the art of modifying by mixture the colours of coloured substances, whether they are in a state of infinite division or of appreciable extent. The mixtures which I am about to mention were made with threads of two colours taken at the same tone; each thread covered the warp; they were arranged parallel to each other and were stretched perpendicularly to the warp. When the mixture was composed of an equal number of threads of each colour, it presented very narrow stripes of equal size, and alternately of different colours. To make mixtures of colcured threads understandingly, we must satisfy the three following rules. The first two are principal, because they result directly from the observation of facts; the third is secondary, because it is the natural deduction from the facts comprised in the first two. ## I. RULE.—CONCERNING THE BINARY MIXTURE OF PRIMARY COLOURS. When we unite Red with Yellow, Red with Blue, Yellow with Blue, the threads must not reflect a palpable quantity of the third primary Colour, if we would have Ôrange, Violets, and Greens as brilliant as it is possible to obtain them by this method. ## EXAXPLE. ## . Red and Yellow. 3 Red threads with 1 Yellow thread 2 Red threads with 1 Yellow thread 1 Red thread with 1 Yellow thread 3 Yellow threads with 1 Red thread 2 Yellow threads with 1 Red thread yield mixtures which appear to the eye as they must do in proportion to the two colours mixed. There is no appearance of Grey in any of those mixtures wben we employ a Red more inclining to Orange than to Crimson, and a Yellow more inclining to Orange than to Green. ## B. Red and Blue. 3 Red threads with 1 Blue thread 2 Red threads with 1 Blue thread 1 Red thread with 1 Blue thread 3 Blue threads with 1 Red thread 2 Blue threads with 1 Rod thread give mixtures which appear to the eye as they must do relatively to the proportion of the two colours mixed. If we use a Red and a Blue inclining to Violet, the mixture will contain no Grey. ## C. Yellow and Blue. 4 Blue threads with 1 Yellow thread 3 Blue threads with 1 Yellow thread 2 Blue threads with 1 Yellow thread 1 Blue thread with 1 Yellow thread give mixtures which appear to the eye as they must appear relatively to the proportions of the two colours mixed." If we use & Yellow and a Blue, inclining to Green more than to Red, the mixture will contain little or no Grey. Experiment on all the preceding mixtures demonstrates the rule enounced above, or rather this rule is only the expression of a generalisation of facts. ## IL RULE. —CONCERNING THE MIXTURE OF COMPLEMENTARY COLOURS. When we mix Red and Green, Orange and Blue, Yellow and Violet, the colours are more or less completely neutralized, according as they are more or less perfectly complementary to each other, and as they are mixed in proper proportions. The result is a Grey, the tone of which is generally higher than that of the colours mixed, if these latter are of a suitably high tone. ## ExAMPLES. ## D. Red and Green. d. 3 Red threads with 1 Green thread give a dull Red. 2 Red threads with a Green thread give a duller and deeper Red than the pure Red employed. 1 Red thread with 1 Green thread give a Reddish Grey, the tone of which is a little higher than that of the preceding mixture. 3 Green threads with 1 Red give a Green Grey, the tone of which is higher than the Green or the Red. 2 Green threads with 1 Red give a Grey less Green, and of a higher tone than the two colours. d'. In repeating the same mixtures with higher tones of the same scales of Green and Red, we remark, that the tone of the mixture of 2 Green threads with 1 Red thread is higher relatively to that of the colours mixed, than it is in the mixtures d. d". 1 Red thread and 1 Yellowish Green thread give a Carmelite Brown, or an Orange-Grey, the tone of which is equal to that of the colours mixed. d". 1 Red thread and 1 Bluish-Green thread, give a coppercoloured mixture, or Catechu-Brown, of a higher tone than that of the colours mixed. ## Conclusion. From this we may conclude that red and green threads, properly assorted and in suitable proportions, yield grey. ## ε. Orange and Blue. e. 3 Orange threads with 1 Blue thread, give a dull Orange. 2 Orange threads with 1 Blue thread, give a duller Orange. 1 Orange thread with 1 Blue thread, give a Chocolate-Grey, browner than the colours mixed. 3 Blue threads with 1 Orange thread, give a Violet-Grey. 2 Blue threads with 1 Orange thread, give a Violet-Grey, redder than the preceding. e'. The results are the same with deeper tones than the preceding, except that the corresponding mixtures are browner. e". 3 Orange threads with 3 blue threads present a remarkable phenomenon according to the intensity of the light and the position from which it is viewed; the tapestry being placed in a vertical plane before the incident light, when the warp is horizontal, we perceive blue and orange rays; but if the warp is vertical, we may then see the upper part of each blue band violet, and its under part, as well as the upper part of each orango band, green, while the rest of each of these latter bands will appear red, bordered on the lower part with yellow. We may also see the upper part of each blue band violet, end its under part, as well as the upper part of each orange hand, green, and the rest of each of these bands red, bordered in the lower part with green, and in the upper part with yellow. We say that they may be seen in this manner, because if the light was strong enough for distinct vision, we should not soe the horizontal blue and orange bands. ## F. Yellow and Violet. 3 Yellow threads with 1 Violet, give a Greyish-Yellow. 2 Yellow threads with 1 Violet, give a Yęllow-Grey. 1 Yellow thread with 1 Violet, give a Grey, much nearer normal grey than the preceding. 3 Violet threads and 1 Yellow, give a Greyish-Violet. 2 Violet threads and I Yellow, give dull Violet, greyer than the preceding. It is remarkable that in observing the mixture of a yellow with a violet thread, at a greater distance than that at which they appear neutralized, the yellow is so much weakened in proportion to the violet, that the mixture appears of a dull violet. Yellow and Blue exhibit an analogous result. IIL. RULE.—CONCERNING THE MIXTURE OF THE THREE PRIMARY COLOUR&, IN SUCH PROPORTIONS THAT THEY DO NOT BECOME NEUTRALIZED, BECAUSE ONE OR THE OTHER OF THEM I8 IN EXCE88. When we unite Blue, Red, and Yellow in such proportions that they do not neutralize each other, the result is a colour much greyer or more broken than if the proportion of complementary Colours was more equal. This rule is the result of the first two; but it was indispensable to enounce it, to comprehend all those cases which may be presented in a mixture of coloured threads, relatively to the point of view which occupies us. For, as Red mixed with a Greenish-Yellow has given a Carmelite mixture, as above-mentioned (380. d'), I shall add the following:— (1.) Crimson-Red and Greenish-Yellow, give much duller mixtures, the nearer these colours are being neutralized. A mixture of 1 crimson-red with 1 greenish-yellow thread, produces a brick or copper-orange, the tone of which is higher than that of the colours mixed. (2.) Scarlet-Red and Greenish-Blue, give mixtures which are without vigour or purity, relatively to the corresponding mixtures made with crimson-red and violel-blue. (3.) Red worked with Blue-Grey, gives Violet mixtures, which are not so dull as the preceding, because the colours contain no yellow. (4.) The Red of the mixture (3.), worked with a Green-Grey, gives mixtures much duller than the preceding, as might have been expected on account of the yellow contained in the green-grey. (5.) Orange and Blue-Violet, give very dull mixtures. (6.) Orange and Red-Violet, give dull mixtures; but redder or less blue than the preceding.