# CHAPTER III. OF THE PATTERNS OF BEAUVAIS TAPESTRY FOR FURNITURE. (396.) Thε objects, although generally smaller than those seen on Gobelins Tapestry, being of simpler form, often symmetrical, offer less difficuity of execution, in order to be distinctly seen ; and the nature of these objects also does not absolutely require he employment of colours much varied in their tones and hues ; for I suppose that the Beauvais weaver does not pretend to rival the painter, consequently, when he represents flowers, for instance, he does not require a model painted in the manner which a pupil of Van Spændonck would make a picture or a drawing for a botanical work. (397.) In the models of tapestries for furniture, we too often neglect the opposition of grounds with the dominant colour ef the subjects placed upon them. For instance, if it is a crimson ground ornamented with a garland of flowers, it is necessary that Blue, Yellow, and White flowers compose the greater part of it. If we place on it Red flowers, they will tend to become Orange rather than Purple;— they must be surrounded with Green leaves contiguous to the ground. When it is a greenish ground, Red and rose flowers must, on the contrary, predominate over the others. If the ground is dead-leaves, then Blue, Violet, White and rose flowers detach themselves completely. (398.) The patterns of tapestry for furniture must possess the qualities which we have desired in those of the Gobelins. Thus, graceful and simple forms detaching themselves completely from the ground upon which they stand, clothed with the purest and most harmoniously selected colours, are preferable to all others. The harmonies of contrast of colour must generally predominate over those of analogy.