II. RuLE.—Respecting the mixture of threads of complementary colours, but in such proportions that they do not completely neutralize each other. The weaver must not have recourse to mixtures which belong to the third rule, except when he intends breaking or tarnishing his colours : and it is evident that the less he retains of a colour in excess over the quantities of those which are mutually complementary, the more this excess in the former will be broken by mixture with the latter. We see, then, that we can break the colours without having recourse to broken tones, and that if we would make one colour pass into another without running into Grey, we must avoid every juxtaposition of colours which, by confusing the eye, would produce the effect of mixed complementary colours(380.). # CHAPTER II. ON THE PRINCIPLE OF CONTRAST OF COLOURS IN ITS CONNECTION WITH THE FABRICATION OF BAVONNERIE CARPETS. (406.) Ir it be true that a knowledge of the principle of contrast is less necessary to the worker of Savonnerie than it is to him of the Gobelins, yet it would be a mistake to suppose that the first can remain ignorant of it without disadvantage. In fact, although the worker of Savonnerie need not so assiduously copy his model faithfully in its colouring as the Gobelins weaver, and as the five or six differently coloured threads which he can unite to form a compound thread may be very favourable to the gradation, and to the passage of one colour into another, yet this same liberty which permits of a slight departure from the colours of the model, imposes the obligation of making him produce the best possible effect. Can he follow a better guide than the law of contrast when he seeks to attain this aim?