# CHAPTER IV. ## CONDITIONS WHICH MUST BE FULFILLED IN THE PATTERNB OF SAVON-NERIE CARPETS. (407.) Tue Savonnerie weaver working from the same painted patterns as the weaver of the Gobelins and of Beauvais, I next speak of the principal conditions which these patterns must fulfil, in order that the carpet reproducing the pattern may fully realise our intention. ## ARTICLE 1. ## 1st Condition—Respective size of the figured objects. (408.) The sizo of the objects represented must be in proportion to the extent of the whole of the carpet : great trophies and ornaments suit only large carpets, and simple pattcrns are best adapted to small ones. (409.) On the other hand, if the apartment to which the carpet is fitted has a defect in the proportion of the breadth to its length, the designer must take care to avoid increasing this defect to the eye by his design, and the manner in which he distributes his masses. ## ARTICLE 2. ## 2nd Condition— Distinct View. (410.) All the parta vividly coloured, and having well defined patterns, must be visible in their entirety, when the furniture is placed in the position it is intended to occupy in the chamber to which the carpet is fitted, this apartment being what is commonly called arranged. For example: — The border of a carpet upon which chairs, couches, sofas, &c. are placed, must be black or brown : in the case where preference is given to a ground uniform with the pattern, this latter must be very simple, and composed only of two or three tones of colours much deeper than those of the rest of the carpet, wlen this does not exhibit large dark masses ; and it is by deep tones of the blue and violet scales, and also with those of other scales (218.), that we have the opportunity of recalling the harmonies of analogy. (41l.) The actual border of a carpet must not be under the chairs. It must appear as a continuous frame to all the objects represented upon the carpet, and this framing must not be interrupted by the hearth. (412.) If s piece of furniture must be placed in the middle of the apartment, or rather of the framing, the figures of the carpet must be executed in conformity; that is to say, in such manner that they commence at the line circumscribing the place occupied by the furniture, and extend beyond this place. (413.) Every trophy or design presenting & well circumscribed object, or, in other torms, every design without lines parallel to the border, must be seen in all its parts, so that the eye can embrace the whole without difficulty. And it must also always have a sufficient interval between the border and the trophies, or, more generally, the objects circumscribed, to which the artist desires to draw the chief attention. ## ARTICLE 3. ## 3rd Condition —Analogy with places or persons. (414.) Other objects than arabesques or imaginary fgures, depicted on a large carpet, must possess some analogy with the purpose of the apartment where the carpet is laid, offering some allusion either to places or persons. ## ARTICLE 4. ## 4th Condition— Distribution of Colours. (415.) The colours must be distributed in such manner as to give value to every part of the carpet, not only in each particular object, but also in the union of objects forming & single composition. ## Of the local Colours and the Colours of each particular object. (416.) Every object must be perfectly detached from the ground upon which it is placed. If rose or red predominates in an object, the ground must be neither crimson nor scarlet, nor violet; if blue predominates, the ground must generally be neither violet nor green. If the object is yellow, orange must be forbidden to the ground. For the rest, I shall refer to what I have said above (396, 397, 398.)in speaking of the conditions which must be fulfilled in reference to the patterns for Beaurais tapestry for furniture. Of the General Harmony of Colours in a Carpet. (417.) There are some important observations to be made upon the general harmony of coloure, which is frequently neglected by the designer of patterns for this kind of fabric; yet without it, the effect in a carpet is injured, whatever may be the perfection with which each particular object is rendered. (418.) If the carpet representa many separate objects, they must each have a dominant colour which accords with those of the other objects, either by the dominant colours belonging to different tones of the same scale or by these colours contrasting with each other, which produces a more satisfactory effect. The whole of these objects must detach themselves from the ground, which will generally be duller than they are, the light being almost always diffused (censée) from the centre of the composition. The manner in which the objects are circumscribed, and the nature of the lines circumseribing each of them, contribute greatly to render a composition harmonious or discordant. For instance, squares or parallelograms, which attract the eye by their size and their brilliant colours, have a bad effect with circular or elliptical figures, especially when they. are very near together. ## ARTICLE 5. 5th Condition — Harmony of the Carpet relatively to the Objects which must concur with it in the Decoration of an Apartment. (419.) For a carpet to produce the best possible effect, it is not enough that it be made in the best manner, that the pattern is excellent, and that the distribution of the colours leaves nothing to be desired ; it is also requisite that it be in harmony with the decorations of the apartment into which it is put, or, in other terms, that it possesses certain relations of suitability; not only of size proportionate to the nature of the ornaments, the facility with which the eye seizes the ensemble of the composition, the skill which has governed the distribution of the large masses of coloura,—but also in the harmony of these same colours with those of the objects which concur with the carpet to furnish given apartment; it is under this latter relation only that I shall now make some remarks, which will be concluded further on, when I come to examine the decorations of rooms. (420.) The method of rendering with respect to the colours the harmony of a large carpet as facile as possible with the other furniture of the same apartment, is at first to make the light commence from the centre of the carpet; it is there- that is to say, in the part most distant from the chairs, hangings, &c.—that we can employ without inconvenience the most vivid and strongly contrasted colours. In placing a much less brilliant part between this vivid picture in the central part of the framing, we can also give to the framing colours so vivid as to glare upon the contiguous parts, still without injuring the colour of the chairs, hangings, &c.