## CHAPTER L ## ON TAPESTRIES FOR HANGINGS. (421.) GobELIns tapestry and Beauvais tapestry for furniture, produced on the system of painting in chiaro'scuro, require in their production so much time, care, and skill on the part of the artistswho execute them, that their price is much too high to permit them to become articles of commerce. Without inquiring if it be right or wrong to prefer stained papers to woollen hangings ; fabrics in a single colour, chintzes, or in patterns to tapestries for furniture, I shall say, that with scales of five or six tones at most, we can execute works of the latter kind on the system of flat tints (368.), which have a good effect, and at a price such as, if I am not mistaken, would bring them into commerce if fashion adopted them. # CHAPTER IL .CARPETS. amvm. ## ARTICLE 1. CARPETS ON THE SYSTEM OF CHIARO'SCURO. (422). Tae taste for carpete, now-a-days so widely extended, far from diminishing, will doubtless increase, just as in modern times has occurred in respect to glazed windows in-our houses. If the Savonnerie carpets are too dear for commerce, such is not the case with those others which, made in imitation of them after patterns painted on the system of chiaro'scuro, are extensively manufactured in France and other countries. (423.) These carpets cost much less than those of Savonnerie, because they contain much less wool, which is generally of inferior quality: the colours also are not so durable; they are worked, too, with scales less varied in colour, and of fewer tones; lastly, as these fabrics are not so elaborate, they are made much more rapidly than those of the royal manufactories. (424.) If the intrinsic qualities of Savonnerie carpets and those of ordinary carpets are really so different, we should be much mistaken if we supposed that the difference is evident on the first superficial examination, or that it can be always recognised on a more prolonged examination by a person ignorant of the difficulties of this class of works. What most persons look for in a carpet is brilliant colours. The manufacturer knowing the taste of his customers, does well to conform to it, and he attains his aim by using fewer broken tones, and more pure and vivid colours than are employed in the royal manufactories. He thus obtains greater appearance of effect at less expense, and I am convinced that in many instances where at Savonnerie they mix a great many coloured threads together, it requires much skill and knowledge in mixing their complementaries, to prevent the brilliant colours extinguishing each other: this danger does not exist, or occurs much less frequently, in the manufacture of ordinary carpets. (425.) The considerations I have put forth on the mixing of colours, lead to the opinion that every workman who would make himself acquainted with the method of producing the carpets of Savonnerie, will, by very simple means, arrive at results the success of which appears to me certain, when, after being well imbued with the rules prescribed (380. and 405.), he will attain to a system of experience calculated to reveal to him what most of his fellow-workers are ignorant of,—the value of the colours of his palette, and in this value we comprise the knowledge of the resulting colour he will obtain, either by mixing given number of threads of the same scale, but of different tones, or by mixing a given number of differently coloured threads belonging to different scales. The first experiments he should make will have for their object the fixing the minimum number of the tones of his scales after he has fixed the number of woollen threads which compose his compound threads; for we know that if he puts three threads into a compound thread, with a scale of the same number of tones, he could by mixing obtain a greater number of mixed tones than if the compound thread was only binary. Suppose it is a scale composed of ten tones, and that we required to make a triple compound thread; two threads of the tenth tone with one thread of the ninth tone will give a mixed tone nearer to the tenth than if we were obliged to mix one' thread of the tenth tone with one thread of the ninth tone to produce a binary compound thread; by which we may learn that by the triple mixture we can obtain many more mixed tones, intermediate between the first and the tenth, than we can obtain from the binary mixture. After having determined upon the number of tones which shall compose his scales, he will next fix upon the number of unbroken scales which will be necessary for him to compose brilliant hues, bearing in mind rule first: and further, he will employ threads for a complex thread, and, other things being equal, he may contrive mixtures which will belong to other distinct scales, and which will be inserted between the scales that have been mized. This determination made, he will next prepare his greys resulting from the mixture of his complementary scales in con formity with our second rule: taking into account the breaking, or the greying which the complementary mixtures will give to the threads of pure colour with which they are combined. Fiually, he will see which are the scales of broken colours, as well as the greys more or less pure, it is important for him to have. In all the preceding it is understood that it is only the question of graduated colours, and not of colours for grounds. ## ARTICLE 2. ## Carpets on the System of Flat Tints. (426.) In most cases where it is required to select a carpet for apartments of a medium size, and especially for small rooms, I should give the preference to carpets in flat tinta, because it is possible to have a very beautiful effective work, without the price being too high, while in paying much dearer for a carpet of another kind, resembling pictures, we ehall be far from having the best in this sort. Carpets in flat tints are most favourable to the brilliancy of colours; in fact, the straight or undulating bands of the dessins points of Hungary, the palms, where Yellow is opposed to Violet, Orange to Blue, Green to Red, &c., produce the most brilliant contrasts. But I only recommend the employment of these carpets for places where their brilliant colours can injure neither the furniture nor the hangings; for instance, in rooms where the hangings, the stuffs of the chairs, are grey, white, black, or selected so as to accord harmoniously with the carpet by their colours and patterns. (427.) The most effective carpets are also those which present detached flowers upon a brown ground, with a garland in the centre, in flat tinta, and perfectly assorted according to the law of contrast. ## ARTICLE 3. ## Carpets on a system intermediate between Chiaro'scuro and Flat Tints. (428.) I have no special remarks to add to the preceding on this kind of carpet; I shall only observe that those which approach the nearest to carpets in flat tints, appear to me preferable to those in which the designer has endeavoured to imitate Savonnerie carpets.