# SECTION I. CALICO-PRINTING. (439.) The object I have in view in this Chapter, is the examination of the optical effeçts produced by patterns when printed upon woven fabrics, but not the chemical effects which arise between them and the stuffs upon which they aro printed. For a considerable period of time printing on textile fabrics was limited, so to speak, to cotton cloths : only of late years has it been extended to fabrics of silk and wool for furniture and clothing. This branch of industry has undergone an immense extension, fashion having accepted these products with much favour; but whatever may be the importance of the subject in & commercial point of view, I must treat it briefly, because this book is not directed exclusively to that branch of inquiry, and, moreover, all the preceding part is intimately connected with it, and to go deeply into details would expose us to the inconvenience of repetition with no compensating advantage. I sball content myself with stating many facts which serve to show that, for want of knowing the law of contrast, the cotton manufacturer and the printers of woollen and silk stuffs are constantly exposed to error in judging the value of recipes for colouring compositions, or rather to mistake the true tint of the designs which they have themselves applied upon grounds of a different colour. ## A FALSE JUDGMENT OF THE VALUE OF RECIPES FOR COLOURING COMPOSITIONS. (440.) At a calico-printer's they possessed a recipe for printing green, which up to a certain period had always succeeded, when they fancied it began to give bad results. They were lost in conjecture upon the cause, when a person, who, at the Gobelins had followed my researches on contrast, recognised that the green of which they complained, being printed upon a ground of blue, tended to become yellow, through the influence of orange, the complementary of the ground. Consequently, he advised that the proportion of blue in the colouring composition should be increased, in order to correct the effect of contrast. The recipe modified after this suggestion gave the beautiful green which they had before obtained. (441.) This example demonstrates that every recipe for colouring compositions intended to be applied upon a ground of another colour must be modified conformably to the effect which the ground will produce upon the colour of the composition. It proves also that it is much easier for a painter to correct an effect of contrast than it is for a calico-printer, supposing that both are ignorant of the law of contrast: for if the first perceives in painting a green pattern on a blue drapery that the green comes too yellow, it is sufficient for him to add a little blue to the green, to correct the defect which strikes him. It is this great facility in correcting the ill effect of certain contrasts wbich explains why they so often succeed in so doing without being able to account for it. ## B. TRUE TINTS OF DESIGNS PRINTED UPON COLOURED GROUNDS MISUNDERSTOOD. (442.) In treating of the modifications perceptible in bodics through the medium of light, I have instanced cottons of a coloured ground printed with patterns which the calico-printer intended making colourless; but, owing to the imperfection of the process, were really of the colour of the ground, but of an excessively light tint (292, 293.), we may be satisfied of this by looking at them after they are isolated from the ground by means of a white paper cut out with the pattern. I bave remarked that, notwithstanding their colour, the cye judges them to be colourless, or of the tint complementary to that of the ground. (443.) I will now oxplain the cause of these appearances, because they have been the subject of questions frequently addressed to me by manufacturers of printed stuffs and by drapers ; it is due to the law of simultaneous contrast of colours. In fact, when the patterns appear white, the ground acts by contrast of tone (9.) ; if they appear coloured, (and this appearance generally succeeds to that where they appear wlitc), the ground then acts by contrast of colour (13.); thc manufacturer of printed stuffe, therefore, will not seek to attribute the cause of these phenomena to the chemical actions manifested in his operations. (444.) Ignorance of the law of contrast has among drapers and manufacturers been the subject of many disputes, which I have been happy to settle amicably, by demonstrating to the parties that they had no possible cause for litigation in the cases they submitted to me. I will relate some of these, to prevent, if possible, similar disputes. Certain drapers having given to a calico-printer some cloths of a single colour,-red, violet, and blue,upon which they wished black figures to be printed, complained that upon the red cloths he had put green patterns, upon the violet the figures appeared greenish-yellow,—upon the blue-they were orangebrown or copper-coloured, instead of the black, which they had ordered. To convince them that they had no ground for complaint, it sufficed to have recourse to the following proofs:— 1°. I surrounded the patterns with white paper, so as to conceal the ground; the designs then appeared black. 2°. I placed some cuttings of black cloth upon stuffs coloured red, violet, and blue;'the cuttings appeared like the printed designs,—i. e. of the colour complementary to the ground, although the same cuttings, when placed upon a white ground, were of a beautiful black. (445.) Finally, the following are the modifications which black designs undergo upon different coloured grounds :- Upon Red stuffs, they appear Dark-Green. Upon Orange stuffs, they appear of a Bluish-Black. Upon Yellow stuffs, they appear Blach, the violet tint of which is very feeble, on account of the great contrast of tone. Upon Green stuffs, they appear of a Reddish-Grey. Upon Blue stuffs, they appear of an Orange-Grey. Upon Violet stuffs, they appear Greenish-Yellow-Grey. These examples are sufficient to enable us to comprehend their advantage to the printer of patterns which are complementary to the colour of the ground, whenever he wishes to mutually strengthen contiguous tints without going out of their respective scales.