# CHAPTER IIL ON THE LAW OF SDMULTANEOUS CONTRAST OF COLOURS IN RELATION TOPAPER-HANGLNGS WITH DESIGNS L A AINGLE COLOUR, OR LN COLOURSBUT SLIGHTLY VARIED. (450.) Tae remarks I have made respecting the modifications to be employed in the recipes of colouring compounds used in printing patterns of stuffs upon grounds of another colour (440.), are also applicable to the printing of patterns upon paperhangings. (451.) It is also the same with the remarks contained in the same Chapter (444.), which refer to the modifications black patterns undergo through the colour of the grounds upon which they are printed. The observations which I relate, although applicable to every case where black is placed upon a coloured ground, have been chiefly suggested by patterns made on woollen stuffs for ladies'mantles, and also upon furniture:-it appears to me that I had better unite to these observations all those which concern other designs than black. The reason which prevents me is, that the patterns of woollen stuffs for furniture or mantles, which are executed in the best taste, are those with black figures, or more generally of figures much darker than the ground. Papor-hangings, I do not say the most tasteful, but those most convenient for use, prevent very light grounds with white or grey figures; I have preferred speaking, as far as they are concerned, of the modifications wbich similar designs may receive from coloured grounds; and the observations which I have already made upon them, determine me to proceed in this maaner. (452.) Grey patterns upon papers tinted of a light colour exhibit the phenomenon of maximum contrast; that is to say, tho grey appears coloured with the complementary of the ground. Thus, conformably to the law (63.) Grey patterns Upon a Rose ground appear - - : Green. Upon an Orange ground they appear - Blue. Upon a Yellow ground they appear . Violet or Lilac. Upon a Green ground they appear - Rose. Upon a Blue ground they appear - . Orange-Grey. Upon a Violet ground they appear - Yellow.