(453.) I cite these facts as examples proper to instruct artists, because, to my knowledge, in manufactories of paper-hangings disputes arise between the proprietors and the preparers of the colours; for instance, a few years ago the proprietor of one of the first manufactories in Paris, wishing to print grey patterns upon grounds of apple-green and of rose, refused to believe that his colour-preparer had given grey to the printer at all, because the designs printed on these grounds appeared coloured with the complementaries of the colour of the ground. It was only at the period when the colour-preparer attended a lecture I gave at the Museum of Natural History, in 1829, for M. Vauquelin, hearing me speak of the mistakes that these contrasts of colours might occasion, he suspected the cause of the effects which he had produced without knowing why, and which had really caused him much annoyance. # CHAPTER IV. OF THE LAW OF SIMULTANEOUS CONTRAST OF COLOURS, RELATIVELY TO THE BORDERS OF PAPER-HANGINGS. (454.) Everr uniform paper, or onc belonging to the second category, must receive a border, generally darker and more compler in design and colour than the paper which it frames. The assortment of two papers exercises a very great influence on the effects they are capable of producing, for each of them may be of a fine colour, ornamented with designs in the best taste, yet their effect wilì be mediocre or even bad, because the assortment will not conform to the law of contrast. I shall return to this subject in the Fifth Division, because this chapter is exclusively devoted to the consideration of the borders themselves. (455.) The ground of a border contributes greatly to the beauty of the pattern, whether flowers, ornaments, or any other object that the designer puta upon it. We cannot treat of this influence in an absolute or methodical manner. I shall select a certain number of remarkable facts, which I have bad occasion to observe, and I shall principally dwell on those from which we can deduce conclusions, which, apparently not immediately flowing from previous observation, might escape many readers, in spite of the great interest they bave in knowing them, without taking into account that the exhibition of these facts will give me occasion to apply the law of contrast to cases where we have designs presenting always many tonesof the same scale, and of different hues, and also often of different scales, morc or less distant from each other,—that is to say, I shall not occupy myself with simple borders presenting black designs upon a uniform Grey ground, for I have already spoken of the modifications which in this case black designs undergo (445.), and grey designs also (452.), in treating of the printing of designs upon stuffs and paper-hangings, from patterns of a single colour, to those slightly varied. (456.) The following observations have been made under these circumstances,— viz. : The design of a border, whether ornaments, flowers or any other object had been cut out and pasted upon a white card. Designs identical with the preceding which had been pasted upon cardboard were then cut out and placed upon grounds of black, red, orange, yellow, green, blue and violet, then compared not only by myself, but also by many persons whose eyes are much accustomed to seeing colours. The results were noted in writing when we had perfectly agreed upon their value. ## LBORDERS OF EIGHT INCHES IN HEIGHT REPRESENTING GILT ORNAMENTS UPON DIFFERENT GROUNDS. (457.) These ornaments executed by the ordinary processes of paper-staining, contained no particle of metallic gold; yellow lakes and oranges of different tones and shades had been exclusively employed in their production. After having enounced the modifcations which the painted gilt-ornaments experience from the colour of the grounds, I shall indicate th oe which the metallic gilt ornaments receive comparatively from these same grounds; this comparison presenting results which &ppear to me interesting. ## (a.) Black Ground. (458.) When we look at painted gilt-ornaments placed upon this ground, with the intention of comparing them with the identical ornaments placed on a white ground, the former appear much more distinct than the latter, because the Yellows and Orange-Yellowe, colours eminently luminous, and the Black ground, which reflects no light, give rise to contrast of tone, which the White ground, essentially luminous, cannot give with colours which are themselves luminous. We perceive, then, as we might expect, after what has been said of the effect of Black in eontrast (53.) that the colours superimposed upon it are lowered in tone; but it must be noted that Yellows and Orange-Yellows, far from being weakened, according to the remark made above (58.), might cause the Black to gain in purity. In considering the effects of two grounds more attentively, we see that the Black imparts a Red to the ornaments, and it is important to remark, that the brightness of this Red, instead of reddening the Yellows, really gilds them. I call attention to this result, because we shall see (460.) an effect of Red ground which, without consideration, would lead us to believe it to be contrary to that which now occupies us. Such is the motive that induces me to insist upon this point, so that we may well understand how Black, in taking away some Grey, imparts brilliancy, and how this Grey, which may be considered as a tarnished or broken Blue, may with Yellow produce an Olive colour. It is also necessary to remark that the gilt ornaments in question present an Olive-Grey tint, which, far from being diminished by the White ground, is exalted by it. Finally, if the Black ground lowers the tone of the colours, while White heightens them, it lowers Yellow more in proportion than Red, and consequently renders the ornaments redder than they appear upon a White ground; finally, in taking away Grey, it purifies the colours, and acts also by giving them some Red, or by taking away some Green. ## Metallic Gilt Ornaments. (459.) Gilt ornaments detach better from Black than from White; but the Orange colour is weakened and really impoverished; the Black ground then does not purify the real gilt as it does the painted ornaments. ## (b.) Deep-Red Ground. (460.) The Yellows are more luminous, the ensembl with the painted ornament is clearer, more brilliant, less Grey, than upon a White ground. Red much deeper than the ornament weakens the tone of it, and this effect is also augmented by the addition of its complementary, Green, a bright colour. This example has much importance in enabling us to see how the red colour, which appears as though it could be of but little advantage to ornaments, because it tends to weaken them by making them greener, is, however, on the whole, favourable, because the lightening or the weakening of the colour is more than compensated for by the brilliancy of the complementary of the ground which is added to the Yellow; we shall return to this effect in a moment (468.). There is this analogy between the influence of the Red ground and that of the Black ground, that the tone of the colours is weakened; but there is this difference, that the ornaments are green upon the first, while they are orange upon the second. ## Metallic Gilt Ornaments. (461.) The Red ground is not so advantageous for gilt ornaments as it is for the painted imitations of them, because the metal loses too much of its Orange colour, and under this relation it appears inferior to gold upon a Black ground. The Red ground appears darker and more Violet than the ground upon which painted ornaments are placed. Grounds of a light Red are still less favourable to the gold than Red grounds of a dark tone. ## (c.) Orange Ground deeper than the Ornaments. (462.) The painted ornaments are bluer or rather greener than upon a White ground. The Yellow and Orange are singularly lowered in tone. This ground, then, is very disadvantageous to ornaments, as we might have expected. ## Metallic Gilt Ornaments. (463.) Orange is not favourable to them: the metal becomes too white; on the other hand, the Orange ground is redder and more vivid than that upon which the painted ornaments are placod. ## (d.) Yellow Ground of Chromate of Lead, more brilliant than the Ýellow of the Örnaments. (464.) The Yellow of the painted ornaments is excessively enfeebled by the complementary of the ground, Violet, which is added to it; the ornaments appear Grey in comparison with those upon a White ground.