## Metallic Gilt Ornaments. (465.) The Yellow ground is not so unfavourable to gilt ornaments as it is to the painted ones. The first assortment may in certain cases be recommended. The Yellow appears more intense, and perhaps greener. # (e.) Bright Green Ground. (466.) The painted ornaments are darker upon a bright Green ground than upon a Red or White ground; they have acquired some Red; but this is not the brilliant tint which is given to them by Black: it is a brick-red tint. It follows from the comparison of the effects of ornaments upon Red and upon Green grounds, that the first is much more advantageous than the second, because it adds an essentially brilliant tint to the eolour of the ornaments; while the latter, adding some Red, or subtracting some Green, produces a brick-red. ## Metallic Gilt Ornaments. (467.) Upon a bright Green ground, they acquire Red, as do the painted ornaments; but the Red, not diminishing the brilliancy of the metal, but, on the contrary, augmenting the intensity of its colour, produces an excellent effect. The Green ground is more intense and bluer than the samo ground upon which the painted ornaments are placed. (468.) The study of the effects of Red and of Green grounds upon painted ornaments on the one hand, and upon gilt ornaments on the other, is extremely interesting to paper-stainers and decorators ; it demonstrates to them the necessity of taking into consideration, in the juxtaposition of bodies which it is proposed to associate, the brilliancy which these bodies naturally possess, and the brilliancy we wish to impart to them when they have none. The preceding examples (460, 461. 466, 467.) very clearly explain why the paper-stainer will prefer dark Red instead of Green for his gilt ornaments, and why a decorator will prefer Green to Red for the colour of the hangings of a show-room of gilt bronzes; besides, we can appreciate the difference that exists between these two hanginge, in seeing how the Green ground is preferable to the Rod in warehouses of gilt clocks. ## (f.) Blue Ground. (469.) Observation agrees perfectly with the law ; it is really upon a Blue ground that painted ornaments (the dominant colour of which is the complementary of this ground) show to the greatest advantage in respect to intensity of the gold-yellow colour; this effect more than compensates for the slight difference which may result from the Red ground giving a little more brilliancy. The ornaments upon the latter ground, compared with those on the Blue, are less coloured, and appear whiter. ## Metallic Gilt Ornaments. (470.) They accord as well as the paintod Ornaments; the Blue ground is deeper and leas Violet than that upon which painted ornaments are placed. ## (g.) Violet Ground. (471.) Conformably to the law the Violet ground giving Greeniah-Yellow to the painted ornaments is favourable to them; they appear upon this ground less Olive-Grey, more brilliant than upon the White ground, and less Green than upon the Rod ground. ## Metallic Gilt Ornaments. (472.) They stand out quite as well from this ground, which is raised in tone, and the Violet appears bluer, or less Red. (473.) It is remarkable that the gilt ornamente, compared with their painted imitations, heighten all the grounds upon which they are placed. We cannot say that this metal causes the grounds to lose any of their brilliancy ; for Orange, taking some Red by the juxtaposition of the gold, appears nevertheless more brilliant than the Orange in juxtaposition with the painted ornaments. The gold, by its Orange colour, gives in addition some Blue, its complementary, to bodies which environ it. ## Black Ground. (475.) Grey lowered three tones in comparison with Grey upon White, less reddish. Blue flowers lowered two tones st least. ## Red Ground. (476.) The Grey is greenish; while upon White it is reddish The Blue flowers are lowered three tones, and the Blue inclines to Green. ## Orange Ground. (477.) Grey much lowered; less Red than upon White. Flowers paler, and of a Blue less Red or less Violet than uponWhite ground. ## Yellow Ground. (478.) Grey higher than upon White ground, more Violet. Flowers of a more Violet-Blue, less Green than upon a White ground ## Green Ground. (479.) The Grey is reddish, while upon White ground it appears greenish. The Blue takes some Red or some Violet, but it loses much of its vivacity; it resembles some Blues of the silk-vat, which, in ceding some Yellow to the water, become Blue-Violet or Slate-colour. ## Blue Ground. (480.) The Blue ground being fresher than that of the ornament, it follows that it Oranges the Blue of the flowers; that is to say, it Greys them in the most disagreeable manner. The Grey ornament is Oranged and lighter than upon the White ground ## Violet Ground. (481.) Grey lowered, yellowed, impoverished, Blue tends to Green, and impoverished.