## IL BORDER OF FIVE INCHES AND A HALF IN HEIGHT, REPRE-SENTING ROSES WITH THEIR LEAVES. # Blach Ground. (482.) This border is particularly useful to serve as an example of the effect of two colours, Red and Green, which are very common in the vegetable world, and often represented upon paper-hangings. (483.) The Green is less Black, lighter, fresher, and purer, and its brown tones rodder than upon a White ground: with respect to its light tones, I see them yellower; while, on the contrary, they appeared bluer to three persons accustomed to observe colours. This difference, on the other hand, as I at last found, was due to my comparing together the ensemble of leaves upon a Black ground with that of leaves upon a White ground; while the other persons instituted their comparison more particularly between the Browns and the light tones of Green placed upon the same ground. This difference in the manner of sceing the same objects will be the subject of some remarks hereafter. Rose lighter, yellower than upon a White ground. ## On a dark Red Ground. (484.) Green more beautiful, less Black, lighter than upon a White ground. Rose more Lilac perhaps than upon a White ground. The good effect of the border upon this ground is due chiefly to the greatest part of the Rose not being contiguous to Red but to Green, because the ensemble of the border and the ground exhibits flowers the Rose of which contrasts with the Green of their leaves, while the same Green contrasts with the Red of the ground, which is deeper and warmer than the colour of the flowers. ## On an Orange Ground. (485.) The Green lighter, a little bluer than upon a White ground. Rose much more Violet than upon a White ground. The general effect is not agrecable. ## On a Yellow Ground. (486.) Green bluer than upon a White ground. Rose more Violet, purer than upon a White ground. The ensemble exhibits a good effect of contrast. On a Green Ground, the tone of which is nearly equal to that of the lights of the Leaves, and the hue of which is a little bluer. (487.) Green of the leaves lighter, yellower than upon 8 White ground. Rose fresher, purer, more velvety, than upon & White ground. Ground of an agreeable effect, from harmony of analogy with the colour of the leaves, and from harmony of contrast with the rose of the flowers. ## On a Blue Ground. (488.) Green lighter, more golden than upon a White ground. Rose yellower, less fresh than upon a White ground. Although the green leaves do not exactly produce a bad effect upon the ground, yet the roses lose much of their freshness, and the appearance of the ensemble is not agrecable. ## On a Viokt Ground. (489.) Green yellower, clearer than upon & White ground. Rose faded. If the ground does not injure the Green of the leaves, then it injures the rose so much that it is not agreeable. ## Blach Ground. (491.) The ensemble clearer than upon a White ground. Orange finer, brighter than upon a White ground. White the same. Green clearer, redder. The roses and the violets gain nothing from the Black. ## Red-Brown Ground. (492.) Ensemble clearer than upon a White ground. Whites and Greens effective. An orange-flower, contiguous to the ground, for the reason explained above (460.), acquires a brilliancy which it has not upon a White ground. ## Orange Ground. (493.) Ensemble more sombre, more tarnished than upon White ground. Orange-flowers and roses tarnished, lilaca bluer. This assortment is not good ## Yellow Ground. (494.) The orange-flower contiguous to the ground evidently loses some of its vivacity, in comparison with the Whito ground. The Whites are less beautiful than upon Red ground. The Greens are bluer than upon a White ground. The roses become bluer, the violets acquire some brilliancy. The whole effect is good, because there is but little Yellow in the border, and but littlo Orange contiguous to the ground. ## Green Ground. (495.) The ground being purer than the Green of the leaves had not a good effect relatively to these latter. On the other hand, the Green in the border was in too small a quantity to produce a harmony of analogy, and it had not sufficient Red for a harmony of contrast. ## Blue Ground. (496.) The Orange have a good effect, the Greens were reddened as well as the Whitee. The roses and the lilacs lost some of their freshnees. This arrangement did not produce a good effect, because there was not sufficient Yellow or Orange in the border. ## Violet Ground. (497.) Orange more beautiful than upon White ground. Roses and violets espocially less beautiful than upon a White ground. A mediocre assortment. ## Grey Ground. (498.) As might bo casily premised, this ground was extremely favourable to all the colours of the border, without exception. (499.) The examination we have made of four sorts of borders has this twofold advantage, that it enables us to verify exactly the conclusions which are directly deducible from the law of simultaneous contrast of colours, besides presenting to us the effects which we could scarcely have deduced from the same law without the aid of experiment. I now speak 1°. Of the influence which a complementary exercises by its quality of luminousness upon the colour to which it is added (460.). 2. Of the very different manner in which not only different people, but even the same person, will judge of the colours of a more or less complex pattern having a certain number of colours, according to the attention the spectator gives at a certain moment to the different parts (483.). (500.) The examination which we have made of the border of roses with their leaves (No. 3.), and especially of that of the border of flowers varied in their forms and hues (No. 4.), makes us feel the necessity of a knowledge of the law of contrast to assort the colours of objocts represented upon a border with the colour which serves as a ground to them. The examination of the border No. 4. has well demonstrated experimentally that this assortment presents so much the more difficulty, as we wish to have the grounds of s purer tint, and more varied colours in the objects we intend placing on them : besides, in demonstrating the good effect of grey, as a ground for these latter objecta, it has furnished the example of a fact which may be deduced from the law, and which is in perfect accordance with what practice has long since taught us.