# SECTION I. ON COLOURING GEOGRAPHICAL MAPS. (521.) Tí colouring of Geographical Charta, as is well known, gives many advantages in presenting readily to the eyes their different component parts, whether continent, empire, kingdom, or republic; state or country. Until lately, the colouring of maps has always depended upon the caprice of the colourer ; yet it appears to me there are some rules which it would not be uscless to observe. (522.) Firstly, the colours should be as pale as possible, especiaily those which are naturally sombre, as blue and violet, so that the reading of the names may always be easy; but preference must be given to the luminous colours, red, orange, yellow, and light green, and to employing only their bright tones. (523.) Secondly, all the parts which have some common relation together should receive a single colour, each part being distinguished from the contiguous parts by a difference of tone. (524.) To attain this end it is not necessary to employ as many different tones as there are parts to bə distinguished; it suffices that we can perceive the difference of tone in the contiguous parts without difficulty. Suppose, for example, there are thirteen divisions in a map, which, although very small, are distinguished one from the other by means of five tones of a single scale. In case we found that certain tones would be too near each other, we could give them an extremely light tint of the colour of the nearest scale. For iustance, if we found that the tone 2, which is near the tone 1, was not sufficiently distinct from it, we could, if the colour was rose, give it a tint of crimson-red. (525.) If we had a surface contiguous to the preceding, we would have to choose the complementary of the first colour; if we had a second surface, we would have to take a colour distinct from the other two. For example, supposing we had rose and green, we take yellow for the second.