(526.) We could proceed in an analogous manner when we would represent the currents of the occan; that is, have recourse to the tones of a blue scale, which is the colour usually devoted to water. # SECTION II. ## ON COLOURING ENGRAVINGS. (527.) Ar a period when so many persons have sought the means of rendering accessible to every mind much of the knowledge which was previously limited to the few, they have not overlooked the advantage that can be derived from coloured engravings, in presenting to the eyes productions which we wish to impress on the memory, or, by presenting them in one view to those who, having studied them, might have forgotten the generalisation they offer. The application of colours to these points is, in some respecta, an extension of the colouring of geographical maps and plans. (528.) Without partaking of the infatuation of many persons for engravings so much as to consider they take the place of books which treat specially of the knowledge to which these pictures refer, I am convinced, however, that by pointing out to the student their relation to the principal facts of the subject he is studying, especially in habituating him to create those pictures for his own use,—I am convinced, I repeat, that these pictures are one of the best elements of instruction we possess, at the present day; and I also think that, if they have had undoubted advantages in thestudy of the natural sciences, especially in that of geology, they will not have less in any other study when we make a rational use of them, concurrently with the study of the details connectod with, the general relations they express. (529.) It ig, doubtless, a matter of indifference whether we employ one colour or another in a given engraving; yet, in considering the object of these engravinge, it is clear that all which can concur to facilitate the conception of the relations they represent, and aid the memory in retaining them, is s means of perfecting their execution. (530.) The advantages we may derive from the colouring of engravings are, I consider, of many kinds. ## 1. Advantage in the general Distinctness of Parts. (531.) The different parts of a picture may be distinguished 1°. By the colours of different scales; 2°. By different tones of the same scale ; and all that has been said in the last subdivisiong, treating of colouring a geographical chart, is applicable to engravings. ## 2. Advantage in the Distinctness of different Objects, either by Order of Superposition or by Örder of Šuccession. (532.) If, in a picture, we represent objects superimposed in a certain order, we can conveniently represent each of them by one of the colours of the solar spectrum, taken in the order it is found, beginning with red, for example, and taking successively orange, yellow, green, blue, purple, and violet. In the case where the number of these colours is insufficient, wo can take different tones of their scales, and we can also modify these tones by having recourse to the scales nearest to the scale to which they relate. (533.) It is evident that, by the same artifice, we can represent a succession of persons or things. ## 3. Advantage in the Connection or Mixture of different Parts. (534.) By thejuxtaposition of divers colours, each representing a different object, we can represent the connection of these objects ; so also by the mixture of different colours, each representing a different object, we can represent the union, fusion, or mixture of these objects, in having regard 1°. To the formation of the binary colours, such s Orange =Red +Yellow. Green = Yellow+ Blue. $$
\begin{array} { r l } { { \bf V } \mathrm { i o l e t } } & { { } = { \bf B } \mathrm { l u e } \quad + { \bf R e d . } } \end{array}
$$ 2°. To the formation of the tertiary colours, represented by the binary colours more or less tarnished with black. In mixing, we can express the proportion of each of the elementary colours by a number. (535.) Something would be wanting in the expression of my ideas on the use that can be made of coloured engravings, if I did not anticipate an objection, which will certainly occur to the minds of many of my readers; it is the inconvenience they think will arise by devoting certain colours to subordinateobjects, through relations which may be more or less modified, if not greatly altered, by the progress of knowledge. This is a graver objection than it appears at first aspect, because, upon reflection, it does not differ at bottom from that which was lately raised against tho utility of methodical or rational nomenclatures in the progressive sciencea. (536.) I was the first to recognise the inconvenience of strictly definite names to designate material objects, when the relations upon which these names rest are of a variable nature, or when, being the expression of a certain manner of interpreting the facts to which they relate, this view becoming changed, the nomenclature is then found more or less in direct opposition to it. For instance, according to the rules of chemical nomenclature, the term muriate of oxide of sodium, signifying the combination of muriatic acid with the oxide of the metal sodium, was applied to common salt, at a period when it was befieved that such, in fact, was its composition. But later researches having induced the belief that it contains neither acid nor oxide of sodium, but two simple elements, chlorine and sodium, wo give it the name of chloride of sodium. These expressions are opposed to each other. Thus, from the first it results that the O·6034 parts of the salt represent the muriatic acid and oxygen, and, conformably to this result, it is thought that these bodies were in suitable proportions to each other to constitute an oxygenated muriatic acid, while the result of the second expression is, that the O-6034 of the weight of marine salt, instead of belonging to a compound body, oxygenated muriatic acid, belongs to a simple body, chlorine. Let us examine the real inconvenience of this state of things, in order to ascertain if it is sufficiently important to induce us to abandon an excellent method of expressing these relations by a rational nomenclatare. (537.) It is evident that when a theory comes to be changed, the nomenclature, which was a concise expression of it, renders instruction more difficult than it would be if the nomenclature was insignificant; but this difficulty, of short duration, disappears when the theory which replaces the old comes in its iurn to be summed up in the new nomenclature, which, equally methodical as the first, has also its advantages. Thus, in taking the preceding example, we see that the nomenclature of the muriatic compounds had only a positive inconvenience at the epoch when they proposed the new theory of chlorine by the terms of the old nomenclature ; but this, once replaced by the new, order was immediately re-established, and the old is entered in the archives of science, where it still serves those who wish tostudy the history of the variationsof chemical theory, as, when it was considered to be the expression of the truth, it served him who wished to study the elements of the science on which it depended. (538.) In speaking of the utility of methodical or rational nomenclatures, I have no wish to defend the abuses to which they are liable. I have supposod that they rest upon a system of perfectly definite facts, and which had alroady been the object of discussions sufficiently numerous and profound, so that their interpretation might be conridered as definite relatively to the state of hnowledge at the epoch when this interpretation took place. (539.) I consider this digression necessary to clearly develope my idea respecting the utility of colouring engravings according to the principles I have proposed. Once these principles are understood by those who employ this methodical or rational colouring, the use of pictures thus treated will greatly aid the understanding of the text to which they are annexed, either for students who see them for the first time, or for the learned who consult them with the intention of recalling things forgotten: finally, the relations between given objects expressed by colours, becoming altered with the progress of knowledge, or by the difference of opinion existing between contemporary authors, the same principles directing the employment of colours in engravings should express these variations. To those who consult them, these pictures will render services analogous to those rendered by methodical nomenclature applied to the same subject, in the study of the variations in science. I conceive, also, under the historical relation, we can employ this colouring in a way which those who have not reflected upon the subject are far from suspecting.