# INTRODUCTION. (556.) Tur title of this section is sogeneral, that I must briefly indicate the subjects which I have thought proper to comprehend in it, and the order in which they will be examined. I shall treat in succession — 1°. On the assortment of stuffs with the wood of chairs, &c. 2°. On the assortment of frames with the pictures, engravings and lithographs which they' circumscribe. 3°. On the general decoration of interiors of churches. 4°. On the decoration of museuma, galleries, &c. 5°. On the choice of colours for theatres. 6°. On the decoration of interiors— houses, palaces, &c. — with regard to the assortment of colours. # CHAPTER L ON THE ASSORTMENT OF STUFFS WITH THE WOOD OF CHAIRA (557.) WHEN we would assort the colour of a stuff with that of a wood for furniture, we must distinguish two conditions; that where we would obtain the greatest possible advantage from two colours by each giving value to the other ; and that where, considering the stuff and the wood as one object, we regard only the colour of the stuff relatively to that of the objects which, with the chair, compose the furniture. It is evident, then, that, in the first instance, we must have between the two parts of the chair-the stuff and the wood harmony of contrast; and in the second, harmony of analogy. ## FIRsT CASE. (558.) Nothing contributes so much to enhance the beauty of a stuff intended for chairs, sofas, &c., as the selection of the wood to which it is attached; and, reciprocally, nothing contributes so much to increase the beauty of the wood as the colour of the stuff in juxtaposition with it. After what has been said, it is evident that we must assort\_ Violet or blue stufs with yellow woods; such as citron, the roots of the ash, maple, satin-wood, &c. Green stuffs, with rose or red coloured woods, as mahogany. Violet- or blue-greys are equally good with yellow woods, as green-greys are with the red woods. But in all these aseortments, to obtain the best possible effect it is necessary to take into consideration the contrast resulting from height of tone ; for a dark blue or violet stuff will not accord so well with a yellow wood as a light tone of the same colours; and it is for this reason that yellow does not assort so well with mahogany as with a wood of the same colour, but not so deep. (559.) Among the harmonies of contrast of tone that we can make with wood which we leave of the colour which is peculiar to it, as ebony, its brown colour permits its employment with light stuffs to produce contrasts of tone, rather than contrasts of colour. We can also employ it with very brilliant, intense colours; such as poppy, scarlet, aurora, flame-colour, &c. (560.) When we employ painted woods instead of those which retain their natural colour, it is better, for a given stuff, to paint the wood of such colour as will best assort with the stuff. For assortments of this kind, I believe we cannot do better than refer to the examples of the assortments of the principal colours with white, black, and grey. (Part I., Prolegomena, § 4. p. 64., and following.) ## SECOND CAsE. (561.) Ebony wood, on account of its brown colour, may be employed with dark stuffs to produce the assortments of analogy. In this case it can be allied with brown tones, and with red, blue, green, and violet. It is scarcely necessary to remark that these assortments prevent our employing with ebony white and yellow inlaying wood, which can be used with more or less