advantage when we employ assortments which enter into the case of harmonies of contrast (559.). (562.) Frequent use is made of crimson woollen velvet with mahogany. This assortment, which is related to the harmony of analogy, is preferable to many othera, by the sole consideration of the great stability of the colour of the stuff, and, consequently, independent of every idea of harmony. This induces me to examine it under several relationg, that we may make the best possible use of it, according to the particular aim in view. When, in assorting crimson with mahogany, we wish to produce the harmony of analogy, in marking out the lines where the wood and stuff touch, we can employ a cord or narrow galloon of yellow, or of golden yellow, with gilt nails; or, better still, a narrow galloon of green or black, according as we wish the border to be more or less prominent. In assorting the same coloura, we are guided by the twofold motive of the stability of the crimson colour and of the beauty of the mahogany; we must necessarily increase the distance which separates the stuff from the wood, by making the black or green stuff of the border wider. (563.) It is in consequence of the red woods always losing more or less of their beauty by the juxtaposition of red stuffs that we can never ally mahogany to colours which belong to the vivid reds, such as poppy, cherry ; and more particularly to orange-reds, such as scarlet, nacarat, aurora; for these colours are so bright, that, in taking away from this wood its peculiar tint, it becomes no better than oak or black-walnut. # CHAPTER IL ## ON THE BELECTION OF FRAMES FOR PICTUREE AND ENGRAVINOS. (564.) IF a frame is necessary to a picture, engraving, or drawing, to isolate them from the different objects which are found in their vicinity, it is always more or less injurious to the illusion the painter or designer has wished to produce, when they occupy the place destined for them. It is a fact of which I shall speak hereafter (584.). I only purpose in this chapter to examine the relation of colour which must exist between the frame and the object it surrounds. (565.) Gilt frames accord well with large pictures painted in oil, when these latter do not represent gildings, at least so near the frame, as to render it easy for the eye to compare the painted gold with the metal itself. I will instance a bad effect of this proximity: a Gobelins tapestry after Laurent, represents a genius armed with a torch, near which is a gilt altar, executed in yellow silk and wool, which are entirely eclipsed by the metallic brilliancy of the gilt bronzes profusely spread over the mahogany frame which holds the tapestry. This is one of the most suitable examples for convincing us that the richness of a frame may not only be a fault against art, but also against common sense. (566.) Bronze frames which have but little yellow brilliancy do not injure the effect of an oil picture which represents a scene lighted by artificial light, such as that of candles, torches, a conflagration, &c. (567.) When black frames, such as ebony, detach themselves sufficiently from an oil painting, they are favourable to large subjects ; but whenever they are used, it is necessary to see if the browns of the painting or drawing which are contiguous do not lose too much of their vigour. (568.) A grey frame is favourable to many landscape scenes painted in oil, particularly when, the picture having a dominant colour, we take a grey lightly shaded with the complementary of that colour. (569.) Gilt framese accord perfectly with black engravings and lithographs, when we take the precaution of leaving a certain extent of white paper round the subject. (570.) Frames of yellow wood, or of a colour called bois, accord very well with lithographic landscapes; it is possible to greatly modify the appearance of the design by mounting it on tinted paper, when we do not desire the effect of a white margin. (571.) The following observations, easily repeated, are very suitable to demonstrate the influence of coloured frames. I took nine proofs, as similar as possible, of the same lithographic subject, having a surface of 10ł inches, by 15ł. It was a view of Lake Zurich. They were pasted on cardboards of equal size, and each one introduced into a deal-wood frame of 2ł inches in width; then I introduced into the frame between the lithograph and the wood a border of tinted cardboard of 21 inches in width, so that the eight proofs were entirely isolated from the wood by a coloured band. I compared each of them with the ninth, which was in a frame isolated from the wood by a white band of 2ł inches in breadth. ## Black border. A vivid diffusod light has a great influence in changing the tones of a picture: it weakens them, and we must understand that the light tones, lose more than the half-tones, and the browns still more. The browns which are distant from the border appear blacker than when surrounded by the white border, in consequence of the enfeebling of the tone of the lights and the half-lights near the black border. If the black does not heighten the red of the lithographic ink, it cortainly dees not enfeeble it. ## Grey Border. If it does not enfeeble the lights and the half-tones like the black, on the other band, it does not heighten them like the white, it imparts to them some red. But a remarkable effect erhibited is a harmony of perspective, if I may so express myself, which takes place neither with black nor with white. The effect of which I speak proceeds in part from the analogy of the grey border with the colour of the lithograph : it is evident that this border destroys in part the bad effect of the frame, which I shall describe hereafter (584.). ## Red Border. The browns near the border appear lighter, and those which are distant appear deeper, than the corresponding browns with the white border; the whites are whiter; the general effect of the landscape is less red, or greener, with the red border. ## Orange Border. It produces a contrary effect to grey, relative to the harmony of analogy of the perspective. In fact, the blue which the orange gives to the lithograph enfeebles neither the browns nor the half-tones; but it greatly enfeebles the lights, and gives at the same time more brilliancy to the whites, by destroying the tan (roux), or more exactly, the orange contained in this tan-colour (for the tan is but orange or yellow + red + black). ## Yellow Border. All the browns and the half-tints take more tone than in the white border. The whites acquire & little vivacity by losing some yellow, and a remarkable effect is, the bringing the perspective nearer to the spectator, contrary to the effect of the grey border, if the daylight is intense ; for, in the contrary case, the whites are darkened, becoming lilac. It is easy to perceive that the violet tint arising from the contrast of yellow neutralises some yellow in the lights, at the same time it heightens the black of the browns from the same cause; and thus brings the perspective nearer; but as the effect of contrast is more evident in a feeble than in a vivid light, the whites of the picture, in order to appear more vivid with the yellow border than with the white one, require that the daylight be sufficiently strong not to tint them with violet. ## Green Border. It weakens the browns: it reddens the half-tints, the lights and the whites, but the latter more feebly; the whites, in the green border, are less light than in the white. As with the yellow, the complementary tint of the border is much more apparent when the daylight is less vivid. The effect of green is agreeable. ## Blue Border. The effect of this border is most definite, and certainly the most remarkable of all those we can obtain by the juxtaposition of a coloured band with a lithograph. The orange shade to which it gives rise, spreading over the landscape, produces the harmony of a dominant colour(179.), and changes the aspect of thelithograph surrounded by white to that of'a drawing in bistre or sepia on india-paper. Doubtless the reddish tint of the lithographic ink, combining with the complementary orange arising from the juxtaposition of the blue, produces the remarkable effect of which I speak. (70tr.) Any one who prefers the effect of sepia upon india-paper to the lithograph upon white paper can change the latter to the former by a simple blue border. ## Violet Border. The browns near the border lose much of their tone; the half-tints are greener; the whites and the lights are yellower than in the white border.