## CHAPTER V. THE CHOICE OF COLOURS FOR A THEATRE (590.) From the importance given to the lighting of a theatre, we might conclude that light colours would generally predominate; for no one can be ignorant how much light such dark colours as blue and crimson require, in order to become illuminated. (591.) Under the relation of Colour I distinguish four principal parts in a theatre: — The interior of the boxes, The fronts of the boxes, The ceiling, The drop-scene and the curtain. # ARTICLE 1. # Interior of the Boxes. (592.) The linings of the boxes of a theatre should never be rose-red, wine-red, or light crimson, because these colours have the serious disadvantuges of making the skin of the spectators appear more or less green. To be convinced of this truth, it is sufficient to make the following experiment. Place two half-sheets of paper coloured rose, wine-lees, or light crimson, $\bullet , \bullet ^ { \prime } ,$ and two sheets of paper flesh-coloured, ${ \pmb p } , { \pmb p } ^ { \prime } ,$ as represented in fig. 1. Pl. 1.; in observing them simultaneousl $\mathbf { \sigma } \cdot \mathbf { y _ { \gamma } }$ we perceive that $\pmb { p }$ loses much of its rose relatively to ${ \pmb p } ^ { \prime } ,$ and that o has become more violet than $\bullet ^ { \prime }$ ; finally, o and $\pmb { p }$ injure each other mutually; a result easily understood, since the two colours losing red, ${ \underline { { p } } } ,$ which has the leas $^ { 1 t } ,$ must appear of a greenishyellow, and $^ { o , }$ which has the most, will appear more violet. (593.) If we replace the half-sheets o and $^ { o ^ { \prime } , }$ by half-sheets of a light green, an effect absolutely contrary to the preceding will be observed ; that is to say, ${ \pmb p }$ will appear more rose than $p ^ { \prime } ,$ and o will appear of a more intense green, more brilliant than ${ \pmb \sigma } ^ { \prime }$ These experiments, repeated by artificial light, give the same result s by daylight. (594.) We may conclude, then, that, whenever we would enhance the value of rose complexions by means of a coloured ground, the colour least favourable will be rose, and the most favourable pale green. (595.) I must remark thst the height of tone of the green colour exercises an influence upon the result; for a very deep green, acting by contrast of tone, will so enfeeble the tone of the complexion, that the contrast of colour, properly so called, will be insensible: a deep red, by the infuence of analogy, blanches the complexion. ## ARTICLE 2. ## The Fronts of the Boxes. (596.) There are many reasons why the fronts of the boxes have less influence on the complexion than the interiors, which, being usually of a uniform colour, serve, so to speak, as a ground to the faces of the persons occupying the boxes ; while the fronta, always painted in colours more or less varied, being more distant from the complexions, would lose much of their infuence, if care was taken to cover them with green Utrecht velvet, their borders stuffed with hair: though, whatever it may be, it is, I believe, always well not to choose red for the dominant colour, and to be moderate in the gildings, in order that the gold of the toilet may come out better. ## ARTICLE 3. ## The Ceiling of Theatres. (597.) The ceiling can only exercise influence upon the audience by reflection. We may put on it, without inconvenience, red paintings and gilding. ## ARTICLE 4. ## The Drop-scene and the Curtain (598.) What I have said of the ceiling is applicable to the drop-scene and the curtain; yet I must remark that the latter