being more exposed to sight than the ceiling, if it has a red or rose colour, it presents the objection of disposing the eyes to soe green as a consequence of successive contrast (79.). A green curtain, on the contrary, disposes the eyes to see rose, and under this relation is preferable to the first. In the chapter on the dress of females (see the following section), I shall give some original details respecting the influence which the draperies exercise on the complexion, sccording as they produce the effecte of contrast or of reflection. # CHAPTER VL ON THE DECORATION OF THE INTERIORS OF HOUSES AND PALACE&, WITH RESPECT TO THE ASSORTMENT OF COLOURS. (599.) ArrEr having treated of the conditions which the carpet must fulfil with regard to the dimensions of the apartment it is intended to occupy—of the conditions which must be found in the paper-hangings—of the adaptation of stuffs to the wood of the furniture—of the adaptation of pictures, engravings, &c., to their frames—I shall nert consider the mutual relations of the different articles of furniture of an apartment in their respective colours. (600.) The following is the order in which I shall examine the matters which are the object of this Chapter : 1" Paragraph. Concerns the adaptation of colours relatively to the interiors which we wish to decorate with tapestry or paper-hangings. It comprehends the following articles:— 1. The wainscoting, mounted with its cornice, or moulding. 2ud. The tapestry or hangings, commencing at the moulding, and terminating at the cornice of the ceiling. 3r. The cornice of the ceiling. 4th. The chairs placed against the wainscoting. 5th. The window-curtains; and, if it is 8 sleeping apartment, the bed-curtains. 6th. The doors. 7h. The windows. 8. The carpet. gth. The picturea. 2ud Paragraph. Concerns the adaptation of the colours relatively to interiors, the walls of which are panneled or covered with marble, stucco, or ornamented with paintings on wood, stone, or plaster. It comprehends the following articles :— 1. Wainscoted interiors. 2d. Interiors covered with marble. 3rd. Interiors covered with stucco. 4th. Interiors of painted wood, stucco, stone, &c. ## §1. ON THE ASSORTMENT OF COLOURS IN CONNICTION WITH THK DECORATION OF INTERIORS, LNTENDED TO RECLIVE TAPIBTRY OR PAPIR-HANGING&. ## ARTICLE 1. ## The Wainscoting. (601.) Wainscotings are used more particularly toconceal the walls, to preserve the furniture from damp on the lower stories (in which case they receive paint, which could not be durably applied on a humid wall); finally, they are used to preserve the hangings from the blows of the chairs, or more generally from the blows of the furniture placed before it. Hence, the height of the wainscot from the floor should be exactly that of the chairs. In this way, the hangings are protected from injury; and besides, the border of the hangings will not be hidden from sight, as happens when the chairs rise above the wainscot, a very common defect in modern apartments, which is doubtless owing to the fact that builders, requiring in a house of given height as many stories as possible, compel the architect to reduce the height of the rooms, which creates the necessity of reducing the height of the wainscoting; thus, in diminishing that of the hangings, we augment to the eye the defect of proportion in the story. (602.) Now-a-day8, except in old mansions, we seldom meet with wainscoting rising above the chairs and other furniture, which it is usual to place before them. The sight of the upper part of the wainscoting is so little agreeable, that it shocks some persons, who cannot perceive the bad effect of a wainscoting which the chairs rise above. This feeling arises, probably from the fact that the furniture should be more valuable than what it conceals, and that a piece of furniture taller than the wainscoting appears more distinct to the sight than when we see a wainscoting above it with which it has more analogy than it has with the hangings. Finally, the portion of the wainscoting which exceeds the furniture in height, considered relatively to the part concealed, offends the principle of distinct view more than the part of the hangings which is uncovered relatively to that which may be concealed by a piece of the furniture. (603.) From this fact, that the wainscotings are generally concealed by the furniture placed before them, we may conclude that they must be of a dark, rather than of a light colour, and that if they have ornaments, these must be simple, and not prominent. The wainscoting may be considered as serving as a ground to the furniture, whenever it is not entirely concealed by the latter. We shall see hereafter what colour is necessary to be given them that they may suit their purpose. ## ARTICLE 2. ## Hangings. ## A. Hangings properly so called. (604.) In consequence of an apartment never being too lights since we can diminish the daylight by means of blinds, curtains, &c., and, on the other hand, when night brings the most vivid and economic light, other things being equal, it is necessary, on that account, for the hangings to be of a light and not of a dark colour, so that, in place of absorbing light, they reflect much of it. 1. Hangings of a uniform Colour, including Paper-hangings (447.). (605.) We proscribe all dark hanginge, whatever be their colour, because they absorb too much light; we proscribe also, red and violet hangings, because they are exceedingly unfavourable to the colour of the skin. It.is for this latter reason that we reject the light tones of the red and violet scales. Orange is a colour that can never be much employed, because it fatigues the eye too much by its great intensity. Among the simple colours, there is really scarcely any which are advantageous except yellow and the light tones of green and of blue. Yellow is lively : it combines well with mahogany furniture, but not generally with gilding. I say generally, because there are some instances where this alliance can be made (615. and 629.). Light-green is favourable to pale complexions as well as to rosy; to mahogany furniture and to gilding. Light-blue is less favourable than green to rosy complexions, especially in daylight; it is particularly favourable to gilding, and it does not injure mahogany, and associates better than green with yellow or orange woods. (606.) White or whitish hangings of a light grey (either normal, green, blue, or yellow), uniform or with velvet patterns of the colour of the ground, are also. good for use. (607.) When we choose hangings upon which to place a picture, they must be uniform, and establish the greatest contrast possible between its colour and that which predominates in the picture, if the hangings are not of normal grey. I shall speak again of this assortment (640.). 2. Hangings presenting a pure Colour with some White, or several Tones belonging to the same Scale or to neighbouring Scales, including Paper-hangings of the second Category (447.). (608.) All that I have said of hangings of uniform pure colours is applicable to bangings in which one of these colours is allied to white, with this exception, however, that these latter evidently reflect more light with equality of toue, and that they are not so suitable for pictures, whenever their tone is light. Besides, among effective hangings of this kind, there is scarcely any other than ticking or the papers which imitate it, in which the colour allied with white is darkened, and it is well known that these latter hangings are intended for places which do not admit of pictures. (609.) Hangings in the best taste are those — 1°. Which present designs of a light tone, either normal or coloured grey, upon a white ground, or the reverse, and in which the pattern is at least equal in extent of surface to the ground ; for small pattern has a very mediocre effect, at least in a large room. ## $2 ^ { \circ }$ Patterns of two or more tones of the same or of very near scales assorted conformably to the Law of Contrast. (610.) Unfortunately, it is only stained papers which present hangings of a clear grey or of very light colours, because the fabrics we would tint with light tones of the colours we recommend would not resist the decolouring atmospheric agencies sufficiently, to enable us to employ them economically, so advantageously as paper-hangings. 3. Hangings with varied and brilliant Colours, representing Flowers, Insects, Birds, Human Figures, Landscapes, corprehending Paper-hangings of the first Category (447.). (6ll.) I have no remark to make on these hangings, which are generally either painted canvas or stained papers, except that they have been employed in decorating large apartments; and what we call chintzes are only suitable to small roome, such as cabinets, boudoirs, &c. In every case these hangings, in consequence of their vivid colours and their patterns being more or less complex, do not admit of pictures; and moreover, inasmuch as hangings with landscapes and human figures should exhibit themselves distinctly to the sight in all their extent, they must therefore not be concealed by the furniture in any of their parts. ## B. Borders to Hangings. (612.) When we proceed to adapt & border to a monochromous hanging, or to one presenting a dominant colour, we must first determine whether we can have recourse to a harmony of analogy or to a harmony of contrast; in all cases the border ought to detach itself more or less from the hangings which it is intended to circumscribe and separate from contiguous objects. I will now examine the borders most suitable to the three groups of hangings which I have previously distinguished (447.). ## 1. Borders for Hangings of a Uniform Colour (605.). ## . Hangings of a Uniform pure Colour (605.). (613.) Harmony of contrast is the most suitable to papers of a uniform pure colour, such as yellows, greens, and blues, consequently we recommend for the dominant colour of the border the complementary of tbat of the hangings, whether this border represents ornaments, arabesques, flowers, or imitations of stuffa, either fringes or tissues. But as every contrast of colour ought not generally to offer at the same time a contrast of tone, then the general tone of the border must only surpass that of the hangings by the number of degrees necessary to avoid a deadening effect in the assortment. If a double border is required,— for example an interior border of flowers, and an exterior border, — the latter must be of a much deeper tone than the other, and must always be smaller. (614.) Among the colours suitable for borders we recommend the following as harmonies of contrast :— 1°. For yellow hangings,violet and blue mixed with white; when it is the question of a fringe, of flowers garnished with their leaves, or of ornaments. 2°. For groen hangings, red in all its bues, in fringes, flowers, or ornaments ; the painted gilt-yellows upon a dark red ground; the borders of brass. 3°. For white bangings orange and yellow; whether in fringes, flowers, or ornaments; the borders of brass : these are much better on blue than on green. (615.) Among the harmonies of analogy, I recommend the following:— For yellow hangings, a border of brass (629.). b. White or Whitish Hangings of Normal Grey, Pearl Grey, or very pale coloured Grey, of a uniform Colour, or with a Velvet Pattern of the Colour of the Ground (606.). (616.) Papers of this kind admit of borders of all colours, but we must nevertheless avoid too great a contrast of tone in a border where we find one or more pure colours; for the intense tones of blue, violet, red, green, are too crude to combine with the light grounds of which we speak. Borders gilt by means of gold-leaf or of brass accord well with these grounds, especially with the whites or the grey whites. If a grey presents a tint of green, of blue, or of yellow, we may use bordors of the complementary of these tints taken many tones above, or of a grey, deeply tinged with this same complementary. (617.) Among the harmoniesof analogy, we may take for grey hangings borders of some tones higher than they are, and of a grey which may contrast with their tint but very lightly. 2. Borders for Hangings which present a pure Colour with White, or many Tones belonging either to the sume Scale or to contiguous Šcales (608. and following). (618.) All that has been said on the assortmentof borders with hangings of a uniform pure colour (613.)is applicable not only to the assortment of borders to bangings where a pure colour is combined with white, but also to the assortment of borders to paper of many tones of the same scale or of neighbouring scales. (619.) As to the assortment of the .border with colours presenting white or grey patterns, I must refer to what has been said above (616.) ## 3. Borders for Hangings of varied and brilliant Colours, representing Flowers, Insects, &c. (611. and following). (620.) For the most simple hangings of this sort, chintzes, we must have analogous borders. For hangings which present larger patterns than chintzes, and which are repeated like those of these latter, a binding of galloon suffices. (621.) Hangings with human figures, landscapes, in a word, all those which are pictures, require a frame either of painted, gilt, or bronzed wood, or, better still, a border imitated by painting. ## Colour of the Wainscoting relatively to the Hangings. (622.) After speaking of the height of the wainscoting, I said (603.) that I should return to speak of the colour most suitable to it. But before treating of particular cases, I must distinguish two general cases, according to whether the assortment of the hangings with the border enters into the harmonies of contrast of colour, or whether it enters either into the harmonies of contrast of scale or of contrast of huee, or into the harmonies of analogy. 18T CAsE.— The Assortment of the Hangings and the Border enters into the Čontrast of Colour. (623.) The colour of the wainscoting, or its dominant colour if it is of several tints (which must generally be more or less approximating), may be- 1°. The same as that of the border, but a little darker, and especially more or less broken with Biack ; 2°. Grey lightly tinted with the colour of the border, and taken at the same tone or very near it; 3°. The complementary of the colour of the hangings, in the case where the dominant colour of the border, although contrasting with that of the hangings properly so called, is not its complementary. If we employ a complementary lightly broken with Black, the moulding must be picked out in Brown on the tints of the border and the wainscoting; 4°. A Grey complementary to the colour of the hangings, always in the case where the border is not of the complementary of the hangings; In the four preceding cases, we bring out upon the colour of the hangings properly so called, that of the wainscoting, which we always tarnish more or less. By this means the colour of the hangings and the wainscoting are agreeably harmonised, and the border suitably separates these two parts, in contrasting the colour with the hangings, and in contrasting brilliancy and tone with the wainscoting ; 5°. A normal Grey of many tones, with which we may combine White. (624.) Without absolutely proscribing the assortment where the colour of the wainscoting is the same as that of the hanginge, but duller or deeper, yet I should say that in general it has a poor effect, and this arises particularly from the fact, that the colour of the border, which contrasts with that of the hangings and of the wainscoting, is in too feeble superficial proportion relatively to the other; and this defect is much more striking when the tone of the hangings and of the wainscoting is higher. 2ND Case.— The Assortment of the Hangings and the Border enters either into the Harmonies of Contrast of Scale or of Contrast of Hue, or into the Harmonies of Analogy. (625.) The colour of the wainscoting, or its dominant colour, if it ia of several tints, which must generally be more or less approximating to each other, may be 1°. The complementary of the colour of the hangings, but more or less broken, and a little deeper ; 2°. Grey complementary to the colour of the hanginge; 3°. A colour which, without being complementary, contrasts with that of the hangings; 4°. Grey, tinted by a colour wbich, without being complementary to that of the hangings, contrasts with them. (626.) When the bangings are white, or of an extremely feeble tone of colour, and the border does not stand out very strongly by its colour, we may make a harmony of tone or of hue with the tint of the wainscoting. For example, white, or nearly white hangings, with a gilt or brass border, harmonises well with a wainscoting which differs only by some tones wnore of the colour of the bangings, whether that colour belongs to the samne scale or to & neighbouring scale. ## ARTICLE 3. ## Cornice of the Ceiling. (627.) The cornice of a white ceiling must be of light colours, and but little varied. In general, it is for the painter to see what colours are most suitable, which must besides not accord with those of the hangings, but with the tints of the wainscoting. He must carefully avoid having white parts which can be confounded with the ceiling, if that is white, and, on the other hand, of colours too distant from each other, as regards the height of tone, and of their respective ecales; in a word, we must particularly avoid whatever will cause too much difference between the parts of the whole. When the hangings are white, or of a very pale grey, with a gilt or brass border, the cornice may present ornaments of the same material, and in this case they may stand upon a white, or upon a grey, a little deeper than that of the hangings. ## ARTICLE 4. ## Chairs placed in front of the Wainscoting. (628.) We must also, in this circumstance, distinguish the general case where we can have harmony of contrast of colour, and that where we can bave harmony of contrast either of scale or hue, or harmony of analogy. ## 1sT GENERAL CasE.— Contrast of Colour. (629.) The colour of the covering of chairs should be complementary to that of the hangings, properly so called, or, more generally, the same as that of the border, because this may be different from its complementary and contrast, nevertheless, with the tint of the hangings. We see, then, that in the general case which occupies our attention the chairs contrast with the hangings, as may also the wainscoting; but the colour of the chairs being pure, it will also be purified by that of the wainscoting, which, with this motive, we have advised to be deadened. There are a few remarks to be made:— 1°. The case of clearest contrast, ie., where the coloure of the hangings and the chairs are complementary,—is the most favourable to diatinct vision, 'as well as to successive contrast, whenever we observe separately the hangings, and afterwards look at the chairs separately, and vice versa. 2°. In the case where the colour of the hangings and of the chairs contrast without being complementary, we must take into consideration the degree of light inherent in the colour of the hangings. For example, if they are Blue, and the border is Yellow, the covering of the furniture being Yellow of a shade more golden than citron, this stuff must be of a much higber tone than the Blue tone of the hangings, and the tone of the wood of the chairs, &c., must be still higher than the Yellow, to avoid a dull appearance. 3°、We may border the stuff at the parts contiguous to the wood, either with well assorted dark colours, or with the same colour as the hangings, butof ahigher tone: there is also a means of harmonising the hangings and the furniture in uniting the same colours, but in inverse proportions. 4°. When, instead of sofas, arm, and other chaira, there is a divan which entirely conceals the wainscoting, we must take the complementary colour of the hangings, and in this case it is more advantageous that the colour of theborder, instcad of being complementary to that of the ground, forms with it a contrast of scale or of hue. It is in this circumstance particularly that yellow hangings bordered with brass in relief (615.), with a violet-coloured divan, will produce an excellent effect, at least by daylight; for we must not forget that Yellow, as well as Violet, loses in artificial light. 5°. We regard as harmony of contrast of colour light hangings of a pure colour with furniture of a Grey, the colour of which is very sensibly complementary to that of the hangings. 2ND GENERAL CasE.—Contrast of Scale, or of Hue ; Harmony of Analogy. (630.) The arrangements which enter into this general case will concern rooms differing in dimensions, and, according as they belong to the lively or grave harmonies, they will concern rooms of very different destinations. ## 1. Bright Assortments. (631.) In small rooms —such, for example, as boudoirs, where the hangings are bright—a harmony of contrast of hue, of scale, or a harmony of analogy, is generally preferable to a harmony of contrast of colour, if the hangings are uniforr, or if they have a dominant colour: but if it has & decided colour allied to white, as ticking, a watered stuff, or better, if it presents patterns of various colours, such as chintzes, the furniture most suitable will be a divan of the same material as the hangings; and we may remark that it is conformable with the object of boudoirs, or of similar places, to diminish apparently their extent to the eye, by employing only one material for the hangings and the chairs, intead of seeking to fix the eye upcn distinct objects. (632.) In lurge rooms there is an arrangement of good effect,— viz. white, or grey almost white, hangings with furniture of a pure colour, such as red, yellow, green, blue, and violet. When we employ these pure colours, we must only hoighten the tone of that which is suitable to avoid a faded appearance. Sky-blue is the most suitable for this arrangement; crimson, which is also employed, is too harsh, cspecially if the room is neither very large nor well lighted. ## 2. Grave Assortments. (633.) Assortments of this kind belong to places devoted to