quiet meetings, such as libraries, museums, studies, &c. In general, the smaller the place, or, what comes to the same thing, the less space there is to receive the hangings, the more the assortment must enter into the harmony of analogy. The tapestry or the hangings must present only normal grey, or a grey of a colour more or less broken; the chairs must be black or of a dark grey, either normal or coloured ; and in this case we can take a grey tinted with the complementary of tho colour of the grey of the hangings. If more contrast is desired, we can have recourse to the brown tones of this complementary of the colour which tints the grey of the hangings. # ARTICLE 5. # Window- and Bed- curtains. (634.) The window-curtains, and those of the bod, if it is a sleeping chamber, are similar to each other : they require — 1°. To be White, of silk or of embroidered muslin; 2°. To be coloured ; 3°. To be composed of a White and a coloured cur tain. Let as now see, when the curtains are not White, what colour is the most suitable. I distinguish two general cases, comprehending many particular ones. 1sT GENERsL CasE.—The Chairs have a decided Colour, such as Red, Yellow, Green, Blue, or Violet. (a) Particular Case.—The hangings have a pure colour, contrasting favourably with that of the chairs. The curtains will generally be of the colour of the chairs, and their borders will be of the colour of the hangings. (b) Particular Case.—The bangings are not of a pure colour. The curtains will be 1°. Of the colour of the chairs; 2°. Of the colour of the hangings with a border of the colour of the chairs. Q4 2ND GENERAL CBE.The Chairs are Grey, or of a very broken Colour. (a) Particular Case.—The hangings are of a decided colour. The curtains will be— 1°. Of the colour of the chaire, with a border of the colour of the hangings ; 2°. Of the complementary of the hangings, or of a colour contrasting favourably with them ; the colour of the border will be that of the hangings. (b) Particular Case.—The hangings of a Grey colour or White. The curtains will be 1°. Of the colour of the chairs ; 2°. Of s pure colour, which will assort the better with the Grey of the hangings, in proportion as it is complementary to the colour of the Grey, if this latter does not belong to the scale of normal Grey. ## ARTICLE 6. ## Doors. (635.) The doors, by their use, size, and position relative to the plane of the wall, being absolutely distinct from the wainscoting, should be distinguished from it by their colour, notwithstanding the contrary practice of painters, who make them the same. (636.) We should paint their different parta in many low tones of the same, or of approximating scales, and always according to the harmony of analogy, because it is a question of the parts of one object. The colour of the doors should be of normal grey, or of a grey tinged with the colour of the hangings or of its complementary, which will thus always unite with the hangings, either by harmony of analogy or by harmony of contrast. It is particularly through the clearness of the tones or of the hues that the doors will be distinguished from the wainscoting. The door-frame should be darker than the door itself.