# INTRODUCTION. (656.) IN explaining the applications of the law of contrast which form the subject of this Section, my intention is, in the instance of male clothing, to treat principally the question of the association of colours in military uniforms, as a matter of state economy ; and in the case of female clothing, of deciding the question of the associations which are most suitable when sitting for a portrait. The first question is entirely one of administrative economy; the second belongs solely to the domain of art. Under the latter relation, I shall attain the aim proposed, if, in the views set forth, the portrait painter finde the means of selecting associations of colours which, by imparting to his works more brilliancy and harmony, render them thereby less suscceptible of appearing antiquated when the prevailing fashion of his time is forgotten. Some readers may suppose, that, having already treated \* of many particulars of portrait painting, I ought to have then considered the question just referred to: my motive for doing otherwise was, that in the section On Colouring, if I could not omit mentioning this branch of painting, it was without giving the developments into whieh I am now about to enter, because not only would they have been out of proportion with the rest of the subject, but also certain details would not have been sufficiently elucidated, as I hope they will be by many facte which I have spoken of only in that part of the work which follows the section On Colouring. ## CHAPTER L ## MEN'S CLOTHINO. (657.) Ir is & fact known to many persons that a uniform compoeed of cloths of different colours may be worn much longer • Second Part, 1st Division, Section 3rd. and appear better to the eye, although nearly worn out, than a suit of a single colour, even when this latter is of a piece of cloth identical with one of those composing the first. The law of contrast gives the reason of this fact perfectly, as I shall show in the following article, in demonstrating the advantage of the assortment of colours for military uniforms in an economical relation. ## §1. OF TRE ADVANTAGIS OF CONTRABT CONBIDKRED WTTH RKGARD TO THE OPTICAL STRENGTHENING OR PUEIFYING OF THE VOLOUR OF CLOTHS FOR CLOTHING. ## ARTICLE 1. ## Of Uniforms, the Colours of which are complementary. (658.) Let us suppose a uniform of Red and Green, like that of many regiments of cavalry; by the law of contrast, the two colours, being complementary, mutually strengthen each other ; the Green renders the Red rediler, and the Red renders the Green greener. I suppose the augmentation of colour resulting from contrast to be one tenth for each of the cloths, the colour of which, seen separately, is represented by unity; by means of the juxtaposition each colour becomes then equal to 1 + r' ; I suppose also that a dress made simply of green or of red cloth, after having been worn a year, has lost one tenth of its colour; it is evident that a uniform composed of green and of rod cloth, after being worn for the same length of time, will not appear to the eye formed of two cloths which will have lost each one tenth of their original colour, since the Green gives Red to the Red, and the Red gives Green to the Green; and if we do not admit that the strengthening is precisely equal to one tenth of the original colour, nevertheless observation proves that the real fraction which expresses it is not far from that, so that if, on the supposition I have made, we cannot say that at the year's end a piece of a bi-coloured uniform exhibits cloths which have exactly the same colour as that of each new cloth seen separately, yet we are obliged to admit that the difference is small; I forgot to say that the two colours are taken at the same tone. (659.) This reasoning applies to bi-coloured uniforms, of which the colours, as Orange and Blue, Violet and Greenishyellow, Indigo and Orange-yellow, are complementary to each other; only we must take into account the difference of tone more or less great that may exist between then, when they are not taken at the same tone, as I have supposod in the preceding example. (660.) Deep Orange and Blue are susceptible of making a good uniform ; but the blue cloth must not be too deep to combine favourably with the bright Orange. (661.) Violet and Greenish-Yellow, s deep as possible, such as can be obtained from woad, are susceptible of forming a fine uniform for light cavalry. The only objection is to the violet colour, which is durable only when it is the result of the mixture of the vat of cochineal and indigo blue, and when it is taken at a certain height of tone. ## ARTICLE 2. ## Uniforms of which the Colours, without being complementary, are nevertheless very contrasting. (662.) Among the colours which are not mutually complementary, but of which the contrast is agreeable, and consequently advantageous for uniforms, I shall cite particularly Blue and Yellow, Blue and Scarlet, Green and Yellow. ## Blue and Yellow. (663.) These two colours accord well together; the Blue gives an Orange tint to the Yellow, much more evident when the tone of the latter is higher, and that of the Blue is lower. In its turn, under the same conditions, the Yellow communicates to the Blue a Violet tint, which brightens it; if the Blue has a disagreeable Green tint, the Yellow neutralises it; but if there exists a great difference of tone between the two 'colours, the contrast arising from this difference might go so far as to render insensible the effect resulting from contrast of colours; and besides, up to a certain point, the deep Blue will appear Black or less Violet, as the Yellow, in weakening itself, may appear Green. ## Blue and Scarlet. (664.) Deep Blue and Scarlet-Red make a good asaortment for a uniform; the first, by its Orange complementary, gives more fire to the Scarlet-Red, and this latter, in adding its complementary, Greenish-Blue, to the deep Blue, brings it up to Blue, properly so called ; for we must not forget that deep Blue tinted with Indigo or Prussian Blue, is rather Violet than pure Blue. In this assortment is included the uniform of Indigo-Blue and Madder-Red of many regiments in the French army. There is no doubt, that for show, a lighter Blue and an Orange-Madder purer, and consequently less dull and less rosy than the actual colours, would be prcferable, if no White enters into the uniform. ## Green and Yellow. (665.) Green and Yellow form an association pleasing to the eye by its gaiety, which especially suits a cavalry uniform. But it should be remarked, that to obtain the most suitable assortment, the Green must be lighter and yellower than that which accords well with Red, for the twofold reason that the Yellow which is in juxtaposition with Green, neutralising by its Violet a portion of tho Yellow of the Green cloth, exalts the Blue, and consequently removes some of the brilliancy of the Green; besides, this effect constantly tends to increase, because the Yellow of the green cloth is sooner altered than its Blue. On the other hand, the yellow cloth receiving some Red by its juxtaposition with Green, it must not be taken too Orange. This case may serve as an example,-in opposition to that where I have cited the assortment Green and Red complementaries, with the intention of demonstrating the economical advantage of assortments of contrast of colour in general (658.), to make us cicarly comprehend that in the assortments of colours suitable to military uniforms, a good selection is much more difficult to make the further it is removed from the contrast of complementaay colours. ## ARTICLE 3. ## Of a Uniform composed of a Single Colour and White. (666.) After the remarks I have made on the increase of tone that the juxtaposition of White gives to colours (52.), and from the order that I have established between the assortmente of Blue, Rod, Yellow, Green, Orange, and Violet with White (185.), I have but little to add upon uniforms presenting these associations. We must not lose sight of the fact, that at the same time the colours are heightened, their respective complementaries ally themselves to White, and produce effects the more evident, other things being equal, the higher the tone of the colours is taken. If the White is reddened, the juxtaposition of Blue will augment the tint; that of Violet will lighten it by yeliowing it; that of Green will exalt the rod colour; finally, that of Yellow, and especially that of Orange, will enfeeble it. (667.) A white uniform has a good effect, not only when white trousers are worn with a white coat, a white coat with the collar and facings of a pure colour suitably chosen, but also when trousers of a light colour are worn, for example, skyblue with a coat white or faced of the same colour as the trousere, or of a colour which will suitably accord with them. Finally, white trousers associate well with a coat of one colour. ## ARTICLE 4. ## Of a bi-coloured Uniform, into which White enters. (668.) White, associated with two colours to compose a uniform-coat, produces a really good effect only with blue and orange, blue and red. It has a weaker effect with green and yellow, and with blue and yellow : this is, however, as we might expect from wbat I have said of associations'of two pure colours with white (185. and following). (669.) If white does not associate equally well with two colours to form a coat, it has always a good effect when it is worn as trousers with a bi-coloured coat. For example, with a light or dark-blue coat and orange; with a light or dark-blue coat and red, with a sky-blue coat and yellow, witl a green and red coat, and with one of green and yellow. Nothing is better suited to demonstrate theadvantage of white asaociated with blue and with red than the difference we remark between a dark-blue coat and madder-red trousers, worn without white leather facings, and the effect of the same uniform worn with these latter. ## ARTICLE 5. ## Of a bi-coloured Uniform, into which Black enters. (670.) Black is susceptible of entering advantageously into the composition of many uniforms composed of two bright colours; such as Red, Scarlet, Orange, Yellow, bright Green, for example; a plain scarlet coat, or one with facings of a yellow more green than orange, or also of a green, or of a delicate blue, accord perfectly well with black trowsers. Finally, black trousers may be associated with sombre colours in uniforms which are not required to be visible from a distance. ## ARTICLE 6. Of a Uniform in which there are more than Two Colours, not comprising either Black or White. (671.) If we can put three colours into a uniform, particularly red, blue, and yellow, without producing a bad effect, nevertheless I give the preference to bi-coloured uniforms, with which white or black are suitably associated; and I also seize this occasion to remark, that if the sight of many colours is more agreeable to the eye than a single one, there is, notwithstanding, all kinds of inconveniences in presenting to the eyes too large a number at one time, whether these colours are distributed over different objects, or upon distinct parts of the same object. ## ARTICLE 7. Of a Uniform composed of different Hues of the same Colour. (672.) Strictly speaking, it is possible to make some agreeable assortments of colours belonging to contiguous scales, or, what is the same thing, to the same hue of colour; yet the difficulty of succeeding in assortments of this kind, and the facility of succeeding in those of contrast of colour, determine me to reject the former, at least whenever we use brilliant colours; for in uniforms of sombre colours they may be employed In order to explain my views against the asorting of different hues of the same colour, I shall cite : The ill effects of the uniforms of French troops where there is a juxtaposition of madder-red and cochineal-red; such as the uniform of dragoons, where the facings of the coat are cochineal-red, and the trousers are madder-rod. ## ABTICLE 8. ## Of Uniforms composed of Twoo Tones of the same Scale. (673.) The sssociation of two tones of the same colour for s uniform is not agreeable; in fact, the lightest tone loses some of its colour, and if the deep tone acquires it, this is seldom or never an advantage. Besides, it will be useless to dwell upon this subject, since practice is altogether dependent on theory. ## ARTICLE 9. Of a Uniform of One Colour. (674.) If uniforms which present contraste of colour are advantageous in an economical point of view, if uniforms of light colours are advantageous when we wish to impress an enemy by the number of combatants opposed to him, there are cases where, far from deploying battalions and squadrons, with the intention of rendering visible extended lines, we seek, on the contrary, to conceal the presence of riflemen or sharpshooters. For the latter, and also if we wish to establish a kind of hierarchy between different corps by means of dress, we may have recourse to a monochromous uniform of a sombre colour. ## §2. ON THE INFLURNCE OF SUPERFICLAL PROPORTIONS ACCORDING TO WHICA CLOTH8 OF DIFFEEENT COLOURB ARR ASSOCLATED IN MANY-CULOURED UNIPORMA (675.) I have already had many occasions to remark that the proportion of superficial extent which different contiguous colours occupy, and the manner in which these colours are distributed, with regard to each other, even if we suppose them well assorted, have considerable influence upon the effects they produce (249. 251. 365.). Conformably to these principles I must add that it will not suffice to choose for uniforms colours of which the association is satisfactory; but, in order to obtain the best possible result, we must employ them in certain respective proportions and distribute them suitably. Although I have no intention of entering into any details upon this subject, yet I shall make a few remarks in connection with it. (676.) When one colour is relatively in smaller proportion than another, it is necessary for it to be distributed as equally as possible throughout the uniform; an example which supports this proposition is the artillery uniform of blue and scarlet : this latter colour, which is far from being equal in superficial extent to the first, produces a very good effect, because it is distributed over the whole uniform. (677.) In a many-coloured uniform, where one colour is found on different pieces of clothing, —both coat and trousers, for example,—we must avoid the colour confounding to the eye contiguous or superimposed parts in such manner that a part of one piece appears to belong to the other; thus some regiments of the French army wear with madder-red trousers a blue coat, the facings of which are of the same red. Now what results from this? Why, at a certain distance, the red facings confound themselves with the trousers; the skirts of the coat appear diminished to their blue parts, and are judged to be too narrow. It would be easy to remedy this defect, by putting facings of blue with a rod edging. In summing up, I am disposed to admit the two following principles :— 1°. Whenever in a uniform the coat and trousers are of the same colour, and there is in the former a second colour which exists only in small proportion, it must be repeated upon the trousers in broad band if the soldier wears boots, and in simple edging if he wears shoes. 2°. Whenever the trousers are of a colour distinct from the coat (that is to say, different from that which we make the ground), band or a simple edging of the colour of the coat will produce the effect of this colour in the trousers. ## §3. ## OF THE ADVANTAGES OF OONTRAST CONSIDERED WITH REGARD TO THE APPARENT FHESHNESS OF CLOTHS FOR CLOTHING. (678.) The contrast produced by the colours of cloths composing a uniform is not only advantageous to the brightness and apparent preservation of the colours of these cloths, but also to render less visible the inequalities which a cloth presents on account.of the colouring material which the dyer has given to the cloth not having equally penetrated to the centre of the stuff, the surface wearing unequally according as it is exposed to friction of different degrees of intensity, the colour of the cloth becomes lighter, or, as it is commonly called, whitens in the parts most exposed to friction : many blue, scarlet, and madderred cloths present this result especially on the salient parts of the vestment, such as the seams. This dofect which certain cloths have of whitening in the seams, is much less apparent in a coat of two or more colours than it is in a monochromic coat, because the vivid contrast of different colours fixing immediately the attention of the spectator, prevents the eye from peroeiving the inequalities which would be visible in a monochromio coat.