(679.) By the like reason, stains on the same ground will always be less apparent in a polychromic than in a monochromic coat. (680.) By the same reason also a coat, waistcoat and trousers of the same colour cannot be worn together with advantage except when new ; for when one of them has lost its freshness by having been more worn than the others, the difference will be increased by contrast. Thus new black trousera, worn with a coat and waistcoat of the same colour, but old and slightly rusty, will bring out this latter tint; while at the same time the black of the trousers will appear brighter. White trousers, reddish-grey also, will correct the effect of which I speak. We see, then, the advantage of having a soldier's trousers of another colour than his coat, especially if, wearing this coat all the year, he only wears trousers of the same cloth during winter. We see, also, why white trousers are favourable to coats of every colour, s I have already said (667.). # CHAPTER IL ## ON FEMALE CLOTHING. ## INTRODUCTION. (681.) ALtHouGH there are many varieties of the human race with respect to the colour of the skin, yet we may arrange them in the three following divisions:— First Division.—Comprehends the Caucasian or white race. Second Division.—Comprehends the American Indians, whose skin is copper-coloured. Third Division.— Comprehends the Negro race, the Papuans, the Malays, &c., who have black or olive skins. It is only the dress of women with white skins that is susceptible of being studied in detail; yet when speaking of dress for women with red or black skins, I shall say a few words on the assortment of colours which is most suitable to them.