# SUB-SECTION I. APPLICATION ON THE LAW OF CONTRAST OF COLOURS TO HORTICULTURE. mm ## CHAPTER L. ON THE ART OF ARRANGINO ORNAMENTAL PLANTS IN GARDENS, 8O AB TO DERIVE THE GREATEST POBSIBLE ADVANTAGE FROM THE COLOUPS OF THEIR FLOWERS. ## INTRODUCTION. (733.) AmonG the pleasures afforded us by the cultivation of choice plants, there are few so intense as the sight of a collection of flowers, varied in colour, form, and size, and in their position on the stems that support them. If the perfume they exhale has been extolled by the poets as equal to their colours, it must be admitted that they never create, through the medium of sight, disagreeable sensations analogous to those which some nervous organisations experience from their exhalations through the sense of smell. Colour, then, is doubtless, of all their qualities, that which is most prized. It is probably because we admire the plants individually, and become attached to them on account of the pains they cost us, that we have hitherto so generally neglected disposing them in such manner as to produce the best possible effect upon the eye seeing their flowers no longer separately, but together. Thus, no defect is more common than that of proportion in the manner in which flowers of similar colours are distributed in a garden. Sometimes the eye is struck by blue or by white; sometimes it is dazzled by yellow. Add to this defect of proportion, the ill effect resulting from the vicinity of many species of flowers, which although of the same kind of colour, are not of the same sort ; for instance, in spring we soee the leopard's bane (doronica), of a brilliant golden yellow, side by side with the narcissua, which is of a pale greenish-yellow ; in autumn, the Indian pink beside the Áfrican marigold, dahlias of various reds grouped together, &c. Such arrangements as these cause the eye, accustomed to appreciate the effects of contrast of colours, to feel sensations quite as disagreeable as those experienced by the musician whose ear is struck with discords. (734.) Previous to my observations on Simultaneous Contrast and the demonstration of the law which governs it, it was impossible to prescribe rules to horticulturists which by instructing them to place, with certainty of success, flowers in proximity whose colours reciprocally enhance each other, would enable them to avoid either the monotony resulting from the grouping of flowers of the same colour, or the disagreeable effect of a collection of flowers whose hues are mutually injurious; and if the good effects of contrast were then spoken of, it was always in a vague and general manner, neither indicating the plants which ought to be grouped together, in order that their flowers should reciprocally enhance one another, nor those which must be placed apart on account of their colours mutually injuring each other. It is evident tlat after stating the Law of Simultaneous Contrast of Colours, distinguishing their various kinds of harmonies and their associations with white, black, and grey, the grouping of flowers will present no difficulty, since it will only be a simple conclusion from facts previously studied under all the relations which concern horticulture. Conformably to the manner in which the applications of the law of contrast have been made to all the arts of which we have spoken, we shall distinguish in this place the associations of flowers which give rise to the harmoniee of contrast, and those which give rise to the harmonies of analogy. ## §1. ASSOCIATIONS OF FLOWERE WHICH RELATE TO THE HARMONIES OF CONTRAST. ## ARTICLE 1. Associations of Flowers which relate to the Harmonies of Contrast of Colour. (735.) We must first distinguish two general cases relatively to the interval which exists between the plants: that where the interval is such that we can see each specimen individually, and the other where they are so near together, that the flowers belonging to different specimens appear mixed pell-mell. ## A. Associations where the Plants are apart. (736.) The associations which relate to the harmonies of contrast of colour, are first those of flowers with colours mutually complementary to each other; such as, Blue flowers and Orange flowers, Yellow flowers and Violet flowers. As to rose or red fowers, they contrast with their own leaves. (737.) White flowers accord more or less favourably with blue and orange flowers already allied together, and perfectly with rose or red flowera, but not so well with yellow or with violet flowers already allied, as we might have presumed from what has been said of the interference of white in this last complementary arrangement (189.). White associates much less favourably with yellow, when the latter is brighter or greener. Whatever be the effect of this latter mixture and of the want of effect of a clump composed only of white flowers, one cannot, however, refuse to consider these same flowers as indispensable ornaments to a garden, after having once seen them suitably distributed among groups of flowers whose colours are associated conformably with the law of contrast; and, moreover, if during the horticultural year we ourselves seek to put in practice the precepts we inculcate, we shall perceive that there are periods when white flowers are not, in general, sufficiently numerous to give us the best result in the cultivation of our gardens: for in fact, if these flowers do not produce as good an effect with pale yellow and violet flowers as with the red and blue flowers, still their association is never objectionable. White flowers are the only ones that possess the advantage of heightening the tone of flowers which have only a light tint of any colour whatever. They are also the only ones that possess the advantage of separating all fowers whose colours mutually injure each other. (738.) After the associations of flowers the colours of which are mutually complementary, we must arrange the following:— Yellow flowers, especially those which incline to orange, accord very well with Blue fowers. Flowers of a Yellow more green than orange, have a very good effect with flowers of a Red that has a tinge of blue rather than of orange. Deep-Red flowers accord well with deep-Blue flowers. Orange flowers are not misplaced near Violet flowers. It is, doubtless, superfluous to remark that white allies itself tolerably well with all these arrangements. ## B. Associations where Plants are mixed pell-mell. (739.) There is a method of arranging the varieties of the same species of annuals or biennials productive of a good effect, which is, to sow their seeds thickly in beds or borders. I will cite, as an example, the seeds of larkspur, china-aster, and, in a word, those which have short stalks, bearing a multitude of white, pink, red, blue, violet, flowers, &c. We can obtain an analogous effect by planting thickly anemones. (740.) I prescribe the pell-mell grouping only for beds or borders, and not for plat-banda. When we wish that the latter should offer flowers only to our notice, we must make the associations conform to the law of contrast, and the plants must be at such intervals from each other as to afford greater room for development than in the preceding case, while at the same time their stalks can spread and conceal the earth under the flowers. ## ARTICLE 2. ## Associations of Flowers which may be classed in relation to the Harmonies of Contrast of Scale. (741.) Among the harmonies of Contrast of Scale which can be made successfully, I shall only cite the associations of the varieties of the Bengal rose, whhich present red, pink, and white. I consider the flower of the blood-red Bengal rose as the type of Red, and the pink variety as being a low gradation of the preceding colour; it is for this reason that I associate them, in order to form an effective harmony of contrast of tone. ## ARTICLE 3. Associations of Flowers which relate to the Harmonies of Contrast of Hues. ## A. Associations where the Plants are apart. (742.) It is so difficult to succeed in making associations of hues which will have a satisfactory effect, that I proscribe in general the mutual associstion of flowers the colours of which belong to neighbouring scales. We must then separate Pink flowers from those that are either Scarlet or Crimson ; Orange flowers from Orange-yellow flowers; Yellow flowers from Greenish-yellow flowers; Blue flowers from Violet-blue flowers. I shall even go further, in advising the separation of Red flowers from Orange flowers; Pink flowers from Violet flowers; Blue flowers from Violet flowers. I say that I proscribe them in general, because I leave to the taste of the enlightened amateur the appreciation of associations of this kind, which may have a good effect, but which it would be difficult to define in writing. ## B. Associations where the Plants are pell-mell. (743.) Flowers which only present contrasts of hue, aad which spring from seeds sown thickly in borders or in beds, will not hove the same objection as when the roots are planted .at a distance from each other. (744.) Finally, there is yet one circumstance where flowers, presenting a disagreeable contrast of hues, may still produce a good effcct. It is when their assortment makes part of an arrangement of contrasts of colours strongly opposod; in this case, being no longer scen isolated, it becomes, in a manner, the element of a picture. I shall return to this circumstance (815.). ## §2. ASSOCIATIONS OF FLOWKRB WHICH RELATE TO THE HARMONIXS OF ANALOGY. ## ARTICLE 1. ## Associations of Flowers which relate to the Harmonies of Scale. (745.) It is not impossible to make associations of analogy of scale, especially among the varieties of the same species of plants; yet I only reckon shrubs susceptible of taking it, because it will be found that only perennial plants afford to the horticulturist a guarantee that the flowers of one year will be identical in tone of colour with those of the preceding; consequently, if we plant woody shrubs in such manner as to secure a gradation, in commencing by the variety which presents the highest tone, and finishing with the variety that presents the lightest tone, the successive annual flowerings will be constantly according to that order. I believe that we may apply this kind of arrangement to standard roses. (746.) But I shall not advise any one to attempt submitting annuals to this arrangement, because of the uncertainty that exists, I do not say in the colour of individual flowers planted, but in the tone of this colour. For example, although it would be easy to establish a harmonious series with dahlias of different tones of the same scale of red, I do not advise the taking of tubers which have given these flowers, for planting the following year, with the object of again realising this series with the living individuals produced from these tubers, because the colours of the new flowers may not only vary in tone, but also go out of the scale of the preceding year. ## ARTICLE 2. ## Associations of Flowers which relate to the Harmonies of Analogy of Hues. (747.) If I have spoken against the associations of contrast of hues (742.), I am the more inclined to speak against the associations of analogy of hue, always considering the restrictions I have enounced above (742. 744.). It must not