be forgotten that my intention is to prescribe associations, of which the good effects are certain; now, the more the colours contrast conformably to our law, the more latitude there will be without the associations ceasing to be agreeable, although the colours of individual flowers associated vary in tone and in hue through circumstances unknown to us. ## Remark. (748.) I shall conclude this Chapter by replying to an objoction which might be addressed to me, that the green of the leaves which serves as a ground to the flowers, destroys the effect of contrast of these latter. But it is not so ; and to be convinced of it, it is sufficient to fix upon a frame of green silk, two kinds of flowers, in conformity with the arrangement of the coloured bands (Pl. 1. fig. 1.), and to look at them from a distance of about ten paces. And this is very simple; when the eye sees distinctly and simultaneously two colours well defined upon a ground, the attention being fixed by them, the surrounding objects causing but feeble impressions, especially those of a sombre colour, which, being upon a distant plane, present themselves confusedly to the sight. This observation relates also to that which I have made with respect to the modification that the green leaves of a garland of roses on stained paper experienced on a black ground (483.). # CHAPTER II ON THE ART or A8SOBTING LIGNEOUS PLANTS IN GARDKNS 80 48 TO DE-RIVE THE BE8T PO88IBLE ADVANTAGE FROM THE COLOUR OF THRIR FOLIAGE (749.) IF we consider trees and shrubs no longer under the relation of the colour of their flowers, but under that of the manner in which we may employ their foliage in the decoration of gardens by assorting them suitably, we shall perceive that there is only a very small number of contrasts of scale and of hues which it is possible to realise, at least at those periods when vegetation is active; for, in autumn, when plants lose their leaves, the latter, before falling, may assume various coloure, such as red, rose, scarlet, orange, and yellow, which by their brilliancy frequently appear to recall the season of flowers. The greater part of trees and shrubs present in the summer season only the green of their leaves ; and if this green varies in tone and hue according to the species and its varietiee, the differences are always very trifing. There is only a small number of ligneous plants, such as the Bohemian olive, of which the foliage is quite silvery, that is to say, on both sides of the leaves; there is but very little purple foliage, like that of the purple beech. Let us consider this state of thinga, in order to establish the harmonies of contrast and of analogy. ## A. Harmonies of Contrast. (750. a.) The most decided contrast of colour we can establish between the leaves of ligneous plants is that of green of the highest number with foliage nearest to red ; we say the nearest, although we know of none to which the qualification of red is really applicable. In fact, the purple beech is more of a redbrown than a dark red, properly so called; and that need not surprise us, when it is considered that the colour of leaves results from a mixture of red and green, which according to the principle of mixing colours (154. and 158.) must give birth to black, if they are in suitable proportion ; and to a brown tone of the green or of the red scale, according as one or the other colour predominates. From this it is evident that it will be difficult to obtain contrast of colour with foliage. (b.) The contrast of hue is established by the assortment of a bluish-green with a yellowish-green, taken at tones of unequal height; by the contrast of a bluish-green brown with a yellowish light green, &c. (c.) The contrast of tone will be established between silvery foliage which has always a decided tone of green, and the foliage of & higher tone of this same green, &c. ## B. Harmonies of Analogy. (751.) Nearly all the masses in our landscape gardens planted with various trees, present certain harmonies of hues almost always resulting from associations established according to considerations foreign to those of the assortment of foliage — an evident result, if we recall the remark made above (749.), that the colours of the leaves of the greater part of plants are of greens belonging to scales more or less allied, and of tones but little distant from each other. (a.) Harmonies of analogy of hues formed of allied tones be longing to neighbouring scales, are those which it is ieast difficult to obtain.