# CHAPTER IV. EXAMPLES OP PLANTS WHICH CAN BE ASSOCIATED TOGETHER UNDER THE RELATION OF THE COLOUR OF THEIR FOLIAGE. (767.) GARDENERs insist much more upon the result which may be derived from the effects of the foliage of trees and shrubs, than upon that which may be obtained from the effects of flowers ; doubtless in consequence of the latter occupying less extent of surface than the leaves, as they are also of shorter duration, and, I add, (conformably to an extreme opinion which excludes them from landscape gardening), as suggesting too strongly the hand of man. From this we should expect to find in works on gardening some indications suitable for making associations of foliage, either by contrast or by analogy, conformably to the principles which have always guided me. But it is not so! The authors of these works confine themselves to generalities, and in the few examples cited by them, I cannot even say that they have sufficiently distinguished the effects arising from the particular form of the leaves from the effect resulting exclusively from their colour. If in this Chapter I do not supply what I regard as an omission on the part of writers on gardening, it is because my own observations are not sufficiently numerous to enable me to cite with confidence a series of examples analogous to those which I have given in the preceding Chapter, relative to the associations based on the colour of the flowers. Besides, I shall indicate in the following Sub-section some associations of plants in which I have taken the foliage into account, but subordinating the effects to others which appear to me morc important to obtain; such is the reason why I abstain from treating the subject in this Chapter.