# SECOND SUB-SECTION. # ON THE DISTRIBUTION AND PLANTING OF TREES, ETC. IN MASSES. m

# INTRODUCTION. (768.) Tí principal object which I propose to myself in the two following Chapters is, to supply a deficiency in works on gardening relative to the manner of distributing and planting trees, &c., conformably with precise rules, in masses the outlines of which have been previously sketched. For.authors say nothing on this subject, and the embarrassment of a land-owner who wishes to plant an estate already planned out is further increased by this circumstance, that, in the majority of cases, the author of the plan of the projected garden, after having defined the lines of the plantations, indicated the places where isolated trees must be placed, designated the kinds of trees which should constitute groups, and others which must enter into the formation of masses with trees and shrubs (which generally he does not indicate), leaves the care of planting and other details to ordinary gardeners. Yet the distribution of trees and shrubs, however easy it may appear, in a piece of ground otherwise perfectly planned, contributes more than is generally supposed to the pleasure of a landscape garden, and presents also more difficulties than to allow of their being made in a satisfactory manner, when they are abandoned, so to speak, to chance, as it generally happens. In fact, if, at the end of a few years, we observe the greater part of masses planted as they so frequently are, we shall be struck with defects which were not at first perceptible, because we were then under the influence of the pleasure we always experience at witnessing the development of plants which have been confided to a carefully prepared soil, and besides, there are some defects which are only perceptible after a certain time; such as, for example- 1. That resulting from the plants being placed too near together. It may happen that one being developed more rapidly than another ends by killing the latter; or that all develope themselves at once, but bedly, because they rociprocally injure each other. 2. That which arises from placing in the front roo clumps which rise too high, or which lose their lower branches. Such are the Elder-tree, nd Sumach (Rhus coriaria). (769.) It was after many years of lost enjoyments through having planted without fixed rule, masses otherwise well designed in their contours, that I was led to seek, by my own experience, the means of avoiding similar errors in future. The rules I now give are not the result of reflection merely ; they have been practised many years, and I am much deceived if those who observe them do not derive great facilities in their application, and experience a lively satisfaction when they compare the effects of plantations made in conformity to the method prescribed, with those planted at random, so to speak. Hereafter I shall substantiate these rules by the principles derived from the faculties themselves which place us in connection with objects of nature and art, when we seek the pleasures of colour, form, and arrangement. (770.) I will now define several expressions employed to designate the different associations of plants which may form part of a landscape garden. An association of trees and shrubs occupying a large space is termed a forest. But in a landscape garden a similar association, or what amounts to the same thing, that which has been arranged to present the appearance of a vast space, is called a wood, if it is composed of trees and underwood; and a park, if it consists of trees only. An association of trees, shrubs, bushes, and underwood, and also of flowering herbaceous plants, occupying a medium or small extent, is called a thichet. A similar mass, when formed of trees and underwood, is called a grove; when it consists only of trees, it is termed a shrubbery or group of trees. There are thickets of shrubs, bushes, underwood, and flowering herbaceous plants. There are thickets formed of plants of a single species, and thickets formed of several species. The frst are called homogeneous, and the second heterogeneous or varied. There are isolated masses, and masses subordinated together.