A small mass of fowers or shrubs, isolated and of a circular or elliptical form is called a bed. The following table represents the mutual relations of all the expressions I have defined. A large extent of land, covered with trees and shrube. It ls distinguisbed into. ## Mass. Nediur or limlted extent of surface planted with trees, shrubs, busbes, and nowering berbaceous planta. The mau ts considered under several relations. a. Wood. A large'extent of land covered with trees and underwood. b. Park. A large extent of land covered with trees without underwood. (A.) Upder the relation of the sise of the plants. a. Grove. A mass of trees and 1. Mass of troes. underwood. b. Shrwbbery. A mass of trees without underwood. 2. Muss of sbrube (abrisocaus). 3. Mau of busbes (arbusles). 4. Mass of under-shrubs (sous arbustes). L3. Mass of lowering berbacovus plants. (B.) Under the relation of the nature of the plants composing a ma 1. Homogeneows Mau. Contalning ouly a single species of plants. (C.) Uoder that of wu. tual subordination. 1. Helerogemcoms Hass. Containing several spa. cies of planta 1. Isolated Masses. 2. Maues subordinated together. # CHAPTER L ## OF LINES OF PLANT&. (771.) I caLL a line of plants, plants placed at equal distances from each other in straíght or curved lines; these plants may be trees, shrubs, bushes, underwood, or flowering herbaceous plants. RuLE.—To make a line of plants, we place a rope in such a manner that it occupies the centre of the projected plantation ; then place stakes at equal distances apart, so that each will represent a centre of vegetation ; we remove the rope on making the holes, then plant. (772.) A line of plants of sufficient extent, and of which the plants are close enough to conceal from view objects placed behind them, is called a Screen; such are a hedge of hornbeam, a row of thujas concealing a wall, &c. (773.) All masses planted according to my method are composed of lines of plants parallel to each other, or, in other words, there is between two similar lines an equal distance throughout: thus, in a mass formed of five straight or curved lines the extremities of which do not join each other, there will appear everywhere the same distance between the first and the second, between the second and the third, between the third and the fourth, and between the fourth and the fifth. But the distance between the first and the second may differ from the distance between the second and the third, and so of the others. The result would be the same, if the lines were closed curves; as, for instance, the circumference of a circle, which has no extremities. The lines of plants considered under this point of view relatively to the masses, are the elements of them. It is evident that we must have at least two lines of plants to constitute a mass. ## ARTICLE 1. ## Of the Lines of Plants called ScREENs (772.). (774.) When we desire to conceal a wall, or, more frequently, any object of considerable extent, we have recourse to a screen of plants. Whenever the extent of the land will not permit of tho planting of several lines constituting a mase, the essential condition to be fulfilled is, that the plants which form the screen are, at least, of the height of the object they are intended to conceal, and are covered with leaves to the ground. Evergreens, such as thujas, almond-laurels, &c, are those to be preferred; succeeded by the hornbeam, lilac, privet, &c. (775.) The most homogeneous screens, that is to say, those which are formed of a single species of plant, are preferable to all others for the object they are intended to fulfil; and if we would avoid the monotony resulting from the sight of a single species, we must have recourse to another which offers varieties. For example, a screen composed of violet and white lilacs will possess at the same time the advantage of bomogeneity for concealing what is behind it, and the advantage of variety of foliage; for, as is well known, the violet lilac has darker leaves, or a green less yellow than those of the white lilac. We may alternate one or more plants of violet lilac, with a plant of white lilac. (776.) It is difficult to give with exactness tho distance which should separate the plants intended to form a screen, because there is a relation, which must be observed, between the height of the objcct wo seek to conceal, and the height to which the plant will grow. Thus, when the height of the object is small, we can make the distance between each plant less than when the height is greater. In a word we must attain the double