aim of having a screen sufficiently elevated, and sufficiently covered with leaves from the ground. Some plants, susceptible of high growth, lilacs, for example, if planted too near, injure one another, and, planted too far asunder, they increase in height too much, and lose their lower foliage. (777.) If we do not wish to make a hedge, we can observe the following distances:— Between two thujas (Thuja occidentalis), from two to three feet. Between two lilacs, from four to five feet. Between two privets, three feet. # ARTICLE 2. # Of Lines of Plants considered as ELEMENTs of Masses. (778.) From the manner in which I have considered a line of plants as the element of a mass, there follow, in my opinion, two conditions, which I regard as absolute, and a third, which, without possessing this character, ought generally to be taken into consideration in the planting of a mass. lst. Condition (absolute). If the plants in the same line are not of the same species, it is essential that they do not differ too much from each other in respect to height. 2nd. Condition (absolute.) In the case where a line happens to be entirely seen, the same species must be placed alternately. 3rd. Condition (not absolute but general.) We must avoid placing the same species in two neighbouring linee, when we would employ varied masses which are only composed of several lines. RuLz.— When we plant two lines of vegetation to constitute a mass, in planting the first or exterior line we must follow the rule indicated above (771.), then proceed with the planting of the second line in the same manner as with the first, except that the stakes indicating the centre of vegetation must be placed chequer-wise relatively to the centre of vegetation of the first line. (780.) I will cite an example of a plantation of two lines intended to conceal a wall.