1st Line, 1. Almond Laurel 2. Violet Lilac. 3. Laburnum. 4. Violet Lilac. la. Almond Laurel, &c. 2nd Line, 1. Clump of Prunus mahaleb. 2. Idem, &c. The distance between the clumps of the first line is four to five feet. (781.) We may plant the first line in screen, and the second with trees larger than in the first; we may also plant the second line with roots of Prunus mahaleb, comprehending between two roots three or five clumps of the same species. # CHAPTER II ## OF HOMOGENBOUS MABSES. (782.) Tíe homogeneous mass includes only a single species of plant; because the intention of the gardener in forming it being to produce an effect of individuality, nothing is more suitable for this object than a collection of identical things. (783.) In the large French garden designed by Lenotre, where the trees combine so effectually with the elements established by the architect to prolong, so to speak, a similar work, the symmetrical plantations are identical, and generally composed of trees of a single species. (784.) If, in a large composition, homogeneous masses of trees have a good effect, it is not so with those which are composed of a single species or of a single variety of flower. They almost always present a monotonous aspect, especially if these latter have a definite extent; and if the species of plant of which they are composed is in flower only a part of the year, the defect of monotony will be found greatly increased. (785.) Homogeneous masses of shrubs or of flowers are only suitable when they are in leaf or in flower during a great portion of the year, as their extent is small, and they serve simply as a bond of union between different parts more or less distant from each other.