# CHAPTER III. ## OF HETEROGENKOUS OR VARIRD MASSES. (786.) In order to fully understand what I have said of masses of this kind, I shall distinguish two cases; one where it is a heterogeneous or varied mass, isolated, intended to serve as an individual composed of distinct parts,—and the other where it consists of many varied masses, allied together, and separated by paths, at least in some parts. ## §1. ## LBOLATKD HETEROGENEOUS OR VARIED MASS. (787.) This mass may be composed of lines, each of which may contain only a single species of plants, or it may consist of several. (788.) If each line consists of only a single species, we must arrange them, from the first to the centre, according to their size: for example, we should put In the lst Line, Violet lilace; 2d Line, Laburnum; 3d Line, Judas trees. This mass is only preferable to the following, in the case where it is isolated and intended to be soen without obstacle on all sides. (789.) If each line contains many species, we must always observe the rule of placing the smallest in the front line. Each line should be planted as I have suggestod above (771.). ## §2. HETEROGKNEOUS OR VARIED MASSES BUBORDINATED TO KACH OTHER. ## ARTICLE 1. ## General Considerations. (790.) Heterogeneous or varied masses placed together so as to form a whole, are generally separated from each other, 1°. by paths, 2°. by glades, or unplanted intervals, but cultivated or sown in grass. To thoroughly understand what followe, I must point out the essential difference that exists between landscape gardening and French gardening (geometrical). (791.) French gardening is regular and symmetrical: the paths are straight, snd the eye is only impressed by objects slightly varied ; for when there are squares, or straight borders, symmetry necessarily requires that the objects on one side be repeated on the other. The result is, that when the spectator has visited the principal points of this composition, which are never very numerous, he has seen everything it is susceptible of offering to his curiosity. (792.) I shall not say, with some writers, that landscape gardening is conceived according to the principle of irregularity, or after a method diametrically opposed to that which governs the design of a French garden ; but I shall say it is conceived with an entirely different aim. The spectator who surveys a landscape garden should be excited, so to speak, at every step by the sight of various objects. The different points of view must then be as numerous as possible; tho paths must always be traced in such manner that from no point can we discover their whole extent. The plantations must be disposed so as to conceal the walls, the fences, and other disagreeable or illplaced objects. They must allow the eye the greatest possible scope at all the points the gardener wishes displayed ; on the other hand, the views must vary with the different points successively observed by the spectator in his promenade. (793.) To attein this aim, it is evident that there must be no straight pathe, but only curved ones; because, in fact, it is only in the latter that those who walk in them will be unable to see their entire length from any one spot, when all these paths pass between the masses; the intervals between these masses must also permit of our perceiving an ensemble of objects, more or less agreeable, which must form planes skilfully prolonging the perspective as far as possible. The masses, each presenting variety, must nevertheless be allied together so that the plantations of the one may harmonise with those of neighbouring masses, as dependent parts of the same whole. ## ARTICLE 2. Rules to be followed in planting Heterogeneous Masses subordinated to each other. (794.) The contours of paths and of subordinated masses being fixed, the following rules must be observed in theplanting. (795.) 1st RuLE.— With a cord trace lines parallel or concentric to the line which circumscribes each mass, as is shown in the masses, 1, 2, 3, 4 of Pl. 4. In the mass 1 there are four closed concentric lines. In the mass 2 there are only two lines concentric with the complete line of circumscription, and a central curved line which divides it into two parts. I trace a central line in all the masses, in the centres of which I plant trees of much larger size than those . which must be placed in the closed concentric lines. In the subordinated triangular masses placed between three paths, as are the masses 3 and 5, we must distinguish those which are reduced by a line AB, (prolongation of the axis of the path A A), into two very unequal triangles, as A B D and A B C of the mass 3, and those which are reduced into two triangles almost equal, as A B D and A B C of the mass 5. In the first, as in the mass 3, the large plants must be found in the line A B and not at the angles D and C, while in the mass 5 the largest plants will be found not only in A and B, but also in C and D. The principal reason I give for this difference is that the spectator who sees from the path A ▲ the angle A of the mass 3, does not see the angle C; while from the same path, observing the angle A of the mass 5, he sees at the same time the angles c and D. Now this circumstance imposes the condition that we must have as much homogeneity as possible between the two parts of the same whole, which are seen simultaneously. (796.) 2nd RuLE.— The lines of planting being fixed, I divide each of them into equal parts by means of stakes which represent the centre of the plants we put on these lines; the plants of the second line must correspond as nearly as possible to the intervals of the plants of the first line, and so on ; or in other words, be planted chequer-wise. Nothing is more important to the producing a fine effect in plantations than to properly space the planta. It is preferable to err by excess of distance than otherwise. In the first instance we may place between one plant and another, either flowers, or small shrubs, which can subsequently be removed. We must not lose sight of the fact that the greater the intervals the better the plants will be developed, and the more distinct they will appear; now, this condition of distinctly soeing a plant, and, if it is an herbaceous plant or a small shrub, of seeing it detached from the earth which serves as a background to it, appears to me an important condition to fulfil in order to derive the best possible effect from the plants employed to decorate & garden. ## Distance between the Plants which enter into the Composition of Masses. About thirty-nine inches for Bengal roses, Kerria japonicas, Spiræas ; and about four feet if we place flowers between them, such as pansies of different colours, lilies, &c.; About four or five feet for lilacs, Philadelphus coronaria, chamæcerasus, Guelder roses, almond laurels (cerasus Laurocerasus); About five to six feet for Prunus mahaleb, laburnums, and Judas tree. Between the lilacs and syringas we may place white and yellew irises, poppies, spiræas, and roses. (797.) 3rd Rul.ε.— Every mass must be viewed as a whole (as the Mass 1, Pl. 4). Every mass placed against à wall to conceal it (as the Mass 8, Pl. 4.), must be composed of lines each presenting the same species, or varieties of the same species, occurring at equal intervals. The smallest plants, whether herbaceous, underwood, shrubs, hushes, must be in the front lines, and the larger ones in the lines receding from the first. For example,— The Mass No. 1. of Pl. 4., is a clump of Bengal roses : it is composed of four lines of roses, and three lines of herbacoous plants. 1st Line, Roaes; red, pink, red, &c. 2nd Line, Persian iberis, red tulip, Alyssum saxatile, bulb. ous iris (Iris Xiphium), Hemerocallis flava, bulbous iris, iberis, &c. 3rd Line, Roses; pink, white, pink, &c. 4th Line, Escholtzia, flax, Escholtzia, bulbous iris, Hemerocallis fava, bulbous iris, Escholtzia, &c. 5th Line, Roses; red, pink, red, &c. 6th Line, Persian iberis, red tulip, Alyssum saxatile, bulbous iris, Hemerocallis flava, bulbous iris, Persian iberis, &c. 7th Line, Roses; pink (or noisette), white (or white noisette), pink, &c. The Mass No. 8. is composed in the following manner :— 1st Line, Roses; red, pink, red, &c. 2nd Line, Roses; pink, white, pink, &c. 3rà Line. Rod Provence rose, Jasminum fruticans, red Provence rose, &c. 4th Line, Violet lilac, Genista hispanica, violet lilac, &c. 5th Line, Prunus mahaleb, laburnum, Prunus m., &c. 6th Line, Ulmus campestris, Sambucus nigra, Acer pseudoplatanus, Sambucus racemosus, Ulmus campestris, &c. Between the first and second ranks there are Persian iberis, flax, Alyssum saxatile, Escholtzia, iberis, &c., at a distanco of about six feet from each other. (798.) 4th RuLE.— In the Masses composed of large trees, and which, as the Mass 2 of Pl. 4., are contiguous to a path or to a grass meadow or lawn, a similar concentric line can have in one of its parts, species or varieties differing from those it presents in the remainder of its extent; but this change of species is only allowable when the parts of the line where it is introduced are not susceptible of being seen at the same time, at least in the whole extent. For example,— 1°. Every part of the first concentric line of the Mass 2, which borders the path r r, may be planted in a different manner from the rest of the samc line which is on the side of the lawn or meadow. 2°. The part c D of the Mass 4 which borders the path x x, may be planted in a different manner from the part A D, and also from the part ▲ C of the same concentric line. Thus, in the Mass 2,— The first line from a to d is composed of Spiræaulmifolia, and of violet lilacs, and from aa to dd of a Spiraa'ulmifolia separated from the preceding by a flowering ash: then almond laurel, syringa, almond laurel, white lilac, almond laurel, &c. Between each tuft there is a pink Bengal rose. This line from aa to dd may be planted with tufts of box (Buxus sempervirens) and Bengal roses. Thus, in the Mass 4,— The first line from c to D is composed of Syringa media and Jasminum fruticans ; from D to A of Syringa media, S. vulg., Jasminum fruticans, Philadelphus coronarius, Syringa oulg., Philadelphus cor.; from ▲ to c of Syringa vulg, Philad. vulg., &c. The side A D and the side A c of the Mass 5, which are seen at the same time from the axis of the path, are contrary to the preceding planted symmetrically, Spiræa hypericifolia, violet lilac, Spiræa hypericifolia, &c. (799.) 5th RuLE.— We must avoid as much as possible putting the same species or varieties in twoo different concentric lines. For instance, if we put lilacs and Philadelphia coronarius in the first line of a mass, we must avoid putting them not only in the second line, but also in the third. This remark has boen made before (778.). (800.) 6th RoLE.— In the masses intended to receive trees, these latter must be placed at double, triple, or quadruple distances from the intervals left for the tufts; and between the trees we may place tufts which would be improperly placed in the front rank, because they would bé too elevated, and which, like the Elder, are without foliage down to the roots. For example, the line E F of the Mass 2, Pl. 4., is composed of a clump of Sambucus nigra, a Robinia viscosa, a Sambucus racemosa, a sycamore, a clump of Sambucus nigra, an Esculus rubicundus, clump of Sambucus racemosa, a eycamore, a clump of Šambucus nigra, an Esculus rubicundus, a Colutaa arborescens, a sycamore, an Esculus rubicundus, a Spiræa ulmifolia, a Fraxinus florifera, a Spiraa ulmifolia, and an Esculus rubicundus. As the distance is considerable which separates the trees from the tufts of the second concentric line in the part E of the medial line, there are planted in fives around the first two trees, four little tufts of Ribes aureum, which must afterwards be removed. (801.) 7th RoLE.We ought to alternate trees with tufts only in planting an avenue, or in a line of tufts of which we wish to correct the monotony resulting from uniformity of height and form, and whenever there is no objection to seeing the objects placed behind this line. ## lst EXAMPLE. Avenue or Belted Path. 1. Platanus Occidentalis. Prunus mahaleb, Jadas Tree, Tufta Pranus mahaleb, 5. Betulus alba. Prunus mahaleb, Judas Tree, Tufta. Prunus mahaleb, 2. Ulmus campestris. Violet Lilac, Laburnum, Tufts. Violet Lilac, 6. Robinia viscosa. VioletiLilac, Laburnum, Tufs. Violet Lilac, 3. Sycamore. White Lilac, Judas Tree, Tufs. White Lilac, 7. Sycamore. White Lilac, Judas Tree, Tufts. White Lilac, 4. Robinia viscosa. Violet Lilac, Laburnum, Tufts. Violet Lilac, 8. Ulmus campestris. Violet Lilac, Laburnom. Tufts. Violet Lilac, 9. Platanus Occidentalis. Pranu mahaleb, Tafu. Prunus mahaleb, The trees are so disposed that the smallest, the Betula, is at equal distance from left to right of the same species, the extremes of which, the Platanus and Ulmus, must be considerably higher than it. For greater variety we may alternate two rose acacias with two white acacias (Robinia pseudo-acacia); replace one of the two birches by a hawthorn (Mespilus oxyacantha); replace one of the planes by a Celtis australis. ## 2nd ExAMPLE. ## 1st Line, 1. White Hawthorn. 1. Violet Lilac. 2. Syringa 3. Violet Lilac. 4. Syringa 5. Violet Lilac. ## 2. Red Hawthorn. 1. Violet Lilac. 2. Syringa 3. Violet Lilac. 4. Syringa 5. Violet Lilac. ## 3. White Hawthorn, &c. 2nd Line, forming a Screen. 1. Laburnum. 2. Prunus mahaleb. 1a. Laburnum, &c. ## 3rd EXAXPLE. Plantation of Fruit Trees and Bushes of Twoelve Feet in breadth, intended to conceal a Kitchen Garden or any other object, and at the same time to present to the Eye a Background, on the side of the Garden. ## Line on the Side of the Kitchen Garden. 1. Apricot (Armeniaca vulgaris). 2. Violet Lilac. 3. White Lilac. 4. Violet Lilac. 5. Almond Laurel, or White or Violet Lilac. 6. Violet Lilac. 7. White Lilac. 8. Violet Lilac. 9. Pear Tree. la. Violet Lilac, &c. Line on the Side opporite to the Kitchen Garden. 1. Cerasus juliana. Ribes rubrum. Berberis vulgaria Ribes rubrum. 2. Malus communis. Ribes rubrum. Pyrus cydonia. Ribes rübrum. 3. Armeniaca vulgaris. Ribes rubrum. Berberis vulgaris. Ribcs rubram. 4. Pyrus communis. Ribes rubrum. Pyrus cydonia Ribes rubrum. ## la. Cerasus juliana, &c. There is an interval of about sixteen feet between two trees. The tufts of Pyrus cydonia and Berberis vulgaris are in the middle. The tufts of Ribes rubrum are about three feet and a quarter from the tree, and consequently, about three feet and a half from the tuft of Berberis vulgaris, or the Pyrus cydonia. It is plain that the eye perceiving more readily the tree and the two little tufts which are on each side, the principle of symmetry bears upon this arrangement, and not upon that of the central tuft with the two little tufts. If we wish to contrive a clear and distant view fromn the other side of the line, as in the firstexample, the distance must be equal between the tufts and from a tuft to a tree. Between the two lines we may place a line of tufts arranged in the following manner — the spectator being placed on the side opposite to the kitchen-garden,—behind each tree of the first line, a Jasminum fruticans — On both sides of each tree, at equal distance from the jasmine, two privets, and at the next tree two evergreen thorns; behind each tuft of Pyrus cydonia or Berberis vulgaris a tuft of raspberry. (802.) 8th RuLe. — To establish Harmony— 1. Between different masses subordinate together,— 2. Between different masses which, without being subordinated, are in proximity, — 3. Between masses more or less distant from each other,— We have recourse — 1°. To similar vegetable forms ; that is to say, to the same species or varieties, or to analogous forms : 2°. To the same colours, or to fowers and leaves of analogous colours, which are suitably distributed in the different masses which we wish to connect or harmonise together. ## (803.) Particularly remarking, — 1. That the concentric lines of the Mass 3 harmonise, on the one hand, with the two lines of the Mass 2 concentric with the alley YY which separates these masses, and, on the other hand, with the line of the Mass 4, which is concentric with the alley x x, which separates this mass from the Mass 3. 2. That our system of planting a small number of spocies in the same line, recurring at equal intervels, is favourable to the harmony of the ne. 3. That the planting of trees in median or concentric lines is favourable to the harmony of subordinated masses, which at a distance bocome as one. ## A. Example of Harmony between Masses subordinated together. First, let us soe the composition of the Masses 2, 3, and 4, PL 4. ## Maus 2. lst. Concentric line of a d C; ash in , Spiraa ulmifolia, lilac, Spiræa, &c. . . . . . Box in c. 1st. Concentric line of ▲ a' d' c; Spiraa ulmifolia, almond laurel, pink, Bengal rose, syringa, Bengal rose, almond laurel, white lilac, Bengal rose, &c. 2nd. Concentric line to A a d c; tuft of Prunus mahaleb, tuft of laburnum, tuft of Prunus mahaleb, &c. 2nd. Concentric line to A a' d' c; tuft of Judas tree, laburnum, tuft of Judas tree, &c. The median line is composed of clumps of elder, a pink acacia, of sycamores, of Esculus rubicundus, of flowering ash, &c., as before mentioned (800.). ## Mas8 3. Median line A B. A box at A; clump of Guelder rose, Kælreuteria, clump of Judas tree, flowering ash, clump of Prunus mahaleb, laburnum. lst. Concentric line, violet lilac, syringa, violet lilac, &c 2nd. Concentric line on the side ▲ C ; Kælreuteria: on the central line, Guelder rose, laburnum, Prunus m., laburnum, Judas tree, Kælreuteria. On the side C B D, after the preceding Kælreuteria, Judas tree, Prunus m., Laburnum, Prunus m., Laburnum, Prunus m., Laburnum, Prunus m., Laburnum, Prunus m., Laburnum, Judas tree, Kælreuteria. On the side D ▲, the preceding Kælreuteria, Judas tree, Laburnum, Prunus m., Laburnum, Guelder rose; and Kælreuteria in the median or central line. 3rd. Concentric line; commencing with the central flowering ash on the side A C, Judas tree, ash, Prunus m., Laburnum. On the side C B D, the preceding laburnum, Prunus m, ash. On the side D A, in commencing with the preceding ash, Judas tree. ## Mass 4. Median or central line of c to D; flowering ash, Prunus m., chamæcerasus, viburnum, chamæcerasus. lst. Concentric line C D; box, Syringa m., Jasminum fruticans, Syringa m., &c. lst. Concentric line C ▲; the preceding box, Philadelphus cor., lilac, Philadelphus cor., &c. 1st. Concentric line A D; Philadelphus cor., lilac, Philadelphus cor., Jasminum fruticans, Syringa media 2nd. Concentric line C D ; Esculus rubicundus, laburnum, Judas tree; laburnum, Judas tree, laburnum; Judas tree, laburnum, Kælreuteria. 2nd. Concentric line DA; the preceding Kælreuteria, laburnum Prunus m., Esculus rubicundus. 2nd. Concentric line ▲ c; the preceding Esculus rubicundus; flowering ash of the central line. The three Masses 1, 2, and 3, are allied together. 1. By means of the lilacs of the first concentric lines. 2. By means of the tufts of Prunus m., and of laburnum, of the second concentric lines. 3. By means of the syringas of the first concentric lines exterior to the Masses 2 and 4. 4. By means of the flowering ash and the Esculus rubicundus, which are in the central line of the Masses 2 and 4, and the three ash-trees of the Mass 3. 5. By means of two Kælreuterias, one placed at the angle D of the Mass 3, and the other at the Mass 4. 6. By means of two box-trees placed at the extremities of the Masses 2 and 4, and of one box-tree placed at the angle A of the Mass 3. ## B. Examples of Harmonies between Masses not subordinated together, but in proximity. The Mass No. 1., composed almost exclusively of Bengal roses, which retain their leaves a long while, is allied, 1. To the Mass No. 2., the line of which is formed of white lilac, almond laurels, and syringas, separated from each other by Bengal roses. Harmony is then established by means of the same species, and increased by means of an analogous foliage; for that of the Bengal roses harmonises perfcctly with the leaves of the almond laurels, and that of the box trec, which terminates the Mass 2. 2. To the Mass No. 6., by means of a border on the side of the meadow or lawn, composed solely of pink and white Bengal roses. 3. To the Mass 4., by the foliage of the box. The Mass No. 2. of the second line of a' to d' is planted with laburnums and Judas trees; and the Mass No. 4., of which the second concentric line includes the laburnums and the Judas trees, is allied to the Mass No. 6., of which the line on the side of the alley v is parallel. The Mass 4. allies itself to a neighbouring mass, composed in the following manner :— lst. Concentric line; Rhus cotinus, rose bush; Rhus cotinus, &c. Between the Rhus plants there is an interval of six feet and a half. 2nd. Median line; almond laurel, tufts of Judas tree, sycamore, laburnum, Esculus rubicundus, Judas tree, satin maple, laburnum, laurel, black ash. The effect of the Rhus cotinus, covered with its fruit, is most agreeable during autumn. ## C. Example of Harmony between Masses more or less distant from each other. Harmonies are established between distant masses by the same means as they are between neighbouring masses, except that the interval which exists between the first requires that at the principal points of view from which they must be presented simultaneously to the eyes, the forms and the colours which connect them should be plainly perceived. The foliage in the masses being much more abundant than the flowers, the shades of their greens will not differ so much among each other as the colours of their flowers; consequently, the distant masses, whatever be the variety of their respective foliages, are always in harmony of form and colour if thcy have been planted according to our rules; and if they are composed solely of ligneous plants which lose their leaves in winter, or solely of evergreens, which do not lose them: but, in the opposite case, that is to say when the distant masses are formed, the one of deciduous trees, and the other of evergreens, some remarks must be made relative to the conditions of harmony, which are the more necessary as landscape gardens generally fail in this respect. For where masses of deciduous trees are found, a clump or a mass of evergreens are almost always out of keeping. To remedy this defect, we must multiply the groups or masses of evergreens, so as to establish between all of them this same correlation which is required by the deciduous trees; but it is not necessary that the trees should occupy a space equal to that occupied by ordinary trees, it is sufficient if their forms recur at suitable intervals. In a word, for evergreens to produce a good cffect, they must compose only an ensemble which unites itsclf where it intercalates with the ensemble of the masses of deciduous trees. We may oppose allspice trees to pines, cedars, larches; different groups composed of three or four trees only, sufficient to harmonise a large space of ground occupied with two or three groups, composed of half a hundred similar trces. (804.) 9th RuLE.— There are certain cases where the want either of perspective or harmony, requires in a large mass a line of trees which is neither concentric with its circumference, nor identical with the central line, if there be one: such for example as the line PR which is found in the Masses 1 and 2 (P 4.) ; for if the planting of this line be correct and consequent of the preceding principles, it is necessary that the trunks which design it, beyond the concentric plantings, be in the points of intersection of the line P R, with the concentric lines and the central line, if there be one ; and the trunks must be as much as possible at equal distances from each other, and in places which, if they were not planted with trees, would be with some plants which compose concentric lines. This rule, necessary in many cases, gives to our system of planting a generalisation which it would not have without it, and by putting it in practice we establish a relation where there would have been none. I shall remark that these lines must generally be composed of plants slightly bushy, a little taller than those in front, and it will almost always suffice to have them placed at wide intervals apart. In fact, they must be regulated with respect to the height of the plants which are both behind and in front of them. (805.) 10th RuLE. — After tracing the lines of plantations, and putting in the stakes to mark out the centre of the holes to be dug, we must draw upon grey paper lines representing those of the masses we iniend to plant, taking as many equidistant points as there are stakes in the corresponding lines of plantation; we then fasten wafers on these points, or little circles of paper of the colours of the flowers or the foliage of the plants, according to the desired effect. We may extend this rule to an ensemble of mass on the saine system. By this means we can judge of the harmony of the colours of flowers with the different hues of green produced by the vegetation of which we may compose a mass, and consequently rectify any defect before we begin to plant. Although this rule is more especially applicable to the masscs of flowers of which the whole extent may be seen at a single glance, it is also advantageous for plants which are intended to act by their foliage.