# CHAPTER II. INFLUENCE OF A SURROUNDING COLOUR UPON ONE COLOUR WHEN COM-PARED WITH ANOTHER COLOUR. (837.) Since the contrast of colours which are not analogous tends to their improving and purifying each other, it is evident that whenever we would exercise a correct judgment upon the beauty of the colours of a carpet, tapestry, or picture, &c., after having compared them with the colours of objects analogous to the first, we must take into account the kind of painting and the manner in which they are juxtaposed, if the objects compared are not the exact representation of the same subject. For, other things being equal, the same colours not shaded and which are not sufficiently analogous to mutually injure each other, disposed in contiguous bands, will certainly appear more beautiful than if each were seen on a ground which consisted of it exclusively, and which, consequently, produced only a single impression of colour upon the eye. Colours arranged as palms, like those of Cashmere shawls, or as patterns, as in Turkey carpets, produce a much greater effect than if they were shaded or blended, as they generally are in paintings. Consequently if we wished, for example, to compare a stripe of amaranth red, in a Cashmere shawl of various stripes with the aramanth of a French shawl, we must remove the contrast of colours near to the amaranth stripe, by concealing them with a piece of grey or white paper, cut out, which allows us to see only this stripe: it being understood that a piece of paper cut similar to the first is laid upon the ground, so that the parts compared will be submitted to the same influence from the surrounding parts. (838.) The same means must be employed when we compare the colours of old tapestries, pictures, &c., with analogous colours recently dyed or painted; and for this reason, time acts very unequally, not only on the different kinds of colours which are applied to stuffs by the dyer, but also upon the tones of the same scale. Thus the deep tones of certain scalesthose of violet for example—fade, while the deep blues of the indigo-blue scale, the deep shades of madder, kermes, cochineal, are permanent. In the second place, the light tones of the same scale fade during a space of time which has no