# Design(As) Research

ANNE BURDICK

Research is only as good as its interpretation. If the data that designers have to work with is as rich and relevant as that presented in this volume, it is absolutely essential that the working material of design used in response—whether a new software application, cinematic language, or typographic form—be the result of similarly rich critical investigation. Therefore design requires a space—the research lab—for design risk-taking, speculation and discovery, not only for specific applications but also to expand our knowledge of design itself.

The set of projects that make up this section are just a sampling of the broad array of concerns that can drive such investigations. All deal with complex issues of representation as defined through form. Can one create a visual-verbal form of writing? ©101 BURDICK Where is the overlap between rationalism and decoration? ©94 GONZALES CRISP How can we exploit the distance between representation and reality to reveal aspects of 3-D perception? ©109 NAIMARK How can computer-based polylinear filmmaking reflect lived experience, outside of narrative? 118 STRICKLAND Such research questions are qualitatively different from those of user testing and human-centered research. The most significant difference is that the experiments developed in response to or in tandem with these questions use the act and material of design as the means of investigation. It is through making (rather than observing or interviewing) that these contributors generate newinformation.

All designers engage in creative exploration in the process of designing, but the difference between design that is simply design and design that serves as research has to do with the goals and outcomes of each. Designers who are conducting research through their creative practice create work that is intended to address both a particular design brief and a larger set of questions at the same time. In most cases, the inquiry is sustained over a period of time and the designers create a body of work in response—projects and practices that serve as experiments through which they interrogate their ideas, test their hypotheses and pose new questions. Critical reflection is a necessary component of a design research practice. Designers must be able to articulate their questions and conclusions, particularly in contexts such as this book.

The value of such formal investigations is not only to advance the array of choices designers have to call upon when in the act of designing, but also to advance the scholarship of the disciplines that make up design—to develop a critical understanding of the work we do and the objects we create. The projects within this section exist primarily in contexts outside of the mass market, in the more rarefied realms of academia, Literature, corporate research culture, documentary film, High Design and Art. Peers, scholars and critics define their value in addition to end users. This secondary community places a high premium on work that challenges and questions. It is necessary that such cultural arenas exist away from the concerns of popular culture and the marketplace—as incubators and hothouses for the difficult, the unresolved, the overly complex and the unconventional.