# DESIGNWRITING

ANNE BURDICK

How might writing change when design is an integral part of its concoption? This is the primary research questiua that Tve enplorad thruugh design (as methndology and outtome)in a range of projects nverthe pasi ten years.The exploration hit its stride through design-writing-programming collaborations that took place in the electrunic realm; inevitably, that experience fed hack into the print onvironment. The issnes turned out to be surprisingly similar, but shifting hetween media hrought hey questions to the fare; specifically, those related to the materiality of writing, the possibilitios and limitations of various modia types, and the ergonomies and cultural conventions of reading.

In the mid-1990s, I came atross Jay David Bolter's ranreptiuu of a "writing space"-"the physical and wisual field defined by a particular technology of writing" [Bolter 1991, 11]-which altered my thinking about writing and design significantly. "Different concoptual spaces fostur different styles and genrus of writing and different thenries af literature" [Balter, 11] Ahat Instead of designing "pages," "sereens," nr "chapters," I was designing spaces forwriting. Thinking about these conventional forms-from pages to essays ta puems tu lists-as containers that have a preduturmining effect on the kind of writing that ean take plare within thum allowed me to pose the questions: If we change the attributes ofthe space do we necessarily change the writing? What if one were to design a space First, and fill it with writing sesand? What happens when the two are developad in tandem? What are the possibilitios for imagining new ways ofseeing/reading/writing?

My experience in collaborations with expansive thinkers from literary triticism and linguistics led to additional questions: What role does representatinn play in the sumanties of writing? Kow tan designers and writers take advantago of che interplay between writing structures and visthlo form? What are the unique capabilities of different media types and haw ean design and writing work to exploit them in innovative ways?