# Test Pilots

BRENDA LAUREL

"What is to be done?" is an excellent question in the context of Design Research. The sections on People and Form have offered a variety of well-considered answers to that question. So far, so good. But the answer to the question, "How?" is often much messier. Reality intrudes in new and often excruciating ways. Resource issues, power hierarchies, turf battles and communication glitches can create complex turbulence in the Design Researcher's journey.

The "how" of Design Research is intimately bound up in its context, and it can be approached in many ways. Some of the following chapters offer clear procedural models and wellarticulated techniques for deploying Design Research successfully 2143 RHEA, ©153 SHEDROFF, O193 SVENNSON. Some authors in this section offer heuristics rather than procedures for keeping oneself and one's work on track in the midst of organizational and operational complexity 172 DEASY. 234 CANA AN. Some offer visions of environments and practices that predispose designers to think productively in exploratory ways ©175 ZIMMERMAN, 225 MOON. Some focus on techniques for effective communication 201 FOGG. 221 KIM. Others approach the process from within, teasing out the often covert structures of power, communication and belief from a position “on the ground” 212 LOCH, 164 DON-AHUE. These “embedded” approaches help us to see clearly despite—or perhaps because of—the situational factors that color our view.

Each of the approaches described in this section can fail; that's why it's good to have more than one of them in your back pocket. The research we conducted in the formation of Purple Moon provides an excessively rich example. We employed literature searches, expert interviews, quantitative surveys, dyad interviews, applied ethnography, user testing and a variety of branding and identity explorations. We represented our findings in reports, prototypes and presentations. But the organizational contexts in which we were embedded eventually brought us to our knees. If I had known then what I know now, based upon both my personal experience and the wisdom of the authors in this section, I believe that we could have succeeded in achieving all our goals.

Rob Tow often parodies the design researcher's process as that of a test pilot whose experimental plane is plunging toward the desert floor—"I'm trying A, I'm trying B, I'm trying C ..."The goal is not to crash the plane, and hopefully not to have to eject. Things rarely get quite so dire in the Design Research process. But in both cases it is true that the “test pilot" had better be informed about the situation and the alternative courses of action that are available. The flight is almost never smooth, but there are ways to keep plane, pilot and project alive to continue the exploration, and to express findings in ways that inform the process and lead to fulfillment of the mission.