# Reports from the Field

BRENDA LAUREL

In the section on Form, the authors' work necessarily represents both process and outcome, as the two are fundamentally inseparable in that context. Although many of the chapters in previous sections have incorporated examples having to do with the design of products and services, this book would not be complete without a few focused case studies. How is the execution and application of Design Research experienced by its practitioners in the context of products, services, brands or audiences? How do methods produce outcomes, and how do we measure their effectiveness? At the end of the day, what worked and what didn't? How do we deal with failure and how can we achieve success?

It takes quite a bit of courage, dedication and resilience to actually employ the methods we've been examining, especially within a commercial context 83 GROCOTT, ©234 CANAAN. Every design context has its own set of obstacles and limiting factors. The market (or the management) seems always to be breathing down one's neck. Design Research intends to encounter the unknown—an uncomfortable journey for an executive with an eye on the bottom line or a marketer who wishes simply to shore up an established brand 212 LOCH, 145 RHEA, 225 MOON. As with manned space flight, failures of all stripes serve to amplify resistance to the risk, time and expense involved in research. Lack of predictability can drive executives crazy. But for the design researcher, each step of the way is informed by the one that precedes it. Even with the best maps and compasses, they must be both cautious and nimble as they navigate new terrain. Design researchers learn by doing. Their experiences and reflections prepare us for our own close encounters.

Many of the chapters in this section deal with the design and development of computer games 244 JENKINS ET AL, ©253 WRIGHT, ©268 DAVIS ET AL., ©260 RAPOZA. The reasons for this focus are many: games are currently the most exuberant region of the recently flat-lined technology sector.

Games must incorporate knowledge about both people and form in exquisitely intertwined ways. The emerging form of the massively multi-player online game (MMOG) is not coded and shoved into a box like the single-player games of yore. MMOGs cannot be said to be "finished" until someone literally pulls them off the Internet; they are always evolving in response to players' behaviors and the changing tropes of popular culture. Because of their technological nature, MMOGs offer the unique opportunity to incorporate technological methods for conducting ongoing design research and making use of findings throughout their life spans.

A word about voice and values. The chapter entitled "Researching America's Army" chronicles the development of a product intended to function both as a game and as an educational tool about the United States Army ©268 DAVIS ET AL. As such, it incorporates the language and attitudes of the Army—attitudes that are also strongly held by the game's developers. As with any other designed object, some may disagree with the intent, tone, values or goals of the project, but it is important that we know what they are. I chose to feature this game primarily because of the unique challenge of designing a multi-lavered representation of something that exists in the real world. I also chose it because, within the domain of design, it represents an extreme excursion into the realms of values and politics. My hope is that it serves to remind us that values are implicit in everything we do. America's Army gives us a rare opportunity to study a case where values are explicitly expressed by both the designers and the design. In Damer's chapter, "A Virtual Walk on the Moon," you will encounter a different set of values--"spacer" values, for want of a better word—that are employed just as passionately ©276 DAMER.

Movies and television also make an appearance in this section ©293 SHUTT, ©301 SINGER.I remind those critical theorists who eschew popular culture that it is relevant to them precisely because it is designed, and that its quality may be as much a measure of designers' willingness to engage it as it is of the public's tastes. As the soup in which all swim, popular culture lends itself to design interventions that can have massive effects. Popular media demonstrate a particular cultural feedback mechanism: they must be sensitive to shifts in public tastes, but they also have a role in shaping those tastes. Games, movies, television and other elements of popular culture provide familiar, accessible examples of design research in action.

The museum experience designed by Jin Hyun Park (and touched upon by BJ Fogg in the People section) is another kind of encounter with the public ©201 FOGG, ©285 PARK. Here, the design problem is to make objects of elevated cultural significance accessible to the general public. The designer encounters the challenge, not only of making the museum's contents meaningful to unique individuals with different goals, but also of designing, albeit indirectly, the movements of people through real space. As new technological capabilities continue to emerge, the intersection of media design and environmental design will become increasingly fertile ground for creative exploration.

Finally, the design of identities and brands are examples of designing ways to communicate the value of other designed objects to their intended customers and audiences 301 SINGER, 309 MASTEN. Brand/identity design incorporates another sort of cultural feedback loop, where the brand both represents and influences the design of products, services and properties. The section's final chapter may be understood as a meta-field report wherein the author condenses a lifetime of encounters with brand and identity design into a pattern that can be seen as both descriptive and prescriptive 309 MAS-TEN. I place it as the concluding chapter of the book because, beneath the conversational tone, Davis Masten brings extraordinary experience and wisdom to his description of where the rubber meets the road.