# Social Impact by Design

## Tailoring Game Play for the Play-Styles of At-Risk Players DARION RAPOZA

When my wife left me alone too long with her college roommate's husband and some video games, we decided to found a game company and build a game of our own. I'd use my background in drug abuse research to get the government to pay for our development of a drug abuse prevention game! When my daughter was born and i promised her I would make the world a better place for her to live in, the game became my life's mission, and the work began in earnest.

## STEP ONE PURPOSE.CHECK.

## STEP TWO BACKGROUND RESEARCH, STARTING IN THE LIBRARY.

Standing on the shoulders of giants beats re-inventing the wheel every time. I found that researchers had identified a number of empirically based, researchderived principles of effective interventions that were directly applicable to the design of a video game-based intervention. These included:

• Interventions should be "theory-based." Those designers who paid attention to the lessons learned by others who came before them were the most successful in preventing drug use.

• Effective interventions are delivered in an engaging, interactive format, rather than didactic one. To be effective as an intervention, a videogame must be fun!

• Changing attitudes (not just knowledge) should be an objective of the intervention.

• Developmentally appropriate information should be delivered. Children and adolescents are more interested in concrete information on current experience than they are in information about possible consequences in the distant future. Older adolescents and young adults may be less responsive to authoritative approaches than their younger counterparts, and show an increased reliance on trusted information from which they can draw their own conclusions and make their own behavior choices.

• Social resistance skills training should be employed.

• Concepts of self-efficacy should be reinforced. Self-efficacy for a specific health behavior is the belief that one is capable of carrying out the behavior successfully.

• Players should learn by doing, as opposed to learning by instruction or observation.

• "Scaffolding" should be used to build new skill sets to be acquired within the game. Learning is enhanced when recently acquired knowledge must be applied as part of the performance of the immediately subsequent learning experience.

· Games should include adequate coverage of the intervention material incorporated in the game, and ideally, provide for subsequent follow-up. Designing socially beneficial games for re-playability permits the player to rehearse the skills acquired in the game, and apply them in different situations. Planning the release of game sequels would directly address the established need for social interventions to have sufficient follow-up a year or more after the initial intervention.

• The principles of operant psychology should be applied, particularly with attention to conditioned reinforcement, conditioned avoidance, and generalization. Briefly, desired behaviors displayed in-game should be reinforced with in-game rewards. For prevention efforts, engaging in targeted risky behaviors should hamper progress towards meeting game objectives, conditioning future avoidance of these behaviors. Closely modeling situations the player will be likely to face in real life increases the likelihood that lessons learned in the game will generalize to real life and impact real-life behavior. The implication is that truthfulness and integrity are critical.

· Avoid reliance on instructional learning. With instructional learning, firstperson experience is replaced with instructions (e.g., subjects learn vicariously through direct observation, or by verbal, written, or some other form of symbolic communication). Combining instruction in program content with playing essentially unrelated game material could actually distract the user from the material the intervention intends to convey [Malone 1980].

• The characters played by the user should be attractive and similar to the user. Studies have shown that children are highly attentive to characters that are very similar to them, and they feel validated to see those characters represented in mass media [Johnston and Ettema 1986, McDermott and Greenberg 1985]. Furthermore, children are more likely to imitate a model they perceive as similar to themselves if the model is attractive [Oei and Baldwin 1992]. Examples include having avatars available that match the user's gender, race and ethnic background, and are appealing but not improbable.

• Multi-component approaches should be used. The efficacy of the intervention will be greater if the videogame intervention is an integral part of a larger program; for example, the game could be supported with links to informational websites, "ask the experts" bulletin boards and monitored chat rooms, or linked to materials and exercises for the classroom or at home, to be completed with parental involvement.

My library research also found a number of reports of theory-based games having profoundly beneficial effects. For example, health behaviors in childhood were significantly affected by computer games concerning asthma [Rubin et al. 1986, Yawn et al. 2000, Bartholomew et al. 2000, Homer et al. 2000] and diabetes [Grossman 1987, Lieberman 1998]. In each case the studies reported as much as a 70% reduction in emergency room visits when comparing the videogame plus-physician instruction to physician instruction alone.

To fill in the gaps that I was certain couldn't be filled in by reading the literature I did some first-hand research. I played games. Many, many games, from all the different genres I could identify. Finally, I asked a lot of questions, talking to gamers, game designers, venture capitalists, publishers, parents, teachers and preventionists. The take-home messages I got were that:

• If the game were too "in your face" or "preachy" about drugs, it would be rejected by teens and fail, period.

• There needs to be a “game reason" to use drugs, or the intervention portion of the game design would be avoided.

• The game could not require players to use drugs. Forcing a player to use drugs would be antithetical to the objective of the intervention as well as bad game design.

• Gamers and publishers (among others) were skeptical that a drug prevention game would sell, and wondered how it could be marketed.

• Interventionists were concerned that knowing that the game was intended as an intervention could lead to reactance (rejection of the message).

## STEP THREE CONCEPTUALIZE A MODEL.

I saw that to date, all the video-game-based interventions had been single-player games. One particularly promising area is the design of socially beneficial, massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs). MMORPGs permit the application of theories relating to social influences on behavior, which is impossible in single-player games because they lack player-player interaction. Using MMORPGs enables the design of interventions based on social learning theory (which holds most behavior is determined by learning from peers), social control theory (behavior is controlled by peer leaders and social norms), and peer cluster theory (behavior is most heavily influenced by one's closest associates; i.e., friends). Furthermore, with their large player bases, MMORPGs would enable intervention designs intended to reach specific player sub-populations. Similar approaches have proven to be effective in the drug rehabilitation clinic, suggesting they may also prove effective in the videogame milieu [Conrod et al. 2000].

I decided to use a stealth approach in delivering the drug intervention content because: publishers had tended to balk at the idea of a "drug intervention game," but had no concerns about a game with drugs in it that (bonus!) casts them in a negative light. Interventionists felt that being too direct might invoke resistance, and players and game designers agreed that drug use had to be optional anyway. Therefore, to keep the drug intervention profile to a minimum, my objectives were to differentially deliver intervention content to those players at greatest risk for substance abuse, and to tailor intervention content for and selectively deliver it to specific player sub-populations, based on their personality characteristics.

The stealth part was easy. I arrived at a design in which I crafted the classic RPG (Role-Playing Game) Attributes and Skills system to model human attributes for which the biological bases are well understood, and game-relevant skills that are performed at a level which is in-part dependent upon the current level of the appropriate attribute(s). For example, I replaced the standard "intelligence" and "wisdom" attributes with short-term memory,"long-term memory, memory consolidation, focus and emotional intelligence; and I discarded "charisma," introducing instead confidence and physical attractiveness. Drug effects are realistically portrayed within the game, directly impacting the attributes/physiological systems in a dose-dependent manner and consequently affecting skill performance level just as they do in real life. For instance, performance of one's "computer hacking" skill, which relies, in part, on short-term memory and focus, would be impaired under the influence of marijuana. Where human physiology is modeled more directly through the user interface (Ul), appropriate drug effects are illustrated through the UI as well (e.g., loss of motor control due to alcohol intoxication is modeled by impairing the user's control of their character's movement through the game environment, etc.). Where drug effects were not easily modeled through the standard user interface or the attributes and skills system, new game mechanics were designed. For example, to model compulsive drug seeking in addiction, pop-up messages appear (e.g., "You sure could use a cigarette about now") and must be responded to in order to continue game play. To model the chance of stroke (etc.) with stimulant (etc.) use, there's a small chance of death (also modeled on real-life data) with each use of the drug.

Since scare tactics or a one-sided "preachy" approach would be ineffective, positive effects of drug use are also illustrated, such as the suppression of natural hand tremor by low doses of alcohol improving accuracy with long-range hand held weapons, or the modest increase in stamina obtained with stimulants (which is really only useful in marathons). I included a "psyche meter" in the display to indicate the mood altering effects of drugs, which also reflects success or failure in reaching game objectives. This permits the realistic representation of the positive mood-altering effects of drugs without providing an unnatural "game reward" for their use, as well as the illustration of negative mood swings during recovery.

I felt that the game mechanics I had created could fully support a typical MMORPG design while transparently providing the player who learns them with a framework for understanding the short-term effects and long-term consequences of drug abuse.

When I turned to content design, some design choices were simpler than others. The genre had to be current day science fiction. Crack and roofies just don't fit in a fantasy realm with elves and goblins. Today's street drugs would be out of context in the past, and probably in the future as well. As a socially conscious game, current concerns about videogame-induced violence had to be taken into account. The sci-fi genre permits the inclusion of non-human (robotic) combatants for lethal combat, and the design of a variety of non-lethal combat weapons for combat with humanoids. The player-characters are cadets, handpicked for the space academy—achievers, just a bit older and more accomplished than the target audience, credible role models in the game's sci-fi setting. Game advancement comes through study, with courses (and later, posts, apprenticeships, etc.) selected in advance by the player. Skills are gained over time, and advancement is influenced by intervening game play (anything from ongoing alcohol use impairing memory consolidation and learning to earning and securing the services of a tutor to speed skill acquisition). Initial drug offers come not from seedy strangers hanging out on the corner, but peers—other cadets—such as on the occasion of events to be celebrated: a cigar to commemorate graduation, a few beers to celebrate a well-played prank, a joint after the successful completion of a mission, etc. Peer pressure in these circumstances is a real game concern, as non-player characters remember how you respond to them and adjust their future interactions with you accordingly. So far, so good. But how would I selectively target those players most at risk for substance abuse, and what types of game design would work best for them?

The answers were not yet in the literature, but there was sufficient background to base a rationale for a research study on. I drew on Bartle's classic analysis of player types, Yee's factor analysis of why people play MMORPGs, and Zukerman's Sensation Seeking Scale. Richard Bartle analyzed the behavior of players within multi-user games, and concluded that play-styles cluster into four characteristic types: achiever, explorer, socializer, and imposer or "player-killer" [Bartle 2003]. Achievers set themselves in game-related goals and vigorously set out to achieve them. Explorers set out to learn everything they can about the virtual world, from mapping out the virtual geography, to un-masking the algorithms that control interactions with objects within the game (i.e., "physics"). Socializers make maximum use of the game's communication facilities, and apply the roleplaying that the game engenders as a context in which to converse (and otherwise interact) with their fellow players. Imposers, or Player Killers (PKers), to quote Bartle, "... use the tools provided by the game to cause distress to (or, in rare circumstances, to help) other players. Where permitted, this usually involves acquiring some weapon and applying it enthusiastically to the persona of another player in the game world." The game developer community at-large has widely embraced this terminology (although the nomenclature remains fluid), but has sub-divided the player-killer category to include "Player-Killers"(unfortunately there was no change in terminology), who add to the enjoyment of the game by the player community at-large by taking on the roles of villains or who simply enjoy brawling with each other, and "Grief Players"(as the term will be used in this chapter), whose apparent motivation is to cause as much distress and frustration in other players as possible, harassing and killing characters that are no match for them, spewing taunts and vituperations targeting players (as opposed to the character), and generally making it difficult for others to enjoy or play the game.

While Bartle's model was derived from observation and speculation, Nicholas Yee used empirical data to build a model of the different motivations of why people play MMORPGs [Yee 1, Yee 2 2002]. Yee's findings supported the hypothesis that the different play-style motivation factors (Relationship, Immersion, Grief, Achievement, and Leadership) correlate with different real-life personality traits, as assessed using validated measures of personality constructs. These personality traits include: Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness and Conscientiousness. Yee also found support for the existence of three of Bartle's four player types (PKr/grief, achiever/achievement, and socializer/relationship), albeit with some modification, and if the "explorer" type is defined as exploring the game environment (as opposed to rule sets), it may be validated by the immersion factor Yee identified. Among his other findings, Yee reported that players who scored high on his "grief" motivation scale also scored low on the Agreeableness personality scale and tended to be younger players.

When taken into account, each of these putative play-styles has different implications for the optimal design of a game. Achievers might best be reached by clear demonstrations that drug use by themselves, their companions, or members of a community to which they belong hinders their advancement within the game. Socializers may constitute one population that would respond well to observational learning. Renowned characters within the game suffering negative consequences from substance abuse could provide "the grist for the mill" for the socializers. Designing the game to encourage the formation of play groups, guilds, clans, etc., and ensuring that the group's stature can be impacted by the drug use of any individual member might facilitate drug-avoidance learning for achievers and socializers. Explorers might be particularly interested in learning about the medical consequences of drug abuse, and with proper in-game prompts, might be motivated to "read-up" on these effects in the game manual or in in-game facilities, such as a medical library or computer. They could then apply their knowledge when, by design, the situation arises, such as by recognizing and seeking medical attention for another character who has overdosed. On the other hand, players who express a high degree of immersion motivation in Yee's analysis (who might also be termed "explorers") may be particularly responsive to "learning by doing": the preferred approach under the theory of reasoned action—and the opposite of the approach theory would have suggested for Bartle's explorer type. Player Killers turned out to be the population of greatest interest. I found good reason in the research literature to hypothesize that they were the players the intervention should target most, as well as empirical evidence that led me to predict what type of designs would work best with them.

Certain personality traits have been demonstrated to be risk factors for or protective factors against a variety of real-life risky behaviors. The Sensation Seeking Scale (SSS) is an extremely well validated survey instrument the constructs of which haye been cross-validated with multiple other personality measurement scales. Sensation seekers need varied, novel and complex sensations and experiences to maintain an optimal level of arousal. They are presumed to have optimal arousal levels that are greater than that of non-sensation seekers, to become bored and nonresponsive more quickly than most other persons when faced with repetitive experiences, and to be more sensitive to internal sensations and less conforming to external constraints than others. High SSS individuals tend to be dominant, impulsive, nonconforming type extroverts, as opposed to good-natured, cooperative, adaptable, attentive, trustful, warm-hearted extroverts. Sensation seeking scores correlate negatively with age. There appears to be a biological basis for sensation seeking [see Harrington and Donohew 1997]. High sensation seekers have lower levels of platelet MAO and higher levels of testosterone. Polymorphism in exon IIl for the Dopamine D4 neurotransmitter receptor is associated with the SSS-related personality trait of novelty seeking. Not surprisingly, sensation seekers have been found to prefer complex over simple designs, and prefer and pay greater attention to commercial messages with high sensation value-message characteristics defined as novelty, complexity, intensity, ambiguity, unconventionality, suspense, fast pace and emotionality. The SSS as well as 3 of its 4 sub-scales correlates strongly with substance abuse.

A number of similarities are apparent between high sensation seekers, PKs, and players with high "Grief Motivations." The "desire to engage in...activities with elements of speed or danger," the "gravitation to an unconventional lifestyle and a resistance to irrational authority and conformity," and the "dominant, impulsive, nonconforming type of extroversion"—validated characterizations of high sensation seekers would all seem to be an equally apt description of Bartle's PKs, particularly of the subset of "grief players" as defined in this chapter. Also, it's possible that grief players are particularly susceptible to boredom in the game, leading them to generate their own excitement through PKing activity. In a similar vein, grief motivation correlated negatively with agreeableness in Yee's factor analysis. While sensation seeking is higher in younger individuals, Yee found grief motivation to be higher in younger players, who also were more likely to report wanting to be thought of as "more powerful," or "evil."

Based upon the observation of multiple similarities between sensationseekers and PKs, I hypothesize that PKs are high sensation-seekers. Furthermore, I propose that as sensation seeking is a known, powerful predictive indicator for future experimentation with drugs [Zukerman et al. 1972], PKs may be the most appropriate targets for drug interventions embedded in a game. Targeting PKs might be done geographically, in game designs where PKing is only permitted in certain areas. It should also be done by PK specific design, where PKs that necessarily have to interact with to proceed in the game (now that they are outlaws) will have more, targeted drug intervention-related design. It should be done user control, where plavers must identify themselves to the system as PKs before they can kill and be killed (and in so doing the world might respond differently to them, including being approached more often by drug users, dealers, etc.), or even operationally (their "conscience"won't allow them to attack another human except in self-defense, except under the influence of drugs)—a model with actual medical validity, giving PKs, and only PKs, a "game reason" to use drugs. High sensation seekers respond more positively to drug abuse prevention messages designed specifically for them [Harrington and Donohew 1997], suggesting that they might also respond more positively to game design created specifically for them. As with other messages that speak weil to high sensation seekers, a game design that targets them should be novel, fast-paced, non-repeating, complex, intense and unconventional; incorporate ambiguity & suspense; and be emotional.

## STEP FOUR FORMULATE AND TEST HYPOTHESES.

I'm currently developing a grant proposal to empirically study whether sensation seeking correlates with a preference for PK/Grief play-styles. I'm also building a prototype of the intervention game that includes each of the approaches I've discussed. I'll start the iterative design process by surveying play testers and correlating their play-styles with how well they liked each intervention approach l incorporated into the game. Two experimental groups will either be informed or uninformed as to the game's purpose to prevent drug use, to test the publisher's and interventionist's fears about being too forthright. With solid research and a little luck, I may just make good on a certain promise I plan to keep.