# ReaI Brand Alignment

DAVIS MASTEN

## 360-Degree Brands

The most difficult aspect of branding is to align the internal culture of the company with the essence of the brand itself. A corporation wants to have an essence, a position and a point of view that is differentiated and can be leveraged in the marketplace. In order to do this efficiently and effectively it needs to express itself in consistent terms with what's commonly being referred to as "360-degree branding."In other words, at every point of interaction the company has with its constituencies, it needs to speak in a consistent voice. This voice needs to adapt to the constraints of the media in which its essence is being expressed. For instance, talking with someone face-to-face is an entirely different type of interaction than the same communication content over email, voicemail or direct mail.

Companies strive to have a clear voice because it helps align employees toward a strategic goal and provides leverage in the marketplace with the trade and consumers. The more people align internally, the more capably they can conduct their business. When they focus with clarity companies can achieve increasing efficiencies, and they can more effectively adapt their differentiable edge to the array of points they use in 360-degree branding.

## Authentic Brands

In the past decade, not only has the notion of 360-degree branding taken hold in the marketing and design worlds, but also has the notion of brand authenticity. What consumers expect is the real thing, not hype. They want an experience that is what it promises to be, or if it is not, they want to understand what to expect going into the brand relationship. In this time-compressed world we live in, consumers have no patience for bait-and-switch. They may be open to being sold—in fact, they sometimes want to be sold—but they insist it be done with integrity. They want to know that the brand is who and what it says it is through the lifetime of the relationship.

Consumers have come to expect that at every point of interaction—all 360 degrees—the brand will show up clearly and in an authentic way. This approach is being preached and whole-heartedly embraced by many of the world's top designers and marketers. But as a market researcher, marketing executive, design and corporate strategist, and business person who has been involved in many of the great brands around the world, I will argue that 360-degree alignment is extremely difficult to achieve. I will also argue that, while there are many variables and obstacles to overcome, those of us in the design profession can play a unique and valuable role if we so desire. To do so, designers must learn about the business obstacles and not only how to overcome them but also how to stay with the process until the internal culture is authentically aligned. This calls for designers to play a new role in corporate strategy and execution that many will not find enticing, but those who heed the call and embrace a broader understanding of changing corporate dynamics have the potential to take their companies and their careers to new heights.

## The New Dress for Success

To use a simple analogy, a great brand should be like the perfect outfit—it should fit the consumer like a glove, be attractive to the distribution channel, and provide the comfort and familiarity that allows everyone in the corporate culture to feel like they are wearing their own clothes. This is much more easily said than done. I wish it were as easy as just buying a new pair of pants, but it's not. So, what are some of the complicating factors?

First off, in a world of so-called 360-degree brands, there is no one look that fits all occasions. While consistency is desired, when taken too literally, you can be way over-dressed for the party. Branding in the 21st century demands that we be sensitive to the vehicle we are using to interface with our audiences. The Persuasive Technologies Lab at Stanford University, headed by B.J. Fogg, is based on the premise that different technologies persuade people differently; therefore it's necessary to be sensitive to the strengths and weaknesses of the particular media/technology being used to communicate.

## A Challenged Wardrobe

The brand wardrobe has some other challenges as well, like intergenerational corporate cultures and interdisciplinary teams. Many corporations have employees ranging in age from 20 to 70. The needs of people under 25 are way different from those of almost anyone older. By the time they have achieved the ripe old age of 25 employees typically have made a life-choice decision. I had coffee with the son of one of my best friends the other day to do a bit of career counseling. He is 21 and feels the pressure to have made up his mind about what he wants to do by age 26. Intuitively, he understands the age dynamic—once someone has made this life choice as an adult, he becomes much more focused on what to do and is more open about what dues need to be paid to get there. On the other hand, someone 50 will not feel comfortable in the clothes of a 25-year-old no matter how mature that 25-year-old is. The same goes for their needs in terms of goals, reactions to authority, willingness or ability to embrace computing, etc. These are non-trivial issues.

Another major issue is life stage. Sometimes age has less to do with issues and decisions than the specific conditions in your life. I remember my wife's and my first kiss. At that time in my life the things that dominated my every waking minute were the wonders of her. While I was CEO of Cheskin at that point and had many professional obligations to fulfill, my personal attention was elsewhere. At the same time, we see people in their 40s recognize their own mortality and question their life's purpose as they see their parents and friends die. The point is that capturing the attention of someone who is preoccupied is a challenge every day of the week in corporations.

Everyone's lives are increasingly complex and time-compressed, so the notion that someone will not only notice but also embrace a brand message is a long shot. Messaging needs to be repeated time and again. The same message often needs to be dressed up in different ways to be accepted. Ideally people are able to interact with the brand "tailors" and experience an outcome that suits them more personally. Even so, over time the message needs to be refreshed.

## Dressing for Sales

In the heyday of SGI I was doing some positioning work for a new platform of workstations, As part of this drill, we met with the top sales people and had them simulate sales calls. Three people played the client and three people represented the sales team. We told the "client" teams what kind of company they represented, what they were looking for, and the positions of those who were going to meet with these sales people. The sales people were told they were sales teams from SGI, Sun or HP. They acted out the selling situation. During the sales simulations, I would stop the teams and ask who they were, what the meeting dynamic and politics were, etc. It was so funny—the SGl guys came roaring up to the meeting in exotic sports cars, very casually dressed, and walked with a bit of a swagger. By contrast, the HP sales simulators drove up in a Ford Taurus, were professionally dressed, and reeked of technical competence. Different cultures have different attitudes, and one must speak and dress to externalize the attitude in clothes and body language.

## Interdisciplinary Dress Code

I think I was in my first interdisciplinary team in a large company at AT&T in 1986. Nowadays such teams are a regular part of everyday business, but with brand they are still something of a novelty. I have come to realize that there are many groups that "own" brand. Traditionally, Marketing drives brand. But I have also talked with many people in Human Resources Departments who believe that they, not Marketing, own the internal brand culture. At the same time, I know many people in Advanced Development who believe that they, not Marketing, provide the real benefits that keep customers happy and loyal. In my experience, few designers are ever brought to the table in the early strategic interactions between these groups. In order for a company to weave a suit of clothes that will work for the consumer, the technology and the corporate culture, it needs to understand the weaknesses, strengths and legitimate contributions of each. In my experience, if Finance or Operations were to dress the corporation, it would fail to attract enough new customers. If HR were to dress the company it would be too inwardfocused—while it might work well for employees, the look would not be receptive enough to the outside. If Marketing were the only people to dress the company, it might be an image that customers love but that the corporate culture itself might not be able to wear comfortably. State-of-the-art teams today incorporate all of the major disciplines early in the discussions.

## Why Design a New Set of Clothes?

People who design things have a place in this conversation. You can participate as people who are told what the clothes should look like or you can help answer the strategic question of why to design a new set of clothes in the first place. Designers have a unique ability to imagine the future and make it tangible. With the tools of design research, they have the added ability to assert the future, combining the multidimensional threads and needs of many disparate constituents. Design researchers can articulate the options, not just in the form of "stratobabble," but through a process that helps the various constituents sense the opportunities.

I am currently working with the Executive Committee of a multibilliondollar company. One brand represents the lion's share of their volume. In order to achieve increased top-line growth they have hired Cheskin to lead them in a design research process. While we are using many techniques, the most applicable is that of involving the members of the executive committee in ethnographic studies. These executive clients have been accompanying our ethnographic teams as they visit homes and explore lifestyles across America. The goal is to discover things together that will shed new light on the fundamental experience of their business. As this happens, senior management's responsibility is to restructure the company to be better aligned with the customer experience. Not only will this give them greater top-line growth; it will also result in increased internal communications, resulting in efficiencies across their company.

Each executive committee member is there because they possess a unique set of strengths and weaknesses. Our processes are designed to bring out the creativity of every one of these players. It would be grossly inappropriate to expect these people to be experts in research or design. That's our team's role. In fact, I would venture to say that the only reason they are doing this is to drive towards their business goals. If there were other techniques that had nothing to do with the customer that seemed like a better bet, they would have undoubtedly gone there instead. However, I believe that the most appropriate approach is to inspire each of these people to new heights of intuitive understanding so they can do a better job of driving the business forward.

In my role, I need to be comfortable with the language of P&L, cash flow, ROI, leverage, PE, etc. so I can redesign the outcome of our process to move the client team forward in a language they understand and are motivated by. While I am definitely considered a “California idea guy," I am not in any need of owning the creative outcomes. The important thing is that they embrace the process and build their business. Their business, like all businesses, is complicated—and while I can help them understand things other don't and gain competitive advantage from it, I know that I am not the guy who is going to reconceptualize how to get a better discounted cash flow in a company reorganization.

## A Fresh Set of Threads

One of the outcomes of our process is to define the most important core attributes that a brand offers in the marketplace. These attributes combine into a positioning that will provide leverage against the competition. These attributes will also hook onto relevant macro-trends that are becoming increasingly influential. As the brand attributes interweave with the attributes of these macro-trends, the brand will be woven into major growth areas. And if I have learned anything in my almost three decades of business, it is to hook onto high-growth areas, if only because the money is easier and the margins are typically larger.

Let me explain this is slightly different way. Think of the core brand attributes as threads. These threads need to combine with others to make a great looking suit that will charismatically appeal to the desired marketplace. These attribute threads become interwoven into the fabric of macro-trends to become something rich and long lasting. In other words, the suit should fit appropriately and wear very well for years.

## Foreign Styles

Foreign markets filled with local management create another challenge to the process of internal alignment. Early in my career, I thought it was not a big deal that I am a Californian with European roots. After all, I was an open-minded guy and had taken anthropology and psychology in college. My, how life humbles one into understanding one's own bias. People now represent Cheskin from 22 different cultures. In another example, I attended a meeting not too long ago where there were 7 senior women in the company. Now I am a pretty friendly, highenergy guy, but I was just returning from a global trip and apologized that I just did not have the energy to greet each of them in the appropriate manner. I knew the Brazilians would be offended if I did not hug them and the Chinese would be if I did. Others would fall somewhere in between. I have learned that subtle cues are incredibly important in communication. In a culturally diverse world, it is so easy to misinterpret a gesture.

Localization becomes another challenge. I just finished a project for a technology client where we involved management from more than a dozen countries. This was not some token effort from corporate headquarters to involve the divisions and then ignore them in the final decisions. The client understood that this technology is more developed in some of the markets outside the U.S. than it is in the U.S. As of this writing, Scandinavia is the world's leader in wireless experimentation. However, the U.S. has the lead in 802.11 Wi-fi technology. Korea and Singapore are the world's leaders in broadband. Japan is the world's foremost leader in consumer electronics. India and China have consumers who are excited to have CDMA phones and many can discuss them knowledgeably by name. Given that we were dealing with all of these issues, it was critical to the success of this product to listen and understand the local market development teams and give each of the local markets the right clothes to wear for local market conditions. All of these styles of clothes came from the same brand wardrobe, but each wove the brand attribute threads into the local fabric.

## Don't Just Dress in Black

In order to be involved in this process in a way that captures the essence of a brand and helps drive strategy, a designer must learn how to become integrated into the process in a different way—don't just dress in black. "What?!" you say. Relax. I didn't say stop wearing black altogether, just use it selectively. And I'm speaking both literally and figuratively here. In your own brand portfolio of expressions that are true to yourself, it is important that you have a "wardrobe" that represents you appropriately in a variety of contexts. To be considered an equal—that is, to earn respect for your talent and contributions—you must be someone people want to deal with seriously on day-to-day basis. Clients need to trust that you are not only capable of dealing with their issues but also interested in them as people. If you dress like an outsider, you will be spotted on sight as "not one of us." The group you are emulating and with whom you want to participate in strategic decision-making processes respect distinct personalities. But keep in mind that they are more a part of the “general committee" running things than an élite force.

David Liddle, a successful venture capitalist and key driver in the early days of both Xerox PARC and the Santa Fe Institute, said it best. At a dinner that Clement Mok and i hosted to discuss breakdowns in the creative service industry and attended by David Kelley of IDEO, Paul Saffo of the Institute of the Future, Ray Riley of Nike and Susan Rockrise of Intel, among others, David floated his "Green Beret" hypothesis. As long as designers choose to dress and act as if they are special, just as Green Berets represent themselves as somehow superior to those around them, they will never reach the kind of power they desire. The real power in the armed forces lies in being a member of Central Command, not a member of the special forces. The real strategy is being designed without designers who live like Green Berets. These Green Berets will be relegated to lower pay, with the big money and notoriety going to the few stars of the culture. So before you decide to tell people you are a hotshot strategist who drives fundamental change within corporations, ask yourself if you are accepted by central command as a regular player on the core strategy team. And think back over the past month about how many times you have dressed like a designer rather than as a member of general management with a great sense of design.

• Lasting, authentic brands come from successful leadership.

• Good leadership means seeing clearly, knowing your talents as well as your limitations.

• Recognize that this is a long term, challenging task. Under-promise and overdeliver.

• Set your sights on what is actually doable. Be credible in your expectations. Don't claim that your brand is going to shift the culture if you do not have a good plan and sustainable resources to do it. Get senior management involved.

• Focus on the customer experience and make it come to life for cross-sections of people within the company. Embrace their creativity and help them see the possibilities. Show the culture how it can more effectively embrace the opportunities in an experience economy.

• Appreciate the differences between you and the rest of the company, the trade and your customer. It will hone your instincts, enabling you to make more insightful creative leaps.

• Listen deeply to the complexity of your client's problems. There are so many dynamic issues of culture, technology, politics and finance that it is easy to under-estimate the depth of the issues. Everybody likes to be listened to, especially if they think you can make a real contribution.

• Be gracious and non-defensive. Keep in mind that most executives understand that they are going to be wrong a lot of the time. The kind of help they are looking for are people they can trust to deliver results consistently over time.

· Build processes that have short-term wins to help show the internal culture that you can build results, not just talk. The more tangible you make your results the less risky you seem. People will want to go with a winner.

• Be honest about what you are good at. Just because you are a great designer or researcher does NOT mean that you are a strategist or a CEO.

We still need design stars. In fact, in these increasingly complex times, we need them more than ever. But these new stars should not be Green Berets; rather, they must be people who truly help drive the meaningful decisions in a company on a day-to-day basis. There is plenty of room for true brand leadership if you are up to the challenge.