## The Department Stores as Commercial Innovators

The very same authors who ascribe to the Boucicaut myth also quite incorrectly consider the early department stores as important pioneers within the field of retailing methods. They depict them as led by revolutionary businessmen who had the audacity to abolish with one stroke traditional retailing methods. As a matter of fact, historical evidence points to a more gradual, less discontinuous evolution of commercial practices.

Until the beginning of the nineteenth century, Western commerce had a Janus face (see, for example, Fraser, 1981; Perrot, 1984; Nord, 1986). Local markets and neighbourhood shops supplied the daily needs. Apart from this everyday circuit, in most large cities, there was a separate commercial circuit of specialized shops that traded in luxury goods such as silks, hand-made furniture, and chinaware. Ultra-specialization set the tone. Thus, merchants in hats normally did not sell umbrellas, ties or leather articles. Most of the other traditional ways of doing business also prevailed at the beginning of the nineteenth century. When a client entered the shop, the customer implicitly engaged in a double contract with the merchant: one had to buy something at a price about which one had to bargain. Most of the time, the customer had no specific idea of the goods with which he or she would return home. The products were neither advertised nor displayed. Merchants dug goods out of big drawers or closed closets, recommended and praised them and, on being asked, mentioned a price about which one had to haggle (these customs are still alive and well in many oriental and African countries, much to the bewilderment or amusement of Western tourists).

Some of the traditional retailing methods were already abandoned before the nineteenth century in England and the United States. Thus, Quaker merchants, for religious reasons, indicated fixed prices from the beginning of the seventeenth century onwards. By the end of the eighteenth century, several new commercial habits even became institutionalized in the world of London commerce (see McKendrick et al., 1982). London shopkeepers sought publicity by means of business cards, displayed their most attractive merchandise in their shop windows and offered dissatisfied customers the opportunity of exchanging their purchases for more satisfactory goods. The Parisian magasins de nouveautés and the founders of the later American department stores such as Wanamaker, Field and Macy, combined these reformations with still other renewals of traditional trade. Thus, they offered no credit and only did business on a cash basis. They also lifted the commitment to buy and competed against each other with low, clearly announced prices. The latter innovations were clearly associated, for free entrance allowed price comparison.

As noted above, most department stores gradually grew out of small shops. When a shopkeeper was successful and a man of enterprise, he constantly increased the range of his products. After a few years of expansion, he was normally obliged to introduce a certain departmentalization in his store in order to facilitate the choice of his many items. Different sorts of merchandise were brought together in different departments (for example clothes, furniture and chinaware). It was particularly this vast assortment that gave the early department stores a distinct and even unusual character in the eyes of their contemporaries. For the stores did not add much to the already institutionalized sale and retail methods. Except for regular price cuts (soldes, sales or bargains) and home delivery, the early department stores only combined previous commercial practices with a massive supply of all kinds of commmodities. They could, of course, develop some elements because of economies of scale. Thus, the department stores could sell at very low prices: quick turnover compensated for the small profits on each product.

The large scale of the new stores had particular consequences for the internal organization of labour, accounting, sales, administration, etc. The perceptive French critic George d’Avenel rightly considered the organizational policies of the new department stores as a prime example of 'the mechanization of modern life'. The growing necessity of sales planning, marketing, distribution of work, accurate price calculation, expansion strategies and so on, indeed transformed the entire business process within the department stores into a factory-like affair. In a word, they changed selling into an industry. The early department stores thus functioned as the prime carriers of the modern tendency towards increasing rationalization, as described by Max Weber, in an economic sector that was once dominated by courtly manners and time-consuming negotiations between merchants and customers.

## From Customer to Consumer: Department Stores as Female Public Places and Leisure Centres

The coming of the department stores drastically changed the character of the act of buying and selling. Up to the middle of the nineteenth century, buying for most Western women was synonymous with going to the neighbourhood shop. They doubtless enjoyed their visits to the local markets or stores, where they could meet friends, discuss family matters or just chat with each other or with the shopkeeper. Nevertheless, these were social pleasures that had no intrinsic link with the act of buying itself or with the role of customer as such. With the breakthrough of the department stores, things changed completely. 'People could now come and go, to look and to dream, perchance to buy, and shopping became a new bourgeois leisure activity - a way of pleasantly passing the time, like going to a play or visiting a museum', comments Bowlby (1985: 4).

The new way of shopping was not just a new pleasure-leisure' machine. In a certain sense, one now had to spend time on shopping in order to be ‘a good housekeeper'. Shopping pleasure and rational consumerism coincided because ‘strolling around' gave women opportunity to compare the prices of the different department stores or 'to pick up a dirt cheap bargain'. While the traditional customer had to negotiate in function of his or her spending power, the modern consumer, created by the department stores, had to gather comparative knowledge about the desired products before he or she bought them. As Philippe Perrot (1984: 39) remarks, le savoir d’achat' now became as important as 'le pouvoir d’achat'. This alteration was clearly reflected by female time-tables. Writing about American middle-class women, William R. Leach notes that

in the early [nineteenth century], shopping was only a minor incident in the round of domestic chores performed by most middle-class women. . . . By the turn of the century, shopping had developed into an almost full-time secular and public business. (Leach, 1984: 333)

The transformation of buying into shopping (in the modern sense) and the subsequent 'leisurization'of shopping itself (see below), offered middle-class women new opportunities within the public sphere. A growing number of urban women found in shopping a legitimate reason to escape the domestic sphere. Men already had their own clubs and pubs, their sports, etc. Moreover, they dominated the urban streets during the nineteenth century. With the coming of the department stores, middle-class women now also obtained a public place in which they could meet each other and experience a certain, albeit limited, kind of public freedom of movement. Without much exaggeration, one could assert that 'the department store made the phenomenon of a feminine public possible';

'the buying stage of shopping appeared as the most widely visible sign of female emancipation in the modern city' (Barth, 1980: 121, 137). The public emancipation of women did not go unnoticed. Zola's comments in his novel Au bonheur des dames on shopping as ‘a new [feminine] religion' were shared by many journalists and social critics of the time. For example, in June 1881, the New York Times complained about ‘the awful prevalence of the vice of shopping among women . . . [an addiction] every bit as bad as male drinking or smoking'(quoted in Leach, 1984: 333). Similar comments on the new shopping mania' were expressed during the 1880s in the leading Chicago newpapers when Field's department store increasingly became ‘the place to be' for well-to-do women (see the many quotes in Duncan, 1965).

The managers of the Parisian grands magasins and the owners of the leading American department stores stimulated both the 'leisurization' of shopping and the transformation of their stores into distinct female public spaces. Indeed, they all heartily subscribed to the modern concept of service. Or, as Marshall Field once told William Clarke, head of his upholstery department: Always remember we are the servants of the public'(quoted in Twyman, 1954: 92). This was not just mere sales talk. ‘Marshall Field and Company from the very first had been noted for its polite and attentive clerks; but in later years its graciousness and courtesy became almost legendary'(Twyman, 1954: 126); another book on Marshall Field is aptly titled Give the Lady What She Wants! (Wendt and Kogan, 1952). Other leading American department stores, such as Wanamaker's and Macy's, were also famous for their deference to visitors, casual sightseers as well as actual purchasers.

Service was not limited to courtesy and deference. Slowly but surely, the owners of the early department stores began to stress comfort and convenience. In addition to the amenities of the location and of the enormous variety of goods, customers would find in the grands magasins a growing number of free services. Thus, the remodelled Au Bon Marché' had a space for the exhibition of paintings and a reading room in which the shoppers could freely consult newspapers and magazines. These two rooms formed together a salon, 20 metres long and 8 metres high, in the style of a Louvre gallery. Adjacent to it was a refreshment area with beautifully decorated tables, luxurious curtains, palm trees, etc. The leading American department stores also offered their female clients many free services. From 1878 on, Macy's provided cus-