tomers with writing tables and newspapers and, in 1879, this famous New York store opened a luxurious lunch room. Around the turn of the century, Macy's experimented with several kinds of free courses and even a bicycle academy for women. Wanamaker realized his cherished idea of public service' by such things as an art gallery (1881), a reading cabinet and a refreshment bar (1882), a post office and an information office (1884) and, from 1892 on, regular selections from the pictures exhibited at the official Parisian Salons. His new department store in New York, opened in 1907, even had an immense auditorium, more than 1000 seats, equipped with a large organ for concerts of classical music.

The steady increase in comforts and free services was partly due to the intensifying competition between the steadily increasing number of department stores.

Granted that the merchandise was of acceptable quality, people tended to patronize the stores which gave the most attractive surroundings, the most convenient delivery, and the most satisfactory all-round treatment. Once the store owners discovered that price was not the sole means of attracting customers, they promptly began to exploit services and equipment. (Hower, 1943: 279)

This tendency also resulted in the reintroduction of credit facilities. However, although the main reasons may have been primarily economic, the net effect of the continual growth in services was a strong reinforcement of the ambience of leisure of the department stores. For more and more women, the stores became equivalents of the male downtown clubs and cafés. Taking the idea of a women's city club to its logical conclusion, a number of stores even provided free meeting rooms for women's organizations (Porter Benson, 1986:85).

## From Looking to Buying: Innovations of the Early Department Stores in Advertising and the Display of Commodities

The transformation of the act of buying into a pleasant, entertaining and even exciting leisure activity overcame the initial hesitations of many middle-class women about the reliability of the new department stores. However, notwithstanding the shopping pleasures offered, department stores remained capitalist enterprises. The pleasures of just looking' or just wandering around', therefore, had to be linked with the potential desire to buy. Because of the shift from buying to shopping and the concomitant disappearance of any obligation to buy, the managers of the early department stores had to invent new strategies. They could no longer even rely on the sales talk that traditionally accompanied the act of selling and buying. Henceforth, the commodities had to praise themselves, without any human comment. This sales problem was solved by augmenting the seductive qualities of the merchandise: the many commodities were transformed into desirable items. It is thus no accident that the words ‘to seduce' and ‘seduction' function as genuine key words in Zola's novel Au bonheur des dames.

In order to transform the many visitors into real buyers, the department stores reformed already well-tried methods. Thus, they used newspaper advertisements, posters, leaflets, postcards and other forms of publicity on a till then unknown scale (cf. Schudson, 1984: 152). This quantitative growth in advertising was supplemented by several qualitative innovations. As a matter of fact, the managers of the early department stores, such as Macy and Wanamaker in the United States and Boucicaut in France, thoroughly modernized' the format and the outlook of newspaper advertising. Traditionally, shopkeepers did not advertise in newspapers very much. And, insofar as they did, they restricted their ads to little announcements that were only informative and not particularly eye-catching. From their very beginnings, the initiators of 'the new kind of store'(Wanamaker) did away with these restrictions. They enlarged the size of their ads and did more than give compact lists of the goods on offer. Instead of dry descriptions, they experimented with appealing catchwords, constantly repeated slogans, fictitious dialogues, unusual arrangements of type, zigzag layouts, etc. To increase the visibility and the appeal of their ads, the managers of the early department stores were also keen to apply new printing techniques. Thus, they were among the first to use photogravure and chromolithography. The latter technique made it possible to print large-sized, colourful posters, lively postcards and so on to propagate the name of the store.

Good advertising could raise personal interest and draw potential buyers into the store. However, once the latter had crossed the threshold of the store, it proved necessary to direct again and to stimulate anew the already aroused willingness to buy. In a word, the external rhetoric of advertising had to be continued inside the store through an appealing and eye-catching commodity rhetoric'. The store managers had to catch the rapidly moving eyes of the many visitors in such a way that they first were willing to contemplate a certain commodity and then to buy it. Visual pleasures had to be changed into forms of pleasant fascination, and fascination into the desire to acquire personally the object of fascination. Several means and techniques were used, sometimes for the very first time, to focus the eyes of the wandering female shoppers who were just looking': dazzling decorations, architectural adornments, fairyland lighting and, first and foremost, a sophisticated display of mostly fashionable merchandise.

The commodities that the department stores wanted to be noticed were often fashionable products, most often purchased cheaply in great quantities. Several display techniques could be used in order to focus the attention of the public on these items. First, it was possible to present them at unusual, unexpected or bizarre places in the store. Thus, a new collection of clothes was frequently shown in one of the non-clothes departments. Sometimes the store managers even changed the whole normal order of the different departments. Second, the commodities were showed and ‘staged' in splendid, eyecatching settings within the store or in the outside store windows. Many of the display strategies invented by the early department stores have become generally accepted. Thus, it is now quite common for stores to combine several products within one easily recognizable and luxurious context: not single pieces of furniture but ravishing drawing rooms or catchy' dining rooms, not separate kitchen utensils but real' kitchens, not single items of clothing but attractive ensembles of well-dressed mannequins.

A particular display technique the early department stores frequently applied was the presentation of products against an exotic background in order to increase their appeal. In line with the then dominant fashion of Orientalism'(see Said, 1991), they often used images of the Orient to give clothes, chinaware, furniture or other nouveautés a distinct 'look'. Thus, commodities were frequently staged, literally, within Oriental decorations. The Thousand and One Nights, in particular, served as a nearly inexhaustible source of inspiration. Stores were decorated to look like Egyptian temples, Japanese gardens and so on. For the American department stores, trendy Europe also functioned as an important source of exotic inspiration. Clothes, hats and other women's fashions were often associated with Paris, 'the capital of fashion'. To obtain the desired effect of 'Parisianism', store managers imitated French salons, simulated 'the streets of Paris' and even copied the complete interior of a 'real Parisian boulevard appartment'. The many exercises in 'Orientalism' or Parisianism' were usually accompanied by other initiatives, such as the organization of a French week'during which French perfumes were presented, French wines could be tasted and

French cooking recipes were demonstrated by real French chefs'. Most department stores also had regularly organized, generally seasonal periods during which the entire store underwent a complete transformation. This is beautifully illustrated by Zola's description in Au bonheur des dames of the spectacular effects on the eyes, even on the entire bodies, of the female visitors when confronted with a store floor that was completely decorated with white linen. As a matter of fact, this was a frequently repeated ‘show'in Boucicaut's Bon Marché:

White sales . . . were famous affairs [in Au Bon Marché]. On these occasions the entire store was adorned in white: white sheets, white towels, white curtains, white flowers, ad infinitum, all forming a single blanc motif that covered even stairways and balconies. (Miller, 1981: 169).

The many display techniques developed by the early department stores actually transformed them into vast ensembles of several 'object theatres' in which commodities were ‘staged' and underwent a theatrical change. The early department stores transformed merchandise into a permanent spectacle, into a show-like theatre of commodities. Or, as Stuart and Elisabeth Ewen (1982: 68) observed, ‘The department store was more then a site for consumption, it was a sight of consumption. . . . Shopping became a perceptual adventure'. But visual fascination was for the owners of the early department stores only a means of arousing the consumer's appetite, of stimulating the willingness to buy. The mise-en-scène or presentation of goods was meant ‘to seduce' the public. A successful decoration was one that not only fascinated the passers-by but also worked as a kind of fatal attraction, culminating in an irresistable desire to possess the displayed commodities. Just looking' was only a prelude to just buying'.

## Modern Consumer Culture within the Early Department Stores: The Dominant Symbolic Meanings of Advertisements and Displays

With their innovative display techniques, the department stores pioneered the 'technocracy of the senses' that Wolfgang Haug considers to be characteristic of the modern consumer culture in general. According to Haug, commodity aesthetics' has to do with an artificially produced fascination, even an enchantment of the senses, especially sight. Power, he concludes, is exercised through the fascination for technically produced aesthetic appearances' (Haug, 1980: 55). Actually, the ‘staged' commodities within the early department stores were changed into meaningful images. The mise-en-scène of merchandise within preconceived decorations directed the looks' of the passers-by not to the commodities themselves but to their 'looks'. Through decoration and display, commodities disappeared in the imaginary images of ‘The Orient' or 'Real Paris', which had to catch the eyes of the passers-by. Outward and inward display windows functioned as ‘impression machines'. Neither the possible practical value of an item nor its real ‘substance' counted, but only its appearance, the ways it might impress the senses, particularly the sight of the gazing shoppers. As T.J. Clark (1985) has perceptively argued, this ideology of the visual' found in the heyday of the early grands magasins its aesthetic counterpart in the impressionism of Manet and his followers.

The advertisements and the displays of the early department stores clearly reveal that the ‘spectacularization' of merchandise was literally meaningful. Thus ‘Orientalism' and Parisianism' symbolized 'good taste', wealth, style and affluence, in short, luxury and glamour. The same meanings were expressed by the grandiose architecture of the early department stores. The abundant use of marble, carpets, ornaments, etc. and the refined, sophisticated ‘styling' of balconies or lunch rooms all incarnated the idea of a luxurious, comfortable and fashionable way of life. The notion of luxury was also behind the concept of personal service. With their many free services for, and courteous treatment of, shoppers, the early department stores created an almost aristocratic ambience. The female customer was intended to feel like a real queen or at least a lady while she was shopping because she walked in a palace-like atmosphere that was thoroughly imbued with luxury.

As Zola and George d'Avenel had already noted, the displayed luxury was most of the time merely semblance, for the great success of the early department stores was partly due to the relatively low price of their merchandise. Most commodities were not costly, handmade goods but cheap, mass-produced items. Ads and architecture, decorations and displays radiated an aura of luxury over the merchandise in order to compensate for their actual cheapness. In sum, the several forms of the new ‘technocracy of the senses' (Haug) were meant to 'up-grade' cheap merchandise. Commodity aesthetics had to produce these very meanings that the commodities themselves usually did not express. Not real richness but illusory signs of wealth and affluence were purchased in the early department stores.