In the path of Zola and d'Avenel or, more recently, the protagonists of the Frankfurt School, one can easily dismiss the schöner Schein created by commodity aesthetics as just another lure of capitalism. But these moral denunciations divert sociological attention from the basic fact of modern consumer society: the thoroughgoing culturalization' of merchandise. During the second half of the nineteenth century, the processes of buying and selling rapidly changed into a consumer culture because mass-produced commodities were associated increasingly with certain meanings. Granted that our Western societies are based on capitalistic economies, modern capitalism also created its own culture in the sociological or the anthropological sense. It transformed mass-produced objects into commodity signs' (Baudrillard, 1970, 1972) or ‘symbolic goods' (Bourdieu, 1972) that convey specific meanings. Leiss et al. (1986) stress the same idea in their informative study on ‘social communication in advertising'. They correctly consider modern consumer society as an ‘anthropological type', characterized by 'privileged discourses through and about objects' or cultural frames for goods' (Leiss et al. 1986: 12). This fusion of culture and economy actually defines modern consumption as a specific historical practice and distinguishes it from earlier forms of producing and consuming. The early department stores pioneered the transformation of traditional customers into modern consumers and of just merchandise' into spectacular 'commodity signs' or ‘symbolic goods'. Thus they laid the cornerstones of a culture we still inhabit.

## Early Department Stores and the Feminization' of Shopping: Contradictory Images of the Female

The statistics on the sales volumes and profits of the stores set up by enterprising businessmen such as Boucicaut, Wanamaker and Field indisputably prove the vast success of the department-store formula between 1860 and 1914. By way of conclusion, I want to explore three frequently invoked causes for this rapid ‘take off’ of 'the new kind of store' (Wanamaker). Two of them may be easily deduced from what has been said above. First, as female leisure centres, the early department stores offered middle-class women who, until the middle of the nineteenth century, were confined to the private sphere, the opportunity to escape the dullness of domestic life. Second, as illusionary palaces of luxurious consumption', the stores particulary appealed to the appetite for status symbols of the then rapidly growing urban middle class. In the concluding section of this paper, I will go into a third, not yet mentioned factor that may explain the success of the early department stores, that is the specific social conditions of living in large cities.

As I have already stated, the coming of the department stores gave women a public place of their own. In the department stores, they were treated courteously and could meet each other without the traditional fear of being harassed by violent men. Thus, the grands magasins gained larger cultural significance as the foci of new, distinctively female communities. But at the very same time they reproduced certain stereotypes of women as ‘good mothers' and good houskeepers'. For the early department stores widened the gap between the harsh world of production and the festive world of consumption, thus reinforcing the existing border within the growing middle class between working males and non-productive females. While the former had to earn the money necessary for family consumption, the latter were still primarily seen as responsible for the actual purchase of household items.

As a matter of fact, the early department stores also directly reinforced the traditional images of women as ‘good housekeepers'. Their constant offering of bargains, their temporary price cuts and their sales campaigns alluded to a presupposed sense for economy and domestic responsibility among their female public. Moreover, the ads and displays made clear that the store managers frequently invoked 'the mothering complex'. Fashionable toys and children's clothing were presented as indispensable for 'modern mothers'. These allusions, of course, assumed the traditional link of femininity with motherhood and responsibility for education. The department stores redefined this traditional stereotype of femininity in terms of optimum consumption of certain products. In sum, the traditional woman's role as mother, wife and lady underwent a twofold change in the course of the breakthrough of the departmentstore formula. Women were redefined as professional shoppers or consumers and their performance of their traditional roles was thoroughly commodified' or redefined in terms of commodities.

Another link between the sales techniques of the modern department stores and the traditional representations of femininity has to do with the implicit psychology of these techniques. As a matter of fact, the stores operated on a rather crude view of the female that reproduced 'the available ideological paradigm of seduction of women by men, in which women would be addressed as objects yielding to the power of male subjects forming, and informing them of, their desires' (Bowlby, 1985: 20). With their multitude of display devices, colourful ads, etc., the storekeepers addressed women indeed primarily as impulsive' and ‘emotional beings' who could not resist the temptation of a ‘good bargain' or a new, attractive piece of furniture. Thus the modern department stores literally reproduced the traditional sex stereotypes. Keen, cold-blooded males encouraged women to be what they were supposed to be, that is ‘irrational', 'childlike' and 'thoughtless' human beings.

The two stereotypes that informed the sales practices of the early department stores were not mutually consistent. The efforts to seduce women into making purchases contradicted the image of the rational and economical housewife. More particularly, the encouragement to buy without much reflection often resulted in intense marital and family conflicts. For middle-class women who could not, indeed, resist the multitude of temptations within every department store, still had to justify their purchases to their hardworking husbands. By the turn of the century, Leach (1984: 334) reports,

an increasing number of court cases pitted [American] women who bought well beyond their means, against husbands, who refused to pay their wives' debts. . . . Those cases as a whole illustrate the strain placed on marriage by the spread of credit and fashion and by the new abundance of commodities.

## The False Democratization of Luxury: Early Department Stores and the Modern Middle Class

As was already noted, the early department stores had a particular appeal for middle-class women because they suffered more from the traditional distinction between a predominantly male public sphere and a female domestic sphere than most working-class wives (cf. the synthesis of nineteenth-century life under the direction of Perrot, 1987). But the grands magasins also explicitly and implicitly addressed the middle classes as such. All the available material shows that the latter did, indeed, form the principal public of the early department stores (see for example Hower, 1943; Barth, 1980; Miller, 1981; Perrot, 1984; Leach, 1984; Nord, 1986). This is not surprising, since the urban middle class was growing rapidly during the second half of the nineteenth century. The process of professionalization and the bureaucratization of public as well as private administrations created a steadily rising number of white-collar jobs (e.g. bookkeepers, school teachers, employees of large banks, insurance companies and railways). The occupants of these new social positions wanted to distinguish themselves from the lower social strata, especially the working class. Thus the new middle class longed for status symbols at cheap prices. The early department stores fulfiled this need. Their merchandise was relatively cheap but, because of its many imaginary associations with luxury and comfort, it looked otherwise.

The urban petite bourgeoisie actually did not possess a distinctive culture at the time it was rapidly emerging. Within the new stratum, there clearly existed a certain desire for social status but there was not enough money to imitate the aristocracy or the rich bourgeoisie. The early department stores partly filled this cultural void by linking status and ‘good taste' to shopping and consumerism. Thus, consumption itself became a sort of substitute for not being ‘a real bourgeois'. In his study on Boucicaut's ‘Au Bon Marché', Miller accordingly concludes that this famous grand magasin functioned as ‘a medium for the creation of a national middle-class culture' (Miller, 1981: 183): 'The Bon Marché showed people how they should dress, how they should furnish their home, and how they should spend their leisure time. It defined the ideals and goals for French [middle-class] society' (Miller, 1981: 188).

As a matter of fact, the department stores redefined the traditional bourgeois ideals of respectability and comfort for the urban middle class in exactly the same way as they rearticulated the traditional images of femininity. In both cases, symbolic culture was fused with material culture, and values and ideals were fused with the actual purchase of commodities. Therefore, they partly produced, partly reinforced one of the very core notions of modern consumer culture, that judgment about a person is not based upon what one does within society, but rather upon what one has. . . . "Middle class" status was becoming something founded purely on one's ability to purchase, construct, and present a viable social self' (Ewen, 1988: 68).

What has just been said about the role of the early department stores in the shaping of a distinctive middle-class culture may perhaps be extended to the bourgeoisie in general for some American stores. Indeed, the French bourgeoisie — like most of their counterparts in Western Europe - still copied the formerly dominant aristocratic culture during the nineteenth century (see Mayer, 1983), but the American bourgeoisie had no such role model. At least in one case, one can firmly assert that a department store helped to