# Learning to Consume: Early Department Stores and the Shaping of the Modern Consumer Culture (1860-1914)

Rudi Laermans

Early Department Stores as Shapers of Modern Consumer Culture: Some Provisional Assertions

Until recently, the phenomenon of modern mass consumption was much debated but not much studied. Most comments on postwar consumer society repeated the same moral denunciations of consumption hedonism' or 'the false democratization of luxury' that were already coined by nineteenth-century critics (cf. Williams, 1982: 211-384). During the past fifteen years or so, a steadily growing number of social scientists have exchanged this discourse for a less prejudiced approach. Within the new sociological interest in actual consumption practices, one can discern two great strands (cf. the overview by Featherstone, 1991: 13-27). First, sociologists began to study the social determinants and the global social logic of distinction that control consumption. The now well-known work of Bourdieu (1979) is, of course, the prime example of such a thorough sociological account of consumer society. Second, ethnographers (for example Willis, 1990) and sociologists with an attentive eye for the micro-fabric of social life (for example Fiske, 1989) demanded that scholarly attention be given to the moments of individual creativity, social resistance and/or the collective pleasures that may be found in everyday consumption practices. They discovered within homogeneous mass culture'a heterogeneous mass of creative symbolic practices fueled by individual imagination and firmly grounded in everyday social relations.

The new sociological accounts of contemporary consumption practices have been supplemented by a growing historical interest in modern consumer culture. The pioneering publications of Ewen and

Ewen (1982), McKendrick et al. (1982) and Williams (1982) on the genealogy of the modern consumer society in America, England and France, respectively, set the tone for several studies on one or more aspects of the history of contemporary consumer culture. The interim results of ongoing historical research justify the tentative assertion that the modern consumer culture took on its contours during the second half of the nineteenth century. In Western Europe and the United States, the years between 1860-1914 were probably decisive for the massive breakthrough and the definitive formation of the present-day consumer society. As McKendrick et al. (1982) have perceptively argued for Britain, the seeds of ‘commercialization'were already sown by the end of the eighteenth century. But only a century later did the national and international markets for mass-produced consumer goods emerge (see Fraser, 1981, on Britain). The interplay of demographic factors, especially urbanization, innovations in the production process, rising wages and — last but not least — improved means of transport, especially railroads, made the coming of the mass market possible. Within a few decennia, commerce and consumption changed rapidly. Neighbourhood shops, local hawkers and peddlers and itinerant market vendors were steadily replaced by national store chains and large-scale retailing firms. Furthermore, brand names won rapid recognition thanks to national advertising campaigns, which were made possible by the vast, expanding market of national newspapers and magazines (see Schudson, 1984; Leiss et al., 1986).

The early department stores played a prominent role in the breakthrough of the modern consumption society (see Chaney, 1983). They not only made people acquainted with recent commercial innovations but also took the lead in the shaping of the contemporary consumer culture. As the Swiss historian Philippe Perrot rightly remarks in his well-documented survey of French nineteenthcentury fashion, 'the grand magasin . . . brought about the psychological "take off" of the desire for consumption in the modern sense, the extended socialization of needs that is not without heightened frustrations or guilty transgressions' (Perrot, 1984: 111). A similar verdict is pronounced by Michael Miller, author of an admirable monograph on the famous Parisian department store, ‘Au Bon Marché'.

The very definition of bourgeois that appeared in the pages and displays of the Bon Marché was no longer sharing a certain life style, but rather buying certain goods in order to live that way of life. . . . Consumption itself became a substitute for being bourgeois. (Miller, 1981: 185).

The judgements of Perrot and Miller on the leading role of the department stores within the early French consumer culture can also be found in historical studies on their American counterparts. Thus, Susan Porter Benson, who wrote an in-depth study on the latter subject, asserts that the coming of the department store symbolizes 'one of the most profound changes in recent history: the shift from a production-oriented society to one centered on consumption' (Porter Benson, 1986: 75).

The discourse on the historical significance of the department stores is not a recent invention of historians who, after all, may take their research subject too seriously and overrate its relevance. During the 1880s, several Parisian journalists and commentators were struck by the commercial changes in those days. Thus George d'Avenel, a then quite famous commentator who regularly published in the leading French periodical Revue des deux mondes, already saw in the department store one of the prime channels of the ongoing mechanization of modern life' and 'the democratization of luxury' (compare the interesting chapter on d'Avenel in Williams, 1982: 94-106). Emile Zola even found the grand magasin such an important social phenomenon that he devoted one complete volume of his magnum opus Les Rougon-Macquart to 'the cathedral of modern commerce'. In 1882, after some months of fieldwork, he published his novel Au bonheur des dames, in which he gives a faithful report of the fascinating world of the early Parisian department stores (cf. Becker, 1971; Bowlby, 1985: 66-82). Last but not least, Walter Benjamin, one of the first social theorists who took the phenomenon of mass consumption seriously, also devoted several notes to the Parisian department stores in his famous Passagen-Werk (Benjamin, 1983; cf. Buck-Morss,1989).

In the following pages, I will apply some recent sociological insights into the modern consumer culture to research findings on the history of the early department stores. The historical account is limited to France and the United States, especially Paris, New York and Chicago. These three cities were probably the forerunners in the modernization of sales methods and 'the production of consumption'(in England and Germany, the department-store formula was only introduced very late, around the turn of the century; see Adburgham, 1981). The short historical survey is followed by an overview of the commercial significance of the department stores.

In the second part of the paper, I will describe the principal innovations that made the early department stores leading proponents of the modern consumer culture. Two main arguments will be developed at some length. First, the department stores functioned as female leisure centres. Second, they transformed active buying into passive shopping and were therefore obliged to develop a thoroughgoing ‘technocracy of the eye'. These assertions lead to the conclusion that the department stores actually changed mere merchandise into spectacular commodity signs (Baudrillard, 1970, 1972) or symbolic goods (Bourdieu, 1972).

In the concluding section, I will explore some possible explanations for the massive success of the early department stores and, more generally, for the breakthrough of the modern consumption culture at the end of the nineteenth century. Particular attention is given to the vast growth of the urban middle classes, to the feminization of consumption and to the specific constraints of social life among urbanites, who are strangers to each other.

## A Short History of the French Grands Magasins and the American Department Stores

According to a commonly accepted myth, the French commerçant Aristide Boucicaut was the founder of the first modern department store (the myth is reported as fact by, among others, Pasdermadjian, 1954; Ferry, 1960; and the influential book by Sennett, 1976, in which one chapter is devoted to the phenomenon of the department store).' Boucicaut was truly a self-made man. After a brief career as a shop clerk, he opened the later famous magasin de nouveauté Au Bon Marché' in Paris in 1852. In the light of other historical evidence, neither Boucicaut nor France may claim the honour of being pioneers in the modernization of commerce and retailing. Most of the business policies that characterized the early department stores (see later) were implemented for the very first time in the United States and England.² Even the prize for the first building designed as a department store has to go to an American citizen. In 1846, Alexander Turney Stewart opened on Broadway in New York the first floor of his 'Marble Dry Goods Palace'. When, two years later, the store was completely finished, the building, covered with Italian marble, was immediately 'the place to be'for trendy New York (see Resseguie, 1964, 1965). Following Harry E. Resseguie,

the Marble Palace was the first ‘big store' in the United States to achieve success and probably the first in the world designed — architecturally and functionally — for the specific purpose of retailing. . .. In it A.T. Stewart perfected the organization and policies of the departmentalized dry-goods store which formed the basis of the modern department store. (Resseguie, 1964: 132).

Stewart's store, however, did not include every feature of the early department stores. He limited his merchandise to dry goods, had a traditional advertising policy, and did not use loss leaders as such.

During the 1850s, the 'Marble Palace'functioned as an outstanding example for other, more daring pioneers in the retailing business. Thus, Stewart's policies were explicitly copied by Potter Palmer, who established a dry goods store in Chicago in 1852. The imitation was so successful that Palmer soon became known as the A.T. Stewart of the West'. This sobriquet was handed down to Marshall Field who, with Levi Leiter, took over Palmer's store in 1865. When the two men moved their business three years later to another place in Chicago, they named their new store the Marble Palace' (on Field and the history of his later celebrated department store, see Wendt and Kogan, 1952; Twyman, 1954; Duncan, 1965). The famous Rowland Hussey Macy was also inspired by the retailing methods of A.T. Stewart. In 1858, he started a small store in New York that rapidly expanded into a flourishing department store (see Hower, 1943). Still another famous American businessman, John Wanamaker, successfully imitated the commercialdiscoveries' of A.T. Stewart. Wanamaker opened his 'new kind of store' in 1877 in Philadelphia, and in 1896 he took over with great satisfaction his original model, the defaulting Stewart business in New York (see X, 1911; Conwell, 1924; Gibbons, 1926; Apple, 1930).

Most Parisian grands magasins, such as Boucicaut's Bon Marché, gradually developed from small shops, usually magasins de nouveautés (for what follows, see Franklin, 1895; Valmy-Baisse, 1925; Renoy, 1978; Marrey, 1979; Perrot, 1984; Nord, 1986). As their name already indicates, the latter sold fashionable articles, especially clothes and other objects that could improve the female look' or the male appearance (hats, ties, walking-canes, etc.). By the 1850s, the magasins de nouveautés, vividly described by Balzac in his novel César Birotteau (1837), were a normal phenomenon in the commercial centre of Paris. Some shops even had the reputation of being 'the place to be seen', for example 'La Belle Jardinière' (established in 1824), ‘Aux Trois Quartiers' (1829), 'Au Ville de Paris' (1843) and 'La Chaussée d'Antin'(1843). Their vastly expanding amount of merchandise obliged the most successful of them to departmentalize. Thus, during the 1860s some magasins de nouveautés changed into true grands magasins.

The first Parisian building that was architecturally conceived as a department store was probably Au Coin de la Rue', which was built in 1864 but closed down in 1880. Three floors of spacious galleries were erected around a large hall on the first floor. A similarly ambitious architecture characterized the many other Parisian stores built during the 1860s. The remodelled 'La Belle Jardinière' (1867), 'Le Tapis Rouge' (1867), ‘A la Ville de St.-Denis' (1869) and 'La Paix' (1869) were all housed in large, impressive structures. But none of them could claim the architectural grandeur of the new 'Au Bon Marché', designed by Louis-Charles Boileau and Gustave Eiffel. When the doors of the splendid and dazzling building opened in 1872, the customers were almost blinded by its beauty. In no time at all, this consumer's palace, like A.T. Stewart's 'Marble Palace', became the symbol par excellence of modern business and retailing. Because of its international fame and the materials used, such as iron, Au Bon Marché' also dazzled many generations of historians, who accepted Boucicaut's personal myths at face value (cf. Miller, 1981). In any event, Boucicaut's example was rapidly followed by other store owners. Thus, 'Les Grands Magasins du Louvre', founded in 1855, welcomed 'le tout Paris' in 1877 in their new, splendid accommodations. Some years later, in 1883, it was the rebuilt 'Magasin du Printemps'(1865) that coaxed admiring comments from foreign tourists and Parisian flâneurs.

After the turn of the century, the department stores were no longer exotic nouveautés in France or America. They lost much of their appeal as they became ordinary, well-known commercial institutions. West European women no longer had to visit Paris to experience 'real shopping'. By the turn of the century, they could find something to suit their fashionable tastes in one of the many department stores of their own capitals. Even in more provincial cities, impressive buildings were erected. Thus, in the period of 1890-1914, French cities like Bourdeaux, Lyon, Le Havre and Toulouse all acquired their department stores to be talked about (Marrey, 1979). Most of these provincial grands magasins have disappeared without leaving much historical trace, except perhaps in the memories of those elderly people whose eyes were once impressed by their captivating newness.

## The Department Stores as Commercial Innovators

The very same authors who ascribe to the Boucicaut myth also quite incorrectly consider the early department stores as important pioneers within the field of retailing methods. They depict them as led by revolutionary businessmen who had the audacity to abolish with one stroke traditional retailing methods. As a matter of fact, historical evidence points to a more gradual, less discontinuous evolution of commercial practices.

Until the beginning of the nineteenth century, Western commerce had a Janus face (see, for example, Fraser, 1981; Perrot, 1984; Nord, 1986). Local markets and neighbourhood shops supplied the daily needs. Apart from this everyday circuit, in most large cities, there was a separate commercial circuit of specialized shops that traded in luxury goods such as silks, hand-made furniture, and chinaware. Ultra-specialization set the tone. Thus, merchants in hats normally did not sell umbrellas, ties or leather articles. Most of the other traditional ways of doing business also prevailed at the beginning of the nineteenth century. When a client entered the shop, the customer implicitly engaged in a double contract with the merchant: one had to buy something at a price about which one had to bargain. Most of the time, the customer had no specific idea of the goods with which he or she would return home. The products were neither advertised nor displayed. Merchants dug goods out of big drawers or closed closets, recommended and praised them and, on being asked, mentioned a price about which one had to haggle (these customs are still alive and well in many oriental and African countries, much to the bewilderment or amusement of Western tourists).

Some of the traditional retailing methods were already abandoned before the nineteenth century in England and the United States. Thus, Quaker merchants, for religious reasons, indicated fixed prices from the beginning of the seventeenth century onwards. By the end of the eighteenth century, several new commercial habits even became institutionalized in the world of London commerce (see McKendrick et al., 1982). London shopkeepers sought publicity by means of business cards, displayed their most attractive merchandise in their shop windows and offered dissatisfied customers the opportunity of exchanging their purchases for more satisfactory goods. The Parisian magasins de nouveautés and the founders of the later American department stores such as Wanamaker, Field and Macy, combined these reformations with still other renewals of traditional trade. Thus, they offered no credit and only did business on a cash basis. They also lifted the commitment to buy and competed against each other with low, clearly announced prices. The latter innovations were clearly associated, for free entrance allowed price comparison.

As noted above, most department stores gradually grew out of small shops. When a shopkeeper was successful and a man of enterprise, he constantly increased the range of his products. After a few years of expansion, he was normally obliged to introduce a certain departmentalization in his store in order to facilitate the choice of his many items. Different sorts of merchandise were brought together in different departments (for example clothes, furniture and chinaware). It was particularly this vast assortment that gave the early department stores a distinct and even unusual character in the eyes of their contemporaries. For the stores did not add much to the already institutionalized sale and retail methods. Except for regular price cuts (soldes, sales or bargains) and home delivery, the early department stores only combined previous commercial practices with a massive supply of all kinds of commmodities. They could, of course, develop some elements because of economies of scale. Thus, the department stores could sell at very low prices: quick turnover compensated for the small profits on each product.

The large scale of the new stores had particular consequences for the internal organization of labour, accounting, sales, administration, etc. The perceptive French critic George d’Avenel rightly considered the organizational policies of the new department stores as a prime example of 'the mechanization of modern life'. The growing necessity of sales planning, marketing, distribution of work, accurate price calculation, expansion strategies and so on, indeed transformed the entire business process within the department stores into a factory-like affair. In a word, they changed selling into an industry. The early department stores thus functioned as the prime carriers of the modern tendency towards increasing rationalization, as described by Max Weber, in an economic sector that was once dominated by courtly manners and time-consuming negotiations between merchants and customers.

## From Customer to Consumer: Department Stores as Female Public Places and Leisure Centres

The coming of the department stores drastically changed the character of the act of buying and selling. Up to the middle of the nineteenth century, buying for most Western women was synonymous with going to the neighbourhood shop. They doubtless enjoyed their visits to the local markets or stores, where they could meet friends, discuss family matters or just chat with each other or with the shopkeeper. Nevertheless, these were social pleasures that had no intrinsic link with the act of buying itself or with the role of customer as such. With the breakthrough of the department stores, things changed completely. 'People could now come and go, to look and to dream, perchance to buy, and shopping became a new bourgeois leisure activity - a way of pleasantly passing the time, like going to a play or visiting a museum', comments Bowlby (1985: 4).

The new way of shopping was not just a new pleasure-leisure' machine. In a certain sense, one now had to spend time on shopping in order to be ‘a good housekeeper'. Shopping pleasure and rational consumerism coincided because ‘strolling around' gave women opportunity to compare the prices of the different department stores or 'to pick up a dirt cheap bargain'. While the traditional customer had to negotiate in function of his or her spending power, the modern consumer, created by the department stores, had to gather comparative knowledge about the desired products before he or she bought them. As Philippe Perrot (1984: 39) remarks, le savoir d’achat' now became as important as 'le pouvoir d’achat'. This alteration was clearly reflected by female time-tables. Writing about American middle-class women, William R. Leach notes that

in the early [nineteenth century], shopping was only a minor incident in the round of domestic chores performed by most middle-class women. . . . By the turn of the century, shopping had developed into an almost full-time secular and public business. (Leach, 1984: 333)

The transformation of buying into shopping (in the modern sense) and the subsequent 'leisurization'of shopping itself (see below), offered middle-class women new opportunities within the public sphere. A growing number of urban women found in shopping a legitimate reason to escape the domestic sphere. Men already had their own clubs and pubs, their sports, etc. Moreover, they dominated the urban streets during the nineteenth century. With the coming of the department stores, middle-class women now also obtained a public place in which they could meet each other and experience a certain, albeit limited, kind of public freedom of movement. Without much exaggeration, one could assert that 'the department store made the phenomenon of a feminine public possible';

'the buying stage of shopping appeared as the most widely visible sign of female emancipation in the modern city' (Barth, 1980: 121, 137). The public emancipation of women did not go unnoticed. Zola's comments in his novel Au bonheur des dames on shopping as ‘a new [feminine] religion' were shared by many journalists and social critics of the time. For example, in June 1881, the New York Times complained about the awful prevalence of the vice of shopping among women . . . [an addiction] every bit as bad as male drinking or smoking'(quoted in Leach, 1984: 333). Similar comments on the new shopping mania' were expressed during the 1880s in the leading Chicago newpapers when Field's department store increasingly became ‘the place to be' for well-to-do women (see the many quotes in Duncan, 1965).

The managers of the Parisian grands magasins and the owners of the leading American department stores stimulated both the 'leisurization' of shopping and the transformation of their stores into distinct female public spaces. Indeed, they all heartily subscribed to the modern concept of service. Or, as Marshall Field once told William Clarke, head of his upholstery department: Always remember we are the servants of the public'(quoted in Twyman, 1954: 92). This was not just mere sales talk. ‘Marshall Field and Company from the very first had been noted for its polite and attentive clerks; but in later years its graciousness and courtesy became almost legendary' (Twyman, 1954: 126); another book on Marshall Field is aptly titled Give the Lady What She Wants! (Wendt and Kogan, 1952). Other leading American department stores, such as Wanamaker's and Macy's, were also famous for their deference to visitors, casual sightseers as well as actual purchasers.

Service was not limited to courtesy and deference. Slowly but surely, the owners of the early department stores began to stress comfort and convenience. In addition to the amenities of the location and of the enormous variety of goods, customers would find in the grands magasins a growing number of free services. Thus, the remodelled Au Bon Marché' had a space for the exhibition of paintings and a reading room in which the shoppers could freely consult newspapers and magazines. These two rooms formed together a salon, 20 metres long and 8 metres high, in the style of a Louvre gallery. Adjacent to it was a refreshment area with beautifully decorated tables, luxurious curtains, palm trees, etc. The leading American department stores also offered their female clients many free services. From 1878 on, Macy's provided customers with writing tables and newspapers and, in 1879, this famous New York store opened a luxurious lunch room. Around the turn of the century, Macy's experimented with several kinds of free courses and even a bicycle academy for women. Wanamaker realized his cherished idea of public service' by such things as an art gallery (1881), a reading cabinet and a refreshment bar (1882), a post office and an information office (1884) and, from 1892 on, regular selections from the pictures exhibited at the official Parisian Salons. His new department store in New York, opened in 1907, even had an immense auditorium, more than 1000 seats, equipped with a large organ for concerts of classical music.

The steady increase in comforts and free services was partly due to the intensifying competition between the steadily increasing number of department stores.

Granted that the merchandise was of acceptable quality, people tended to patronize the stores which gave the most attractive surroundings, the most convenient delivery, and the most satisfactory all-round treatment. Once the store owners discovered that price was not the sole means of attracting customers, they promptly began to exploit services and equipment. (Hower, 1943: 279)

This tendency also resulted in the reintroduction of credit facilities. However, although the main reasons may have been primarily economic, the net effect of the continual growth in services was a strong reinforcement of the ambience of leisure of the department stores. For more and more women, the stores became equivalents of the male downtown clubs and cafés. Taking the idea of a women's city club to its logical conclusion, a number of stores even provided free meeting rooms for women's organizations (Porter Benson, 1986: 85).

## From Looking to Buying: Innovations of the Early Department Stores in Advertising and the Display of Commodities

The transformation of the act of buying into a pleasant, entertaining and even exciting leisure activity overcame the initial hesitations of many middle-class women about the reliability of the new department stores. However, notwithstanding the shopping pleasures offered, department stores remained capitalist enterprises. The pleasures of just looking' or just wandering around', therefore, had to be linked with the potential desire to buy. Because of the shift from buying to shopping and the concomitant disappearance of any obligation to buy, the managers of the early department stores had to invent new strategies. They could no longer even rely on the sales talk that traditionally accompanied the act of selling and buying. Henceforth, the commodities had to praise themselves, without any human comment. This sales problem was solved by augmenting the seductive qualities of the merchandise: the many commodities were transformed into desirable items. It is thus no accident that the words ‘to seduce' and ‘seduction'function as genuine key words in Zola's novel Au bonheur des dames.

In order to transform the many visitors into real buyers, the department stores reformed already well-tried methods. Thus, they used newspaper advertisements, posters, leaflets, postcards and other forms of publicity on a till then unknown scale (cf. Schudson, 1984: 152). This quantitative growth in advertising was supplemented by several qualitative innovations. As a matter of fact, the managers of the early department stores, such as Macy and Wanamaker in the United States and Boucicaut in France, thoroughly modernized' the format and the outlook of newspaper advertising. Traditionally, shopkeepers did not advertise in newspapers very much. And, insofar as they did, they restricted their ads to little announcements that were only informative and not particularly eye-catching. From their very beginnings, the initiators of 'the new kind of store'(Wanamaker) did away with these restrictions. They enlarged the size of their ads and did more than give compact lists of the goods on offer. Instead of dry descriptions, they experimented with appealing catchwords, constantly repeated slogans, fictitious dialogues, unusual arrangements of type, zigzag layouts, etc. To increase the visibility and the appeal of their ads, the managers of the early department stores were also keen to apply new printing techniques. Thus, they were among the first to use photogravure and chromolithography. The latter technique made it possible to print large-sized, colourful posters, lively postcards and so on to propagate the name of the store.

Good advertising could raise personal interest and draw potential buyers into the store. However, once the latter had crossed the threshold of the store, it proved necessary to direct again and to stimulate anew the already aroused willingness to buy. In a word, the external rhetoric of advertising had to be continued inside the store through an appealing and eye-catching commodity rhetoric'. The store managers had to catch the rapidly moving eyes of the many visitors in such a way that they first were willing to contemplate a certain commodity and then to buy it. Visual pleasures had to be changed into forms of pleasant fascination, and fascination into the desire to acquire personally the object of fascination. Several means and techniques were used, sometimes for the very first time, to focus the eyes of the wandering female shoppers who were just looking': dazzling decorations, architectural adornments, fairyland lighting and, first and foremost, a sophisticated display of mostly fashionable merchandise.

The commodities that the department stores wanted to be noticed were often fashionable products, most often purchased cheaply in great quantities. Several display techniques could be used in order to focus the attention of the public on these items. First, it was possible to present them at unusual, unexpected or bizarre places in the store. Thus, a new collection of clothes was frequently shown in one of the non-clothes departments. Sometimes the store managers even changed the whole normal order of the different departments. Second, the commodities were showed and ‘staged' in splendid, eyecatching settings within the store or in the outside store windows. Many of the display strategies invented by the early department stores have become generally accepted. Thus, it is now quite common for stores to combine several products within one easily recognizable and luxurious context: not single pieces of furniture but ravishing drawing rooms or 'catchy' dining rooms, not separate kitchen utensils but real' kitchens, not single items of clothing but attractive ensembles of well-dressed mannequins.

A particular display technique the early department stores frequently applied was the presentation of products against an exotic background in order to increase their appeal. In line with the then dominant fashion of Orientalism'(see Said, 1991), they often used images of the Orient to give clothes, chinaware, furniture or other nouveautés a distinct 'look'. Thus, commodities were frequently staged, literally, within Oriental decorations. The Thousand and One Nights, in particular, served as a nearly inexhaustible source of inspiration. Stores were decorated to look like Egyptian temples, Japanese gardens and so on. For the American department stores, trendy Europe also functioned as an important source of exotic inspiration. Clothes, hats and other women's fashions were often associated with Paris, 'the capital of fashion'. To obtain the desired effect of 'Parisianism', store managers imitated French salons, simulated 'the streets of Paris' and even copied the complete interior of a 'real Parisian boulevard appartment'. The many exercises in 'Orientalism' or Parisianism' were usually accompanied by other initiatives, such as the organization of a French week' during which French perfumes were presented, French wines could be tasted and

French cooking recipes were demonstrated by real French chefs'. Most department stores also had regularly organized, generally seasonal periods during which the entire store underwent a complete transformation. This is beautifully illustrated by Zola's description in Au bonheur des dames of the spectacular effects on the eyes, even on the entire bodies, of the female visitors when confronted with a store floor that was completely decorated with white linen. As a matter of fact, this was a frequently repeated ‘show' in Boucicaut's Bon Marché:

White sales . . . were famous affairs [in Au Bon Marché]. On these occasions the entire store was adorned in white: white sheets, white towels, white curtains, white flowers, ad infinitum, all forming a single blanc motif that covered even stairways and balconies. (Miller, 1981: 169).

The many display techniques developed by the early department stores actually transformed them into vast ensembles of several 'object theatres' in which commodities were ‘staged' and underwent a theatrical change. The early department stores transformed merchandise into a permanent spectacle, into a show-like theatre of commodities. Or, as Stuart and Elisabeth Ewen (1982: 68) observed, ‘The department store was more then a site for consumption, it was a sight of consumption. . . . Shopping became a perceptual adventure'. But visual fascination was for the owners of the early department stores only a means of arousing the consumer's appetite, of stimulating the willingness to buy. The mise-en-scène or presentation of goods was meant ‘to seduce' the public. A successful decoration was one that not only fascinated the passers-by but also worked as a kind of fatal attraction, culminating in an irresistable desire to possess the displayed commodities. Just looking' was only a prelude to just buying'.

## Modern Consumer Culture within the Early Department Stores: The Dominant Symbolic Meanings of Advertisements and Displays

With their innovative display techniques, the department stores pioneered the 'technocracy of the senses' that Wolfgang Haug considers to be characteristic of the modern consumer culture in general. According to Haug, commodity aesthetics' has to do with an artificially produced fascination, even an enchantment of the senses, especially sight. Power, he concludes, is exercised through the fascination for technically produced aesthetic appearances' (Haug, 1980: 55). Actually, the ‘staged' commodities within the early department stores were changed into meaningful images. The mise-en-scène of merchandise within preconceived decorations directed the looks' of the passers-by not to the commodities themselves but to their 'looks'. Through decoration and display, commodities disappeared in the imaginary images of ‘The Orient' or 'Real Paris', which had to catch the eyes of the passers-by. Outward and inward display windows functioned as ‘impression machines'. Neither the possible practical value of an item nor its real ‘substance' counted, but only its appearance, the ways it might impress the senses, particularly the sight of the gazing shoppers. As T.J. Clark (1985) has perceptively argued, this ideology of the visual' found in the heyday of the early grands magasins its aesthetic counterpart in the impressionism of Manet and his followers.

The advertisements and the displays of the early department stores clearly reveal that the ‘spectacularization' of merchandise was literally meaningful. Thus ‘Orientalism' and Parisianism' symbolized 'good taste', wealth, style and affluence, in short, luxury and glamour. The same meanings were expressed by the grandiose architecture of the early department stores. The abundant use of marble, carpets, ornaments, etc. and the refined, sophisticated ‘styling' of balconies or lunch rooms all incarnated the idea of a luxurious, comfortable and fashionable way of life. The notion of luxury was also behind the concept of personal service. With their many free services for, and courteous treatment of, shoppers, the early department stores created an almost aristocratic ambience. The female customer was intended to feel like a real queen or at least a lady while she was shopping because she walked in a palace-like atmosphere that was thoroughly imbued with luxury.

As Zola and George d'Avenel had already noted, the displayed luxury was most of the time merely semblance, for the great success of the early department stores was partly due to the relatively low price of their merchandise. Most commodities were not costly, handmade goods but cheap, mass-produced items. Ads and architecture, decorations and displays radiated an aura of luxury over the merchandise in order to compensate for their actual cheapness. In sum, the several forms of the new ‘technocracy of the senses' (Haug) were meant to 'up-grade' cheap merchandise. Commodity aesthetics had to produce these very meanings that the commodities themselves usually did not express. Not real richness but illusory signs of wealth and affluence were purchased in the early department stores.

In the path of Zola and d'Avenel or, more recently, the protagonists of the Frankfurt School, one can easily dismiss the schöner Schein created by commodity aesthetics as just another lure of capitalism. But these moral denunciations divert sociological attention from the basic fact of modern consumer society: the thoroughgoing culturalization' of merchandise. During the second half of the nineteenth century, the processes of buying and selling rapidly changed into a consumer culture because mass-produced commodities were associated increasingly with certain meanings. Granted that our Western societies are based on capitalistic economies, modern capitalism also created its own culture in the sociological or the anthropological sense. It transformed mass-produced objects into commodity signs' (Baudrillard, 1970, 1972) or ‘symbolic goods' (Bourdieu, 1972) that convey specific meanings. Leiss et al. (1986) stress the same idea in their informative study on ‘social communication in advertising'. They correctly consider modern consumer society as an ‘anthropological type', characterized by 'privileged discourses through and about objects' or cultural frames for goods' (Leiss et al. 1986: 12). This fusion of culture and economy actually defines modern consumption as a specific historical practice and distinguishes it from earlier forms of producing and consuming. The early department stores pioneered the transformation of traditional customers into modern consumers and of just merchandise' into spectacular 'commodity signs' or ‘symbolic goods'. Thus they laid the cornerstones of a culture we still inhabit.

## Early Department Stores and the Feminization' of Shopping: Contradictory Images of the Female

The statistics on the sales volumes and profits of the stores set up by enterprising businessmen such as Boucicaut, Wanamaker and Field indisputably prove the vast success of the department-store formula between 1860 and 1914. By way of conclusion, I want to explore three frequently invoked causes for this rapid ‘take off’ of 'the new kind of store' (Wanamaker). Two of them may be easily deduced from what has been said above. First, as female leisure centres, the early department stores offered middle-class women who, until the middle of the nineteenth century, were confined to the private sphere, the opportunity to escape the dullness of domestic life. Second, as illusionary palaces of luxurious consumption', the stores particulary appealed to the appetite for status symbols of the then rapidly growing urban middle class. In the concluding section of this paper, I will go into a third, not yet mentioned factor that may explain the success of the early department stores, that is the specific social conditions of living in large cities.

As I have already stated, the coming of the department stores gave women a public place of their own. In the department stores, they were treated courteously and could meet each other without the traditional fear of being harassed by violent men. Thus, the grands magasins gained larger cultural significance as the foci of new, distinctively female communities. But at the very same time they reproduced certain stereotypes of women as ‘good mothers' and good houskeepers'. For the early department stores widened the gap between the harsh world of production and the festive world of consumption, thus reinforcing the existing border within the growing middle class between working males and non-productive females. While the former had to earn the money necessary for family consumption, the latter were still primarily seen as responsible for the actual purchase of household items.

As a matter of fact, the early department stores also directly reinforced the traditional images of women as ‘good housekeepers'. Their constant offering of bargains, their temporary price cuts and their sales campaigns alluded to a presupposed sense for economy and domestic responsibility among their female public. Moreover, the ads and displays made clear that the store managers frequently invoked 'the mothering complex'. Fashionable toys and children's clothing were presented as indispensable for 'modern mothers'. These allusions, of course, assumed the traditional link of femininity with motherhood and responsibility for education. The department stores redefined this traditional stereotype of femininity in terms of optimum consumption of certain products. In sum, the traditional woman's role as mother, wife and lady underwent a twofold change in the course of the breakthrough of the departmentstore formula. Women were redefined as professional shoppers or consumers and their performance of their traditional roles was thoroughly commodified' or redefined in terms of commodities.

Another link between the sales techniques of the modern department stores and the traditional representations of femininity has to do with the implicit psychology of these techniques. As a matter of fact, the stores operated on a rather crude view of the female that reproduced 'the available ideological paradigm of seduction of women by men, in which women would be addressed as objects yielding to the power of male subjects forming, and informing them of, their desires' (Bowlby, 1985: 20). With their multitude of display devices, colourful ads, etc., the storekeepers addressed women indeed primarily as impulsive' and ‘emotional beings' who could not resist the temptation of a ‘good bargain' or a new, attractive piece of furniture. Thus the modern department stores literally reproduced the traditional sex stereotypes. Keen, cold-blooded males encouraged women to be what they were supposed to be, that is ‘irrational', 'childlike' and 'thoughtless' human beings.

The two stereotypes that informed the sales practices of the early department stores were not mutually consistent. The efforts to seduce women into making purchases contradicted the image of the rational and economical housewife. More particularly, the encouragement to buy without much reflection often resulted in intense marital and family conflicts. For middle-class women who could not, indeed, resist the multitude of temptations within every department store, still had to justify their purchases to their hardworking husbands. By the turn of the century, Leach (1984: 334) reports,

an increasing number of court cases pitted [American] women who bought well beyond their means, against husbands, who refused to pay their wives' debts. . . . Those cases as a whole illustrate the strain placed on marriage by the spread of credit and fashion and by the new abundance of commodities.

## The False Democratization of Luxury: Early Department Stores and the Modern Middle Class

As was already noted, the early department stores had a particular appeal for middle-class women because they suffered more from the traditional distinction between a predominantly male public sphere and a female domestic sphere than most working-class wives (cf. the synthesis of nineteenth-century life under the direction of Perrot, 1987). But the grands magasins also explicitly and implicitly addressed the middle classes as such. All the available material shows that the latter did, indeed, form the principal public of the early department stores (see for example Hower, 1943; Barth, 1980; Miller, 1981; Perrot, 1984; Leach, 1984; Nord, 1986). This is not surprising, since the urban middle class was growing rapidly during the second half of the nineteenth century. The process of professionalization and the bureaucratization of public as well as private administrations created a steadily rising number of white-collar jobs (e.g. bookkeepers, school teachers, employees of large banks, insurance companies and railways). The occupants of these new social positions wanted to distinguish themselves from the lower social strata, especially the working class. Thus the new middle class longed for status symbols at cheap prices. The early department stores fulfiled this need. Their merchandise was relatively cheap but, because of its many imaginary associations with luxury and comfort, it looked otherwise.

The urban petite bourgeoisie actually did not possess a distinctive culture at the time it was rapidly emerging. Within the new stratum, there clearly existed a certain desire for social status but there was not enough money to imitate the aristocracy or the rich bourgeoisie. The early department stores partly filled this cultural void by linking status and ‘good taste' to shopping and consumerism. Thus, consumption itself became a sort of substitute for not being ‘a real bourgeois'. In his study on Boucicaut's 'Au Bon Marché', Miller accordingly concludes that this famous grand magasin functioned as ‘a medium for the creation of a national middle-class culture' (Miller, 1981: 183): 'The Bon Marché showed people how they should dress, how they should furnish their home, and how they should spend their leisure time. It defined the ideals and goals for French [middle-class] society' (Miller, 1981: 188).

As a matter of fact, the department stores redefined the traditional bourgeois ideals of respectability and comfort for the urban middle class in exactly the same way as they rearticulated the traditional images of femininity. In both cases, symbolic culture was fused with material culture, and values and ideals were fused with the actual purchase of commodities. Therefore, they partly produced, partly reinforced one of the very core notions of modern consumer culture, that judgment about a person is not based upon what one does within society, but rather upon what one has. . . . "Middle class" status was becoming something founded purely on one's ability to purchase, construct, and present a viable social self (Ewen, 1988: 68).

What has just been said about the role of the early department stores in the shaping of a distinctive middle-class culture may perhaps be extended to the bourgeoisie in general for some American stores. Indeed, the French bourgeoisie — like most of their counterparts in Western Europe - still copied the formerly dominant aristocratic culture during the nineteenth century (see Mayer, 1983), but the American bourgeoisie had no such role model. At least in one case, one can firmly assert that a department store helped to create a true culture of the riches'. Duncan's informative in-depth study clearly shows the formative role of the Field store in the process of self-definition of the emergent Chicago plutocracy during the last quarter of the nineteenth century:

TABLE 1  
Population of Paris, New York and Chicago during the 19th Century (in thousands)
<table><tr><td></td><td>Paris</td><td>New York</td><td>Chicago</td></tr><tr><td>1800-01</td><td>547</td><td>172</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>1850-51</td><td>1053</td><td>419</td><td>30</td></tr><tr><td>1880-81</td><td>2269</td><td>1122</td><td>509</td></tr><tr><td>1910-11</td><td>2888</td><td>2071</td><td>2185</td></tr></table>

Source: Adapted from Lees (1985: 5).

Field, John G. Shedd, and all Field executives, considered the plutocratic drama of consumption to be a status drama of taste and studied how to translate taste into money. For the new rich people of Chicago, taste must become taste in spending. (Duncan, 1965: 117)

This is not to say that Field was only a ‘taste leader' and ‘trend setter' for the then emerging Chicago plutocracy. The patronage of wealthy women increased the attractiveness of the store in the eyes of middle-class women, who were treated with nearly equal courtesy to that accorded to the wives of the new plutocrats.

## Early Department Stores and Urban Culture

The immense and rapid success of the early department stores not only resulted from their roles as leisure and ‘taste centres' for middle-class women. The vast appetite for status symbols of the new middle class of professionals and employees was actually fostered by their particular conditions of living. A major portion of the petite bourgeoisie lived in the steadily growing cities of the nineteenth century. As Table 1 clearly shows, cities like Paris, New York and Chicago expanded rapidly during the second half of the nineteenth century. The people living in these cities had to invent new ways of living, new habits, new forms of social interaction (cf. Sennett, 1976; Barth, 1980). Modern city culture was not already present but emerged during the nineteenth century out of the uncountable social and individual experiments of urbanites, who were mostly strangers to each other.

The distinctive experience of the many new urbanites was — and still is for every newcomer - their daily visual interaction with unknown passers-by. Large cities were and are 'worlds of strangers' (Lofland, 1973). Within these new worlds, there rapidly aroused ‘an intensified “viewing culture" and an increased “semiotic sensibility", based on the sense for detail, on a particular assessment of the small nuance, of the insignificant clue' (Perrot, 1984: 176; cf. Sennett, 1976). Urbanites mainly have visual contacts with each other: looking and being looked at are the predominant forms of social contact within large cities. The reflexive consciousness of the eye' (Sennett, 1990) of these activities rapidly changed the urban sense of the self. Knowing that one was judged on first impressions and immediate visual evidence led people to take particular care of their appearance. To look after one's public or social self became synonymous with caring for one's 'look' down to the last detail. But, because people did not know each other personally, it was possible 'to cheat' with external signs. By means of certain clothes or, more generally, a particular style, the new inhabitants of the rapidly growing cities could simulate a higher social status in the eyes of the unknown passers-by than the one they actually possessed.

The consciousness of the eye' within urban life probably reinforced the desire for social status of the new urban middle class. They, too, realized the crucial importance of their appearance, of visible clues and external signs, and so were inevitably drawn into an intense and endless social competition about actual status symbols because of the many efforts of the other inhabitants to look successful. This may explain why the fashionable merchandise of the early department stores had a particular appeal for middle-class women. The struggle over distinction profits' (Bourdieu, 1979) was keen, and rapidly made new items obsolete. New status symbols were continuously devalued through the process of imitation and emulation. Thus, their appetite for status signs pushed urban middle-class women again and again through the doors of the early department stores in order to look for new items that could update their 'look' and secure the desired 'distinction profits'.

In connection with the remarks of Ewen and Ewen (1982: 215) concerning 'the commercialization of the self' in large cities (cf. Ewen, 1988: 57-100), one may wonder if there was not a structural affinity between the new consumption culture promoted by the early department stores and the new urban sense of self. As I have already noted above, the department stores had to experiment a great deal with display devices in order to make their merchandise noticeable. The new urban sense of the self also had to do with the display of one's social identity before the eyes of strangers. The department stores developed all kinds of devices to display commodities in an attractive way, and the urbanites used commodities to display themselves. Thus, the very same commodities displayed in the department stores were frequently bought for the sole reason of displaying one's (desired) status and/or personality'.

The world of consumer objects and the world of consumer subjects, the world within the early department stores and the urban world outside the stores of the new middle-class women actually merged within that one world of consumer culture in which to look', in the passive and the active sense, means everything. The new world that emerged during the second half of the nineteenth century was, from its very outset, dominated by the reign of the eye, of meaningful images and quickly readable signs. In the early department stores, the merchandise disappeared into continuously renewed images, made possible through the use of all sorts of display devices. It was not the commodity as such that counted, but the way it looked in the eyes of the female shoppers. Within the urban world outside the department stores, people also tended increasingly to disappear in their appearances. It was not what one actually was that counted, but how one came across in the eyes of unknown passers-by. Because of the new predominance of 'looks' and images, simulations of meaning, status, 'personality', etc. were from the outset a genuine possibility and often a reality. One can dismiss this new world as 'hyperreal' (Baudrillard), 'superficial' and ‘artificial', 'voyeuristic', etc. But however one may judge the consumer culture and the predominance of 'the look' and the visual, it is still the world we all live in.

## Notes

The material that is used in this paper was compiled in large part during a study leave in New York in October and November 1989. Due to other obligations, the final version could only be completed in December 1992. I wish to thank Professor Vera Zolberg of the New School for Social Research and Professor Richard Sennett of New York University for their hospitality and support during the time I spent in New York. I also want to thank the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research (NFWO) for the grant that made my study leave in New York financially possible.

1. I only criticize the very inspiring, very well-written study of Richard Sennett (1976) The Fall of Public Man for repeating the Boucicaut myth and the related myth concerning the pivotal role of the early department stores in the breakthrough of new retailing methods. The 'hard core' of his study is certainly not put into question by this critique. Intellectual honesty even obliges me to say that my own interest in the history of the early department stores and, more generally, in the history of modern Parisian commerce, was aroused by Sennett's perceptive book. Walter Benjamin's by now well-known Passagen-Werk, also a hidden source of inspiration for Sennett's study, did the rest.

2. I base this assertion on a comparison of the historical studies and materials cited.

## References

Adburgham, A. (1981) Shops and Shopping, 1800–1914. London: Allen and Unwin.

Apple, J.H. (1930) The Business Biography of John Wanamaker, Founder and Builder. New York: Macmillan.

Barth, G. (1980) City People. New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Baudrillard, J. (1970) La Société de consommation. Paris: Gallimard.

Baudrillard, J. (1972) Pour une critique de l’économie politique du signe. Paris: Gallimard.

Becker, C. (1971) 'Préface', pp. 13-37 in E. Zola, Au bonheur des dames. Paris: Garnier-Flammarion.

Benjamin, W. (1983) Das Passagen-Werk. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

Bourdieu, P. (1972) 'Le Marché des biens symboliques', L'Année Sociologique 1971.

Bourdieu, P. (1979) La Distinction. Critique sociale du jugement. Paris: Minuit (English translation Distinction. Routledge, 1984).

Bowlby, R. (1985) Just Looking: Consumer Culture in Dreiser, Gissing and Zola. New York: Methuen.

Buck-Morss, S. (1989) The Dialectic of Seeing: Walter Benjamin and the Arcades Project. London/Cambridge: MIT Press.

Chaney, D. (1983) ‘The Department Store as a Cultural Form', Theory, Culture & Society 1(3): 22-31.

Clark, T.J. (1985) The Painting of Modern Life. London: Thames and Hudson.

Conwell, R.H. (1924) The Romantic Rise of a Great American. New York/London: Harper.

Duncan, H.D. (1965) Culture and Democracy: The Struggle for Form in Society and Architecture in Chicago and the Middle West During the Life and Times of Louis H. Sullivan. New York: Bedminster Press.

Ewen, S. (1988) All Consuming Images. New York: Basic Books.

Ewen, S. and E. Ewen (1982) Channels of Desire. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Featherstone, M. (1991) Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: Sage.

Ferry, J.W. (1960) A History of the Department Store. New York: Macmillan.

Fiske, J. (1989) Understanding Popular Culture. Boston: Unwin Hyman.

Franklin, A. (1895) Les Magasins de nouveautés (4 vols). Paris: Plon.

Fraser, W.H. (1981) The Coming of the Mass Market, 1850-1914. London: Macmillan.

Gibbons, H.A. (1926) John Wanamaker (2 vols). New York/London: Harper.

Haug, W.F. (1980) Kritik der Warenästhetik. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

Hower, R.H. (1943) History of Macy's of New York, 1858–1919. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Leach, W.R. (1984) Transformations in a Culture of Consumption: Women and Department Stores, 1890–1925', The Journal of American History 71(2): 319–42.

Lees, A. (1985) Cities Perceived. New York: Columbia University Press.

Leiss, W., S. Kline and S. Jhally (1986) Social Communication in Advertising. New York: Methuen.

Lofland, L. (1973) A World of Strangers: Order and Action in Urban Public Space. New York: Basic Books.

McKendrick, N., J. Brewer and J.H. Plumb (1982) The Birth of a Consumer Society. London: Europa Publications.

Marrey, B. (1979) Les grands magasins des origines à 1939. Paris: Picard.

Mayer, A. (1983) La Persistance de l’Ancien Régime: l’Europe de 1848 à la Grande Guerre. Paris: Flammarion.

Miller, M.B. (1981) The Bon Marché: Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store, 1869-1920. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Nord, P.G. (1986) Paris Shopkeepers and the Politics of Resentment. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Pasdermadjian, H. (1954) The Department Store: Its Origins, Evolution and Economics. London: Newman.

Perrot, P. (1984) Les dessus et les dessous de la bourgeoisie: une histoire du vêtement au XIXe siècle. Bruxelles: Editions Complexe.

Perrot, M. (ed.) (1987) Histoire de la vie privée, tome 4: de la Révolution à la Grande Guerre. Paris: Seuil.

Porter Benson, S. (1986) Counter Cultures: Saleswomen, Managers and Customers in American Department Stores, 1890-1940. Urbana/Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

Renoy, G. (1978) Paris naguère: grands magasins. Zaltbommel: Bibliothèque Européenne.

Resseguie, H.E. (1964) 'A.T. Stewarts's Marble Palace', The New York Historical Society Quarterly 58(2): 131–62.

Resseguie, H.E. (1965) 'Alexander Turney Stewart and the Development of the Department Store, 1823-1876', Business History Review 39(3): 301-23.

Said, E.W. (1991) Orientalism. London: Penguin.

Schudson, M. (1984) Advertising, the Uneasy Persuasion. New York: Basic Books.

Sennett, R. (1976) The Fall of Public Man. New York: Knopf.

Sennett, R. (1990) The Conscience of the Eye: The Design and Social Life of Cities. London: Faber and Faber.

Twyman, R.W. (1954) History of Marshall Field & Company, 1852-1906. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Valmy-Baisse, J. (1925) Tableau des grands magasins. Paris: Plon.

Wendt, L. and H. Kogan (1952) Give the Lady What She Wants! The Story of Marshall Field & Company. Chicago: Rand McNally.

Williams, R.H. (1982) Dream Worlds. Mass Consumption in Late Nineteenth-Century France. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Willis, P. (1990) Common Culture. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.

X. (1911) Golden Book of Wanamaker Stores. Jubilee Year 1861-1911 (Copyright by John Wanamaker).

Zola, E. (1971) Au bonheur des dames. Paris: Garnier-Flammarion.

Rudi Laermans teaches sociology at the Catholic University of Louvain, Belgium.