# Learning to Consume: Early Department Stores and the Shaping of the Modern Consumer Culture (1860-1914) / A Short History of the French Grands Magasins and the American Department Stores

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\1860-1914：《Learning to Consume Early Department Stores and the Shaping of the Mo\1860-1914：《Learning to Consume Early Department Stores and the Shaping of the Mo\1860-1914：《Learning to Consume Early Department Stores and the Shaping of the Mo\auto\1860-1914：《Learning to Consume Early Department Stores and the Shaping of the Mo.md

# Learning to Consume: Early Department Stores and the Shaping of the Modern Consumer Culture (1860-1914)

Rudi Laermans

Early Department Stores as Shapers of Modern Consumer Culture: Some Provisional Assertions

Until recently, the phenomenon of modern mass consumption was much debated but not much studied. Most comments on postwar consumer society repeated the same moral denunciations of consumption hedonism' or 'the false democratization of luxury' that were already coined by nineteenth-century critics (cf. Williams, 1982: 211-384). During the past fifteen years or so, a steadily growing number of social scientists have exchanged this discourse for a less prejudiced approach. Within the new sociological interest in actual consumption practices, one can discern two great strands (cf. the overview by Featherstone, 1991: 13-27). First, sociologists began to study the social determinants and the global social logic of distinction that control consumption. The now well-known work of Bourdieu (1979) is, of course, the prime example of such a thorough sociological account of consumer society. Second, ethnographers (for example Willis, 1990) and sociologists with an attentive eye for the micro-fabric of social life (for example Fiske, 1989) demanded that scholarly attention be given to the moments of individual creativity, social resistance and/or the collective pleasures that may be found in everyday consumption practices. They discovered within homogeneous mass culture'a heterogeneous mass of creative symbolic practices fueled by individual imagination and firmly grounded in everyday social relations.

The new sociological accounts of contemporary consumption practices have been supplemented by a growing historical interest in modern consumer culture. The pioneering publications of Ewen and

Ewen (1982), McKendrick et al. (1982) and Williams (1982) on the genealogy of the modern consumer society in America, England and France, respectively, set the tone for several studies on one or more aspects of the history of contemporary consumer culture. The interim results of ongoing historical research justify the tentative assertion that the modern consumer culture took on its contours during the second half of the nineteenth century. In Western Europe and the United States, the years between 1860-1914 were probably decisive for the massive breakthrough and the definitive formation of the present-day consumer society. As McKendrick et al. (1982) have perceptively argued for Britain, the seeds of ‘commercialization'were already sown by the end of the eighteenth century. But only a century later did the national and international markets for mass-produced consumer goods emerge (see Fraser, 1981, on Britain). The interplay of demographic factors, especially urbanization, innovations in the production process, rising wages and — last but not least — improved means of transport, especially railroads, made the coming of the mass market possible. Within a few decennia, commerce and consumption changed rapidly. Neighbourhood shops, local hawkers and peddlers and itinerant market vendors were steadily replaced by national store chains and large-scale retailing firms. Furthermore, brand names won rapid recognition thanks to national advertising campaigns, which were made possible by the vast, expanding market of national newspapers and magazines (see Schudson, 1984; Leiss et al., 1986).

The early department stores played a prominent role in the breakthrough of the modern consumption society (see Chaney, 1983). They not only made people acquainted with recent commercial innovations but also took the lead in the shaping of the contemporary consumer culture. As the Swiss historian Philippe Perrot rightly remarks in his well-documented survey of French nineteenthcentury fashion, 'the grand magasin . . . brought about the psychological "take off" of the desire for consumption in the modern sense, the extended socialization of needs that is not without heightened frustrations or guilty transgressions' (Perrot, 1984: 111). A similar verdict is pronounced by Michael Miller, author of an admirable monograph on the famous Parisian department store, ‘Au Bon Marché'.

The very definition of bourgeois that appeared in the pages and displays of the Bon Marché was no longer sharing a certain life style, but rather buying certain goods in order to live that way of life. . . . Consumption itself became a substitute for being bourgeois. (Miller, 1981: 185).

The judgements of Perrot and Miller on the leading role of the department stores within the early French consumer culture can also be found in historical studies on their American counterparts. Thus, Susan Porter Benson, who wrote an in-depth study on the latter subject, asserts that the coming of the department store symbolizes 'one of the most profound changes in recent history: the shift from a production-oriented society to one centered on consumption' (Porter Benson, 1986: 75).

The discourse on the historical significance of the department stores is not a recent invention of historians who, after all, may take their research subject too seriously and overrate its relevance. During the 1880s, several Parisian journalists and commentators were struck by the commercial changes in those days. Thus George d'Avenel, a then quite famous commentator who regularly published in the leading French periodical Revue des deux mondes, already saw in the department store one of the prime channels of the ongoing mechanization of modern life' and 'the democratization of luxury' (compare the interesting chapter on d'Avenel in Williams, 1982: 94-106). Emile Zola even found the grand magasin such an important social phenomenon that he devoted one complete volume of his magnum opus Les Rougon-Macquart to 'the cathedral of modern commerce'. In 1882, after some months of fieldwork, he published his novel Au bonheur des dames, in which he gives a faithful report of the fascinating world of the early Parisian department stores (cf. Becker, 1971; Bowlby, 1985: 66-82). Last but not least, Walter Benjamin, one of the first social theorists who took the phenomenon of mass consumption seriously, also devoted several notes to the Parisian department stores in his famous Passagen-Werk (Benjamin, 1983; cf. Buck-Morss,1989).

In the following pages, I will apply some recent sociological insights into the modern consumer culture to research findings on the history of the early department stores. The historical account is limited to France and the United States, especially Paris, New York and Chicago. These three cities were probably the forerunners in the modernization of sales methods and 'the production of consumption'(in England and Germany, the department-store formula was only introduced very late, around the turn of the century; see Adburgham, 1981). The short historical survey is followed by an overview of the commercial significance of the department stores.

In the second part of the paper, I will describe the principal innovations that made the early department stores leading proponents of the modern consumer culture. Two main arguments will be developed at some length. First, the department stores functioned as female leisure centres. Second, they transformed active buying into passive shopping and were therefore obliged to develop a thoroughgoing ‘technocracy of the eye'. These assertions lead to the conclusion that the department stores actually changed mere merchandise into spectacular commodity signs (Baudrillard, 1970, 1972) or symbolic goods (Bourdieu, 1972).

In the concluding section, I will explore some possible explanations for the massive success of the early department stores and, more generally, for the breakthrough of the modern consumption culture at the end of the nineteenth century. Particular attention is given to the vast growth of the urban middle classes, to the feminization of consumption and to the specific constraints of social life among urbanites, who are strangers to each other.

## A Short History of the French Grands Magasins and the American Department Stores

According to a commonly accepted myth, the French commerçant Aristide Boucicaut was the founder of the first modern department store (the myth is reported as fact by, among others, Pasdermadjian, 1954; Ferry, 1960; and the influential book by Sennett, 1976, in which one chapter is devoted to the phenomenon of the department store).' Boucicaut was truly a self-made man. After a brief career as a shop clerk, he opened the later famous magasin de nouveauté Au Bon Marché' in Paris in 1852. In the light of other historical evidence, neither Boucicaut nor France may claim the honour of being pioneers in the modernization of commerce and retailing. Most of the business policies that characterized the early department stores (see later) were implemented for the very first time in the United States and England.² Even the prize for the first building designed as a department store has to go to an American citizen. In 1846, Alexander Turney Stewart opened on Broadway in New York the first floor of his 'Marble Dry Goods Palace'. When, two years later, the store was completely finished, the building, covered with Italian marble, was immediately 'the place to be'for trendy New York (see Resseguie, 1964, 1965). Following Harry E. Resseguie,

the Marble Palace was the first ‘big store' in the United States to achieve success and probably the first in the world designed — architecturally and functionally — for the specific purpose of retailing. . .. In it A.T. Stewart perfected the organization and policies of the departmentalized dry-goods store which formed the basis of the modern department store. (Resseguie, 1964: 132).

Stewart's store, however, did not include every feature of the early department stores. He limited his merchandise to dry goods, had a traditional advertising policy, and did not use loss leaders as such.

During the 1850s, the 'Marble Palace'functioned as an outstanding example for other, more daring pioneers in the retailing business. Thus, Stewart's policies were explicitly copied by Potter Palmer, who established a dry goods store in Chicago in 1852. The imitation was so successful that Palmer soon became known as the A.T. Stewart of the West'. This sobriquet was handed down to Marshall Field who, with Levi Leiter, took over Palmer's store in 1865. When the two men moved their business three years later to another place in Chicago, they named their new store the Marble Palace' (on Field and the history of his later celebrated department store, see Wendt and Kogan, 1952; Twyman, 1954; Duncan, 1965). The famous Rowland Hussey Macy was also inspired by the retailing methods of A.T. Stewart. In 1858, he started a small store in New York that rapidly expanded into a flourishing department store (see Hower, 1943). Still another famous American businessman, John Wanamaker, successfully imitated the commercialdiscoveries' of A.T. Stewart. Wanamaker opened his 'new kind of store' in 1877 in Philadelphia, and in 1896 he took over with great satisfaction his original model, the defaulting Stewart business in New York (see X, 1911; Conwell, 1924; Gibbons, 1926; Apple, 1930).

Most Parisian grands magasins, such as Boucicaut's Bon Marché, gradually developed from small shops, usually magasins de nouveautés (for what follows, see Franklin, 1895; Valmy-Baisse, 1925; Renoy, 1978; Marrey, 1979; Perrot, 1984; Nord, 1986). As their name already indicates, the latter sold fashionable articles, especially clothes and other objects that could improve the female look' or the male appearance (hats, ties, walking-canes, etc.). By the 1850s, the magasins de nouveautés, vividly described by Balzac in his novel César Birotteau (1837), were a normal phenomenon in the commercial centre of Paris. Some shops even had the reputation of being 'the place to be seen', for example 'La Belle Jardinière' (established in 1824), ‘Aux Trois Quartiers' (1829), 'Au Ville de Paris' (1843) and 'La Chaussée d'Antin'(1843). Their vastly expanding amount of merchandise obliged the most successful of them to departmentalize. Thus, during the 1860s some magasins de nouveautés changed into true grands magasins.

The first Parisian building that was architecturally conceived as a department store was probably Au Coin de la Rue', which was built in 1864 but closed down in 1880. Three floors of spacious galleries were erected around a large hall on the first floor. A similarly ambitious architecture characterized the many other Parisian stores built during the 1860s. The remodelled 'La Belle Jardinière' (1867), 'Le Tapis Rouge' (1867), ‘A la Ville de St.-Denis' (1869) and 'La Paix' (1869) were all housed in large, impressive structures. But none of them could claim the architectural grandeur of the new 'Au Bon Marché', designed by Louis-Charles Boileau and Gustave Eiffel. When the doors of the splendid and dazzling building opened in 1872, the customers were almost blinded by its beauty. In no time at all, this consumer's palace, like A.T. Stewart's 'Marble Palace', became the symbol par excellence of modern business and retailing. Because of its international fame and the materials used, such as iron, Au Bon Marché' also dazzled many generations of historians, who accepted Boucicaut's personal myths at face value (cf. Miller, 1981). In any event, Boucicaut's example was rapidly followed by other store owners. Thus, 'Les Grands Magasins du Louvre', founded in 1855, welcomed 'le tout Paris' in 1877 in their new, splendid accommodations. Some years later, in 1883, it was the rebuilt 'Magasin du Printemps'(1865) that coaxed admiring comments from foreign tourists and Parisian flâneurs.

After the turn of the century, the department stores were no longer exotic nouveautés in France or America. They lost much of their appeal as they became ordinary, well-known commercial institutions. West European women no longer had to visit Paris to experience 'real shopping'. By the turn of the century, they could find something to suit their fashionable tastes in one of the many department stores of their own capitals. Even in more provincial cities, impressive buildings were erected. Thus, in the period of 1890-1914, French cities like Bourdeaux, Lyon, Le Havre and Toulouse all acquired their department stores to be talked about (Marrey, 1979). Most of these provincial grands magasins have disappeared without leaving much historical trace, except perhaps in the memories of those elderly people whose eyes were once impressed by their captivating newness.

