# CHAPTER VI

# Tariffs

The interests of India imperatively require the timely removal of a tax which is at once wrong in principle, injurious in its practical effect, and self-destructive in its operations.

LORD SALISBURY

That principle and that policy are that the infant industries of India should be strangled in their birth if there is the remotest suspicion of their competing with English manufactures.

PHEROZESHAH MEHTA

Another important economic issue to be taken up by the Indian national leadership during the period 188o—19o5 was that of tariffs. The importance that the Indians attached to the subject flowed from its intimate link with industrial development and the problem of poverty, whose removal depended, in their opinion, upon rapid industrialisation. The tariff policy of the nationalists was evolved in the course of a dual process: as a reaction to official measures relating to cotton and sugar duties, and, on the theoretical plane, as a response to the doctrine of Free Trade. The latter aspect is examined in a subsequent chapter on Indian Political Economy. In the present chapter only the first aspect has been reviewed.

## I. REMOVAL OF COTTON IMPORT DUTIES, 1878-821

At the time of the transfer of administration of India from the East India Company to the Crown, import duties in India consisted of a 3½ per cent duty on cotton twist and yarns, and a 5 per cent duty on other British goods, including cotton piecegoods. The rate of duty on goods from other foreign countries was double of this. The financial difficulties of the Government of India emanating from the Revolt of 1857 forced it in 1859 to raise the import tariff on cotton twist and yarns to 5 per cent and to 1o per cent on other articles. In the following year the duty on cotton twist and yarn was also increased to 1o per cent. But, under pressure from British traders and cotton manufacturers, a process of tariff reform and reduction, particularly on cotton products, was soon set in motion. The duty on cotton twist and yarn was reduced to 5 per cent in 1861 and to 3½ per cent in 1862. The duty on cotton piece-goods was cut down to 5 per cent in 1862. The general import duties were brought down from 1o to 7½ per cent in 1864 and to 5 per cent in 1875. All through these years import duties were imposed for purely revenue purposes without even a tinge of protective intention.

Even so, about the year 1874, cotton duties, which contributed nearly half of the total revenue yielded by import duties, came under a severe attack from the Lancashire cotton manufacturers.2 In 1874 the Manchester Chamber of Commerce addressed a memorial to the Secretary of State complaining that a protected trade in cotton manufactures was growing up in India to the disadvantage both of India and Great Britain and asking for the abolition of the import duties on cotton manufactures. But a committee appointed by the Government of India in November 1874 rejected the contention that the duties were protective. The cause of Free Trade was, however, taken up most vigorously by the new Conservative Secretary of State for India, Lord Salisbury, who repeatedly impressed upon the Government of India the necessity of removing the import duties on cotton goods.3 He stressed that their abolition was necessary on both economic and political grounds. First of all, he pointed out, protective duties were opposed to the general policy of Free Trade accepted by Great Britain. Secondly, they harmed the British producers by restricting the export of their manufactures to India. Thirdly, they were against the interests of the Indian people whose necessaries of life were made costlier by them. Lastly, they were not even in the true interests of the rising Indian textile industry that was, because of them, growing upon unsound foundations under artificial stimulation. Furthermore, he remarked, the political reasons for early abolition of the cotton duties were equally imperative. Indeed, the prophetic insight revealed in his reasoning in this respect tempts us to reproduce at length from the original:

The gradual transfer of the Indian trade from the English to the Indian manufacturer, which appears likely to take place, will be attended with much bitterness of feeling on the one side, and with the keen anxiety for the security of an unexpected success upon the other. The English manufacturer will press with increasing earnestness for the abandonment of the duty to which he will impute his losses; and in proportion to his urgency the Indian manufacturer will learn to value it.... Some soreness even now will be felt, and more will be expressed by persons who will trace such a policy to a preference of English over Indian claims. But the irritation will only extend over a wider surface if action is delayed, and may, if the delay be too far prolonged, become a serious public danger.4 (Emphasis added).

The whole controversy was conclusively settled, at least in so far as Lord Salisbury was concerned, in his despatch of 31 May 1876. After re-examining the entire question, he declared that 'the interests of India imperatively require the timely removal of a tax which is at once wrong in principle, injurious in its practical effect, and self-destructive in its operations.'The only remaining argument against the removal of the cotton duties was the harmful effect that it would have upon the exchequer; and, in this respect, he laid down that, while the Government of India should use its discretion in implementing his directive, the abolition of these duties should have priority over every other form of fiscal relief to the Indian tax-payer.

The Government of India and the Viceroy, Lord Northbrook were, however, not amenable to the proddings of the Secretary of State and refused to abandon the cotton duties on the ground that they were not in practice protective. But with a view to appeasing the critics, the Government decided to impose a 5 per cent duty on the import of long-staple cotton.

The fate of the cotton import duties was, however, sealed when the resignation of Lord Northbrook in 1875 was followed by the appointment of Lord Lytton as the Viceroy and of Sir John Strachey as the Finance Member, both of whom were quite keen to comply with the wishes of the Secretary of State.5 At this time (on 11 July 1877), the House of Commons passed a Resolution to the effect that ‘the duties now levied upon cotton manufactures imported into India, being protective in their nature, are contrary to sound commercial policy, and ought to be repealed without delay as soon as the financial condition of India will permit.'6 The enthusiasm of Lord Lytton and his Finance Minister was, however, curbed to a certain extent by the financial stringency produced by the Afghan War, recurring famines, and the depreciation of silver. Even so, the duties on certain coarser kinds of cotton goods were remitted in 1878 and in 1879 the duties on all cotton goods not containing yarn of a count higher than 3o were remitted. Further opportunity came in 1882 when the budget showed a surplus of £3 millions. Cotton duties, along with duties on most of the other commodities, were remitted in toto. Only the special duties on salt, wines and liquors, and arms and ammunition were allowed to remain.

For the next 12 years India was virtually without any tariff duties, and conformed more nearly to the principles of Free Trade than any other country. Even the ports of Britain were less free than those of India. This naturally resulted in an increase in the import of manufactured goods, the value of these imports went up by 28 per cent from 1878-9 to 1881-2 and 45 per cent during 1878-9 to 1884-5. Since these were also the years of a steady fall in prices, the quantitative increase in India's imports was much greater. Admittedly, this increase was the product of many other factors and forces; but, unquestionably, it was also in part due to the abolition of import duties.7

## II. NATIONALIST OPPOSITION TO ABOLITION OF COTTON IMPORT DUTIES

From the beginning of the movement for the abolition of cotton import duties, the Indian national leadership opposed it unanimously and with such fire and fury that it led Sir John Strachey, one of the main targets of this attack, to complain many years later that popular opinion in India had always, in regard to questions of fiscal reform, been obstructive and ignorant.'8

As early as 1874, when the Manchester Chamber of Commerce demanded the repeal of cotton duties in India and the Secretary of State referred the demand to the Government of India, the Sahachar of Bengal remonstrated against it most vigorously.9 A similar protest was lodged by the Bombay Branch of the East India Association in January 1875.1o The newspapers also criticised severely the Government's attempt to appease the critics of the cotton duties by imposing in 1875 a 5 per cent duty on the import of long-stapled cotton and reducing import duty on cotton textiles.11 Early next year, the press deprecated the assurance given by Lord Salisbury to the Manchester Chamber of Commerce that cotton duties would be gradually reduced.12

The repeal of the duty on some of the coarse cotton goods in March 1878 was vehemently decried by many of the newspapersi3 and the further exemption from duty of all grey cotton goods in 1879 resulted in a nation-wide condemnation by the press and public men.14 Burning with indignation, Surendranath Banerjea enquired: 'Was there ever a more wanton sacrifice, a more utter disregard of the interests of the people of this country?'15 Simnilarly, the Sadharani of 23 March 1879 condemned Lord Lytton for this act in very strong language. 'In fact, the more we study the character of Lord Lytton', it wrote, 'the greater becomes our disgust with it.' It described the repeal of cotton duties as the story of Lord Lytton's ‘imbecility' and exclaimed: Never shall we forget this instance of partiality which he has shown to his race in this time of our distress.'i6

The talk during 188o-o1 of the total repeal of the remaining cotton duties had the Indian newspapers and public bodies once again up in arms.17 Lord Hartington's remark, in August 1881 in his speech on the Indian Budget, that no opportunity would be lost of urging the Indian government to abolish the cotton duties sparked off another round of nationalist protest.i8 Finally, when Major Baring announced the complete abolition of cotton duties in i882, Indian public opinion unanimously disapproved of his action.19 Some of the critics expressed themselves in rather strong language. 'The repeal of the import duties is a crime', wrote the Amrita Bazar Patrika on 6 April 1882, 'and any attempt to justify it, we repeat, simply heightens the enormity of the crime.' But, on the whole, nationalist criticism of Baring's action was comparatively mild. This was so partly because the measure had long been anticipated and excoriated and criticised threadbare and, in any case, did not really affect Indian textile industry as it concerned textile goods of ner counts which Indian mills were not yet manufacturing on any significant scale. But perhaps a more important reason for the temperateness of the nationalist attack was the wide popularity enjoyed by Lord Ripon and Major Baring among Indians and the latter's anxiety not to embarrass the former politically.zo

While opposing the repeal of cotton duties, the Indian leadership refuted the chief ground advanced by their opponents that the duties gave protection to Indian textile industry. On the one hand, it maintained that the cotton duties were entirely non-protective in character, since India did not produce fine cotton goods, which constituted the bulk of cotton imports, and since it imported very little of coarse cotton goods, in the production of which Indian mills specialised and in which they enjoyed certain natural advantages which could not be neutralised by the abolition of cotton duties;21 on the other, it asserted that in India the duties were needed for purely revenue purposes and were, in fact, essential because of the character of Indian finance.2z It argued that there was no other source of revenue as painless and inoppressive as cotton duties, and expressed the fear that, owing to the hopeless plight and disordered condition of Indian finances, the loss caused by the abandonment of cotton duties would be, and was indeed being, made up by recourse to further public borrowing and more odious forms of taxation.23 In fact, remarked some of the Indians, it was highly iniquitous that cotton duties should be abolished when the salt tax and the licence tax were still on the statute book.24

Surprisingly enough, many of the Indian leaders also declared, in the same breath 'in which they upheld the nonprotective character of cotton duties, that their abolition would have a very injurious effect on the Indian textile industry;25 thus, they acknowledged, by implication, the protective character of the duties, for on no other basis could it be maintained that the Indian industry would suffer on account of their repeal. As a matter of fact, some of them did openly admit that the duties were protective and defended them on that score. Moreover, as will be shown in a later chapter, nearly all the Indian leaders of the period under study fervently advocated the use of protection to promote industrialisation.

## III. POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS

Opposition to the abolition of cotton duties was one of the few public issues taken up for agitation by the early Indian nationalist leaders that was pursued consistently, intelligently, and unitedly for years. But the final outcome of the struggle was, for them, completely frustrating. Step by step their point of view was ignored and rejected and, in the end, the cotton duties were totally repealed. This resulted in the widespread growth and prevalence of embittered feelings and antagonism towards the rulers. Gradually, the good faith of the rulers began to be doubted and appropriate political conclusions began to be drawn by many of the rising Indian leaders.

Thę enforcement of a policy that seemed to the nationalists to be demonstrably opposed to the interests of the country made them raise and, then, answer the question: why was such a policy being followed? According to them, the mainspring of the tariff policy of the government lay neither in the care for welfare of the Indian people nor even in a genuine regard for the principles of free trade but, on the contrary, in the jealousy aroused in the hearts of Lancashire manufacturers by the rapid growth of Indian textile industry. They also came to believe that, since both the political parties in England were keen to win political favour in Lancashire, the partial or complete repeal of cotton duties amounted to nothing less than an immense sacrifice of the interests of India to those of the powerful Lancashire interests and to the exigencies of party politics in England.26 For instance, as early as 15 December 1875, the Bodha Sudharak expressed this view in an editorial entitled: The Selfish Merchants of Manchester and their bounden Servant the Secretary of State for India.'7

Even Justice Ranade was led to observe in July 1881 that Conservative statesmen had during their term of office 'sacrificed the interests of India in the name of free trade', and surrendered £250,000 of Indian revenue 'to gratify Manchester',28 Similarly, Rao Bahadur K. L. Nulkar, the conservative Chairman of the Managing Committee of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha, angrily remarked at a public meeting at Poona in 188o :

To see how those who control the destinies of India from England can prostitute their power in order to prolong their own tenure of office and save their own treasury, we have only to consider how our revenues from cotton duties were recently sacrificed to gain favour with Manchester.29

The Bengalee of 11 March i882 condemned not only the action: of the Liberal government of' Gladstone in repealing the remaining cotton duties in 1882 but also the hypocritical mnner in which it was done: 'But it is the high ground upon which the repeal is placed, it is the air of sanctimonious affectaton and the pretence of conferring a boom when a wrong is being done that fills us with indignation.'

While the British administrators chose to ignore the logic as, well. as the vehemence of the Indian protest,3o many of the Indian.leaders began to "delve deeper into , the political implications of the long-drawn out tussle over the. repeal of cotton duties. Hitherto the line of approach they had followed-and. were to follow in many instances for some time to, come—was. that of putting the blame for all acts of misgovèrnment on theshoulders of the English officials in. India, who-were looked upon as the villains who had for selfish reasons failed to implement the generous mandate of the benig Queen, the democratic parliament, and the liberty-loving Énglish people. But it soon. bęcame public knowledge that in ,the, controversy over cotton duties, the: bureaucrats had by and large taken a pro-Indian stand, while the British governmerit ändtheparliament had played the demon.31 This drove many, ·Indians to subject to examinatioņ, and to openly question,perhaps for the first time on such·a wide scale, the good faith of their rulers and, in fact, the very why and. the wherefore of.the Britislı rule in India. And the painful conçluşion they drew was that India was being ruled primarily for the benefit of England and its merchants and manufacturers rather than in the interests of the people of India. .?

As early as 1875; the Belgaum Samachar commented that the .assurance, given by the Secretary of State to the Manchester Chamber of Commerce—that the import duty on English textiles wold be abolished—was 'in accordance with other acts of the British Government. They are professedly done for the benefit of India, but are intended for the benefit of the ruling race.'32 Bholonath Chandrà was, however, the first Indian to make a detailed' and fearless analysis of the problem. Writing in 1876, he started out by'conceding that in the entire controversy the point at issue, namely, the import duties, was not important in itself, since Indian, textile industry would grow, because of natural advantages, even if the import duties were removed. However, he asserted, 'the 'real point struggled for .by our, nation was to know whether India was to be 'governed in Indianinterests or in the interests of England.' And it was quite obviousto him that the answer served as a 'complete denial to the flattering hopes indulged in by our nation that better days had dawned for them'. The. promise- of 1858 had proved a mirage and the belief that the transfer of the reins of govérnment from a trading compaņy to the Crown'would lead to a chånge'in the, náture and purposes of the government ·had .been founded on 'grains of sand :

Instead of reform, and an improved. regime, and a ne role, there is the most positive retrogression. There is the same sympathy of race for race, the same persistent avowal of the coincidence of Indian with English interests, the same rapacious spirit,for exaction, and the same determination to hold India in pupilage in 1876, as in 1776.33

Indeed, sermonised Bholonath Chandra, the victory of Manchester had a valuable lesson to teach the people of India, for ‘it plainly tells, that all combined, India is no match for the cottom spinners and weavers of that city.'34 Three years later, S.N. Banerjea enquired oratorically: 'If we had a native Government, would such a Government, I put this question to my countrymen, venture upon a thing of this kind in reckless. defiance of public opinion and in total forgetfulness of the interests of the people!'35 The same hard reality that India was not one among equals in the Empire but a conquered nation was pinpointed by the Mahratta of 18 September 1881 when it opined that the sacrifice of Indian interests to those of Manchester was the type of 'penalty which every conquered nation must pay to its conquerors without grumbling'. The troubles of India lay, the Mahratta seemed to be hinting, not in this or that particular act of the alien Government but in the fundamental political condition of the country.

The assertion that the repeal of cotton duties was 'beneficial to the general interests of India' was reiterated in 1882 by Lord Ripon, who also proclaimed simultaneously that he desired 'to govern India in the interests of India and for the benefit of her people'.36 Pat came the reply from the Bengalee of 11 March 1882: 'It may be all very well to talk of governing India for India's own sake, our rulers cannot forget... that they are Englishmen and that the Government must to some extent at any rate be conducted according to principles which must benefit Englishmen.' And, once again, the Amrita Bazar Patrika drew attention, in its issue dated 6 April 1882, to the political enslavement of India and hinted at the remedy: 'She (England) cannot confer this boon (free trade) upon her sisters in Europe. She cannot confer it upon her own colonies. They govern themselves.... But India is a helpless country. Her sons are weak and powerless.'37 Many years later, referring to the removal of cotton duties, R.C. Dutt wrote as follows: 'British administrators in India marked with satisfaction, rather than with jealousy, the growth of the infant cotton industry of Bombay; but in matters of Indian administration they were the servants of the British merchant and the British voter.'38

Implied in this criticism was the yearning to free the Government of India of the control of British merchants so that a pro-Indian tariff policy could be adopted. Sometimes, however, as in the case of the Sahachar of 22 March 1882, a demand for the transfer to Indian people of the power of controlling the public purse was explicitly put forward.39 Four years later, the same paper urged the people to struggle for self-government, as had been done by the English colonies (Canada and Australia), if they wanted the import duties to be restored.4o Similarly, the Mahratta of 17 January 1886 wrote in utter despair that 'under the foreign rule of a commercial country we must never expect the reimposition of import duties'.

Voluntary protection through refusal to purchase foreign textiles, or swadeshi, was another way of countering the harmful effects of the abolition of cotton duties on Indian industry which suggested itself at this time to Indian leaders. The great merit of swadeshi was that it might be practised even under conditions of political subjugation. The nationalist attempts at the propagation of swadeshi need not, however, detain us here. They have been discussed at length in Chapter III of this study.

## IV. RE-IMPOSITION OF IMPORT DUTIES

At the time of the total abolition of cotton duties in 1882, Lord Ripon expressed the pious hope that this action would ‘put an end to those differences of opinion upon the question, which have unhappily now for several years existed between the people of England and the people of India.'41 But those who claimed to speak for the people of India did not relent; and for many years after—in fact as long as the nationalist movement lasted—repeal of cotton duties remained a favourite target of attack and bitter criticism by the nationalists. After reiterating all the points of criticism examined above, they repeatedly held up the surrender of cotton duties as an example of national injustice, ‘a weak betrayal of trust', and an example and a proof of the subordination of Indian interests to those of Britain.42 Moreover, at the slightest provocation and at every moment of financial distress, they put forward a demand for the reimposition of an import duty on cotton. goods in place of other forms of taxation, such as the salt tąx and the income tax, or instead of measures of retrenchment.of welfare expenditure, such as discontinuation of the Famine Grant and reduction of revenue assignments to the provincial governments.43

The tariff-holiday, won after such a prolonged and bitter struggle, was not destined to last for long. The falling exchange rate, the speedier construction of railways, and the mounting military expenditure exerted continuous pressure on the financial resources of the Government of India. Resort to fresh taxation failed to bring about the desired financial, equilibrium. Matters, ultimately, came to a head in 1894 when the government was confronted with a deficit of 3½ crores of rupees. Desperately looking. around for new sourceș of reyenue, it decided to act upon the advice given bythe Indian Currency Committee of 1893 that import duties. were likely to excite the least opposition in India. Andso in March 1894 a ne Tariff Act, which ‘imposed a general 5 per cent duty on all imports, was .enacted. Cotton fabrics, yarņs,, and, thread were, however, exempted from the scope of the nęw Açt in deference to Lancashire,interests and at the bidding of·the Secretary of State.44

.The nationalist reaction to the new imposts is examined in a separate section below. Here we confine ourselves to a discussion of the nationalist reaction to the exclusion of cotton goods from the new tariff schedule. This exclusion produċe a storm of protest in the country. In ithe Legislative Council, the Indian members vigorously opposed the Tariff Bil :for perpetrating a: great wrong by omitting cotton goods from its purview.45 Various public bodies expressed their resentment through memorials, petitions, etc., while public meetings were organised in different parts of the country\*to protest against it.46

And, of course, the press took up cudgels on behalf of cotton duties.47

The nationalists maintained that an import duty on cotton goods, especially on goods of finer counts, would have been purely financial in character and not at all protective as there was practically no competition in the Indian market between most of the imported English goods and the products of Indian mills.48 In any case, most of them believed, there was nothing wrong in a backward country like India levying protective duties to safeguard and promote its industries.49

They unhesitatingly branded the omission of cotton goods. from import duties as another instance of the sacrifice of India's interests to the interests of Manchester and the ruling party in England. Even the extremely moderate Poona Sarvajanik Sabha was led to remark that ‘it will be difficult for the people of India to resist the conclusion that this exemption is a concession to the selfish and ignorant cry of a body of English merchants.'so In fact many of the Indian leaders learnt from this episode a valuable lesson in the underlying politics of the alien rule. As the Advocate of 30 March 1894 observed, the long and heated debate that preceded the enactment of the Tariff Act threw ‘a ghastly light upon the secret springs of British rule in India'.s1 When mildly expressed the conclusion drawn was that the English government in India cared 'more for the home interests than for those of the Indian people'.5z.

A detailed analysis was made in the Petition adopted at a public meeting held at Poona on 18 March 1894. "After remarking that ‘a whole policy that was incomprehensible is explained by the omission of the cotton duty from the Tariff', the petitioners observed: 'Now it would appear why the Government would not lift a hand to help India to develop its mineral and manufacturing resources. It is in obedience to a command that emanates from the Lancashire caucus.... Instead of a national policy of industrial development suited to India, which the Government studiously shuns, here is a policy of Industrial development suited alone to foreign manufacturers.'53. A more vigorous expression to this feeling was given by the Dainik-o-Samachar Chandrika when it sarcastically advised Her Majesty's Government to declare in plain language that 'India is nothing more or less than a field to be looted by England.'54 The Bangabasi summed up and ventilated the nationalist point of view with its usual forthrightness in an article entitled 'The Mask has Fallen Off', published in its issue dated 17 March 1894:

Be that as it may, as regards this question of the cotton duties, the mask has now fallen off the foreign English administration of India. The highest officials in the country, nay the entire official body and the leading newspapers in England, have had to make the humiliating confession—'The boast in which we have been so long indulging, the boast that we govern India in the interest and for the welfare of the Indians, is perfectly unfounded; India is held and governed in the interests of the English merchants.'55

Interestingly enough, as a counterpoise to the official policy, the Hindu Punch of 22 March and the Arunodaya of 18 March 1894 urged the people of India to defeat the purpose of their rulers in excluding cotton goods from the new tariff by resolutely resolving not to buy foreign cotton products.56

## V. TARIFF AND COTTON DUTIES ACTS OF 1894 AND 1896

So strong was the outcry in India against the exemption of cotton goods from import duties that Lord Elgin felt it necessary to appease the critics by hinting that it was not necessarily the final arrangement.57 And, in fact, this arrangement did prove to be transitory. Once again, the financial needs of the Government of India forced it to enact a fresh Act in December 1894, subjecting cotton fabrics and yarns to an import duty of 5 per cent. At the same time, however, a countervailing excise duty of 5 per cent was imposed upon yarns of the counts 2o's or above produced in Indian power mills. This excise duty an impost without parallel in the economic history of any country'--was imposed not for the sake of revenue but in order to remove any element of protection that the new import duties might give to the Indian textile industry. vis-a-vis its Lancashire counterpart.58 As a matter of fact, prior to this, the Government o India itself was not convinced of the wisdom of this step. For as early·as 1878, Sir John Strachey had rejected excise duties for being 'costly, vexatious, and inconvenient' and ‘in most cases impracticable in India'.59 Even in 1894, the Finance Member, James Westland, had pointed out in a despatch to the Secretary of State that 'of the manufactures of India, quite 94 per cent is absolutely outside the range of any competition with Manchester being the coarser quality of goods (24s. and above) which Manchester cannot pretend to supply so cheaply as India'; and advised that if a countervailing excise duty waseimposed it should be levied only on cotton yarns of counts above 24.6o But it was the Secretary of State who finally insisted on the application of the excise duty to counts above 2o, thus bringing 20 per cent of the yarn produced in Indian mills within the purview of this duty.61 This was frankly admitted by James Westland in his speech on the Cotton Duties Bill, when he apologetically conceded that the Government of India did not recommend the measure on its own merits but rather on account of the direction received from the Secretary of State.62

As was to be expected, the Indian nationalists welcomed the reimposition of import duties on cotton products as signifying the acceptance of the popular will.63 'In this instance', acknowledged D. E. Wacha, 'the Government of India has really voiced the needs of the people and nobly advocated their true interests.'64 Suçh âppreciation was not general and there was criticism -of the paftriness of the import duty. For example, while supportin'g thě' government for its action, the Mahratta of 16 ,December 1894 remarked that it had done so only when no'optior was left to it in the matter and bankruptcy stared it in the face. Moreover, it felt, the duty should have been higher still, say 1o or 15 per cent. In contrast, the Indian national leaders unequivocally denounced the levy of cotton excise duties, which were branded as unjust, impolitic, and opposed to the interests of the Indian people.65

The British manufacturers were, however, not fully satisfied by the fiscal arrangement of 1894. They contended that the exemption of yarns below the count of 2o's from the excise duty was providing protection to the Indian textile industry, because 'Lancashire could and did compete in the production of coarse goods', and because an excise duty upon yarn was lighter in practice than an equivalent import duty upon the finished product, and also because Indian exports to Burma were, in any case, unduly favoured.66 Ultimately, in February 1896, the Government of India bowed before their pressure, exercised through the Secretary of State, and enacted two fresh pieces of legislation, which abolished the import duties as well as the excise duties on cotton yarns and, at the same time, reduced the import duty on woven goods from 5 per cent to 3½ per cent and simultaneously imposed a corresponding excise duty of 3½ per cent on all woven goods produced by Indian mills. The new measures resulted in a remission of taxation amounting to Rs. 51½ lakhs or 37 per cent on imported goods and an increase of 11 lakhs or 3oo per cent in taxation on Indian goods.67

This act of taxing even coarse Indian cloth to remove the will-o'-the-wisp of protection had the most explosive effect on Indian public opinion. It lashed out in white fury against this \*sacrifice' of the interests of Indian industry and Indian people.68 For example, in its issue dated 9 February 1896, the Mahratta thundered: Never before since the Government of this country was transferred from the East India Company to the Queen-Empress was perpetrated an act of injustice as flagrant as the readjustment of the cotton duties in favour of Lancashire.' Similarly, the Samaya of 31 January 1896 wrote bitingly: 'It shows how Englishmen are blinded by selfishness; how in their anxiety to protect the interests of their own countrymen, they do not even hesitate to injure the interests of others—to draw the knife, so to speak, across other people's throats.'69

The cotton excise duty continued to excite the nationalists for many a year to come. Thus, in 19o2, the Indian National Congress passed a strongly worded resolution condemning the excise duty and asking for its repeal. The request was repeated in 1904.70 Moving the resolution in 1902, D. E. Wacha declared that, until this was done, the Congress would ‘agitate and agitate for the repeal of this iniquitous duty'.7i R. C. Dutt discussed it at length in his written works and innumerable speeches. 'As an instance of fiscal injustice,' he remarked, 'the Indian Act of 1896 is unexampled in modern times'; and added: 'Most civilised 'Governments protect their home industrie by prohibitive duties on foreign goods. Themost thorough of Free Trade Governments do not excise home manufactures when ithposing a moderate customs duty on imported goods for thepurposes of revenue.'7 G. K. Ghokhale repeatedly voiced in his speeches before the Legislative Council the resentmett felt by the Indian nationalists against the excise duty.73 From the Congress Presidential Chair, N. G. Chandavarkar and Surendranath Banierjea raised the demand for abolition of the exċise duty.74 And, of course, the newspapers kept the issue alive in ther columns.75

The nationalist attack on the fiscal changes of 1894-6 was based on the following grounds:

The Indian leaders were convinced that the cotton excise duties were likely tò arrest and retard India's industrial development.76 They were, in· particular, afraid that the excise duty would prevent the Indian textile industry from turning to the spinning of finer counts of yarn which was the main direction in which further expansion of this industry could take place.77 Moreover, some of them entertained the apprehension that the duty would give a rude shock to textile exports of India and thereby enable its Asian rivals, for example Japan, to outcompete its products.78 This fear was, in fact, baseless as both the Excise Duty Acts of 1894 and 1896 provided for full rebate of the duty on products intended for export. Perhaps these leaders misunderstood the clauses of the Acts concerned or they held to the belief that a general weakening of the industry's productive capacity and profit structure would indirectly affect its ability to compete with its rivals abroad.

The Indian leaders further attacked the Cotton Excise Duty Act of 1896 on the plea that it would hit hard the poorer sections of the people, who bought coarse cloth that had now been taxed.79 As a matter of fact, pointed out some of them, the new impost, combined with the reduction of i½ per cent in the import duty on foreign cloth, used mainly by the richer strata of the Indian population, virtually amounted to taxing the poor to relieve the rich.8o 'Where is the Government's much vaunted sympathy for the poor masses?' asked the Bengalee of 8 February 1896.

They next argued that, apart from its-harmful effects on industry and the economic well-being of the people, the excise duty was unnecessary even from the point of view of the purposes for which it had allegedly been brought forth and was, therefore, unjust. First of all, they observed that financial productivity was obviously not one of the reasons for its imposition since the receipts from it would barely equal the cost of its collection and would in no case be substantial.81 In 19o2 D. E. Wacha made an interesting point in this respect: whiie the sum of Rs. 17 lakhs, which represented the excise collection at the time, was paltry as revenue, it affected the profits of millowners disastrously, as it constituted 5o per cent of those profits. As a corollary to the above statement, Wacha also denied that millowners were recouping, or could recoup, the duty from the consumers.82 Interestingly enough, by making this contention, Wacha also refuted the assumption, which was implicit in the earlier nationalist argument that the poor would suffer from the imposition of the excise duty, that the burden of the duty was passed on to the consumers.83 Secondly, the Indian leaders rejected the plea that the excise duty was required to neutralise the protective character of the import duties and thus maintain free trade between India and Britain. They asserted, as before, that the import duties did not, for all practical purposes, provide any protection to local industry because the field for competition in the Indian market between the cotton products of India and Britain was extręmely narrow; Britain exported to India very little of coarse goods while India did not produce in any appreciable quantity the finer :grey goods which formed the bulk of British exports to India.84 In line with this argument, many Indians demanded in 1894 that if excise duty had to be imposed at all it should begin with yarns of counts 24's and above rather than with yarns of 2o's and above.85 An amendment to this effect was moved by Fuzalbhai Vishram in the Legislative Council; and it secured the support of all the 7 Indian members present.86 Later, when the British manufacturers started clamouring for further concessions on the ground that exemption of Indian yarns below 2o's militated against free trade, the Indian leaders vehemently denied their contention.87 Some of them even suggested that if the Government of India wanted to pacify the British manufacturers it should, instead of extending the excise duty fur-. ther, exempt English yarns up to 2o's from import duty.88

The vehemence of their resentment against, and their denunciation of, the excise duty did not, however, spring chiefly from their analysis of its evil consequences or its uselessness; it: arose from their understanding of the basic causes which had led to the imposition of the excise duty; it emanated from their belief that the duty was no mistaken, misplaced, or misconceived measure,89 and that, on the contrary, the conscious objective of its proponents was to injure the rising textile industry of India so as to placate the ‘philistines of Manchester', who hoped thus to check the growth of a rival. This was. put quite bluntly by the Indian National Congress at its 1894. session, when it put 'on record its firm conviction that in proposing this excise, the interests of India have been sacrificed to, those of Lancashire.'9o The Bengalee of 8 February 1896 remarked sarcastically: 'The masses of India cannot keep the Home Government in power; Manchester can and may.... Power first, duty next!'

Delving even deeper, some of the Indian leaders came to the conclusion that underlying the excise duty were the principle and the policy of subordinating India's industrial development to the needs and commands of British industry. Giving vigor-- ous expression to this feeling, Pherozeshah Mehta declared in the Council Chamber: 'That principle and that policy are that the infant industries of India should be strangled in their birth if there is the remotest suspicion of their competing with English manufactures.'91 Even N. G. Chandavarkar, perhaps the most moderate of the Indian publicmen of the time, was constrained to remark in his Congress Presidential Address of 19oo that under the present policy no Indian industry will be .allowed to outgrow European competition.'92 The Khasim-ul-Akhbar of 24 December 1894 remarked that hitherto the English had pretended to aid the development of Indian industries, but this fact now showed that their real intention was to check them.93 The Mahratta, in its issue dated 17 March 1895, made an even more penetrating remark regarding the basic economic policy of Britain in India. This single episode revealed, it wrote, 'that the manufacturer of England wants that India should remain agricultural, or that we should always œemain producers and England should continue to be the manufacturer.'

## VI. POLITICAL IMPACT

On the basis of their study of the questions of tariff and excise duty, many of the thoughtful Indian leaders made even broader generalisations challenging the beneficient character, and, indeed, the very aims and purposes of the British rule in India. In fact the great historical importance that this tariff episode occupies in the history of Indian national movement lies chiefly in this aspect of the problem. Moreover, the significant role that the cotton excise duty and the different tariff amendments played in the growth of national sentiment in India centred around precisely this questioning of the moral basis of the alien rule, or, in other words, of the foundations of this rule in the minds of men and their leaders in India.94

The main theme of the moral drawn by a large number of Indians from this tale of tariff and excise duties during 1894 and 1896 was that India was ruled not in the interests of the people of India but for the benefit of British people in general, and British merchants and manufacturers in particular, and that in case of any clash between the interests of India and the interests of Britain, the former were bound to go to the wall.95

This feeling was expressed most pungently by Tilak in Kesari, dated 28 January 1896: 'Surely India is treated as a vast pasture reserved solely for the Europeans to feed upon.'96 Similarly, the Amrita Bazar Patrika of 29 January 1896 pithily remarked that it was obvious that India was ‘an English property'. Many other Indians expressed themselves with equal clarity though with less of anger. The entire nationalist thought on the question was summarised by P. Ananda Charlu, an ex-President of the Indian National Congress, in his speech on the Cotton Duties Bill in the Legislative Council in 1896. 'While India is safe-guarded against foreign inroads by the strong arm of the British Power,' he observed, 'she is defenceless in matters where the English and Indian interests clash and where (as a Tamil saying puts it) the very fence begins to feed on the crop.'97

In this manner did a vast section of the Indian leadership lose its faith in the moral purpose of the British rule in India and in the loudly professed benevolent motives of the foreign rulers. It is, however, remarkablethough entirely in keeping with the temper of the nationalist movement at the time—that even this realisation did not lead to any positive intensification of political demands and that the vast majority of the Indian leaders failed to exploit the opportunity. Nonetheless, a few of them did try to utilise it for pushing forward their pet demands for political reforin most of which were, however, extremely moderate, especially when contrasted with the political and economic perception from which they issued. The lead in this respect was taken by Madan Mohan Malaviya in his speech on the reform of the legislative councils at the 1894 session of the Indian National Congress. Malaviya noted that the reformed legislative councils had failed to protect the interests of the people of India, that the official members of the Imperial Legislative Council had not been able to vote on the Indian Tariff Bill of 1894 according to their.own inclinations, and that the Council had been used merely to register the fiat of the Secretary of State. He concluded, therefore, that the reformed legislative councils were nothing 'but shams, so far as the real and true interests of the people are concerned'.98 Taking cognisance of the fact that the non-official members had generally supported the Indian case, he demanded that the number of nonofficial members should be increased and the councils themselves should be armed with greater and more substantial powers to protect the interests of the people of this country'.99 Going even further, the Mahratta of 16 December 1894 demanded that the majority of the members of the Imperial Legislative Council should be elected and the Imperial budget submitted to the vote of the Council. Many others drew the conclusion that the Government of India was no longer capable of protecting the interests of India.ioo Some even asked the government to openly abdicate in favour of the Secretary of State, or at least to do away with the legislative councils, so that he might publicly wield the naked power that he exercised surreptitiously at the moment.1o1

In a few, though very rare, instances the case even for selfgovernment was put forward; the revolutionary idea that India could get fiscal justice or follow a policy of industrialisation only if it could get rid of British political control and become a self-governing country was expressed. This opinion was openly advanced by the Banganivasi of 9 February 1896: 'England is pre-eminently a manufacturing and commercial country, and India must put up with her tyranny in commerce and manufacture so long as the English people will lord it over her children.'ioz R. C. Dutt skirted very close to this view when he wrote in 1898 with reference to the excise duty and tariff concession of 1896 that

unless the people of India are allowed the constitutional right to stand by the Government, and to defend their national revenues and their national interests, the humiliating sight will be witnessed again and again of the British Government in India knowingly and openly sacrificing the interests of the people of India under the mandate of British voters at home.103

The excise duty excited even Gokhale to remark that it illustrated 'what John Stuart Mill has said about the Government of the people of one country by the people of another.'io4

But the struggle for political emancipation of the country was still in the womb of time. What was on the agenda was the arousal of national feeling, consolidation of this feeling, and the training of Indian people in political agitation and struggle. The frst of these tasks was, as we have seen earlier, performed with vigour, insight, and success. The second was accomplished by the very sweep of the nationalist feeling aroused on this issue of tariffs which encompassed the entire length and breadth of India. The value of the agitation on the tariff issue in this respect was fully recognised by that most astute of tacticians among the nationalist leaders of that generation, Lokmanya Tilak, whose paper Mahratta was quick in giving the clarion call for national unity. In its issue dated 9 February 1896, we read :

Sceptical English opponents of Young India have always been crying themselves hoarse that India can never be a nation. Let this terrible crisis make us one. Let all Indians--Hindus, Mohamadans, Parsees and Englishmen living in India—make common cause.... This is not a time for scruples and hesitations. All private differences must be sunk for the national cause and natives and Anglo-Indians must alike unite to face the common enemy.105

However, what distinguishes the nationalist reaction to the excise duty, and sets it apart in a higher class qualitatively, from the nationalist reaction to other features of British policy, economic or otherwise, is the fact that for the frst time in the history of Indian national movement the nationalist leadership carried out the third task. It emerged from the stage of mere agitation and crossed into the realm of action, even though this was done on a small scale and perhaps in only one part of the country, the Bombay Presidency. It was at this time and around the issue of the cotton excise duty that the idea of boycott of foreign goods was put into practice on a visiblé scale.1o6 Boycott of foreign goods was declared by a section of the national leadership to be the only available way of helping indigenous industry since the British sense of justice and benevolence could no longer be relied upon. Mass meetings where vows of swadeshi were taken were organised in many parts of the country. A miniature swadeshi campaign was organised in Maharashtra. In its political implications, this miniature boycott-of-foreign-cloth campaign was not less significant than the political agitation against the excise duty for it represented a new form of direct action by the people themselves. It represented the spirit of self-help as against reliance on appeals to the rulers for redress of grievances.1o7 In imparting a sense of self-confidence and in bringing a large number of urban people into the vortex of nationalist politics, this early swadeshi movement, arising out of the tariff policy of the government, played a seminal role.

## VII. SUGAR IMPORT DUTIES, 1899

Another significant measure of fiscal policy to engage the attention of Indian leadership was that of countervailing import duties on bounty-fed sugar from Europe. This was indeed a complex issue which put to test the depth of the economic grasp, économic nationalism, and political subtlety of Indian leadership, and which provides one of the few instances of a wide split in its ranks during the period under study.

India had been an exporter of sugar up to the middle of the 19th century; however, soon after, it began to import refined sugar mostly from the British colony of Mauritius. During the last decade of the 19th century there was an enormous increase in importation of beet-sugar from Germany and Austria as a result of the system of state-bounties to exports adopted by their governments. By 1898 beet-sugar threatened, because of its cheapness, to overwhelm imports from Mauritius as well as indigenous sugar. To check this tide, the Government of India carried out, on 2o March 1899, an amendment to the Indian

Tariff Act of 1894, acquiring the power to impose countevailing import duties on bounty-fed sugar to the extent of the amount of state-bounties. The chief reason advanced by the government for this apparently bold departure from its avowed policy of Free Trade was that it was anxious to prevent further decay and destruction of a great Indian industry, and of the cultivation of sugarcane based on it, at the hands of artificially stimulated competition. Already, it was alleged, a great deal of damage had been done. There had occurred a widespread and a still unarrested closing of Indian refineries and as much as a 13 per cent contraction in the area under sugarcane cultivation. The Government also claimed that bounty-fed sugar competed not only with sugar manufactured and refined in India's modern factories but also with its unrefined and crudely refined sugar.1o8 At the same time, the Government vehemently denied that Imperial considerations, such as the protection of the interests of the planters and manufacturers of Mauritius, had played an important role in its decision. It maintained that, on the contrary, the interests of Indian industry and agriculture had been the sole guiding force.109 ·

But though Lord Curzon openly claimed an overwhelming support in the country for his measure and publicly declared that only the importing merchants, represented mostly by the European Chambers of Commerce of Bombay and Karachi, had expressed disagreement,1o the reality was a little different. The Indian national leadership was never—not even in the beginning—unanimous in its support to the countervailing import duty; and, with the passage of time, nationalist opposition to it gained strength and momentum. Moreover, as we shall see below, at no stage was Indian support unqualified and in accord with the spirit that permeated the government circles when adopting the measure.

The supporters and critics of the Government of India's. action were, however, not equally balanced, at least initially. The supporters outnumbered the critics before and at the time of the passage of the amending Act. The most important voice among the former was that of Justice M. G. Ranade, whose word still had, for a large number of Indians, the force of a law in matters economic, and whose views were expressed in three articles in the Times of India in May and June 1899.111 Other active supporters were P. Ananda Charlu, who gave loud and strong support to the Government from his seat in the Imperial Legislative Council, and R. C. Dutt.1i² Nearly all the important nationalist newspapers, for example, the Amrita Bazar Patrika, the Bengalee, the Hindu, the Mahratta, the Indu Prakash, the Advocate, and the Tribune, were ranged on this side.113 The Amrita Bazar Patrika was, in fact, the first in the country in publicly raising the cry against bounty-fed beetsugar and demanding protective action by the government.114 However, a small but vocal group among the nationalists forcefully and relentlessly opposed the countervailing duty. The leader of this section was said to have been Prithwis Chandra Ray, a member of the Executive Committee of the Indian Association and Assistant Secretary to the Calcutta Standing Congress Committee, who had earlier in 1895 made quite a name for himself in Bengal as an economist with his book, The Poverty Problem of India, and who now brought out a pamphlet on the sugar duty.115 Standing between these two groups and occupying a middle position was the lone but powerful personality of Pherozeshah Mehta who refused to be hustled in the matter and who suggested, during the course of the debate on the Government Bill in the Imperial Legislative Council, that more facts and more detailed enquiry and debate were needed before the issue could be decided either way.u6

Before we examine at length the position assumed and the arguments advanced by the two groups, we may invite attention to two other factors in the situation. Firstly, the memory of the tariff struggles of 1894 and 1896 was still fresh in the minds of Indian nationalists, all of whom tended to look at the countervailing sugar duty in the light of lessons learnt from and the points of view adopted during those struggles. Differences arose in their ranks only when they applied those lessons to the present issue. And, secondly, the controversy was carried on by them not only as regards the merits of the case but also within the context of the wider controversy raging in England and India around the alleged violation of the principles of Free Trade by the imposition of the sugar duty. We are, however, not directly concerned with the latter controversy.

Critics of the sugar duty based their stand, first of all, on the ground that the need for it had been derived from false premises. They argued that European sugar did not compete with India's crude and unrefined sugar, which formed by far the largest portion of the indigenous manufacture of sugar, and that so long as the home-made country sugar was not undersold there was no danger to India's real sugar industry or to the sugar-cane cultivation dependent upon it. They admitted that the area under cane cultivation had shrunk in recent years; but this was, they said, primarily due to prevalence of famine conditions and failure of monsoons. Moreover, such contraction had taken place prior to 1896-7 also, that is before the import of bounty-fed sugar had assumed large proportions. These critics nonetheless conceded that the indigenous refined sugar industry had suffered at the hands of foreign competition. But they contended that this was not an important enough loss from the point of view of the country as a whole. After all, they said, there were only 6 large sugar factories in Bengal, 2 in N.-W.P. and Oudh, 1 in Punjab, and 5 in Madras; the total quantity of refined sugar produced was about 8oo,ooo cwts., i.e., only about one-fifth of the country's total consumption of refined sugar. Even if all these factories were to close down, not more than 4 to 5 thousand labourers would be thrown out of work. Moreover, beet-sugar was not the only enemy of India's refined sugar, sugar from Mauritius played an equally important role in ruining Indian sugar refineries whose products would not be able to compete with Mauritius sugar even if European sugar was completely embargoed. Had not 89 sugar factories closed down in Bengal alone between 1883-9o, i.e., before the entry of German and Austrian sugar?ıi7 The Prativasi even maintained that in any case there was at the time no real possibility of the growth of modern sugar industry in India.118 Supporters of the sugar duty, on the other hand, cited facts and figures to show that sugar refineries were being progressively closed down everywhere in the country; that production of unrefined sugar was also suffering; and that, on account of these two, a serious decline had taken place in the area under cane cultivation and date trees and a more serious decline might be expected in future.1i9 This result was due not to famine but to 'the unprofitableness of industry due to foreign competition'.izo They therefore looked upon the countervailing sugar duty as a partial protection for, and a kind saviour of, the indigenous sugar industry. The duty would, they asserted, check the stagnation and decline in the production of refined sugar, give a new lease of life to rural sugar industry, lead to extension of sugarcane cultivation, and provide new employment opportunities to thousands of workers.121 Justice Ranade agreed with the critics of the sugar duty on the point that at the time there was perhaps not much of refining industry in the country and that, consequently, not much of industrial loss was involved. But, he maintained, to take this view was to be extremely shortsighted. The real danger lay in the entire future of this industry being jeopardised.122

Another point of contention between the critics and supporters of the sugar duty was its effect on the consumers. The critics contended that the bounty paid by sugar exporting countries cheapened sugar and benefited the Indian consumers to that extent. Since the countervailing duty would not in any case provide a stimulus to local industry and since the latter could meet only a small part of the Indiaņ demand for refined sugar, sugar would still continue to be imported—the only difference after the imposition of the duty would be that instead of, cheap sugar from Austria and Germany, sugar would be imported mainly from Mauritius at a higher cost. The duty would, therefore, be in the nature of an additional tax on the consumer.123

The critics of the critics, so to say, did not deny that the bounty-fed sugar was cheaper; but they declared that this might be a valid argument against the countervailing duty only if the prospects of an Indian industry were not involved. However, having shown that Indian sugar industry was being injured by European sugar, they readily discounted this argument. In addition, they warned that the very cheapness of subsidised sugar might, in the long run, turn out to be a veritable snare for the consumer. The real aim of the state bounties was to cheapen beet-sugar by artificial means so as to ruin its rivals. But once the indigenous industry was ruined beyond revival, the Europeans would set out to rule the market and charge monopoly prices.124 Furthermore, the supporters of the duty cleverly turned the cheapness-argument by appealing to the utilitarian doctrine of the greatest good of the greatest number. They pointed out that the cost of imported and refined sugar affected not the poor in India, who consumed only unrefined local product, but only the middle and upper classes, who should be enlightened enough to make a sacrifice for their community and who should look upon the rise in price of sugar resulting from the countervailing duty as ‘a species of indirect taxation for the benefit of their poor brethren'.125

Once again, it may be noted, these leaders were following the dictum of 'industry before all'. Even though coming from and, in the main, leading the rising westernised and urban middle class of India, they were willing to sacrifice their interests .as consumers to the interests of the country's industrialisation. It may also be pointed out that even the critics of the sugar duty would not perhaps have objected to such a sacrifice—their only objection being that it would be a useless sacrifice by a part when the whole would in no way benefit as a result thereof.

The critics also suspected the motives of the Government of India in bringing forward the Sugar Duty Act. They felt that things were not what they seemed, that in introducing this measure the government was not really moved by solicitude for Indian interests, that its cry of Indian sugar in danger was false, and that all the sympathy being shown by its spokesmen for Indian cultivators and manufacturers was hypocritical or éven worse. The true purpose of the government measure, in their opinion, was to help the planters and manufacturers of Mauritius and the West Indies in driving away from the Indian market their rivals, with whom they were unable to compete otherwise. Indeed, an index of the sincerity of the rulers would be their willingness to extend the protective duty' to all sugar imports. Such a measure would be welcomed by all, declared the critics. The existing measure was totally inadequate if the real intention of the government was to save Indian sugar industry, since it did not protect Indian sugar from its most formidable rival—the Mauritius sugar.126 After all, Ray wrote, 'it makes very little difference to us that, instead of Germany and Austria, it is Mauritius which sends us the greater part of the refined sugar we want and kills our gugar industry.'127 In fact, he held, if the government was .genuinely interested in reviving and encouraging Indian sugar industry, it should not only impose restrictions upon the Mauritius sugar also but simultaneously give direct aid and encouragement to indigenous industry and make efforts to improve cultivation of sugarcane and methods of manufacture of sugar.128

When it came to evaluating the underlying motives of the government in levying sugar duty, most of its supporters reacted quite favourably to the government till the publication in May 1899 of the Blue Book on the subjecti29 brought home 'the bitter truth'. At the time of the passage of the Sugar Duty Act many newspapers and persons believed that it was enact-.ed 'only for the benefit of India'.13o There was even ‘an exultation that an economic saviour had come in the person of

Lord Curzon to revive the industries of the land.'i31 But the mood of exultation lasted for less than two months. While the Blue Book on the Sugar Duty confirmed the worst suspicions of the critics,132 it convinced even the supporters that the step was taken not solely or principally in the interests of the Indian cultivators and manufacturers, but mainly for the benefit of the planters and manufacturers of Mauritius and the West Indies.133 Even Justice Ranade was led to remark that the change in policy had been ‘due to the ruin of the West Indies sugar industry'.134 And P. Ananda Charlu, the most enthusiastic of the Indian supporters of the measure, confessed in 19o1 that the suspicion 'freely expressed'at the time of its passing 'that it was legislation for the benefit of some of the colonies, seems not to have been altogether unfounded.'i35 This led many of the defenders of the Sugar Duty Act to admit that their enthusiasm for it had been 'dampened'.136 Even so, they refused to condemn the Act. In this respect they again parted' company with the critics and continued to maintain that, since the measure would secure the long-range interests of Indian sugar industry, Indians should not hesitate to support iti37 and even make common cause with the Mauritius planters.138 After all, they said, it would be a positive gain if the duty knocked down at least one of the two foreign enemies of Indian sugar.139 Moreover, it would provide Indian sugar industry some ‘breathing time'.140

This section of Indian leadership also found common ground with the other section on the proposition that the mere imposition of a countervailing duty would not succeed in protecting and promoting Indian sugar industry and that certain other steps had to be taken urgently for this purpose. One step suggested was the extension of protection to Indian sugar even against the Mauritius sugar.141 Another was the grant of special and active governmental facilities to indigenous industry.142 Interestingly enough, in demanding these special facilities, Justice Ranade went to the extent of attacking one of the pet dogmas of the nationalist movement, namely, temperance or discouragement of the drinking habit. He pointed out that one of the external economies of sugar manufacture lay in the production of rum as a by-product. 'Unless the sugar refiner is allowed to get rid of the spirit from the waste, and sell it near the works, under the still-head system, no sugar factory can be worked.' But, he complained, this facility was not available to Indian producers because of the excise monopoly of the government. He therefore demanded that the liquor excise interest should be subordinated to the needs of sugar industry and sugar refineries should be given full freedom to manufacture rum and sell it ‘to those who would like to drink what is stated to be a superior product'.143 This plea of Ranade should be contrasted with his own and the national leadership's full throated demand, made in another context, for restriction of sale of liquor to the public.144 Obviously, in this case, the lover of industry in Ranade got the better of the social reformer and, the moralist in him and made him plead for spread of intemperance!

In the running controversy between the assailants and the upholders of government action, later events proved the former to be correct on nearly all counts. We have already seen. how, after the publication of the Blue Book on the Sugar Duty Act, most of the Indians came to doubt the motives lying. behind its enactment. Moreover, this measure failed in checking imports of bounty-fed sugar;145 and, what was even worse,. when the latter was eventually pushed off the Indian market, it was replaced not by indigenous sugar but by increasing imports from Mauritius and Java.146 In fact, the validity of the various contentions of the critics of the measure was openly recognised a few years later by the officials themselves. For example, Lord Curzon admitted in 19o2 that there was ‘at present no real or serious competition' between the Indian raw sugar and the refined imported sugar. Reversing his previous position, he declared :

As far as I can ascertain, the area under sugarcane has remained almost stationary during the past few years. If anything, it has been slightly decreasing. This, however, has been due neither to foreign competition, nor to any failure of market supplied by the Indian refineries, but to the conditions of scarcity that have prevailed in so many parts of the country, and that have equally affected every class of agricultural production.147

It stands to reason, therefore, that, if the arguments that we have reviewed above were the only ones to be advanced in favour of their position by the Indian champions of the sugar duty, we would have to conclude that their economic analysis and judgment were in this case shallow and divorced from the facts of life. Such a conclusion would be erroneous and less than just to the depth and subtlety of their economic thinking and approach. In our opinion, they were guided, in supporting the government in this case, by some other, more important consideration than any hitherto examined by us. This con sideration was sometimes stated openly and sometimes expressed with that clever circumspection which the leaders of à subject people are sometimes compelled to use, though often with a great deal of effect. It arose out of their belief that the Sugar Duty Act marked 'a very important epoch by way of departure in the fiscal legislation of this country'.148 They saw the measure as a golden opportunity, which they seized with eager hands, to attack the doctrine of Free Trade and to force an acceptance of the protective principle on the government. Having once departed, for whatever reasons, under whatever circumstances, and hedged in with whatever qualifications, from the thoroughgoing principles of Free Trade, the government could, these leaders thought, no longer resist their pleas and pressure for the extension of the policy of protection, embodied in the Sugar Duty Act, to other industries in need of similar state protection, even if in their case British competitors were involved.149 If V. G. Kale is to be believed—and we don't see any reason why he should not be—even Justice Ranade had this consideration uppermost in his mind when he so actively took up cudgels on behalf of the Act In his introduction to the collection of Ranade's letters on the subject, Kale says that the countervailing import duty only provided to Ranade a convenient peg on which to hang his criticism of the Free Trade school. Ranade saw in the duty, 'only a thin end of the wedge and wished that the narrow gap made in the stronghold of laissez faire should be widened so that economic policy in India would be formulated with an eye to the systematic development of indigenous industries.'15o

## VIII. THE SUGAR DUTY AMENDMENT ACT, 1902

As we have just seen, the Sugar Duty Act of 1899 failed 'to check the imports of beet-sugar, for the continental sugar manufacturers immediately changed to indirect subsidisation of their exports through the formation of cartels. The Government of India replied by imposing in June 19o2 additional countervailing duties.151 The Sugar Duty Amendment Bill did not, however, get as much support from the nationalists as the earlier Act had. On the contrary, the arguments advanced by the critics of the earlier Act got a much wider acceptance in the context of the new Act. Even though Lord Curzon once again proclaimed that ‘in this legislation we have no other object in view than the public interest',152 no hallelujahs and bouquets rained forth from the Indian leaders; instead, came many a brickbat. The overwhelming majority of them declared that the government was acting in the interests of colonial planters and manufacturers, who would be able, as a result of the sugar duties, to charge high prices from Indian consumers and at the same time destroy Indian sugar industry.153 In addition, some of them felt that perhaps consideration for the welfare of the European manufacturers of refined sugar also lay behind Government of India's action.154 The only major nationalist newspaper to take the opposite view was the Bangabasi, which supported the new Sugar Duty Act on the ground that Indian manufacturers had, in fact, benefited during the first year of the operation of the earlier Act, that encouragement to Europeans to start sugar factories in India would create new employment opportunities and a greater .demand for sugarcane and molasses, and that European example might later be followed by Indian industrialists.i55

As an alternative to the official policy, some of the Indian leaders again proposed the imposition of protective duties on all foreign sugar, including that from British colonies.156 A few of them went so far as to suggest that if this could not be done the countervailing duties on bounty-fed sugar should also be removed.157

## IX. MISCELLANEOUS QUESTIONS

It remains for us to take note of a few other, though minor, aspects of tariff policy which were commented upon by the Indian national leadership and of one aspect of British tariff policy in which it evinced keen interest.

In sharp contrast to their stand on import duties on cotton textiles and sugar was the attitude of the Indian leaders. towards import duties on many other commodities which did not compete with any indigenous product and which, on the contrary, helped the growth of Indian industries or agriculture. Such import duties were evaluated from the point of view of their ultimate effect on the process of industrialisation and the interests of the consumer. Quite vocal in this respect was their criticism of the import duty on kerosene, which was first imposed in 1888 and then enhanced in 1894. The Government of India believed this tax to be quite unobjectionable since it did not affect any British industry.158 But Índian leaders took exception to it on the ground that since kerosene did not affect any Indian industry either, the interests of the poorer classes of Indians, who consumed most of it for lighting their houses and who would feel the new levy as a burden, should be given primacy.159

They reacted even more sharply when in March 1894 the Indian Tariff Bill was introduced proposing the imposition of varying import duties on coal, metals, dyes, industrial raw materials, and other industrial stores. They vehemently criticised the government for trying to hamper industrial growth by thus indirectly taxing industries.160

Silver plate was one of the minor items of export from India to England during the last quarter of the 19th century. The British government levied a duty of 30 to 35 per cent on its import, and subjected it to a cumbersome system of hall-mark ing.161 From the year 1882 onwards, there was widespread protest by Indian leaders against this impost.t62 This protest reached its high watermark in 1889 when the Indian National Congress urged immediate abolition of the plate duties and making of hall-marking voluntary.163 This had the desired effect, as Charles Bradlaugh, who attended this session of the Congress, took up the question in the parliament and got the duties repealed in 1890.

Indian leaders devoted so much importance to such a minor evil mainly with a view to show the hollowness of British adherence to the principle of Free Trade. While pleading for the repeal of plate duties in England, they repeatedly asked the question: when the cotton duties in India were abolished in 1882 allegedly to uphold the principle of Free Trade, why were the plate duties being maintained and why did England not reciprocate the good example set by India? England's refu sal to do so, they declared, only exposed the double-dealing and selfishness of the rulers of India.164 ‘'What can be more ridiculous', observed the Dnyan Prakash of 21 February 1884, 'than that England, preaching a free trade policy, should make herself liable to the application of the proverb of preaching philosophy to others and yet behaving oneself like à fool.'165 Similarly, the Amrita Bazar Patrika of 27 March 1884 angrily declared: 'This they call free-trade. We call it foul play, not free trade.' And in its issue dated 3 June 1888, the Mahratta commented: 'The free trade policy of England is a sham and a farce....The whole selfish policy is fully exposed and England's boasted liberality of views in the matter of trade is proved to be all humbug.'

Indian leaders also advanced certain other arguments in favour of their plea for the abolition of plate duties. They pointed out that these duties, unlike the cotton duties in India, were a purely protective measure, since the total revenue derived from them amounted to a meagre few thousand pounds a year.166 They argued that the abolition of these duties would help Indian technique and trade.167 Moreover, they urged, the increased export of silver plate would by providing an outlet for Indian silvei reduce pressure on the rupee and check its. depreciation.168

## X. CONCLUSIONS

The preceding examination of the Indian national leadership's attitude towards the different tariff measures adopted by the Government of India brings out four·salient aspects of its tariff policy. Firstly, it was clearly a policy of granting protection to Indian industries, though not in an indiscriminate manner. Secondly, it furnishes another illustration of the national leadership's intense and undivided devotion to the cause of modern industry. Once again the interests of industry, and not those of commerce, were kept in the forefront. Moreover, the Indian leaders very consciously subordinated their interests as the middle-class consumers of foreign textiles and refined sugar to the larger interests of industrialisation of the country. In other words, they gave priority to the interests of Indians as producers over their interests as consumers. Interestingly enough, however, whenever Indian industries were thought to be uninvolved, as in the case of petroleum or, in the opinion of some of them, of sugar, the interests of consumers were pushed forward without any hesitation and restraint. Thirdly, they came to believe fully in the notions, which they then vigorously propounded and propagated, that the tariff policy of the Government of India was hampering the growth of Indian industries, that it was perhaps designed by the alien government to serve the interests of British manufacturers and that the Indian government was determined to preserve, as far as possible, for industries of Britain the growing internal market for manufactured goods, which was being created by the fast proceeding dissolution of the economic autonomy of Indian villages and destruction of indigenous handicrafts. Fourthly, not only did the tariff policy of the government awaken their nationalism and make them see more clearly the political realities, but it was, in turn, utilised by them to arouse and educate the people politically, consolidate the growing nationalist feeling among them, bring the people all over the country closer together, and even train them in the arts of political agitation and struggle. Tariff policy was, in fact. one .of those issues which were responsible for the rise of militant nationalism and anti-government feelings in the country during the period under study.