# CHAPTER VII

# Currency and Exchange

Public opinion in India is ripe for the adoption of decisive measures, that the stoppage of the coinage of silver would be generally approved, — DESPATCH FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, 1891

No proposal likely to affect in a similar manner the savings of the poor could be entertained for a moment in England; and it is possible to conceive that, if such a proposal was made in a poor continental country like Italy, the masses would rise in rebellion from one end of the Peninsula to the other.

— R. C. DUTT

One of the most important and controversial issues to arise in the realm of economic policy of the Indian Government during the period under study was that of the currency changes initiated by the closure of the mints to the free coinage of silver in 1893. What inexorably linked the subjects of currency and exchange in the economic history of modern India was the fact that these currency changes were induced not by some failure of the monetary functions of the rupee—for example, its insufficiency or redundancy—but by a fall in the exchange value of the rupee in terms of the pound sterling, and that the remedies applied by the government were also designed to redress just this one aberration, while completely ignoring the effects of the currency changes on the internal economiic situation of the country.

Currency as such is indeed a vast subject—too vast to be treated here in its entirety. Exchange is no less a formidable topic. Fortunately, we are not here concerned with these two in their totality. It was the impact of the' changes in Indian currency and exchange on the country's foreign trade, industry, and finances, and on the economic well-being of the people that became an issue of controversy between the government and the nationalist leadership of India and that aroused a plethora of passions and strong nationalist feelings in the ranks of Indian public men. Consequently, the scope of the discussion in this chapter is confined to this particular aspect of the two allied subjects of currency and exchange.

## I. OFFICIAL CURRENCY POLICY

The rationale of the currency policy of the Government of India during the last quarter of the 19th century has been exhaustively dealt with in the Reports of the Indian Currency Committee, 1893, and the Indian Currency Committee, 1898, nd in many excellent books on the subject.1 We therefore need only give here a very brief resume of the events and changes in the domains of Indian currency and exchange during the period under study.

Indian currency was put on silver standard by Act No. XVII of 1835; and the Coinage Act of 187o made it mandatory upon the government to mint rupees on private account in exchange for silver bullion. This made Indian currency 'natural'; in other words, the value of the rupee was determined by the market price of silver and its exchange value with couņtries on gold standard by the gold price of silver. Since the latter remained more or less stationary until 1873, the exchange value of the-rupee also remained stable during this period, hovering around 2s. But a major change began to occur in 1873 when the gold price of silver began to steadily decline all over the world—owing to certain causes into which we need not go here as they were extraneous to India—and, consequently, the rupee, which was freely mintable in exchange for silver, also began to depreciate in relation to currencies based on gold. In other words, Indian exchange with countries on gold standard —and England was at the time on gold standard—-began to fall. Thus, while in 1872 the Indian rupee was worth nearly 2s., it exchanged for only 14.54d. in 1893-4.

The historic fall in Indian exchange came under a multipronged attack from various sources. It was assailed, first of all, for seriously hampering and harassing the Indian foreign trade, especially the import trade. The merchants engaged in foreign trade felt that the violent oscillations in the sterling value of the rupee were having a particularly pernicious effect on trade relations between England and India. Moreover, they complained, the uncertainty of exchange had imparted to foreign trade the character of gambling and speculation.2 Another charge against the falling exchange was levelled and vigorously aired by English officials, civil and military, employed by the Government of India. They grumbled that, while they received their salaries in rupees, a large part of their expenditure for the maintenance of their families, education of their children, etc. had to be incurred in sterling. This imposed an undue loss on them and caused them acute pecuniary distress as they had to remit home a larger number of rupees to get the same number of sovereigns in exchange.3. Another cardinal sin attributed to the decline in the sterling value of the rupee was that it discouraged and retarded the flow of British capital into India. This it did by depreciating, or at least making uncertain, the gold value of profits and interest as well as of the capital itself. This check to the influx of British capital, it was declared, was hampering in particular the urgently-needed railway extension in the country.4

By far the most important objection to falling exchange came from the Government of India whose finances were acutely embarassed by it. The case of India in this respect was quite peculiar, for, while the Government of India collected its revenues in silver, it had to incur a large part of its expenditure in gold in England, mainly on account of the Home Charges. As the gold value of silver declined incessantly over the period 1873 to 1898, the Government of India had to pay ever-increasing number of rupees every year to meet its sterling liabilities. And, to make the matters worse, the latter itself went on increasing year after year. Thus was the notorious loss by exchange brought about. In other words, 'the difference between the actual number of rupees paid by the Government in any particular year, and 'the number of rupees which would have been required if the exchange value of the rupee had remained at the conventional rate of 2s. was considered to be the loss by exchange to the Government of India.' For example, in 1894-5 India had to pay 28.9 crores of rupees to defray the Home Charges amounting to £15.77 millions. If, however, the rate of exchange had continued to be what it was in 1872-3, the same sum would have involved the payment of 16.6 crores of rupees only. The difference, amounting to 12.3 crores of rupees, thus represented the loss by exchange. The seriousness of the situation can be easily imagined if it is remembered that this came to more than half of the total amount received by the government as land revenue in that year.5

The total loss due to fall in exchange during 1875 to 1898 was nearly 154 crores of rupees, the highest figure being reached in 1894.6 To make up this loss, the government had to find year after year more and more money through retrenchment of taxation. The first method. was, however, found to be infeasible. As a matter of fact, governmental expenditure increased with remarkable spurts during this period. Recourse had, therefore, to be taken to such widely unpopular measures or taxation, as the salt tax, the income tax, and enhancement of the land revenue. But in a poor agricultural country the scope for expansion of revenue by taxation was clearly limited. Any undue tax-burden on the peasantry was fraught with political dangers of 'the most serious order', especially as the new burdens would arise ‘as a consequence of the foreign rule imposed on the country, and virtually to meet additions to charges :arising outside of the country’.7

In addition, the violent and sudden fluctuations in exchange resulted in a great deal of financial uncertainty and harassment to the Government of India by bedevilling all their financial calculations and arrangements and making the Indian budget ‘a gamble in exchange'.8 Thus the fall in the gold value of the rupee became, for nearly a quarter of a century, 'the nightmare of Indian financiers' who desperately searched for ways and means to balance the budget. To thein, it appeared that there were only two courses open to the government, either to stop the fall in exchange or to tread the unpopular road of additional taxation. There was, they felt, no other way out.9

Desperately did the Government of India search for expedients to arrest the fall in exchange. For many years it pinned its fondest hopes on an international bimetallic agreement which would fix the relative values of silver and gold. But when all attempts at concluding such an agreement broke down — the failure of the Brussels Conference in 1892 being the latest — the Government of India began to look favourably upon the proposal for changing .the standard of currency from silver to gold. This proposal was also pressed upon the government at this time by the mercantile community of India, which was organised into chambers of commerce, and: by the recently-formed Indian Currency Association.1o The entire currency question as well as the proposals of the Government of India were referred to a committee presided over by Lord Herschell, then Lord Chancellor. In pursuance of the recommendations of this committee, the Government of India. enacted on 26 June 1893 Act No. VIII of 1893 closing the Indian mints to the unrestricted coinage of silver on private account. Simultaneously, the government also issued notifications fixing is. 4d. to the rupee as the rate at which rupees or notes would be supplied to the public in exchange for gold coins and bullion and sovereigns and half-sovereigns would be received in payment of public dues. These measures were to be the first steps towards the eventual introduction of a gold standard in the country.

The main purpose of the action of 1893 was the enhancement of the gold value of the rupee to is. 4d. by reducing the quantity of rupees in circulation. Thus, the value of the rupee was to be divorced from, and raised above, the value of the amount of silver contained in it. The rupee was to lose its. 'natural' or 'intrinsic' value and acquire an artificial' and enhanced value. Consequently, the purchasing power of the rupee would go up, or, in other words, internal prices would fal as a result of the contraction of internal currency.

After a period of transition, during which the rate of exchange fell further till it reached is. id. for the rupee in 1894, the official currency policy achieved its desired object and the rupee began to rise steadily, even in the face of a further decline in the value of silver, till, in 1898-9, it nearly equalled is. 4d. At this stage, the Government of India felt that the time had come to carry through to its logical conclusion the policy of 1893. Another committee, with Sir Henry Fowler as Chairman, was therefore appointed to go into the question. The committee recommended the establishment of a gold standard with a gold currency and suggested various measures for the eventual realisation of this aim. Consequently, the value of the rupee was fixed at 1s. 4d. (by Act No. XXII) in 1899 and sovereigns and half-sovereigns were made legal tender at this rate. The rupee was thus made a token coin, though it still continued to remain unlimited legal tender. We are not concerned here with the later developments in the domain of Indian currency, and will therefore bring our narration to a close, except to take notice of two interesting developments. Firstly, what eventually came to prevail in India was not a gold standard with a gold currency but what is known as the Gold-Exchange Standard.11 Secondly, a new era of stability of exchange and budgetary surpluses was now inaugurated in the monetary history of India. But this result was not the outcome of the closure of mints or the removal of the relative 'redundancy' of the rupees. In reality, rupees began to be coined again after a short time at so considerable a scalei² that J. M.

Keynes was led to remark that the Government had 'started on a career of furious coinage'i3 and the Indian leaders soon began to complain of a glut of rupees.14 The truth was that the gold value of the rupee remained stable 'solely due to administrative measures' which the government was under no compulsion to undertake'.15

## II. EARLY REACTION OF INDIAN LEADERSHIP

Indian nationalist reaction to the problems raised by the continuous fall in the gold value of the rupee was spasmodic and slow in coming. Many of the nationalist leaders did criticise the fall in exchange and looked upon it as a great calamity, especially because of the new taxes imposed as a result of the loss by exchange.16 Most of them did not, however, grasp for a long time the full implications of the question, nor did they analyse it at length. There were, of course, a few nationalists who did not share this general lethargy.17 For the sake of brevity, their opinions have been examined along with the later nationalist attitude, of which they were obvious precursors. But during the early years—up to 1892 to be precise most of the Indian leaders confined their very vague remarks to making bare suggestions for (a) reduction of Home Charges;18 (b) conversion of gold obligations into silver obligations;19 and (c) adoption of international bimetallism.2o A few of them even recommended the introduction of gold currency²i and the stoppage of free mintage for private specu. lators.22 Justice Ranade advocated a policy of letting things be and declared that 'the temptation of manipulating the currency must be resisted as involving a breach of faith, and tending to depress silver, and raise the rate of exchange.'23

## III. NATIONALIST OPPOSITION TO CHANGES IN CURRENCY

The apathy of Indian national leaders towards the question of currency and exchange disappeared around 1892 when the agitation started by the British merchants and officials made it a burning topic of the day. The Indian leadership now recog. nised its full importance, as is borne out by the assertion of D.E. Wacha, the chief spokesman of Indian nationalism 'on what may be called his own subject', before the Indian National Congress of 1892 that on the correct solution of the cur rency question 'entirely depends the economic salvation in the near future of a country so peculiarly circumstanced as ours'.²4

At this stage, the attitude adopted by the Indian leaders was that of defending and fighting for the low and declining gold value of the rupee; and they continued to praise and press for a low exchange even after the Currency Acts of 1893 and 1899 had been passed. As a matter of fact, in view of its remarkable continuity over the years, the nationalist policy on the currency question before and after the adoption of the Currency Act of 1893 has been examined in this work as a single entity and therefore at one place.

The starting point of the nationalist approach was the belief that the heart of the matter was not the stability of exchange but the ratio at which the rupee should exchange with gold. The Indian leaders felt that various interests who advocated a high rate of exchange did so for selfish motives: the government wanted it to avoid the loss on its sterling payments resulting from a fall in exchange; government officials so as to be able to make larger remittances to England; and importers of European goods because otherwise they were being forced to compete with Indian products and thus operate with a comparatively low margin of profit. For these reasons, these people carried on a ‘selfish and unscrupulous' agitation.25 But, the Indian leaders firmly asserted, the interests of foreign merchants, foreign capital, and foreign officials should not—indeed, could not—be identified with the interests of the country; even the interests of the government and the people were not so related in India's case. And it was precisely the interests of the Indian people which had to be regarded as ‘the crucial test' in any discussion of the question.26 Applying this criterion in practice, the Indian leadership firmly opposed the agitation, led by the Indian Currency Association in 1892 and readily supported by the Government of India, for the abandonment of silver standard, the closure of the mints, and the introduction of gold standard, all of which would lead to an artificial appreciation of the rupee.27 This opposition .also found expression in a mildly worded resolution passed by the Indian National Congress at its session of 1892.28 It is of interest to note that the national attitude to the currency question was, wittingly or unwittingly, ignored and misinterpreted by the official authority in India, which reported to the Secretary of State on 21 June 1892 that ‘public opinion in India is ripe for the adoption of decisive measures, that the :stoppage of the coinage of silver would be generally approved.. . .'29

The falsity of the official reading of Indian opinion was again revealed when, on the closure of the Indian mints in 1893, the nationalist newspapers raised a more or Iess unanimous voice against the measure and condemned it as being inimical to the interests of the Indian people, particularly to those of the manufacturers and agriculturists.3o Later in the year, the Indian National, Congress passed a resolution decrying the government action.31 Introducing the resolution, D. E. Wacha censured the Currency Act of 1893 as ‘a total jump in the dark' and ‘a huge and inexcusable blunder'.3 Another round of denunciations of what Wacha called 'the Crime of 1893'33 followed in 1898 when the Government of India proposed the establishment of a gold standard with the value of rupee fixed' at 1s. 4d.34 Dadabhai Naoroji denounced the closure of mints as being ‘illegal, dishonourable, and a despotic act', and asked for the abandonment of the gold standard.35 R. C. Dutt also criticised the government's attempts at artificially raising the value of the rupee as unnatural and desperate and dangerous',36 and warned against the introduction of a gold standard.37 The Indian National Congress too, once again,, expressed its disapproval of 'any artificial device' for meeting the loss on account of exchange 'by changing the currency at a heavy cost or contracting the internal currency'.38 D. E. Wacha was as vehement as ever in holding the Currency Act of 1S93 responsible for ‘all the economic evils from which the people at large and the banking and mercantile communities have suffered and are suffering since that event'.39 Naoroji, Dutt, and others pressed, instead, for the reopening of the mints and for letting the rupee go down to its silver bullion price.4o The Indian leaders also took exception to the composition of the Fowler Committee for not containing a single representative of Indian interests.41 The recommendations of this committee and their aftermath, the Currency Act of 1899, were again criticised by the Indian leaders, though the old fervour was not in evidence perhaps because by this time the currency revolution had become an established fact.42 Still, the Indian National Congress continued to give prominence to the question for many years afterwards. At its 17th session in 19o1, it reaffirmed ‘its protest against the Currency Legislation of 1893 which has artificially enhanced the value of the rupee by over 30 per cent'.43 À similar resolution was again passed at its 18th Session.44 Numerous public men also continued for several years to criticise the artificial appreciation of the rupee and its adverse effects on the welfare of the people.45

The nationalist disapprobation of the currency policy of the Government of India rested in the main on three grounds: (1) the beneficial character of the depreciating rupee; (2) the want of proof that currency was at the root of the financial difficulties of the government or the people; (3) the harmful effects of the appreciation of the rupee on the economic condition of the people. A detailed analysis of these grounds is presented below as it illumninates the basic postulates underlying the economic outlook of the Indian national leadership of the period under study.

## IV. BENEFITS OF LOW EXCHANGE

Many of the Indian leaders believed that, considering the progress that Indian trade and industries had made since 1873, the silver standard with its falling rupee had served the needs of the Indian economy quite satisfactorily and that it was perhaps the best of all the currency standards that India might have adopted.46 According to them, the chief merit of low exchange lay in the encouragement it provided to Indian manufactures, particularly textiles, by giving them indirect protection against imports, which were made more expensive to the extent of the fall in exchange. 'The exchange discount acts like an import duty on all English goods;' wrote the Mahratta in its issue of 25 September 1892, ‘and here again exchange has done what the Government of India...has steadily refused to do.'47 The Hindu of 4 September 1889 was even able to notice the fact that low exchange had enabled India to wrest the Chinese and Japanese markets from the English cotton textile manufacturers.48 P. C. Ray saw another advantage in the situation : by making India ‘a very uninviting place for English capital', the fall in exchange had created vast opportunities for enterprising Indian capitalists.49

Surprisingly enough, however, the nationalists did not advance at the same time, as one of the grounds on which they supported the silver-rupee, the argument that a low rate of exchange imparted a stimulus to exports by cheapening their price on world markets. As a matter of fact, some of the Indian leaders — barring R. C. Dutt who recognised, though somewhat vaguely, that 'the export trade of India rather benefited than suffered by the depreciation of silver'so — even disclaimed that Indian exports had been stimulated by the fall in the rupee.5i In any case, the most widespread tendency among them was to deny — as was consistent with their anti-foreign trade bias— that an impetus to exports of raw materials was at all good.52 This lends strength to the view that the defence .of the depreciated rupee by the Indian national leadership was not prompted mainly by their sympathies for the mercantile class and its interest in foreign trade. They also denied that, by getting more rupees for his produce, the peasant had benefited by the fall in the rupee. They pointed out that the prices of agricultural produce had not increased in India and had in many cases even declined.53

## V. THE ROLE OF EXCHANGE IN INDIAN FINANCE

The second ground on which the Indian leaders objected to changes in currency was their contention that the fall in the gold value of the rupee did not lie at the root of the financial straits of the Government of India. They did, of course, note and deprecate the loss by exchange suffered by the Indian treàsury— especially as the burden of this loss had to be borne ultimately by the Indian tax-payers — and wanted its complete cessation.54 For instance, in 1886, Dadabhai Naoroji described the loss by exchange as 'disastrous to British India' and a grievous burden on the people. 'The "miserably poor" people,' he wrote, 'in addition to having to remit produce worth 14o millions of rupees at 2s. per rupee for home charges, have to remit another 7o millions or so worth more to take up the fall in exchange, say at is. 4d.'s5 The area of accord between the Indian leaders and the government, however, ended at this point, since they disagreed on the factors responsible for this evil and so on the nature of remedies to be applied. The Indians would not concede that this loss by exchange was the outcome of the fall in the gold value of the rupee. The source of evil, they said, lay somewhere else. In fact, there was remarkable coherence and unity of feeling among the Indian leaders on this aspect of the currency question; and their diagnosis of the true character of the disease and the required remedies occupied a crucial position in their entire currency policy. This diagnosis may be summarised as follows: The crux of the whole problem was not the rate of exchange but the economic and political relations of India with England. It was not low exchange but the Home Charges which were responsible for the exchange-losses of the government. But for the compulsory remittances in gold by India to England, the fall in the gold value of the rupee could not possibly have affected the financial fortunes of the Indian government or the people. On the other hand, as long as the Home Charges existed, a mere change in currency would be of no avail.56

In this respect, many of the Indian spokesmen firmly believed in the classical monetary theory of international trade, that the monetary system operates in such a way that a country's balance of payments tends automatically towards a state of equilibrium'.57 They repeatedly emphasised that apart from the loss on the payment of the Home Charges the fall in exchange would not in itself affect India's foreign trade because the latter would adjust itself automatically to the requirements of exchange, through the increase and decrease of prices.58 Some other Indian leaders also pointed out that the very necessity of making compulsory payments abroad continuously for long periods forced the government to purchase sovereigns at any price, thereby depreciating silver and producing an adverse effect on the exchange.59 This argument acquired greater force when the Indian rupee went off the silver standard. In i899, Wacha told the Bombay millowners that disturbances in exchange were themselves the product of India's adverse balance of trade as a result of its having to make payments abroad. He remarked: 'Be your currency anything, silver or gold, cotton or wheat, so long as these charges grow and grow, this so-called exchange difficulty will arise.... The difficulty lies with the Home Charges.'6o He, as well as G.S. Iyer, also observed that this pressure of the Home Charges on exchange had gone unnoticed up to 1872, and even till later, because of the large loans-raised in England for railways and other purposes.61

Basing themselves on the above-mentioned analysis, the nationalist leaders rebutted the official view that the loss by exchange was beyond control and that its remedy lay in two directions only, namely bearing it through increased taxation or counteracting it by appreciation of the rupee. According to them, there was another way out that was clearly indicated by the very diagnosis of the disease. Firstly, they maintained, if the fall in exchange was not the fundamental cause·of the government losses by exchange, obviously changing the monetary system, as the government had proposed, would 'not improve matters.62 Secondly, since the basic fault lay at the head of the Home Charges, the only effective cure of the disease was to introduce a fundamental change in the policy that had brought into existence, and constantly increased, ·the sterling liabilities of India. The chief and the only 'natural and proper' remedy, therefore, lay in abolishing or reducing the Home Charges or the 'drain' of wealth to England, or, at least, in converting a large part of sterling liabilities into silver obligations, so that ‘pro tanto so many less number of Rupees will have to be paid for the equivalent, which is the same thing as bringing greater relief to the Treasury'.63 One of the surest ways of achieving this objective, felt the Indian leaders, was 'to carry on the administration of India, as far as it is consistent with efficiency, through the instrumentality of the children of the soil, whose pay and pensions have not to be defrayed in gold'.64 Another method was to purchase an even larger share of the government stores inside the country.65 Yet another remedy was for England to bear ‘an equitable share' of the Government of India's expenditure in England.66 In fact, some of the Indians welcomed the depreciation of the rupee and the loss by exchange in the hope that this would draw the attention of the government and the people to the problem of the drain and compel the former to take corrective steps.67 The Bengalee of 3 September 1892 articulated this view quite distinctly :

If the present state of things lasts for any length of time, it must lead to changes highly beneficial to the people of India.... The Home Charges must be curtailed, and the necessary articles must be found in the country.... If Government becomes a purchaser in the Indian market, what a stimulus would be imparted to Indian trade... (it) would stimulate Indian industry.

Moreover, it was felt, the fall in exchange would force a large number of Englishmen to stay at home and leave the Indian jobs to Indians.68

The Indian leaders denied that the purpose of the appreciation of the rupee was to save India from increased taxation or financial disaster. They argued that even if the Home Charges were not cut down radically and the loss by exchange had to continue it could be met from the existing financial resources and the normal increases in the revenues of the government and without fresh taxation.69 They also maintained that though exchange was a disturbing factor it should not be looked upon as 'the lodging-house cat' or the 'deus ex machina' of Indian finance, responsibility for whose disequilibrium should largely be ascrib. ed not to the loss by exchange but to the disproportionate growth of the civil and military expenditure of the government, especially as it, in its turn, involved an increase in the sterling liabilities of India.7o Hence, the true remedy of the situation lay in curtailment of expenditure, especially the ilitary expenditure, and not in a change of the monetary system.71 D. E. Wacha, in particular, pegged away at this idea and tried to prove, with the help of statistics, that increased military expenditure since 1884-5 had absorbed the whole of the fresh taxation during the period and that if the military expenditure was reduced 'India would be able to pay its way without the wailof exchange'.72 CAllang :f -1

Some of the Indian leaders further suggested that, even if all the existing factors had to be taken as unalterable, the exchange difficulty should be met 'by the imposition of a small import duty on all articles imported into India which are neither pro; duced nor required by the mass of the population of India nor for the development of the country.'73 This description itted very well the. cotton duties.74

.. In any case, the Indian leaders vehemently questioned the proposition that closure of the mints and appreciation of the rupee would give any relief to the government and the people by removing the need for new taxation. This plea was, they felt, nothing but juggling with economic facts. Changes in currency could not possibly do anything of the sort. On the contrary, by the currency legislation of 1893 and 1898, the people of India had been subjected to further indirect taxation of a burdensome and indefinite character'75 to the extent of the enhancement of the value of the rupee, because the old taxes were now collected in an artificially appreciated rupee.76 Closing of the mints, and thereby raising the true rupee, worth at present about 1id. in gold, to a false rupee to be worth 16d. in gold', wrote Dadabhai Naoroji in 1898, 'is a covert exaction of about 45 per cent more taxation all round from the Indian taxpayers.'77

To the Indian leaders, the handling of the currency question by the government smacked of a clever political manoeuvre which, by imposing indirect and hidden taxation, aimed at confusing the ignorant masses of the people, who would have resented any direct increase of the tax-burden.78 Some of the national leaders would have preferred, on the contrary, direct taxation as the lesser of the two evils since, in that case, the poor taxpayer would have had 'to submit to such additional taxation only...as will be absolutely necessary to meet the deficit caused by the natural fall of exchange, instead of a concealed enormous enhancement of the whole taxation of the. country'.79

Later, when budgetary surpluses began to occur after 19o1, the national leadership once again started claiming that they were the products of the indirect taxation imposed by the currency legislation of 1893 and 1898,8o and, recognising that a reversal of the currency policy was no longer 'within the pale of practical politics', demanded that these surpluses should be utilised for giving relief through tax-remission to the poor taxpayers who had had to bear the brunt of the currency legislation.81 In this connection, G. K. Gokhale asked the very pertineut question that if

such an impossible feat as that of raising the exchange value of the rupee without involving an indirect increase in the taxation of the country can be performed, what is there to prevent the Government of India from raising the rupee still higher—say, to 1s. 6d. or 1s. 9d. or even 2s.? The surpluses then would be even larger than now and as, according to Lord George Hamilton's argument, no harm is done to anybody in India by such artificial appreciation, there is no reason whatever why such a wonderfully easy and simple method of increasing the resources at the disposal of the Government should not be adopted.82

According to the more percipient of the nationalist economists, the claim that by appreciating the rupee the country saved on its remittances to England and thus diminished the drain on its wealth was even more preposterous—‘a mere fiction of the imagination and an unfortunate delusion'.83 They asserted that by unilaterally and artificially raising the gold value of the rupee India could not save a pie on its gold payments. After all, they pointed out, the Home Charges were inet by sending abroad Indian commodities, the quantities required to be exported being determined by their gold prices in foreign markets and not by, their rupee prices in India. In the recent past, India had been compelled as a result of the fall in the gold prices of all commodities to export larger quantities of its produce. As long as the gold prices of commodities did not go up, India would have to send abroad the same quantities of commodities as it did before, irrespective of the fact whether the Government of India procured this produce by imposing new taxes or by increasing the purchasing power of the old ones.84 Dadabhai Naoroji was further of the view that this loss by exchange would not be avoided even if

India had been on gold standard.85 As a matter of fact, he observed, India's position was the same as that of any debtor in a gold-using country who had to pay a gold debt.86 This did not of course mean, remarked Dadabhai, that the fall in exchange had not caused any loss to India. The loss was very much there; but it was the result of the higher value of gold; a change in the Indian currency could not mitigate this loss. 'It is a change in the value of gold that alone will save India, or will make her loss so much the greater.'87 During the course of his examination by the Currency Committee of 1893 Dadabhai stated the nationalist position most lucidly. In answer to the question by Sir Thomas Farrer: 'You say that India is suffering from this fall in exchange, and you say at the same time that India would not gain by a rise in exchange?'Dadabhai answered:

Oh, no, I did not say so at all. Oh, no; I never said that. I said India will gain or lose according to the value of gold; if gold fell, which means rise in exchange, of course, then India will have to send less produce, other circumstances being the same. If gold still rises higher, that is to say if exchange still went down, India will have to send still more produce.88

In fact, avowed some of the Indian leaders, the appreciation of the rupee would increase the drain of wealth from India because, while providing no relief on account of the sterling liabilities, it would enhance the value of the public debt in silver, most of which was held in England, to the extent of the appreciation of the rupee.89 Similarly, they pointed out that the government measure would have the effect of raising the cost of administration in India as the salaries of all the officials, whether Europeau or Indian, would have to be paid in the enhanced rupee, leading to ‘a sweeping transfer of property from the working millions who create the wealth and make the prosperity of the empire to the tax eaters'.9o

D. E. Wacha also drew attention to another harmful, though indirect, effect. India could afford to have a negative balance of trade with countries on the gold standard because of its positive balance with China and other silver-using countries. By reducing Indian exports to the Far East, the new Currency Act would render the task of making remittances to England even more burdensome than before.9i

## VI. HARMFUL EFFECTS OF APPRECIATION OF RUPEE

In addition to emphasising the futility of the currency legislation of the Government of India, the Indian leaders drew attentjon to the positive harm that it had actually done or was likely to do to the economic interests of the people, particularly those of the producers'.

First of all, they claimed that appreciation of the rupce had been 'prejudicial to the indigenous manufacture of the country'.92 Some of them were also worried about the 'trading disadvantage' imposed upon the country by the changes in currency through their deleterious effects on the export trade of the country.93 Invariably, however, their anxiety was only superficially about trade: in reality they were concerned only about industry. They were not really bothered by the adverse effects of the appreciation of the rupee on India's foreign trade as a whole or even on export trade in its totality. Their wrath was primarily aroused by the prospects of Indian yarn exports to: China and Japan suffering disastrously because of competition from manufactures of these two countries, which had either remained on silver standard or fixed a low ratio of exchange between silver and gold and which had thereby acquired a price-advantage over Indian manufactures.94 In short, the Indian leaders were largely concerned about the fortunes of cotton textile industry for which the Eastern trade had assumed a vital importance by then.95 They soon began to loudly bewail that as a result of appreciation of the rupee Indian textile industry had been crippled and disorganised.96 For instance, G. K. Gokhale alleged in 19o2 that cotton industry of India was ‘in a state of dreadful depression, in large meașure due to the currency legislation of Government';97 and Ambalal Sakarlal Desai inforned the Indian National Congress of 1904 that ‘in the course of the last few years 20 mills in Bombay have gone into liquidation on account of the fall (sic. rise?) in exchange with China.'98 The nationalist position in this respect was succinctly summarised by V. D. Thakersay, himself a textile millowner, at the 18th session of the National

Congress. Asserting that the spinning industry of the country had been passing through a terrible crisis for several years because of the recent currency changes, he opined that the enhancement of the value of the rupee had brought ·about a serious rise in exchange with silver-using China, and had thus bestowed an indirect advantage upon the Japanese textile industry—which did not suffer from any such handicap—vis-a-vis the Indian industry in the Chinese market. Consequently, Japan was able to meet more than one-third of China's demand. This led him to exclaim: 'I would not be surprised, if the day comes when Japan would hold the market all to itself as India once did.... Ît is this bounty of Rs. 20 per bale to our competitors in the Far East, that has contributed so materially to the ruin of our spinning industry.'99

Without entering into an examination of the correctness of the nationalist view, we may point out that this peculiar manner, adopted by the Indian leaders, of looking at trade through the extremely narrow glasses of the yarn trade, makes any criticism of their view—criticism that bases itself on the harm done to foreign trade by the depreciating rupee or on the benefits conferred on foreign trade by the currency policy of the government-quite irrelevant. Once it is conceded, as is done by most of their critics, that Indian exports of yarn to China and Japan were adversely affected, however partially, by the appreciation of the rupee,1oo the nationalist case becomes unassailable on the ground they had chosen to fight on. As a matter of fact, the nationalists themselves soon began to revise the onesided assertion that the depression in the textile industry was wholly due to the altered currency. For example, D. E. Wacha admitted in 19o1 that other causes, like over-production, improvident management, and plague and famine, had also had some shiare in bringing about this depression. He did, however, reaffirm that the currency policy of the government had also been injurious 'though possibly not to the exaggerated extent alleged by the complainants'.101

On grounds similar to those advanced in the case of textile industry, the Indian leadership also pleaded the case of the tea and other plantation industries as needing a low exchange.1o2 They were, however, not very enthusiastic about this part of their campaign. Perhaps they took it up only with the idea of getting the support of some English planters like Captain A. Banon, a tea-planter from the Kangra Valley.1o3

Interestingly enough, both Dadabhai Naoroji and D. E. Wacha, the two nationalist experts on currency problems, accused the Government of India of paying attention, while considering the currency question, to the needs of foreign trade only and completely ignoring the needs of the much more important internal trade that required abundance, and not stringency, of currency,104

The second most widespread ground for the nationalist attack on the changes of 1893 and 1898 was their deleterious effects on the cultivators, who, it was alleged, would have to bear the crushing burden of these changesio5 and who would be hard hit by the currency policy of the government in. the following ways:

Firstly, the savings of the poor peasants and poor labourers -their chief provision against famine and other calamities were to be mostly found in the shape of silver ornaments. The depreciation of silver as a commodity would all of a sudden lessen the value of these savings to the extent of the fall in the rupee price of silver.io6 Condemning the changes in cur. rency as an attempt of the government 'to confiscate about a .third of the poor man's savings in India', R. C. Dutt observed:

No proposal likely to affect in a similar manner the savings of the poor could be entertained for a moment in England; and it is possible to conceive that, if such a proposal was ade in a poor continental country like Italy, the masses would rise in rebellion from one end of the Peninsula to the other.107

'G.K. Gokhale further pointed out in 19o2 that the price of silver bullion had gone down even when the prices of other commodities had not.1o8 In this connection, the Amrita Bazar Patrika and the Maliratta made the interesting suggestion that in order to right 'this great wrong', the government should "purchase all the silver from the people at prices which prevailed before the closing of the mints, and pay them in gold'.109 .Secondly, the ryots as well as the other Indian poor were usually deep in debt. To increase the value of the rupee was to increase their indebtedness, or, in R. C. Dutt's words, 'to add to the profits of the prosperous classes who feed on the distresses of the poor, and to add to the weight of the millstone which the poor and indebted classes carry round their necks'.11o Thirdly, the peasants would have to pay their land revenue in the artificially inflated rupee, which would mean that a peasant would now have to sell a larger quantity of his produce to procure the same number of rupees as before to meet his fixed assessment. In other words, the burden of hidden taxation involved in the forcing up of the rupee would be largely borne by the peasantry.11 By the same logic, pointed out some of the Indian leaders, the burden of land rent, wherever it had to be paid in cash, had also increased.11

If the agriculturists and industrialists suffered as a result of the government's currency policy, who were its beneficiaries? The Indian leaders were convinced that in this particular instance the interests of India had been sacrificed not only to save the government from the necessity of imposing fresh taxation or retrenching its expenditure but also to help various

European classes and groups in India or, in short, 'for the benefit of England'.113 According to them, the appreciation of the rupee was designed, firstly, to result in an unearned increase in the salaries of the government officials, particularly of 'the army of British officials with which India is burdened'.114 Secondly, the convenience of the foreign merchants had been kept in the forefront so that 'a handful of Englishmen may carry on their golden trade with serene equanimity and without any of those ordinary risks which traders undergo in every other part of the civilised globe'.115 Thirdly, one of the underlying aims of the new currency legislation was to facilitate the influx of foreign capital into India.116

The nationalist argument, that the closure of mints would be harmful to the interests of the peasants, was based on the assumption—an assumption that was equally accepted by the government—that the resulting shortage of rupees would enhance the purchasing power of the rupee. But, except for a few years between 1893 and 1899, this fundamental assumption was not borne out by reality, particularly in the case of foodgrains. While the prices of manufactured goods and agricultural raw materials did fall immediately after the closure of the mints as predicted by the nationalists, the prices of foodgrains showed a noticeable decline from the level of 1893 only in the years 1894, 1895 and 1899.117 While we are not concerned here with the different reasons responsible for this phenomenon, it is of some interest to observe the manner in which the nationalist leaders grappled with this belying of their basic postulate.

R. C. Dutt's retort to the assertion that the general price level had not gone down as a result of the currency changes was to affirm in 1898 that at least the prices of foodgrains had actually gone down and that was what mattered most to the agriculturists.118 G. K. Gokhale, on the other hand, readily admitted in 19o2 that general prices had not been quick in adjusting to the new rupee. But, in his opinion, the delay in such adjustment was due to non-economic causes, such as 'the force of tradition in a backward country like India' and the prevalence of famine conditions during the years 1896-1901, and various other extraneous circumstances. He had no doubt in his mind that these factors could not last for long and that 'there would be a general fall of prices sooner or later corresponding to the artificial appreciation of the rupee'.119 According to D. E. Wacha, one such specific cause that had actually checked the fall of prices was the coinage of 14 crores of new rupees in 19o1. This act of the government, he remarked in

19oi, had not only demonstrated the fallacy of the theory that rupees were redundant but also allayed the stringency of money in the country.i2o Digressing here a little, we may point out that at least one nationalist observer, the Bengalee of 28 June 1898, was able to ignore the adage that 'nothing succeeds like success' and detect that the improved position 'of the rupee in relation to the sterling did not prove that the policy of the closure of the mints was a correct one or that this policy was even responsible for the improved exchange position of the rupee. This improvement was in fact due 'to the withholding of Council Bills from the market, and the constant borrowings of the Secretary of State, a very different thing from the natural operation of the Act of 1893'.121

The staunchest defence of the nationalist point of view came, however, from Dadabhai Naoroji. The main line of his defence was deceptively simple: he asserted that what actually happened to prices—whether they moved down or not-was really immaterial to the nationalist argument. He pointed out that, since prices were the result of a multiplicity of factors, 'the test of, or appeal to, prices for the effect of any particular individual factor is altogether fallacious'. For a correct économic analysis, it was essential that 'the real and full effect of the closing of the mints must be examined by itself, irrespective of other factors'. Viewed in this manner, it was obvious, contended Naoroji, that the proposition that the peasant had to pay a higher amount of revenue to the government as a result of the increase in the gold and silver value of the rupee was ‘altogether independent of whateverthe actual price of commodities may be'. If the prices did not go down in reality because of the operation of certain other factors, it only meant that in the absence of the currency changes and with the continued operation of these other factors prices would have gone up and the peasant would have gained to that extent. Thus by 'the covert device of the closing of the mints', the government had 'robbed away' the peasant of the benefit of these other 'fortunate factors'. This line of reasoning was presented by him in another way also: since the old rupee and the new rupee had different silver values—say 184 and 269 grains of silver respectively—there would always be a difference, irrespective of the actual price level, between the commodities commanded by these varying quantities of silver in a particular market and at a particular moment of time; and this difference would always represent the loss that the peasant suffered at any particular point of time due to the appreciation of the rupee.122

## VII. POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS

A corollary of the nationalist point of viewthat the Home Charges lay at the heart of the currency difficulties of the Government of India—was the belief that if India had been politically independent the currency problem would not have arisen at all.i23 In any case, once the problem had arisen, the Indian leaders felt that it should be dealt with in consultation with the Indian people and their representatives.124

When in spite of nationalist protest the mints were closed to private coinage in i893 and steps were taken later for the introduction of the gold standard in India, many of the Indian leaders drew the uncomfortable conclusion that in reality India was being ruled not in the interests of its people, but, as was well-summed up by the Mahratta in its issue of 12 March 1893, 'on the principle of Government of officials, by officials, and for officials'.125 In 1898, R. C. Dutt bemoaned: 'It would seem, from the action taken by the Indian Government, as if India existed for the convenience of the Government of India and for the convenience of foreign traders. It would seem as if the happiness of the Indian nation was a "negligible quantity", and the opinion of representative Indians was superfluous.'1z6 Dadabhai Naoroji was equally forthright in his statement submitted to the Indian Currency Committee of 1898:

The fact seems to be that India is the vile body upon which any quacks may perform any vivisection, and try any cruel, crude, or rash experiments. What matters what is done to it?...India is our helot, she can be forced to pay everything....The Government here dare not play such pranks with the tax-payers. In India the Government only thinks of the foreign ‘interests' (official and non-official) first, and of the subjects afterwards, if it ever thinks of the subjects at all when foreign ‘interests' are concerned.127

In fact, the very diagnosis of the currency disease made by the national leadership and the consequent remedies offered by them had deep political implications. To suggest that the Home Charges should be abolished or at least drastically cut down and that the military expenditure should be reduced was very much like asking the foreign rulers to start on the road to abdication. In any case, there can be no doubt that the currency policy of the government was used by the Indian leaders as a whipping boy to arouse the nationalist fervour of the people. This becomes even clearer from a study of their .attitude towards the Exchange Compensation Allowance.

## VIII. EXCHANGE COMPENSATION ALLOWANCE

Even more than the main issue of currency reform, it was the .secondary issue of the Exchange Compensation Allowance that aroused the full fury of Indian indignation and hostility .and fanned the flame of Indian nationalism. The Exchange Compensation Allowance was the allowance that the Government of India agreed to pay in 1893 to its non-domiciled European and Eurasian officers in order to obviate the hardships suffered by them in their remittances to England on account of the fall in the gold value of the rupee. The allowance was granted up to such amount as would enable an officer to send to Europe half of his salary, subject to a maximum limit of .£iooo a year, at the privileged exchange rate of is. 6d. per rupee. The allowance was paid whether any remittance was .actually made or not.i28 It amounted to a virtual increase in the salary of these officials. The total expenditure on this .account from 1893 to 1898 was nearly 5 crores of rupees, the maximum amount having been reached in 1895-6 when it .amounted to nearly 1.33 crores.129

When the British officials initially put forward the demand for an exchange compensation allowance, the Indian leaders opposed it vehemently. Later, when the demand was accepted by the government, a storm of protest against the government .action was raised which raged for years afterwards. In their condemnation of the allowance, the nationalists used very strong and pungent language; in particular, they gave vent to a feeling of near-hatred for the European officials. The type and degree—one might even say the quality—of indignation aroused by the measure and the fearlessness with which it was expressed by a leadership that was on the whole known for its moderation are well-brought out by the following, rather long, extract from a comment by the Kaiser-i-Hind of 27 August 1893:

When impartial history comes to record her imperishable verdict on the conduct and administration of the British during the close of the nineteenth century, perhaps no part of it will merit a more scathing condemnation than that which has most ruthlessly inflicted on the helpless and voiceless people of this great country the cruel and crushing burden of maintaining a bureaucracy, as alien as it is. unsympathetic, on a scale of extravagance which has no parallel in times ancient or modern. Mournful and interminable, indeed, is the catalogue of the financial wrongs and cruel spoliation by the Government of India from the days of Hastings to those of Lansdowne. But it would seem as if that catalogue were not long enough and heavy enough in all conscience. That the heap of the deeds of past injustice and wrongs should be swollen by fresh deeds of greater injustice and greater wrongs, to Lord Lansdowne was reserved that inglorious task. And who will say that he has not acquitted himself of it with unblushing audacity and reckless responsibility—audacity and responsibility for which, it is to be presumed, he will be rewarded with the highest step in the British peerage?... The Marquis of Landsdowne has rendered so many disservices to millions of the Indian subjects of Her Brittanic Majesty that no doubt Her Majesty will advance His Lordship in the peerage by offering him a Dukedom!... Who will grudge him the honour or dishonour of being the author of the amended Currency Act and the exchange compensation allowance... by which the harpies of the foreign tax-eaters are to be allowed to eat their cakes and have them, too, at the expense of the famishing tax-payers? Thus has Lord Lansdowne made his Viceroyalty memorable; and thus has he completed the circle of that unspeakable greed, territorial and financial, which Lord Lytton commenced and Lord Dufferin continued! Need we say that we burn with indignation at these daylight deeds of wrong and injustice, of spoliation and high-handedness, in the administration of the country? We burn to see the hands of retributive justice overwhelming the perpetrators of these un-Christian acts. We have no heart to enlarge on the theme. Altogether, a more barefaced act of spoliation was never before witnessed. It might put to the blush any Government having some conscience for the weal of its subjects. But it is to be presumed that because the British Indian Government is a Christian and honest Government, it has exclusive privilege of robbing Paul to pay Peter.13o

The other nationalist newspapers also reacted equally strongly and used words like 'spoliation', ‘cruel act', and 'plunder' to describe the grant of the Exchange Compensation Allowance.131 The Indian Association of Calcutta and the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha sent memorials to the Government of India protesting against the measure,132 An emphatic protest against the allowance was recorded by the Indian National Congress at its session held in 1893.133 Subsequently, resolutions demanding the discontinuance of the allowance continued to find a place in the Congress programme for the next 1o years.134 The public men of India joined in this chorus of condemnation of government action. For instance, Surendranath Banerjea described it as ‘a crime and worse than a crie' and 'an unutterable shame'; and exclaimed: 'Call this a civilised, a Christian and a Righteous administration!'135 Dadabhai Naoroji branded it as 'a heartless, arbitrary, and cruel exaction from the poverty of India, worse than Shylocky (sic!)—not only the pound of flesh of the bond, but also the ounce of blood'.136

The injustice of the Exchange Compensation Allowance was felt by the Indian leaders all the more keenly since the Government of India had thrown this additional burden on the exchequer at a time when the latter was already chronically embarrassed, new difficulties were looming on the horizon, and the country was being threatened with fresh·taxation that soon came in the shape of custom duties.'37 In fact, it appeared as if the new taxes were the direct outcome of the grant of the Exchange Compensation Allowance and were imposed for the sake of the officials. This really amounted, according to the Indian leaders, to helping the European officials, who could afford to do with less, at the cost of the poor Indians, who were in no position to bear any additional burden and who 'toil and moil from morn to eve, without bread enough!'138 This feeling was graphically expressed by Surendranath Banerjea while addressing the Indian National Congress of 1893. The poor of India, he remarked, would be 'stinted of their food, of their rice and of their salt, in order that the highly paid officials of the Government must be provided with their usual brandy, beef and champagne'.139 Another commentator, the fiery Jami-ul-Ulum of N.W.P. and O., wrote: 'India can ill afford to pay even their salaries, while these "dakaits" demand something more.'139a

The national leadership also maintained that the Exchange Compensation Allowance was not only burdensome but also unjust and unnecessary. They asserted, first of all, that the European officials in India had not really suffered any appreciable loss on account of the fall in the gold price of the rupee, since the loss suffered in remitting money to England was amply offset by the fall in the gold prices of articles of consumption in England; or, in other words, as Dadabhai Naoroji put it as early as 1886, though in their remittances they got less gold, that gold had higher purchasing power in England.14o Secondly, the Indian leaders held that the salaries of the officials were 'so excessively high, considering especially the great change that has taken place in the facilities and means of communication between England and India, that even with the fall in exchange they were high'.141 Thirdly, the Indian leaders pointed out that the officials did not have a legal claim to this concession, since they were under contract to draw their salaries only in rupees.

It was, therefore, highly inequitable to drag in the ratio of exchange; after all, the officials had not declined in the past, and would certainly not decline in future, to receive the contracted salaries in rupees when the rupee had arisen, or were to rise, higher than 2s.142 Moreover, remarked Gokhale, the government continued to pay the high rate of interest of 5 per cent to railway companies even though it could now borrow at the rate of 2½ per cent. 'If existing contracts are not to be disturbed in favour of the Indian Exchequer', he remarked, 'why should they be disturbed against it?'143

The Indian leaders further maintained that the government had not been very fair and above reproach in the actual award of the allowance. Firstly, the allowance should have been paid not upon half'the salary whether sent abroad or not but only upon the amount actually remitted.144 Secondly, it should have been given only to those officials who had joined service before the rupee started to fall heavily•and not to those who accepted the rupee salaries with their eyes open'.145 Thirdly, the government had indulged in an invidious race distinction by refusing to grant the allowance to those Indian officials who had to send money abroad for the education of their relatives.146

The Indian national leaders were quick iņ drawing political conclusions, particularly in regard to the purposes of British rule in India, from the entire episode. They accused the Government of India of 'trifling with the interests of the people .and having been guilty of injustice to the interests committed to its care'.147 They complained that while the most pressing of Indian sanitary, social, and administrative reforms had been kept in abeyance on grounds of financial stringency,. the government had not hesitated to throw the unjust and unnecessary burden of the Exchange Compensation Allowance upon the Indian finances.148 While there was no money for saving people's lives during famines, angrily wrote the Amrita Bazar Patrika in its issue of 22 August 1893, 'there is money enough to fatten the fatly-paid members of the services who are already fattening upon the fat of the Indian ryot!'G. K. Gokhale made a similar complaint:

While the miserable pittance spent by Governinent on the education of the people has stood absolutely stationary for :the last five years on the ground that Governent has no more money to spare for it, here is a sum larger than the whole educational expenditure of Government given away to its European officials by one stroke of the pen!149

The Indian leaders also complained that while the salaries of the highly paid British officials had been indirectly increased the miserably low salaries of the Indians, employed in government offices as clerks or ministerial officers, had not been improved.150

All this confirmed the view that India was being ruled entirely in the interests of England. In fact, cogitation over this point produced a great deal of bitterness. Dadabhai Naoroji's usual optimism deserted him as he wrote: 'But, of course, when European interests are concerned, legality and heart go to the winds; despotism and force are the only law and argument.'151 Surendranath Banerjea commented with bitter irony :

This Exchange resolution is the embodiment of a principle which Government has persistently followed and what is that principle? We are the children of the soil; we are the helots of the land, the hewers of wood and the drawers of water and we exist for the services, the Gods of the bureaucracy.152

The Gujarat Darpan of 31 August 1893 expressed its anger and frustration in the following words :

Blessed be the memory of these protectors of millions who have sent their three hundred millions, whom they profess to protect with the kindness of a parent, to damnation! We cannot contain ourselves as the thought rushes upon the mind that the country is being plundered... to feed fat their few swans which are sent among their numerous flock of geese, to keep them, to edify them, to civilise them, to rule them, to kick them, and to kill them if necessary. God save us from our very friends!153

Many other Indian leaders made similar critical remarks about the light shed by the Exchange Compensation Allowance on the true nature of the British rule and the role of the British officials in India.154

## IX. CONCLUSIONS

The foregoing review would support the conclusion that the Indian leaders, on the one hand, avowedly kept in the forefront the interests of the rising textile industry and the peasantry when determining their attitude towards the question of the low and falling exchange value of the rupee, and, on the other, completely ignored or even opposed in the process the interests of certain other groups and classes.

One such group consisted of the salaried Indians most of whom were employed by the government, the higher-paid among whom were consumers on a large scale of imported goods, and all of whomn enjoyed fixed incomes. The closure of the mints and the resulting fall in prices in India were clearly to their advantage. The opposition of the national leadership to their interests was not only implicit and tacit but was sometimes expressed overtly and distinctly.155 Similarly, the moneylenders were obvious gainers from the appreciation of the rupee. Here again, the national leaders not only showed no favour to the usurers but used the possibility of the latter's profiting from the changes in the currency as a major argument against the currency policy of the government. The nationalist attitude towards the effects of currency legislation on the moneylenders and the salaried officials is well summed up in the following extract from the address of D. E. Wacha to the 9th session of the Indian National Congress: ‘The hard-working labourers, the over-taxed peasantry, are being impoverished in order that Government officials and usurers may fatten at their expense.'156 Furthermore, they disregarded in practice the interests of the wage-labourers, whose wages would invariably lag behind prices in case of the latter's climbing up, and who would, on the other hand, certainly gain from falling prices for the same reason. Surprisingly enough, this correlation between the welfare of the wage-labourers and the poor peasants and prices was, in a different context, loudly acknowledged and asserted by the Indian leaders themselves;157 it was, however, left out of their calculations when discussing the problems of currency.158

However, the most important Indian group to be by-passed and even opposed by the national leadership in the framing of its currency policy was that of the traders, particularly of traders engaged in the import of goods. This is very clearly and decisively brought out by the following factors:

(a) Firstly, as has been brought out earlier, the Indian leaders did not look upon the prosperity of foreign trade as one of the considerations to be kept in view while deciding upon the question of a correct currency policy for the country.159

(b) Secondly, the currency policy recommended by the Indian leadership was contrary to the demands put forth by a large section of the Indian merchants engaged in foreign trade and by their spokesmen. For instance, Rai Bahadur Dhanpat Singh sounded the following warning in 1892 in his presidential address at the 5th annual meeting of the Bengal National

Chamber of Commerce: ‘The present rate of exchange is a death blow to commerce and if immediate steps be not taken to raise the value of silver the day is not far distant when we shall see total collapse of business and the winding up of many a respectable firm in Calcutta.'i6o When in 1892 the Indian Currency Association started its vigorous agitation for the closure of the mints and the adoption of gold standard, a large number of Indian merchants joined it as active supporters.161 Seventy-seven leading merchants of Karachi memorialised the government in June 1892 and 674 merchants of Bombay in October 1892 for fixity of exchange on the ground that fluctuations in it tended to transform 'their legitimate transactions from safe business to purely speculative gambling'.16z Sir Shapurjee Bharucha, a leading merchant· and banker of Bombay, strongly advocated the cause of the closure of the mints and the adoption of the gold exchange standard on the ground that the falling upee had seriously harmed India's foreign trade and checked the inflow of foreign capital.163 Similarly, Jay Gobind Law, the doyen of Bengali merchants, pressed the government in 1898 to establish, above all, ‘a practical fixity of exchange'.164

(c) Lastly, some of the Indian leaders went to the extent of even publicly expressing their hostility to the merchants engaged in foreign trade, most of whom were foreigners in any case, and advised them to 'take their chance' and not to grumble.165 This antagonism is brought out expressively by the

## following outpouring of Dadabhai Naoroji :

On the top of all this comes the merchant with his agitation for the gold currency, that he may be saved, at the sacrifice of the ryot, from his, risks of trade. The profits of trade are for his pocket, but risks of a commercial disturbance must be met by the ryot! The poverty-stricken ryot must protect the well-to-do trader! God save India!166

The nationalist attitude towards the merchants engaged in foreign trade and their demands makes an interesting contrast with their attitude towards the textile manufacturers. Not only the currency policy of the Indian national leaders but also the very reasons advanced by them for arriving at it coincided with those put forward by the textile mill-owners of Bombay. This is clearly demonstrated by a perusal of the Reports of the Bombay Mill Owners' Association for the years 1893, 1898, 1899, 1900 and 1901 and the long interview with J. N. Tata published by the India in its issue of 1 December i893. Indeed, the Indian National Congress threw open its platform to many a textile manufacturer to enable him to plead the case of his industry before the bar of Indian opinion. J. A. Wadia, Vithaldas D. Thakersay, Sorabji Karaka and Ambalal Sakarlal Desai were among the textile magnates attracted to the Congress fold for this reason.167

In fact, the loyalty of the Indian national leadership to the falling rupee is, in our opinion, to be explained largely, though not exclusively, by their whole-hearted and one-sided .devotion to the single cause of industrialisation of the country through the agency of indigenous capital. It is true that their criticism of the harmful effects of the possible appreciation of the rupee on the peasantry had some validity, though perhaps not as much as was claimed by them.168 It is also true that the loss by exchange suffered by the government on account of the Home Charges was not really eliminated by the currency legislation of 1893 and 1899 but only transferred to the shoulders of the public, and that continuation of this loss in a direct form might have forced the government to take some much-needed steps towards retrenchment .of public expenditure and the Home Charges. We suspect, however, that, ultimately, it was the clear and actual loss suffered by the textile industry of the country that really bothered the Indian leaders and that led them to take an uncompromising stand on the question, making them impervi-.ous to the pleadings of the government. The loss to Indian textile industry was of course immense. The industry was at the time largely dependent on the East Asian market for the consumption of its products.169 For example, of the 430,472,000 lbs. of yarn produced by Indian mills in 1895-6, nearly 185,493,00o lbs. were exported, mostly to China.170 In reality, the secret of the rapid rise of Indian textile industry after 1875 lay in the even more rapid growth of Indian -textile exports.17ı It is also difficult to deny that low exchange .did act as a sort of protection to Indian textiles both in India and abroad in the silver-using countries.172 No doubt, the later history of the industry shows that, due to the inherent advantages of cheap labour and raw materials, it was able to continue its upward progress unchecked; this fact cannot, however, obliterate the reality that at that particular juncture of time the future of the only major Indian-owned modern industry appeared to be in serious jeopardy on account of the currency policy of the government. This was conceded even by the official advocates of the currency policy of the government.173 In fact, the Indian leaders agreed with the following line of approach suggested in 1893 by David Barbour, the Finance Member, for resolving the difficulty:

The answer to these objections is that the question of the adoption of a gold standard must be decided not with reference to any one consideration, or to a limited number of consideration, but after a careful examination of all the circumstances of the case, and that we must decide where the balance of advantage lies and act accordingly.174

The crux of the wide difference between the two approaches. to the question, the official and the nationalist, was to be found in the fact that 'the balance of advantage' lay for them in two opposite directions. While the official view was that ‘if our trade with silver-using countries will be injuriously affected, our trade with gold-using countries will be beneficiallv afected in a corresponding degree; and the latter branch of our trade is much larger and more important than the former',175 the nationalists believed that the trade with silverusing countries was, in spite of its smaller proportions, qualitatively of a higher kind than the trade with gold-using countries. Consequently, the Indian leaders would gladly sacrifice the latter for the sake of the prosperity of the indigenous textile industry which was linked, in their minds, with the long-range industrial development of the country.

As a matter of fact, for the sake of the industrial advancement of the country, the Indian national leaders were even willing— wittingly or unwittingly — to embrace a pet aversion of theirs, namely the drain, for it was obvious that a depreciation of the rate of exchange led to a deterioration in the terms of trade or the prices at which India's exports exchanged for its imports, at least during the period of transition and till prices had adjusted to the new rate of exchange, both at home and abroad. The very economic logic that pointed to actual or potential potection to Indian manufactures against imports through the mechanism of a relative increase in the prices of imports also pointed to an adverse movement in the terms of trade which would last as long as the protective effect of the falling exchange lasted. Indeed, in a different context, the Indian leaders were quite worried, as has been shown in the Chapter on ‘Foreign Trade', about the terms of India's international trade. Obviously, the Indian leaders were willing to bear this additional 'drain' in order to protect and encourage the nascent Indian industry, though the falling exchange was perhaps the costliest and the most awkward method of doing so.

This brings us to another aspect of the currency policy of the Indian leaders. To them goes the credit of seeing the peculiarly Indian aspect of the problem, namely, that India, being a politically dependent country,176 had no control over its finances or its tariff policy; in the present context, this political subjugation had dual implications; it meant, firstly, that India did not have the power to grant tariff protection to its industries; and, secondly, that it had to pay the Home Charges. Low exchange was regarded by the Indian leaders to be the only remedy available to counteract these twin evils, since, on the one hand, it afforded protection to Indian industries, and, on the other, it would sooner or later force the government to reduce its Home Charges, first of all by the purchase of government stores in India and the employment of more Indians in the services. In any case, low exchange highlighted the problem of the Home Charges. If in both respects it was a costly remedy, the adoption of which would not be advised in normal circumstances, the Indian leadership perhaps felt that it was the only one available to a country so abnormally situated as India was.