# CHAPTER X

# Agriculture, II

Let the landlords be placed in a position in which they may not oppress the tenants, but, at the same time, let not the tenants be encouraged to set them at nought and defy them in matters of social delicacies. Let the interest of the one be to love the other, and the interest of the other to respect him.

— Amrita Bazar Patrika, 8 January 1885

Whatever were the primary causes... that fastened crushing hard work and slavery on one section of society and gave perfect leisure and exemption from manual work to the other, it is now perfectly clear that the tendencies of modern civilisation, and the growing sense of equality would not permit those, unequal and unjust relations between them to subsist long. The day of re-arrangement must come sooner or later and we must be prepared to welcome it without grudging and grumbling.

\- Mahratta, 21 October 1883

If we call the oppression by the English a spark, we ought to call the oppression by the Rajas and Zemindars a conflagration,

— Banganivasi, 30 October 1891

## I. THE PEASANT AND THE LANDLORD

The tax-collector's was not the only claim on the cultivator's produce. In the zamindari areas of Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Northern Madras, the Central Provinces, the N.-W.P. and Oudh, and in small parts of Bombay and the Punjab the actual cultivator was a tenant who paid rent to the zamindar out of which the latter paid land revenue to the government. Besides, in all thesé areas the number of intermediaries—rent-receivers and rentpayers——between the zamindar and the actual cultivator was continuously multiplying. Moreover, even in the ryotwari areas peasant-proprietorship was slowly disintegrating and disappearing; the peasant-owners were gradually losing land to moneylenders, traders, professional classes, and bigger proprietors, who invariably became absentee landlords and who let the old proprietors continue but in the new role of rack-rented teuantsat-will. Ever-mounting rents and evictions were creating an explosive situation in the countryside; and in one form or another the question of landlord-tenant relations had become an important economic and political problem. The government therefore felt compelled to take up the question of giving some relief to the rack-rented and disaffected tenantry and to pass a series of tenancy and rent acts in the different provinces. It may be noted that the government completely ignored the problem of the tenants-at-will in the ryotwari areas.

Surprisingly enough, however, the national leadership not only had no clear-cut policy on the question but did not even pay sufficient attention to it. It did not regard the relation between the tenant and the landlord as a major economic problem, nor did it espouse the cause of the tenants through a general political agitation. The extent to which the problems of the tenantry were ignored by the national leadership may be gauged from the fact that the Indian National Congress had virtually nothing to say about them during the period under study. But a leadership that was alive and active and that was increasingly coming to grips with the economic realities then facing the country could not shut its eves to these problems. It dealt with these problems at two levels: the general and the particular. At the former level, they made sporadic comments and offered general remedies, often taking a vaguely pro-tenant stand. At the second level, they commented on the different tenancy and rent acts passed by the government. Here they had to express opinion on, or to suggest, concrete remedies for particular maladies and, therefore, to openly come out as the protagonists of either landlords or tenants.

On a general plane, the nationalist newspapers sometimes expressed humanitarian solicitude for the tenants in zamindari areas and protested against the rack-renting, evictions, and the general oppression of the tenants by the zamindars.2 The protest was sometimes couched in strong words. Thus, the Bengalee of 9 December 1882, criticising oppression by powerful zamindars, wrote: 'Tyranny is hateful in all forims, whether it is the white man or the black man who is the tyrant, whether the oppressor has been born and bred amongst us, or whether he comes from the far west!'3 The Som Prakash of 24 July 1882, disapproving of a system of revenue collection under which 'one person enjoys with all the luxury of ease the hardearned wealth of ten thousand persons', asked rhetorically 'on what ground should one enjoy the fruit of another's labour', and declared : As the landlords have in course of time become increasingly powerful so the tenants have become increasingly miserable.'+ The Bangabasi of 14 June 1884 described the village zamindar, whom no law or regulation could reach, as 'the greatest scourge of Bengal'.5 The Banganivasi of 30 October 1891 published a long and angry editorial condemning the 'inhuman and unspeakable oppression' of the ryots by the zamindars and their gomastas and other underlings. It criticised the inaction of the educated people in the matter and wrote:

If these countrymen of ours (zamindars and their agents), dressed in a little brief authority can commit this hideous oppression, how can we reasonably clamour against a slight stretch of authority by a foreign head of a district possessed of unlimited power? If we call the oppression by the English a spark, we ought to call the oppression by the Rajas and Zamindars a conflagration.6

In N.-W.P. and Oudh, the Oudh Punch, the premier humorous weekly of North India, edited by Sajjad Husain, one of the leading Muslim supporters of the Congress in the north, published on 18 January 1894 a cartoon in which two half-clad and bare-footed cultivators were shown carrying their landlord in a palanquin. The fat landlord wore glittering jewellery and the insignia of the Star of India. The cartoon bore the caption, 'The Cause of Famine', and one of the cultivators was saying to his companion: 'My friend, his weight is simply crushing us to death. Why not throw him away?'z In Malabar, the Kerala Patrika, edited by K. P. Karunakara Menon, in its issue dated 21 March 1896, attributed the frequent Moplah outbreaks to the poverty caused by the intolerable oppression of the landlords who oppressed tenants of all classes and communities.8 On 4 July 1896 the Kerala Patrika warned the government that, if landlord oppression was not checked, not only the Moplah outbreaks would not cease but Nayar outbreaks would also occur.9

A few of the Indian public men also assailed the system of zamindari. In the early 187o's, a powerful attack on the zamindars was made by Bankim Chandra Chatterjea in his articles on 'Samya' in the Banga Darshana.1o He was followed by young R. C. Dutt.1 In a long article the Mahratta of 17 February 1884 vigorously attacked the system of zamindari. As discussed below, the Indian Association and many nationalist leaders adopted a pro-ryot attitude during the controversy on the Bengal Rent Bill. Later still, Prithwis Chandra Ray held the zamindari system and the oppression by the zamindars responsible for the poverty of the people in his two publications, The Poverty Problems in India, published in 1895, and The Causes of Indian Famines, published in 19o1.12 G. V. Joshi made a detailed criticism of landlordism, both in the zamindari and the ryotwari areas, in his essay. 'The Economic Situation in India', published in 189o. He pointed out that all over the country sub-leasing of land was increasing and the number of intermediaries and tenants-at-will multiplying, and that the rents were being forced up to ruinous heights by the increasing competition for land, which in turn was the result of increase of population combined with the progressive. collapse of non-agricultural industries. High rents and insecurity of tenure in turn destroyed all effective motivés on the part of the actual cultivator to improve íand.13 To sum up:

The Ryot is so placed that he has nothing to gain by any amount of industry or prudence that he might practise, and nothing to lose by any amount of recklessuess : he has nothing to hope, and being above all anxious not to be dispossessed of his few acres. he pavs any rents rather than starve. 'A situation more devoid of motives' to self-help and self-exertion can hardly be imagined.14

In his essay, 'Notes on Agriculture in Bombay', published in 1894, Joshi dealt at length with the growth of landlordism and tenants-at-will, 'owing partly to the extended practice of subletting and partly to the consequences of unrelieved indebtedness', and bemoaned the fact that no tenant-right proper or tenancy laws existed in the presidency of Bombay, so that there was 'no provision for the accrual of occupancy rights and the under-tenant has no legal protection against rackrenting or eviction'.15

Many of the Indian leaders suggested positive steps for the protection of the tenants. The most popular of these were the grant of legislative protection to them against undue enhancement of rent, rack-renting, eviction, destruction of tenantrights, etc., and the extension and strengthening of occupancy and other rights.16 It is of some interest to note that three of the leading nationalist economists, namely, Justice Ranade, G. V. Joshi, and R. C. Dutt, lent full support to the tenancy legislation undertaken by the government and put in vigorous pleas for the further strengthening of tenant-rights.17 G. V. Joshi also asked the authorities to extend legislative protection to the utterly unprotected under-tenants in the ryotwari areas of Bombay.18

Understandably enough, there was no widespread demand for the abolition of the zamindari system during the period of our study. But, what is of greater interest, the demand was voiced. Thus, the Indian Spectator of 2 October 1881 urged the government to buy up all zamindaris and then to settle directly with the ryots.19 The Som Prakash of 24 July 1882 entreated the government to follow the example of the Rus sian government and to remove the zamindars by paying them compensation equal to 2o years' profit, the cost to be borne equally by the government and the ryots.2o Sometimes the Indian leaders temporised with the demand and, accepting the zamindari system as a settled fact, advocated a permanent settlement between the zamindar and his tenant.21

The Bengalee of 12 June 188o made another interesting criticism of the Permanent Settlement of Bengal. It was, asserted the Bengalee, responsible for the lack of industrial and commercial activity in Bengal as it created a source of sure profits in the zamindaris and thus led to the diversion of capital from industry to landlordism. Two years later, in its issue dated 28 January 1882, the Bengalee repeated the criticism and opined that the prevalence of the zamindari system explained the marked difference between the levels of industrial and commercial activities in Bombay and Bengal.

In contrast, the instances in which Indian leaders espoused the cause of the zamindars or other superior holders of land as against the ryots on general grounds were very rare. In Bengal, the Bangabasi of 19 March 1887, reversing its earlier pro-tenant attitude, asked the government to take vigorous measures to break up peasant combinations in East Bengal and to make it clear to the peasants that proper rents would have to be paid.22 The Amrita Bazar Patrika of 2o February 1899 also claimed that 'the safety of the Empire from famine, agrarian riots and other great evils' depended upon 'the maintenance, and not the destruction, of the rights and privileges of the zamindars'. A year later, on 12 January 1goo, the Patrika urged the government either to relax its own strictness towards the zamindars or to give them facilities to realise rentals from' the ryots. On the other side of the country, the Kesari of 18 October 1881 complained that in Satara and several other districts of Bombay the revenue authorities did not give 'the needful assistance to Inamdars to enable them to recover the land revenue assessment from their ryots'.23 The Mahratta of 27 July 189o bemoaned the pitiable condition in many instances of the zamindars and landlords of the country and criticised the government's attempts to gradually abolish their rights. It advised the landlords to hold together 'for selfpreservation, if for nothing else'; and, in particular, suggested to the Deccan landlords the formation of an association of their own. On 9 December 19oo it urged the government to help the inamdars in the collection of the revenue. It may, however, be reiterated here that this desire to preserve the class of landlords and, therefore, to preserve their rights arose to a large extent out of the understanding that they constituted the only natural leadership of the fallen Indian people.zi

The extent of general nationalist comment on landlordtenant relations was, however, as pointed out earlier, very meagre, thereby revealing the nationalist leaders' lack of interest in this aspect of agrarian relations rather than revealing their pro-tenant or pro-landlord proclivities. This is also borne out by a study of their attitude towards the tenancy legislation undertaken by the government during 188o-1905. Except for the Bengal Tenancy Act of 1885, they did not evince keen, or eveu sufficient, interest in any other tenancy enactment.25

## II. THE BENGAL TENANCY ACT OF 1885

The Permanent Settlement of 1793 had left the ryots at the mercy of the zamindars. Over 6o years elapsed before the government became aware of the plight of the Bengal tenantry. The Rent Act (Act X) of 1859 enabled ryots who had held the same lands for 12 years to acquire the right of occupancy. Moreover, their rents could not be enhanced except on specific and reasonable grounds provided in the Act. This Act and its amending Act of 1869 could not, however, remove the growing friction between the landlords and tenants. The former continued to have recourse to ejection, frequent shifting of tenants, force, harassments, illegal distraints and exactions, etc., to somehow prevent tenants from acquiring occupancy rights and to enhance rents. At the same time they complained that the rent laws of 1859·and 1869 had made it extremely difficult for them to collect the existing rents and that to enhance them even on legitimate grounds had become nearly impossible.26 Consequently, Bengal witnessed large scale agrarian conflicts and anti-zamindar riots during the years 1872-6. and the situation threatened to get out of hand any moment.27 In Bihar the condition of the tenants was even worse and their relations with the zamindars equally ominous.28 From 1876 onwards, the Government of Bengal and the Government of India made attempts to legislate on the question with a view to maintain the crumbling structure of the Permanent Settlement and to save the Presidency from the threatened agrarian revolution that could very well have proved to be a source of serious political danger to the British rule itself. The remedy was clear: relations between landlords and tenants must be placed on a stable footing. But there was a great deal of hesitation, consultation, and deliberation among the officials as to how to put this remedy into effect. The accepted aims of any effort in this direction were: extension of occupancy to settled cultivators, extension of security, if not fixity, of tenure to all ryots -- occupancy or non-occupancy - by preventing undue enhancement of rents, securing of the interests of the zamindars and subordinate tenure-holders by affording them adequate facilities for realisation of rent and by guaranteeing them a fair rent and a fair share of the increased value of the produce of the soil, and the laying down of rules and procedures under which all agrarian disputes would be settled promptly and equitably.29 But to enact a tenancy law that would embody all these reforins and thus reconcile the tenantry without antagonising the zamindars proved to be a difficult, and in the end an impossible, task. In 1879 the Rent Law Commission investigated "the problem in Bengal. The Commission submitted its Report and the draft of a Bill in 188o which were the subject of detailed official and non-official comninent.3o Next year, a draft Bill, based on the one prepared by the Rent Law Commission but differing from it in many material aspects, was submitted to the Government of India.3ı The latter took nearly two years to make up its mind in consultation with the authorities in England and ultimately introduced its own Bill on the subject in the Imperial Legislative Council in 1883. The five important proposals embodied in the Bill of 1883 were: (1) The right of occupancy was to be conferred on all settled ryots who had held land in the same village or estate for a period of 12 years though the land so held by them at different times during that period might have been different. Moreover, the onus of disproving the ryot's claim to the right of occupancy was thrown upon the landlord. (2) The right of occupancy was made heritable as well as freely transferable subject to the landlord's right of pre-emption. Occupancy ryots could also sublet their lands without any restriction. (3) In regard to enhancement of rent, it was provided that in no case should the rent paid by an occupancy ryot exceed 1/5th of the gross produce and that no enhancement could at once double the rent or take place except at the interval of ten years. The rent paid by a nonoccupancy ryot was not to exceed 5/16th of the gross produce. (4) The non-occupancy ryot, if he were ejecteJ from his holding, was to receive compensation for disturbance. (5) To meet the zamindars' main complaint, a simple and summary procedure for rent suits was provided. Moreover, a provision was made for the distraint and sale of crops through courts. The Bill provided for the intervention of the civil courts or the executive authority to ensure due implementation of nearly all its important clauses.32

The Tenancy Bill of 1883 was attacked vehemently by the zamindars, and the government, reeling under this attack, appointed a Select Committee to make changes which would placate and conciliate them. The Committee included two prominent spokesmen of zamindars—Kristodas Pal (later replaced on his death 'by Piaremohan Mukerjea) and the Maharaja of Darbhanga.33 It amended tie Bill, emasculating it of its pro-ryot bias; and the amended Bill was passed into law in March 1885. In the Tenancy Act of 1885, the scope of acquisition of occupancy was narrowed down to land held by a ryot in the same village only, the provision in the earlier Bill of 1883 regarding land held in the same estate being dropped; the provision of the Bill of 1883 regarding the absolute power to transfer land was withdrawn; the proposed limits on the enhancement of rents of occupancy and nonoccupancy ryots were withdrawn; the clause providing for compensation for disturbarce in case of ejectment to the nonoccupancy· ryot was also struck down. Thus, of the four provisions of the Bill of 1883 which might have been beneficial to the ryot, three were dropped while one relating to the acquisition of the right of occupancy was diluted. The only amendment of the Bill in the opposite direction was a reduction in the amount by which the rent of an occupancy ryot might be enhanced by contract out of court from 6 annas in the rupee to 2 annas in the rupee.33a The Tenancy Act of 1885 failed to give any protection to the under-tenant of the occupancy ryot.34 The admirers of the Act claimed that, even though it made concessions to the landlords, 'the tenant's status, his hold on the land he occupied, and his safeguards against arbitrary dispossessions, were all very materially strengthened by the Act as it was finally settled'.35 In any case the best proof of its efficacy, in their opinion, was 'the peaceful acceptance by all classes of the principles which underlay it'.36 To others it seemed that the fear expressed by Florence Nightingale in 1883 that 'there is always the danger that they (zamindars) will get all the proposed Bill will give them, while concessions to the ryots will be lopped off'37 had proved to be too true.38

As was to be' expected, the zamindars were in complete opposition to any tenancy legislation' that would extend occupancy, make it transferable, and put restrictions on their powers of enhancing rent and ejecting tenants. They claimed that any such legislation would encroach on their proprietary rights, extinguish their time honoured vested rights and violate the compact of 1793. They also maintained that the type of legislation contemplated by the authorities would harm the ryots themselves as it would lead to useless litigation and sub-infeudation.

The Indian Association, Surendranath Banerjea-the rising leader of the youthful nationalists of Bengal—and a large majority of the nationalist newspapers of Bengal, on the other hand, adopted a pro-tenant attitude. They justified the government's right to intervene in the tenant-landlord relations, accepted the necessity for such intervention in favour of the tenants, gave general approval to the various draft tenancy Bills brought forward during 188o to 1883—even though many of them thought that the Bills did not go far enough in protecting the tenants—and opposed the zamindars' agitation against these Bills.39 The younger and the more advanced section of the national leadership in Bengal went beyond expressing mere approval of the official legislation. Many of them vigorously championed the ryots' cause and exhorted the educated men and the political associations and leaders of Bengal to give tongue to the interests of the silent peasantry and to counter the powerful agitation by the zamindars. For example, the Bengalee of 18 December 188o wrote:

We have our associations, which seek to represent the interests of the dumb peasantry of this country. We know not whether a nobler opportunity for duty and patriotic exertion will ever present itself in the course of the next 50 years than what has now occurred. The time has indeed come when these associations must vindicate their usefulness and justify their existence....The dumb peasantry of Bengal, the ignorant millions of this country know not what is passing around them....It is for their friends to give them a voice, to speak in their name, and to act in their behalf....The time for pompous rhetoric has passed by. What is wanted now is that earnest-minded men deeply sympathising with the ryot and anxious to improve his lot should go about from district to district calling public meetings and getting up demonstrations in his favour... he who serves faithfully the humble peasant in his lowly cottage truly serves the nation at large.4o

In fact, the Bengalee claimed, in its issue dated 3 January 188o, to be an organ of the Bengal ryots; and the Indian Association came forward to fulfil 'the solemn duty' of acting as the spokesman of their ‘wants and grievances'.41 The Indian

Association and several individuals like Dwarkanath Ganguli, Krishna Kumar Mitra, and Ranglal Mukerjea also undertook the task of organising the ryots themselves to agitate for their own demands. The agents of the Association and other sympathisers of the ryots went into the rural areas of Bengal and organised during 188o, 1881, and 1885 innumerable peasant demonstrations and mass meetings, some of them attended by as many as 1o to 2o thousand ryots and addressed by orators like Surendranath Banerjea, Anand Mohan Bose, and Dwarkanath Ganguli.42 In several places rent unions and ryots unions were also formed.43 In fact, the Indian Association tried to utilise these unions to expand its own network of branches and to spread its political work in the countryside.44

The Bengal Tenancy Bill of 1883 also got the support of many prominent nationalist leaders from other parts of the country. In particular, the editorials, penned either by B. G. Tilak or G. G. Agarkar, which appeared in support of the Bill in the Mahratta during 1883, deserve to be quoted at length as showing early symptoms of a radical agrarian outlook in the ranks of the Indian national leadership. Praising the Bill as a great measure ‘in point of deep political foresight and enlightened love of humanity,' the editorial in the issue dated 14 October 1883 declared it to be ‘a small beginning of that equal distribution of physical comforts, which the advancing world... seems to be destined to possess at some remote date.'

Asking the government to stand firm in its 'righteous work', the editorial advised: 'Interested parties will try to cry down a noble measure, but a far-sighted statesman should not yield to the threatening attitude assumed by the losers of power, wealth and .patronage.' It pointed cut that even if the zamindars had 'held these proprietary rights from the beginnings of the world'they would have to be modified to suit 'the march of time'. Moreover, the government was bound to maintain the vested rights of the zamindars only so long as they might be compatible with the general welfare of the society. 'When that is threatened modifications of the sacred rights must be made....When circumstances are ripe for them, changes will find their way into society and force themselves upon it, whether some of its members do or do not will to welcome them." The Mahratta dealt with the objections raised by the zamindars in the editorial dated 21 October 1883. Replying to their assertion that the time was not yet ripe for tenancy legislation, the editorial remarked that ‘those who are immediate losers can never concede that the time ever comes for circumscribing their privileges'. Having described the hard lot of the agriculturists all over the world, the writer observed:

Whatever were the primary causes, whether superiority in the field or superiority in the court, that fastened crushing hard work and slavery on the one section of society and gave perfect leisure and exemption from manual work to the other, it is now perfectly clear that the tendencies of modern civilisation, and the growing sense of equality would not permit those unequal and unjust relations between them to subsist for long. The day of re-arrangement must come sooner or later and we must be prepared to welcome it without grudging and grumbling.

Left to himself, the writer declared, he would have brought forward a more radical measure according to which the zamindars would be compelled to grant a permanent settlement to their tenants. On 18 November 1883 again, the Mahratta adopted a highly moral tone and declared that the question on which the entire controversy over the Bill turned was 'whether we are willing to have a small class of lazy, and profligate idlers, enjoying and squandering the fruit of other men's labour and perfectly indifferent whether they die of cold or starve for want of food.' On 6 January 1884, it warned the zamindars that even though they possessed 'money and consequently influence' and the ryots, on the other hand, were 'poor, weak, and voiceless', the latter would not'continue to be so for long and, if the zamindars did not make timely concessions, 'the crash, whenever it may come, will come with the strongest force, and crush the zamindars altogether'.45 Similar anti-zamindar and pro-Tenancy Bill sentiments were expressed by the Indian Spectator of 25 March 188346 and the Native Opinion of 25 March and 1 April 1883.47 Several other papers from outside Bengal also supported the Bill.48 It may be noted that even though Justice Ranade opposed the Bengal tenancy legislation, on grounds which are discussed below in another section, he fully acknowledged the urgent need for remedial legislation to help the tenantry and also justified the government's right to undertake such legislation in spite of the Regulations of 1793.49 It may also be pointed out that, as an official, R. C. Dutt extended full support to Ashley Eden's proposals for the extension of tenant-rights in Bengal.5o

À section of the national leadership in Bengal and Bihar, however, adopted the point of view of zamindars and opposed the Tenancy Bills of 1881 and 1883, the opposition being expressed openly in some of the cases.51 The Amrita Bazar Patrika and its Bengali counterpart, the Ananda Bazar Patrika, also adopted an attitude of general opposition to tenancy legislation but on different grounds. Sometimes, they advanced the paternalistic argument, which was in effect pro-zamindar, that any legislative interference would spoil the 'friendly' and harmonious' relations between the zamindars and the ryots. This argument was put forward by the Amrita Bazar Patrika, with a great deal of hesitation and hedging, in its issue dated 8 January 1885:

Our principle on the subject of the landlord and tenant is this. Let the rights of the tenants as regards their holdings be clearly and satisfactorily defined so that they may be protected against attempts at encroachment on them. But at the same time, let not the ties of the fine and social sympathies which bind the two and which time has sanctioned be ruthlessly disturbed. In short, let the landlords be placed in a position in which they may not oppress the tenants, but, at the same time, let not the tenants be encouraged to set them at nought and defy them in matters of social delicacies. Let the interest of the one be to love the other, and the interest of the other to respect him.52 (Emphasis added).

Sometimes, they also felt that any attack upon the Bengal zamindars was an attack upon the only leading and prosperous class left in the country.53 But in the main their opposition sprang from the belief that all the proposed measures completely ignored the interests of the middlemen between the zamindars and the cultivators, i.e., of the intermediate tenants or landlords.54

It may be noted, however, that when the zamindars made an attempt to seek the support of Englishmen in Bengal, who were at the time carrying on a virulent agitation against the Ilbert Bill, even the Amrita Bazar Patrika and several other pro-zamindar nationalist papers joined hands with the antizamindar papers in condemning their action and describing it as a base treachery and a betrayal of their country.55

The arguments advanced by the nationalist newspapers and leaders of the time in favour of or against the proposed tenancy legislation differed depending on whether their sympathies lay with the zamindars, the middlemen, or the tenants.

The pro-zamindar nationalist newspapers opposed the provisions regarding the extension of occupancy rights,56 the transferability of occupancy,57 the imposition of restrictions on enhancement of rent,58 and the grant of compensation to nonoccupancy ryots in case of ejectment.59 They asked for the fixation of a higher maximum in case the rent was limited.6o

A group of nationalist newspapers consciously championed the interests of the middlemen or intermediaries, like the taluqdars, jotedars, etc. The Amrita Bazar Patrika, for example, openly pleaded for recognition of and improvement in the rights of the middlemen whom it described as the ‘pith and marrow of the Bengalee society'.6oa The Ananda Bazar Patrika argued that the rights which the government proposed to confer on all ryots might with better advantage be conferred on the intermediate tenants who were ‘remarkably free from the faults that are found both in the zamindar and the ryot', who were better men than zamindars and would take more direct and deeper interest in land than the latter, who were wealthier and better educated than the ordinary ryot and were, therefore, better able to improve land and use scientific methods of agriculture, who were strong enough to resist the oppression of the zamindars, and, at the same time, who would not oppress the ryots as they would deal with the ryots directly and not through peons, naibs, dewans, etc.6i It, therefore, opposed the Tenancy Bill of 1883 once it was convinced that the Bill went against the interests of the intermediate tenants.6z It also observed that socially and politically the intermediaries constituted the most important class in Bengal since most of the Bengali middle class, namely, students, lawyers, clerks, and postal and police officials, were recruited from it and since this class formed the backbone of the movement for self-government.63 The Bengalee of 17 March 1883 also favoured the strengthening of the rights of 'the backbone of native Indian society', though it was of the opinion that the Tenancy Bill already did so. The Bangabasi, the Navavibhakar, the Bharat Mihir, and the Sadharani also favoured the extension of the middlemen's rights.64

Those Indian leaders who took up the tenants' cause supported those provisions of the Tenancy Bill which aimed at extending the tenant-rights, pleaded for the further strengthening of these rights, and criticised those features which they considered inimical to the interests of the tenants. Firstly, they approved of the provisions which extended the right of occupancy on a broad and permanent basis65 and demanded even greater facilities in the direction.66 Secondly, they fully supported the provision making the right of occupancy inheritable and transferable.67 Thirdly, they supported the proposed restrictions on the landlord's right to enhance rent.68 Many of them felt, however, that the restrictions were not adequate and that the maximum limit of enhancement had been fixed too high.69 Some of them demanded that no enhancement should be permitted when the zamindar had no share in bringing about improvement in land.7o Some others even demanded à permanent settlement of rent between the zamindar and the tenant.71 Fourthly, they favoured the proposal for payment of compensation to the non-occupancy ryot in case of ejectment by the landlord.72 Some of them proposed that there should be no distinction between occupancy and non-occupancy ryots regarding the rates of rent and their enhancement.73 Fifthly, they felt that while some facilities for ,easier recovery of rent were in justice due to the zamindars,74 the continuation of any provision for the distraint of crops would act as a powerful instrument of oppression in their hands.75

This section of the national leadership adopted a sharply critical, and one might even say an almost modern, attitude towards one particular feature of the Tenancy Bill of 1883, namely, that it did nothing to check the spread of sub-infeudation and to protect the under-tenants of the occupancy ryots. In view of the shape that the affairs took in rural Bengal later on,76 this criticism acquires additional historical importance and is, therefore, examined below at some length.

These leaders pointed out that in the absence of any provisions for the due protection of the actual tillers of the soil, the various provisions of the Bill of 1883 extending the right of occupancy, making that right transferable and permitting leasing out of land, combined with the improper definition of the term 'ryot', would only lead to the large-scale growth of the class of middlemen, who were as a rule more given to oppression and rack-renting than the zamindars, while the overwhelming majority of the actual cultivators would remain mere under-ryots—without rights and utterly defenceless.77

They therefore demanded that the growth of this new class must be checked. But how was this to be done? It is to be noted in this context that the zamindars were opposed to the provision regarding the right of transfer of occupancy on the ground that it would lead to the transfer of land into the hands of moneylenders-middlemen. But the group of leaders whose views we are exàmining here were opposed to the middlemen from the point of view not of the landlords but of the ryots. They therefore refused to adopt the position assumed by the landlords and, on the contrary, favoured transferability of occupancy on the ground that it helped the ryots. At the same time, with a view to check the resultant growth of middlemen and discourage subletting, they suggested other remedies which were simultaneously pro-ryot and anti-zamindar, anti-middleman, and anti-moneylender. The remedy that found the widest favour with them was that the right of occupancy should go with actual cultivation and should, therefore, be conferred on the actual cultivator of the soil and not on the nominal owner of the right of occupancy. Moreover, whenever the holder of an occupancy right sublet the whole or a portion of his holding for a certain period, he should lose his right of occupancy with respect to that portion, and the sublessee should instead get that right.78 The Sanjivani of 10 November 1883 and Navavibhakar of 12 November 1883 advised a legal ban on under-letting.79 The latter defined, quite precociously, a self-cultivating ryot as follows: 'Will it not be better to rule that those who will not cultivate land with their own hands or by means of servants, or will not directly participate in the profit and loss of cultivation, will not be deemed ryots, and consequently will not be able to acquire the occupancy rights?' The Bengalee of 13 March 1883 anticipated tlie present-day proposals for a ceiling on land-holding by recommending that 'no tenant should be allowed to have in his possession more land than what his resources would enable him to cultivate properly and regularly'. Lastly, some of the pro-ryot newspapers. proposed that the margin of difference between the rents payable by an occupancy ryot and his under-ryot should be made so narrow that no occupancy ryot would find it profitable to. lease out his land.8o

As the Select Committee of 1884 and the Government of India: whittled down the three main principles of the Tenancy Bill of 1883, namely, fixity of tenure, fair rent, and right of free sale, the pro-ryot national leaders carried on an angry agitation against the changes. They criticised the government for 'betraying' the interests of the peasantry and amending the Bill in the interests of the zamindars and, in particular, protested against the watering down of the provisions regarding acquisition of the right of occupancy and its transfer and abandonment of the clauses limiting the enhancement of rent and providing compensation for disturbance in case of ejectment.81 Some of them went to the extent of opposing, and asking for the postponement of, the passage of the amended Bill which, they felt, was not only unsatisfactory from the ryot's point of view but highly prejudicial to his interests.82 In the end, however, most of the pro-tenant critics of the Bill swung,round to its support in the belief that something was better than nothing.83 Moreover, many of them must have felt that, as the Sadharani of 5 July 1885 put it, 'though the Tenancy Act is not satisfactory, the main principle underlying it is favourable to the ryots, and will thus serve as a foundation for future agitation for new rights on the part of the ryots.'84 It has, however, to be noted —with surprise perhaps—that no such agitation actually arose in Bengal during the period of twenty years following 1885 that have been covered in the present study. At the same time, it would be quite correct to conclude that if the Government of India bowed down before the zamindars of Bengal and Bihar in 1885, it did so on account of the pressure exerted by them and not because of lack of adequate support, not to speak of any opposition, from the majority of the rising national leadership of Bengal. In fact, a section of the national leadership was much more advanced and farsighted than the officials in so far as it agitated for the checking of sub-infeudation and the protection of the under-ryots at à time when many of the officials looked upon sub-infeudation either as a safety valve for the rural unemployed, who could not be employed otherwise, or as an inevitable evil at the most.85

## III. OTHER TENANCY LEGISLATION, 1880-1905

No nationalist comment upon the North-Western Provinces Rent Act of 1881 is available.86 The Central Provinces Tenancy Bill, which was enacted into law in 1883, was criticised sharply in an anonymous article published in April 1881 in the Journal of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha.87 The author objected to those provisions of the Bill which imposed limits on the malguzars' powers to enhance rent—especially as the government was not willing to lay down any such limit on its own revenue demand—-and which restrained them from levying distress for rent and evicting their tenants. He also condemned the provisions relating to the payment of compensation for improvements to a non-occupancy tenant in case of ejectment, and to extension of occupancy rights.88 On a theoretical plane, the writer was convinced that relations between landlord and tenant could not be regulated 'by outside agency' and must be left to private competition'.89 The Nyaya Sudha also criticised the C.P. Tenancy Bill from the zamindars' point of view.9o The Bengalee, on the other hand, supported the Bill but felt that it did not go far enough in protecting the interests of the tenants.91 When later the government made an attempt to amend the C.P. Tenancy Act of 1883 so as to make it a little more pro-tenant, the Mahratta, in its issue dated 29 September 1889, protested against the government policy of tampering with the rights of the landlords.

The Oudh Rent Act of 1886 and the Punjab Tenancy Acts were again not commented upon by the national leadership.

The Bill to amend the Bengal Tenancy Act of 1885, moved in 1897 and passed in 1898, aroused remarkably little controversy in Bengal. The Dacca Prakash and the Bangabasi adopted a pro-zamindar attitude towards it,92 while the Bengalee and the Hitavadi remained pro-tenant.93 In the Bengal Legislative

Council, Surendranath Banerjea and Kali Charan Banerjea spoke against those features of the Bill which they thought would go against the interests of the tenants.94 These two, joined by N.N. Sen, even tried to amend the Bill so as to strengthen the rights of the tenants.95

Government's efforts during the 188o's to protect the interests of the tenants in the zamindari areas of Madras were declared to be unnecessary by the Hindu of 16 April 1884 and the Swadesamitran of 15 February 1888.96 The Madras Tenancy Bill of 1898 was supported by the Hindu in its issues dated 27, 28 and 30 May and 23 June 1898. The Hindu, however, felt that its provisions did not go far enough in protecting the tenants. In particular, it wanted the right of occupancy to be conferred 'once for all upon all ryots', since they and not the zamindars were the virtual proprietors of land. In the Madras Legislative Council, the nationalist members adopted a vascillating position.97

The Malabar Compensation for Tenants Improvement Bill was moved on 24 January 1899 with the purpose of checking the large-scale evictions of their tenants by the jenmis or landlords of Malabar. The Kerala Patrika, the premier nationalist paper of Malabar—which had for years been complaining against the existing law on the subject, ascribing the repeated Moplah outbreaks to the poverty caused by landlord oppression, and demanding that the tenants in Malabar should be given some sort of occupancy rights in the land98—actively supported the Bill along with the Kerala Sanchari and the Kerala Chandrika.99 On the other hand, the Bill was opposed by the Hindu and the Manoramaioo and by the nationalist members of the Madras Legislative Council, namely C. Vijayaraghavachariar, G. Venkataraman, and P. Ratnasabhapati Pillai.io1 One of C. Vijayaraghavachariar's objections was that the Bill sought to protect only the karnomdar tenants in Malabar, who being in reality the rural moneylenders did not require any help, and that the actual cultivating-tenants were in no way protected by the Bill, which was, he declared, being supported only by the Nair middlemen between the Namboodiri jenmis and the actual cultivators.1oz

Efforts to amend the North-Western Provinces Rent Act in 1899 were opposed from the landlord's point of view by the Tohfah-i-Hind, the Nasim-i-Agra, the Anis-i-Hind, and the Prayag Samachar, and supported from the tenant's point of view by the Oudh Punch. The Hindustani adopted the middle approach, though leaning towards the landlord's cause.1o3 The N.-W. Provinces Tenancy Bill of 19o1 was given full support by the Indian Daily Mail in its issue dated 25 October 19o1.104 But the national leadership of the province adopted on the whole a pro-zamindar attitude; it pressed for the revision of the Bill so as to accommodate many of the landlords' demands and later criticised the Act for failing to do so adequately.1o5

Between 1898 and 1904, the Government of Bombay made an attempt to legislate on the complicated question of relations between the Khots and their tenants in the district of Ratnagiri. The national leadership in Bombay adopted an essentially pro-Khot approach in the ensuing controversy.1o6

## IV. THE PEASANT AND THE MONEYLENDER

The village sahukar or the moneylender was the third scourge of rural India. Rural indebtedness increased rapidly during the last quarter of the 19th century and became one of the acutest problems of the countryside. The exorbitant rates of interest charged by the rural creditor led to two major evils: interest charges absorbed a large part of the peasant's income; and the peasant's frequent inability to repay the debt led to the large-scale transfer of land to the non-cultivating moneylenders. The old ryot was thus increasingly transformed into a tenantat-will resulting in the further depression of agriculture as well as the agriculturist.107

The Indian national leaders generally adopted somewhat complex, many-sided, ambivalent, and sometimes divergent attitudes towards the problem of rural indebtedness. While the British Indian administrators looked upon the moneylender and his usurious rates of interest as one of the chief causes of the peasant's indebtedness and his poverty,1o8 the Indian leaders

## Agriculture

believed that the moneylender was a secondary and not a primary cause of the peasant's poverty or his indebtedness, and expressed the apprehension that to hold the moneylender ‘the head and front of the offence' was tantamount to diverting attention from the real and basic causes of the peasant's indebtedness and his poverty.1o9 They felt that the question that should be asked in this respect was why do ryots go to usurers'? Aftēr all it was not ‘a pleasure or an advantage to them to borrow money'.11o

According to them, one of the main causes of the alarming increase in rural indebtedness lay in the poverty of the Indian peasant, who could not get adequate livelihood from his land and who was consequently compelled to borrow at exorbitant rates of interest in order to feed himself and his family, especially in times of scarcity. Thus, for the peasant the choice often lay between starvation and the moneylender.111 Another important cause of rural indebtedness, in their opinion, was the land revenue system with its.fixity and rigidity and the high pitch of the revenue demand. The peasant, they declared, borrowed most often in order to pay his dues to the government., 'But the money-lender, the blood-sucking Soukar, is a creature of the land revenue system of the Government,'wrote the Amrita Bazar Patrika of 12 June 1884: 'The money-lender was created because the Government rack-rented the ryot, and never gave remissions of revenue during seasons of distress.'1z Some of the Indian leaders also cast the blame for rural indebtedness on the complicated and elaborate system of laws, which in practice helped the moneylender and encouraged him to seize possession of land and thus intensified all the evils of usury.113 Also, most of them firmnly controverted the official assumption that the peasant borrowed for unnecessary expenditure on marriages, funerals, and other social or religious ceremonies or that, in other words, the peasant was in debt because he was extravagant.114

Thus, implied in the nationalist analysis of the causes of rural indebtedness was the belief that it was a product of the British administrative svstem and that the monevlender was an appendage of British economic policies. This belief was in a few cases even explicitly stated. For example, the Amrita Bazar Patrika of 2 January 19o1 asserted that the moneylenders, ‘at least the Marwari adventurers, are the products of British rule in this country': and the Kesari of 18 February 1902 observed:

No doubt, the moneylenders have increased in number under British rule; but that is because British rule has killed indigenous industries. When national industries have become extinct, and when about forty-five crores of rupees are every year drained away to England, is it to be wondered at that the various classes of the Indian population should have no alternative open to them, but to feed upon one another? British rule has not only effected this revolution but has also sought, by means of legislation, to perpetuate it.115

Having dissociated themselves from what they believed to be the official over-emphasis on the moneylender and rural indebtedness as primary causes of the Indian peasant's poverty, most of the national leaders willingly recognised the evils which arose out of the spread of usury, strongly condemned the exorbitant rates of interest charged by the village moneylender and the illegal and rapacious devices adopted by him to milk the peasant, declared usury to be an important but secondary cause of the ryot's poverty, and demanded that the ryot should be protected from the exactions of the inoney-Jender, who was quite often described as a 'blood-sucker'.1i6

470 The Rise and Growth of Economic Nationalism in India

For example, at the 1899 session of the National Congress, Lala Murlidhar from the Punjab described a moneylender in the following words :

The moneylender is a curious formation of man and beast. Those who believe in the doctrine of transmigration of souls and reincarnation will readily agree with me in believing that he has the claws of a lion, the brain of a fox, and the heart of a goat....He is a money-grabber, a contemptible leech, I will say, a man who sucks the blood of the poor agriculturist.117

Some of the Indians also took note of, and condemned, the growing tendency towards the transfer of agricultural land into the hands of non-agricultural and non-cultivating

classes,118

At the same time, many of the Indian leaders realised that under the existing economic conditions and in the absence of alternative sources of credit, the moneylender was an economic necessity in rural India since without him the peasant would not be able to carry on agricultural operations, meet his revenue demand promptly, and maintain himself and his family in times of economic stress. The moneylender should, therefore, they felt, be corrected and controlled and not suppressed.119 This line of argument was undoubtedly sound in the conditions prevailing at that time.io However, a few of them carried it too far and sometimes openly spoke up in defence of the moneylender and his interests.121

The attitude of the Indian national leaders towards peasants relations with moneylenders can perhaps be better studied in the context of their attitude towards the measures adopted by the government from time to time to prevent the exploitation and displacement of the peasant by the moneylender and the consequent threat to the political and social stability of British rule.

## V. THE DECCAN AGRICULTURISTS' RELIEF ACT, 1879

The Deccan Agriculturists'Relief Act of 1879, the first important anti-moneylender measure adopted by the authorities, aimed at redressing the agrarian discontent in the Bombay Deccan, which had found expression in serious riots in 1875, by curbing usury and fraudulent practices on the part of the moneylender, simplifying the legal procedure, and. scaling down rural debts. The Act, which was made applicable initially to only four districts of the Deccan, authorised the courts to go behind the letter of the bonds, to inquire into the history and merits of a debt, and to determine, after disallowing unreasonable rates of interest, the sum actually due on a reasonable basis. It protected a debtor against the sale of his land unless definitely pledged and even provided for the restoration of the land to him ander certain circumstances. The Act provided for the appointment of village registrars before whom all debt bonds had to be registered and for declaring, on application, insolvent a debtor owing large sums of money; it abolished imprisonment for non-payment of debt and also made provision for the appointment of debt conciliators. The Act was amended in 188z thereby empowering debtors to sue for accounts without seeking the redemption of mortgaged land.

The Act was actively supported by Justice Ranade, the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha, and some of the Bombay newspapers.122 Writing in 1881, Ranade summed up his attitude in the following words :

Its sole justification consists in the fact that the ordinary law assumes an equality of advantages and intelligence between the insolvent and uneducated Ryot and the thrifty and intelligent Sowkar, which equality as a matter of fact does not exist. The assumption of equality was entirely a fiction of artificial legislation, and as it led to great abuses, it was time enough to correct the mischief by a return to the old conservative native traditions in favour of the protection of the weaker party.123

In the article The Deccan Agriculturists Bill', published in the Journal of thc Poona Sarvajanik Sabha in October 1879, Ranade defended nearly all the important provisions of the Bill.

Many of the nationalist newspapers of Bombay, however, disapproved of the Act mainly on the ground that it was a half-hearted measure and would not, therefore, succeed in saving the peasant; it dealt with the secondary evil of the moneylender, while leaving the primary evil of a rigid and harsh land revenue system untouched. It could only result in destroying the credit of the peasant, while keeping intact his liabilities, and, therefore, in his further ruin.124 Perhaps working in the minds of the critics of the Act was the feeling, which was openly voiced by the Mahratta of 3 February 1884, that it was ‘a measure that was launched for concealing the real source of the fountain of misery ...a measure by the aid of which the Government wanted to throw off its own responsibilities on to the shoulders of the sowcars'. Even Ranade had qualified his full-throated support to the Act with the statement that it 'could bring relief to the ryot only if it was worked ‘in conjunction with a more liberal land revenue policy, and on that condition alonc'.125 Otherwise, he had further asserted, 'the

Act alone will do no real, tangible, or lasting good, and might even aggravate the present condition of things,'-since the peasant would have to find money somewhere in order to pay the excessive land revenue.126 A few of the Indian leaders also held it against the Act that it tended to ignore the interests of the, moneylender altogether and to effect his complete ruin.127

## VI. RESTRICTIONS ON ALIENATION OF LAND

After 1879, the government took no major step against the growing menace of rural indebtedness till the close of the century when the authorities, taking alarm at the speed with which land was passing into the hands of the non-cultivating. classes, felt compelled to seek out a more drastic remedy than was tried hitherto. The official thinking on this matter had slowly veered round, over the years, to the view that the primary causes of the large-scale transfer of land from the peasantry to the non-cultivating classes were the excessive leniency of the government demandwhich by absorbing only a: part of the economic rent left a large unearned surplus in the hands of the landowners and enabled a chain of parasitic rentreceivers .to exist the unrestricted power of transferring their land by sale or mortgage conferred upon the landholders.

by the British administration, and the thriftless nature of the Indian peasant, who was induced, because of the power of alienation of land vested in him, to borrow heedlessly to the maximum extent of his credit.128 Believing, therefore, that higher the assessment the better for the ryot, some of the British administrators would have perhaps liked to propose an increase in the land revenue in order to make non-cultivating landlordism uneconomic if they had not realiséd that such a proposal was an impossibility politically.129 The only other remedy, it was felt by the authorities, was to take away from the improvident and shortsighted peasant the 'fatal gift' of free alienation of land and to impose restrictions on his power of transferring land and thus to contract his credit and remove the power and temptation to incur large debts.13o

The first major embodiment of the new policy was the Punjab Alienation Act of 19oo. The Act prohibited the permanent alienation of land by a hereditary cultivator except to defined agriculturists without the sanction of a Deputy Commissioner, permitted certain forimns of temporary alienation to non-agriculturists up to a maximum period of 2o years after which the land reverted unencumbered to the alienator, and prohibited the sale of agricultural land in execution of any decree or order.131 It is obvious that the Act was desigued not so much to relieve the existing indebtedness of the peasant or to check its future growth as to prevent the evil of the peasantry of the Punjab being expropriated by the moneylender --an outsider—and thereby perhaps constituting ‘an ever increasing political danger'.132 That is the reason why the transfer of land to agricultural clases was freely permitted; and, in fact, alienation of land was restricted and regulated and not prohibited altogether. It was, of course, expected that the Act would indirectly tend to curb the peasant's tendency and capacity to run to the moneylender at the first temptation.

The next important step in this direction was taken in Bombay in 19o1 with the enactment of the Land Revenue Amendment Act, which contained provisions empowering the government to settle waste lands and fields, which had been forfeited to the government because of default in the payment of land revenue, on a new kind of tenure that carried no right of transfer. Moreover, the Act provided for the grant of forfeited land on such terms and for such periods as the collector might prescribe.133 Because the Act was only an enabling and not an obligatory measure and because it imposed inalienability only on the forfeited land, it might be said to be much narrower in its scope than its Punjab counterpart. On the other hand, it was more stringent than the Punjab Act in two respects: one, that whatever land it was extended to it imposed not restrictions but complete prohibition on alienation of land by sale or mortgage; and two, that it empowered the government to let out forfeited land on short leases in place of the permanent occupancy of the survey tenure.

The nationalist attitude towards the efforts at restricting the power of private alienation of land highlights the differences between the British officials and the Indian leaders regarding the causes of, and the cure for, rural indebtedness. In view of these differences, it was not unexpected that the latter opposed the remedy of non-alienability of land from its very incubatory period to the stage of its acceptance by the Government of India.134

The Punjab Land Alienation Bill was either opposed or left unsupported outside the Punjab.135 Within the Punjab the Bill caused a split in the nationalist ranks;136 it placed many of the Indian nationalists on the horns of a dilemma. For example, the leading Urdu language nationalist paper of the province, the Akhbar-i-Am, in the beginning adopted a very hesitant approach and reacted by opening its columns to communications from both the supporters and the opponents of the measure. After having sat on the fence for nearly a year, it opposed the Bill in its issues dated 7 August 19oo and 27 October 190o.137 But, two weeks later, it turned a somersault and confidently predicted in its issue dated io November 19oo that the Act would prove,a success and all objections to it unjustified.138 In any case, opposition to the Punjab Alienation

Act was not stubborn or heated or prolonged whether in or outside the Punjab.

The Bombay Land Revenue Amendment Bill, on the other hand, aroused great public indignation in the Bombay Presidency. Meetings of protest were held all over the Presidency, and the Bombay Presidency Association, the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha, and the Deccan Sabha sent petitions against it.139 Leading nationalist newspapers filled their columns with vituperations against the Bill,140 while leading public men lashed out against it.141 Some of the Indian members of the Bombay Legislative Council, namely, P. M. Mehta, G. K. Gokhale, G. K. Parekh, Balachandra Krishua, and D. A. Khare, took the unprecedented step of staging what was perhaps the first walk-out in India's legislative history as a protest against the 'hasty' enactment of the Bill.142

The opposition of the Indian national leaders to the nonalienation legislation originated in the main from their belief that, even though such legislation was undertaken with the worthy object of saving the peasant from being expropriated by the moneylender, it would do little good in practice and would probably even go counter to the best interest of the peasantry. Firstly, they averred that restrictions on land alienation would reduce, if not ruin entirely, the ryot's credit, and since he required loans to carry on agricultural operations, to pay the government dues, and to maintain his family during daýs of scarcity this would mean that he would either fail to raise a loan or would be able to do so at much higher rates of interest.143 They further claimed that such restrictions would inevitably lead to a reduction in the value of land,144 that they amounted to an encroachment on the proprietary rights of the peasant, and they would in due course transform him into a virtual serf of the state.145 This criticism was voiced partiçularly loudly by Indian leaders in the course of their attack on the Bombay Land Revenue Amendment Bill, whose provisions regarding the right of the government to resettle forfeited lands on such terms and for such periods as it might consider fit were declared by them to be intended not only to take away the ryot's power of alienation but also his perpetual tenure or right of permanent and inheritable occupancy and were, thus, regarded by them as a covert attempt at implementing the theory of state landlordism and at virtual nationalisation of land.146 Some of them predicted that the real consequences of these 'revolutionary' provisions would be the very opposite of those intended, in so far as the ryot, in order to save his right of full proprietorship fromn forfeiture, would become even more dependent on the moneylender, who, in turn, would try to foreclose and take possession of the ryot's land in order to forestall its forfeiture by the government.147 A few of them questioned the wisdom of the attempt to maintain intact an inefficient and impoverished peasantry, since this would invariably lead to the stagnation of agriculture. On the other hand, they argued, free transfer of land resulted in its passing into the hands of more efficient and resourceful peasants and capitalists who could invest capital and raise agricultural technique and production to a higher level.148 The clarity with which this point of view was advanced in iS8o by Justice Ranade, its chief exponent, is brought out in a separate section below.

Only rarely did the Indian leaders offer injury to the moneylender as a ground for opposing the imposition of restrictions. on the transfer of land.149 Rather, they were at pains to refute that they had any pro-moneylender proclivities. For example, both Pherozeshah Mehta and G. K. Gokhale vehemently denied that their opposition to the Boinbay Land Revenue Amendment Bill was in the least inspired by a regard for the moneylender's interest.150

On a wider plane, the Indian leaders felt that to restrict alienation of land was to attack the problem of rural indebtedness at the wrong end, the entire scheme being based on ‘a grievous misapprehension of the fundamental conditions of the problem'. True, the right to transfer land enabled a ryot to borrow by offering his land as security, but, they argued, it was not the cause of his borrowing. They therefore contended that in order to check the evil of large-scale land transfers it was not the credit of the ryot but the factors responsible for his borrowing which should be attacked. To check the former while letting the latter remain was ‘only suppressing the symptom while maintaining the original cause of the disease'.151 In this context, they repeatedly controverted the view that the Indian peasant was by nature improvident and would, therefore, always go on borrowing to the maximum limit of his capacity.15z They also poured ridicule over the view that the lightness of the government demand on land indirectly led, by creating an unearned surplus, to the moneylender's control over land.153 They complained that while the government was willing to clutch at any straw it was unwilling to remove the one real cause of indebtedness, namely, the high pitch and rigidity of land assessment, simply because its own financial interests would be affected thereby.154 Remarkable insight in this respect was revealed by Satis Chandra Mukherjea in an article on 'The Economic Situation in India' that appeared in 1899 in the December issue of the Dawn magazine. Tracing the origins of the right of alienation of land in India under British rule, he pointed out that having introduced 'its stringent fiscal system' the Government of India had to take the supplementary step of giving the ryot the right to alienate his land by way of sale or mortgage, otherwise the prompt collection of land revenue would not have been possible. Any amendment of the right of alienation so as to prevent social disruption had, therefore, to be accompanied by substantial modification or even repeal of the fiscal system of which the right of alienation was a necessary corollary.155

Most of all, the Indian leaders were convinced that in the matter of non-alienation legislation the actual effectiveness of the means adopted was not commensurate with the end in view. Since such measures touched only the superficial aspects of the problem of rural indebtedness, they could at the most possess the efficacy of mere palliatives and would leave the real problem untouched and unsolved.156

## VII. ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES

The basic approach of the Indian leaders towards the problem of rural indebtedness was that emphasis should be placed not so much on anti-moneylender measures as on the more positive steps which would remove the causes that compelled the ryot to go to the usurious and grasping moneylender and which would replace the latter by better agencies of rural credit. This view was succinctly put forward by the Mahratta of 8 Octo. ber 1899 as follows:

But so long as want will continue to create a craving for borrowing money, the agriculturist and the money-lender will put their heads together and hatch out a plan for evading the wholesome object of these Land Alienation Acts... Government must do what it can, either to lessen the burden of assessment and thus reduce, in part at least, the cause of indebtedness or be themselves money-lenders and thus meet the proper wants of agriculturists, saving them from the clutches of unscrupulous and heartless private money-lenders.157

Similarly, G. K. Gokhale, in the course of his speech on the Bombay Land Revenue Amendment Bill, challenged the government to select a small area, take over the debts of the ryots from the sahukars there, start agricultural banks to provide for their ordinary needs, and then declare their lands inalienable. 'This would be facing the question in the only manner in which it ought to be faced', he asserted, and went on to declare that 'many of our countrymen will support Government in such a policy'. The heart of the matter, he felt, was that the ryot could not be given any relief unless his existing debt was reduced and his necessary needs of credit were duly met; it was 'not possible to improve the position of the agriculturist by a mere manipulation of the legislative machine'.158 In short, the palliatory remedies must be accompanied by more fundamental and permanent remedies which would try to get rid cf the disease itself.159

Besides suggesting the eradication of rural poverty by ‘opening out of new avenues for labour and industry and surplus capital'i6o and the relaxation of the land revenue demandi61 as remedial measures, the Indian leaders laid considerable emphasis on the provision of easier and cheaper credit facilities to the ryot. They argued in this connection that, while it was necessary to save the ryot from the rapacity of the moneylender, it was equally necessary to provide him with facilities for borrowing the necessary funds at low rates of interest; to stop the functioning of the moneylender without providing alternative sources of credit would be tantamount to leaving the ryot at the mercy of the sahukar but on much worse conditions than before. They therefore agitated throughout the period under study for the starting of a network of agricultural banks in the country.162 And when in 1903-04 the Government of India brought forward the Co-operative Credit Societies Bill to enable it to promote agricultural banks and credit societies they offered the Bill a full-throated welcome.163 An important aspect of the nationalist attitude in the context was their firm belief that the government must take an active part in promoting agricultural banks and not just leave the work to private effort.164 Justice Ranade, G.V. Joshi, and G. K. Gokhale also maintained that the old debts of the debt-ridden peasants must be compounded and liquidated before they could be expected to stand on their own feet with the aid of agricultural banks.165

## VIII. CAPITALIST FARMING

While the ways and means of protecting the ryot from the excesses of landlords and moneylenders suggested by the government and the national leadership in general would improve his condition within the existing structure of land relations, Justice Ranade, basing himself upon the experience of land legislation in Prussia, Russia, and France, advanced the policy of placing the Indian land relations on an entirely new footing.i66 While he was in full sympathy with the ryot and supported various official efforts, and put forward his own proposals, to save the ryot from the oppression of the state, the landlord, and the moneylender, he did not agree with the direction and the spirit of the official measures which, he believed, did not remove the existing bondage of, and the restrictions on, the agrarian classes, as the Prussian legislation had successfully done during the first half of the 19th century. Under the Indian tenancy legislation, he pointed out, both the landlord and the ryot would continue to live within the bonds of the old pattern of agrarian relations; all that such legislation would succeed in accomplishing would be to increase 'the existing complexity of rights and interests', to reduce the landlords to 'the class of Rent-receiving Pensioners', and teach the ryots ‘to look more and more to the State as their sole Landlord, without acquiring the training necessary to raise them to a sense of their position'. All this amounted to 'tinkering'with existing rights in the assumed interests of one class', while what was called for was 'an urgent Reform, and a radical Reform'. The result of such tinkering would be that 'the interests and ownership in land will still continue to be as divided as before between quarrelsome partners, and no real improvement will take pace'.167 Similarly, objecting to proposals for making land nou-alienable with a view to save the ryot from expropriation bv the moneylender, Ranade opined: 'The forcible prohibition of all transfer of real property, voluntary and involuntary, can never mend matters—-it can only stereotype existing poverty and aggravate existing helplessness.'168

In place of the existing land relations, Ranade called for the establishment of land relations based on ‘individual and independent property';169 in place of a protected tenant, he called for the bringing into existence of a free and independent ryot who would be unencumbered in' every way, who would enjoy his property in absolute possession, and who would therefore work hard on his land under the inspiration of 'the magic of property'.17o At the same time, he believed that agriculture based entirely on small peasants would, in Indian conditions, neither be stable and progressive nor utilise the best energies of all classes of people nor make proper use of public works, advanced techniques, etc. 'A complete divorce from land of those who cultivate it is a national evil, and no less an evil is it to find one dead level of small Farmers all over the land', he wrote.i7ı For a proper and balanced development of agriculture, it was necessary to have, he asserted, a large class of capitalist farmers, who would be, unlike the zamindars, complete owners of their land on the model of British landlords or the German junkers. As early as 1879 he had expressed the hope that, once the land was free of artificial restrictions, 'the provident and thrifty classes will succeed to the ownership of land, and a class of landlords would spring up all over the country, whose interest it will be to make the most of the resources of the soil, and of the great public works constructed by the Government.'i72 A little further he had made the interesting remarks :

In all old and backward countries like India, there is always only a minority of people who monopolise all the elements of strength. They are socially and religiously in the front ranks, they possess intelligence, wealth, thrifty habits, knowledge, and power of combination. The majority of the population are unlettered, improvident, ignorant, disunited, thriftless, and poor in means. No political manipulation can hold the balance between these two classes, power must gravitate where there is intelligence and wealth, and it is a hopeless struggle to keep up a poverty-stricken peasantry in possession of the soil, and divorce the natural union of capital and land.173

During his examination of the Bengal Tenancy Bill of 1883, Ranade criticised it for tending to reduce Khamar land, or land in personal possession of the zamindars, and to increase land under the tenants.174 Contrasting the provisions of this Bill with those of the Prussian land legislation, he praised the latter for permitting the old feudal lords to convert a part of their estates into large capitalist farms under their absolute, unencumbered possession.175 Similarly, among other reasons for which he criticised the land revenue policy of the government an important one was his belief that it hampered the growth of large-scale capitalist agriculture.176 In the same way, he was opposed to the imposition of restrictions on the right to transfer land mainly because of the fear that such restrictions would check the inevitable tendency towards ‘concentration of the landed capital of the country'.177

Ranade therefore·advocated that the future development of agrarian relations in India should be based on the creation of two basic agrarian classes which would live side by side: (a) a large petty peasantry which would be free of all encumberances, whether of the state or the landlords, and which would be bolstered by a permanent and low land tax and the provision of cheap credit through agricultural banks; and (b) a large class of capitalist farmers and landlords who, being unhampered by any tenancy rights, etc., would be in complete possession ot their land and in a position to invest capital and utilise the latest advanced techniques of. agriculture. In this 'respect he held up for approval and imitation the pattern of land ownership, based on the growth of absolute property both in the landlord class and in the peasantry, that had come into existence in Prussia by the middle of the 19th century.178 In Prussia in 186o, he pointed out, 15 per cent of culturable land belonged to the state or the church, 44 per cent to large estate owners, 35 per cent to peasant proprietors, and 5 per cent to petty owners. Thus, he approvingly remarked, land had been divided equally 'between the rich landlords and the poor Free men', and the feudal serf had been converted into a free proprietor and the feudal lord into an unencumbered owner of his property.179 Applying the lessons of Prussia to India, Ranade came to the conclusion that

If this country sadly wants a proud and independent Yeomanry as the backbone of its strength and prosperity, it no less equally needs the leading and the light of Propertied men.... High and petty farming, with an upper ten thousand of the holders of large landed estates, and a vast mass of peasant farmers, this mixed constitution of rural society is necessary to secure the stability and progress of the Country.180

Ranade also discussed the ways and means of bringing into existence the class of capitalist farmers and landlords. In this connection, he surmised that some of the thrifty independent ryots would slowly extend their position and rise 'to a better position.181 He also hoped that many people from the moneyed classes would be attracted towards land and would buy the lands of the ‘indifferent and lazy' ryots and thus come to perform the function of capitalist landlords.182 This remedy would obviously be applicable to the ryotwari areas. For the zamindari areas of Bengal, Ranade suggested the copying of the Prussian land reforms. First of all he advised that all agrarian reforms in the zamindari areas should take place 'without any violent disruption of the economical relations of different Classes of Society, and without the shock of Revolution or internecine class struggles'.183 One of the grounds on which he opposed the Bengal Tenancy Bill was that, as its inevitable consequence, 'class will be set against class'.184 He was also opposed to any one-sided expropriation of the existing rights of the zamindars as, in his opinion, the Bengal Bill tended to do.185 Moreover, he believed thiat abolition of any of those rights should be duly compensated.i86 Ranade's own scheme was in favour of harmonising the interests of the zamindars and ryots by raising both to the status of independent proprietors of the soil. He proposed that full proprietary rights should be conferred on the ryots but only over a part of the land under their tenancy and that, as the price of purchase of these rights, the ryots should resign all rights over the remaining part of the land in favour of the zamindars. Thus one part of the land under tenancy would be assigned in full ownership to the ryot and the other part, also in full ownership, to the landlord. If a balance was still due to the zamindar, he might be compensated over a certain number of years by means of payment of money rent charges.187 In short, the zamindars should be paid compensation for the loss of zamindari rights and permitted to resume a part of the land under tenancy for personal cultivation. Under this scheme the absentee rent-receiving zamindars would be transformed into entrepreneurial capitalist farmers and landlords. Ranade also tried to give a more concrete shape to these proposals by proposing that in Bengal ½rd of the occupancy land and ½ of the non-occupancy land should be made over to the ryot in absolute right and i/3rd of the occupancy land and ½ of the non-occupancy land should be handed over as personal land to the landlord. Since he believed that this division would leave the zamindar partially uncompensated, he further proposed that to redress the balance of rights and liabilities the ryot should continue to pay his old rent on the reduced holding for a period of thirty or forty years, 'so as to repay balance of purchase money with interest'. The government might help by advancing the money to the ryots to purchase outright their landlord's claims which, according to Ranade, would amount to about Rs. 34o crores.188 Thus, Ranade hoped to ‘achieve the liberation of the Ryots in Bengal in a generation or two without any violence to vested rights'.189 It may be noted that the entire scheme of Ranade for the creation of independent peasants and capitalist landlords in Bengal was biased in favour of the zamindars, and that the land reforms he proposed were oriented not so much towards the creation of independent farmers as towards the transformuation of the rent-receiving zamindars into capitalist landlords. Independent property in land was to be created not by distribution of land to the ryots, but by handing it over to the landlords. As a matter of fact, his plan of land reforms was so unfavourable to the tenants that it was unimaginable that they would prefer to exchange their status as tenants, protected or unprotected, for the new title of independent owners of land.

While vague support to Ranade's seminal plan for the institutional reorganisation of Indian agriculture was given by some of the Indian leaders when they asked for the union of capital and labour to develop the agriculture of the country,19o more specific and detailed support was rather rare. One such occasion was the speech delivered by Deorao Vinayak at the Congress session of 189o wherein he said that land should be held mainly by those who could afford to improve it and not by poor hand-to-mouth cultivators'. He claimed that agricultural wealth could be best increased 'by the creation of a class of small capitalists—a middle class in fact'.191 As opposed to this support, Satis Chandra Mukherjea, editor of the Dawn, specifically opposed capitalist farming on the ground that it created unemployment and led to loss of self-respect on the part of the peasant.191a

## IX. AGRICULTURE AND INDUSTRY

Some of the Indian leaders viewed the problem of development of agriculture and improvement of the economic condition of the peasant in the wider context of the Indian economy and arrived at the conclusion that progress in agriculture was vitally linked with the simultaneous and rapid industrial development of the country, and that unless the tendency towards the ruralisation of the country was reversed radically no amount of 'tinkering' with the agrarian problem would serve a really useful purpose.

As the initiator of this point of view, Ranade argued, as early as 1881, that, since the malady from which Indian agriculture suffered lay ‘deep in the heart of the political system', ‘no mere external alleviation or dressing of the surface skin will prove of any avail'. What was needed, more than anything else, to remedy the situation was a diminution of the state burden on agriculture and a reduction of 'the pressure of the agricultural population on the land by the opening out of new avenues for labour and industry and surplus capital'.i92 Later, in 1892, in his address on 'Indian Political Economy', Ranade propounded the view that a country consigned for ever to dependence on agriculture would be condemned to remain poor and grow still poorer since agriculture had to work ‘under the bane of the Law of Diminishing Returns' and, in India, 'under the disadvantage of an uncertain rainfall'.193

The close inter-dependence between agricultural and industrial progress was repeatedly stressed in a series of editorials by the Mahratta during 1881-84. On 4 September 1881, for example, it opixed:

There is a superfluity of agricultural labour in the agricultural labour market, and unless that is removed from it and employed elsewhere, no remedial measure to improve the wretched condition of the agriculturist will be productive of permanent good results. The development of agriculture and mechanical industry must be simultaneous.

Similarly, in its issue dated 12 February 1882 it argued that 'no mere legislation, no banks, not even the permanency of tenure would go to improve the condition of the peasantry without the introduction of several industries', since no merely agricultural country could ever prosper.194 This argument was echoed by the Native Opinion of 25 May 1884.

In 1895, P. C. Ray endorsed Ranade's view and declared that 'a nation of agriculturists will always compare most unfavourably with a nation of artisans and manufacturers'. The revival of the dying Indian industries and the introduction of the modern industries from the West so as to 'relieve agricuiture of its redundant labourers' would be the best solution of the country's economic difficulties.195

G. V. Joshi blamed the over-crowding of agriculture for the unhealthy and excessive competition for land, which in turn forced up the rents to ruinous heights, led to sub-division of land, and weakened the ryot's motive to improve land.196 Moreover, the over-crowding of agriculture resulted in the underemployment and enforced idleness of millions, or, in other words, in ‘a ruinous waste of economic energy'. According to his calculations, more than half the rural population was in fact without proper work.197 He, too, therefore recommended that non-agricultural industries should be developed 'to draw off the superfluous numbers'. 'Thie more the Ryot is relieved from the existing unhealthy and abnormal pressure by the opening up of such new outlets for labour, the freer the conditions of his work would be and the greater his chances of success', he maintained.i98 He also emphasised that so long as India remained dependent on the single industry of agriculture, 'the root of our economic difficulties will remain untouched'.199 Tilak's Kesari affirmed both these contentions in its issues dated 18 June 1901 and 11 November 1902.200

G. Subramaniya Iyer also gave unequivocal expression to this line of thinking in his book, Some Economic Aspects of British Rule in India, published in 1903. Expressing his agreement with the Finance Minister of Russia, M. De Witte, that so long as a country remained a purely agricultural country it would not be able to ‘get rid of periodic famines and general destitution', he alleged that in this respect India was even in worse position than Russia, since eight-tenths of its population was dependent upon agriculture and the rest 'mainly on cooly work or trivial unproductive occupations'. 'Until this serious anomaly in the economic condition of India is redressed', he wrote, 'the millennium will not arrive either to the peasant or to other classes. The present dead level of poverty will not be removed.' Industrialisation of the country was, therefore, 'the essential condition of India's prosperity'.201