# Afterword

Te said in Chapter 5 that any domain of knowledge tends to generate words that communicate the thoughts and concepts important to that domain. These words become the vehicle for communication between people, but they also frame and limit what we think.

Our own field is full of such words: usability engineer, software developer, human factors engineer, user interface designer. When we use these concepts to help us identify and promote the skills necessary to deliver useful systems, they serve us well; but when they lead us to balkanize our organizations, separating the functions into groups focused only on their own part of the problem, they become stumbling blocks.

I started in this industry as a liaison between customer service and engineering. From this position I learned firsthand how different the two points of view are and how difficult it is to bridge the gulf. There is no good way to explain to an extremely competent database expert why his technically sophisticated three-phase commit algorithm is simply beside the point given the reality of specific customer needs. Even when there's a clear need to introduce new ways of working, making change happen is another story. People are helpless to adopt new ways of working unless they know of available alternatives and have the skill to put them into action. My first development work was on data dictionaries, which had (at the time) the distinction of being almost the only point of integration between development tools. Consistent use of the dictionary would make or break the integration among tools, but no one had any idea how to get the different groups to agree. I naively took the problem on and had no trouble generating interest in solving the problem—in fact, I ended up with representatives of 14 teams in a room and not the least idea what to do with them. The idea that an engineer should learn how to manage a room as a basic tool of the trade was foreign to the expectations of the time, as it is still.

Just as our language tends to compartmentalize our organizations, so it tends to compartmentalize the development process itself. "Requirements analysis," or "needs analysis"—whatever term is currently fashionable——splits the initial task of determining what a system will be from the rest of development. In doing so, it gives developers a reason for thinking "It's not my job. It's marketing's job—or the analysts job—or the customers' job to tell us what they want." But it's not a job that can be done in isolation. Black-box design is a useful implementation strategy but not a good approach to organizational design. We need development expertise involved in understanding the customer's problems, and we need the other functions involved in understanding how to turn the solution to these problems into a system structure that works for the user.

Much of the work that Karen and I have done together has focused on how to put the techniques, process tools, and interpersonal tools into the hands of project teams so that they can solve their own problems. Contextual Inquiry hit me at just the right time—I had recently completed a round of customer visits for a product I was working on, using traditional interviews and discussions, so I recognized the idea as stunningly obvious on the one hand and yet totally foreign to the accepted way of gathering product requirements on the other. But I wasn't interested in the technique to give it away—as a project leader, I wanted it for myself and my team, and I wanted to build it up into a rational way of designing products. So we've always approached the process not as an add-on, or a tool for those with specialized expertise, but as a way to get the basic job of design done.

We've had to learn along the way that what makes a process rational differs from organization to organization and from team to team. Whether you're designing what you'll do for the next hour or how you'll run a two-year project, you can't get out of process design. Contextual Design is the raw material for designing a workable process. We've had the privilege of working with teams that learned how to manage and reinvent their own processes, picking up the customercentered techniques while inventing and integrating new approaches and techniques along the way. We've distributed some of their stories throughout the book. These teams have taught us what is possible, and for that, we are grateful.

Hugh Beyer