# Promoting Aluminum: Designers and the American Aluminum Industry Dennis Doordan Aluminum is one of the ubiquitous metals of the late twentieth century. Designers have used aluminum for everything from aircraft design to cookware; objects as diverse as skyscrapers and lunch sandwiches have been wrapped in aluminum. This pervasive presence of aluminum in the designed environment is not, of course, the result of chance or coincidence. Starting in the late 1940s, the American aluminum industry embarked on a remarkably successful campaign to promote the use of aluminum. Even a brief review of this campaign, such as this essay offers, can be rewarding for design historians and practitioners. A case study of the design activity sponsored by the American aluminum industry affords historians the opportunity to explicate the complex relationship between design and industry in the modern era. A review of the place and role of design in the American aluminum industry also challenges historians to distinguish between the emerging field of design history and other scholarly disciplines such as the history of technology or business studies. In order to understand the dynamic role played by industrial designers within the American aluminum industry after World War II, several questions need to be answered: • What were industrial designers asked to do by the aluminum industry? What was the agenda for design within the industry? • How were designers integrated into the corporate structure of the industry? • What was the political and economic situation within the industry that prompted the industrial leadership to engage the services of professional industrial designers? • How do we assess the impact of the war on design? Is the post-1945 era distinguishable in any significant way from the pre-World War II era? Aluminum, of course, was a familiar material to designers and consumers alike before the outbreak of World War II. Since aluminum was clearly part of the new "machine esthetic" of the pre-war years in America, it is important to identify the factors that distinguish the post-war history of aluminum. Although the volume of aluminum available to designers was greatly increased after 1945, the post-war story of aluminum is not the result of quantitative factors alone. There was a significant difference in the importance attached to design activities within the aluminum industry before and after the war. Design was a marginal activity within the industry before the war; it was a crucial corporate concern after the war. In order to understand why this is so, it is necessary to know something about the history of the industry and the life cycle of aluminum itself. The life cycle of aluminum begins with bauxite, which is refined into something referred to within the industry as pig aluminum. Pig aluminum constitutes the basic material from which all end products (often in the form of alloys created to enhance various properties of aluminum) are fabricated. Activities best described as scientific and technological in nature dominate the front end— from bauxite to pig aluminum—of the aluminum cycle. However, activities more properly characterized as design efforts dominate the rear end of the cycle—from pig aluminum to final fabrication. Before 1940, the American aluminum industry was synonymous with one company, the Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa), founded in 1888. Alcoa was the sole American producer of pig aluminum. Anyone who designed and made anything with aluminum—from architectural elements to cooking utensils— purchased their aluminum from Alcoa. And Alcoa was oriented to the capital-intensive, large-volume front end of the material cycle. The company directed its efforts to basic research and development in the areas of metallurgical science and the production technologies necessary to reduce, refine, smelt, forge, and cast aluminum. It did so because, for most of the first four decades of this century, pig aluminum represented a very substantial share of the value of finished or end-line aluminum products. In 1919, for example, the value of pig aluminum represented fully two-thirds of the value of any finished aluminum product. Industry analysts noted that, as a result, the early stages of the industrial process—from bauxite to pig aluminum—were creating more wealth for the industry than the later stages. In such a situation, it is in the immediate interests of the industry to focus its efforts on scientific and technological research directed to improving the production and handling of pig aluminum. World War II dramatically changed this. It did so for two reasons. First, the war accelerated one existing trend within the industry. Second, the war ultimately forced a complete reconfiguration of the aluminum industry. Together, these two factors created a postwar climate in which activities we can recognize as design activities (as opposed to strictly technical research and development activities) emerged as important industry considerations. In the 1920s and 1930s, the value of pig aluminum in relationship to the value of fabricated end products declined. In 1933, it still amounted to more than half the value of any finished aluminum product; but by 1939, pig aluminum's share of product value had fallen to 40 percent. World War II accelerated this decline as more and more new applications and end products were developed. The rear end of the material lifeline—fabrication of finished products—now grew in importance. Another factor to note involves the productive capacity of the industry. In order to meet the voracious wartime demand for strong lightweight metals, the United States government subsidized the expansion of the industry's productive capacity. As a result of direct government investment, the production of aluminum increased by more than 600 percent between 1939 and the peak year of 1943. This far outpaced the increase in other critical metals such as steel or copper.² Even before the conclusion of the war, industry executives were concerned with developing new markets to absorb the expanded productive capacity. In an important study of the aluminum industry, published in 1945, industry analysts argued: Looking to the future, the transition from war- to peacetime uses of aluminum must take place at the fabricating stage, new products must be discovered, engineered, and produced or there will be fewer jobs at all stages of the aluminum industry. In 1944, Congress passed the Surplus Property Act; it initiated the process by which the federal government divested itself of the factories built with public money during the war. Alcoa was ready and willing to purchase the new aluminum facilities in order to preserve its monopoly. However, in 1945, the Justice Department initiated an antitrust action designed to break Alcoa's monopoly. The goal of the United States government, repeated by numerous government officials in courtrooms, committee hearings, and legislative chambers, was to promote a free enterprise system based on competition for market share within the industry. The government refused to sell the new productive facilities to Alcoa and, through every possible means, worked to create a competitive industry for aluminum. Alcoa's monopoly was at an end. Encouraged by the federal government, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company—long a consumer of aluminum for cigarette packaging—and the Kaiser Company—a shipbuilding and heavy construction concern—quickly established independent aluminum companies, acquired aluminum production facilities from the Surplus Property Board, and entered the market as vertically integrated primary producers of aluminum. The forced reconfiguration of the aluminum industry, together with the recognition on the part of the industrial leadership that the continued vitality of the industry was increasingly dependent upon the rear end or final application stage of the material cycle, ushered in a fundamentally new era in the history of aluminum: the design era. The Reynolds Metals Company led the way in providing a coherent identity and clearly defined role for design in industrial planning. In 1950, Reynolds created a Styling and Design Department headed by Jim Birnie, a package designer already employed by Reynolds. In 1955, Alcoa consolidated staff and activities previously scattered throughout the company into a new Market Development Department headed by Fritz Close, formerly of Alcoa's Sales Department. Close immediately hired Sam Fahnestock, an industrial designer previously employed in the design offices of Harold Van Doren, Dan Dailey, and Peter Muller-Munk. Kaiser Aluminum hired Franklin Q. Hershey in 1956 to head up its Industrial Design Department. Hershey was the former chief stylist for Ford. The size and designation of these design units varied among the three companies. Here we are interested in what they had in common. • All three design units were clearly distinguished from the more scientific and technologically oriented research and development units within the industry. • The heads of design units reported to the vice president for sales or to some corporate strategic planning committee, while the heads of R&D reported to the individuals or committees responsible for basic manufacturing processes. • The personnel in these design units came, for the most part, from a sales background or from design staffs of other corporate and industrial design offices, in contrast to the science and engineering backgrounds of most of the R&D staffs. What did the aluminum industry ask their in-house design staffs to do? Interestingly, the industry did not ask Birnie, Close, and Hershey to design end products. Designers employed by the aluminum industry seldom competed directly with independent designers or those employed by the industry's customers. Instead, they were expected to work with designers outside the industry, to assist them in understanding the properties and performances of aluminum and aluminum alloys, and to encourage other designers to find new uses for aluminum. A 1956 Reynolds publication succinctly states the prevailing design wisdom in the industry during the 1950s: The fullest exploitation of anything new, whether it is an idea, a technique, or a material, demands understanding and imagination." To promote understanding and imagination, industry design staffs set out to educate and stimulate designers. At the rear end of the material cycle (i.e., final fabrication), aluminum appears in the form of various alloys, all of which can be produced in a variety of thicknesses, textures, finishes, colors, etc. Aluminum is really an amazingly diverse set of lightweight metals. In order to assist independent designers in identifying and specifying the proper form of aluminum for specific situations, industry designers distributed informative literature and samples, visited design offices to demonstrate new developments, invited outside designers to visit aluminum production facilities, answered questions, and publicized innovative uses for the material. In 1959, Frank Magee, president of Alcoa, described Alcoa's approach to working with outside designers: Our program with industrial designers, begun over the past five years, aims to place Alcoa's knowledge and facilities at the disposal of any designers who can use them. Our own industrial design group was established for the sole purpose of aiding industrial designers in their projects—not in any way to compete with the designer! At Reynolds, Birnie conceived of his design department as an open house where designers were welcome to visit with problems and questions, or just to satisfy their curiosity. According to Birnie: Designers are welcome to come in here and stay as long as they like. And they do come, too. And we tell them what tricks we know about designing in aluminum. How successful were Alcoa, Reynolds, and Kaiser? Extremely successful. Henry Dreyfuss, for example, noted: I think most designers would agree that the aluminum people have done a far more effective job of education than other metal suppliers. They have spread the word about the design possibilities of their material, and have succeeded in establishing a connotation of "modernity" which older industries have reason to envy." Education, then, was an important function performed by the industry's own design staffs. They developed and disseminated a specialized body of information for use by the primary designers of finished products. Industrial design departments served as a crucial link between the industry's research, development, and production divisions and the design community. One of the conclusions to be drawn from this is that this kind of design activity alters the traditional relationship between the designer and the designed object. Birnie, Close, and Hershey designed information not objects. This is in contrast to the classic (and limiting) model of a designer engaged by an industry to design-or redesign—final products. The corporate and design leadership of the aluminum industry realized that providing information concerning the physical properties of aluminum was not enough to insure designers would actually employ their product. Alcoa, Kaiser, and Reynolds all worked to stimulate a climate of creative engagement with aluminum on the part of independent designers. Industry publications, distributed free to design offices and schools, were filled not only with technical data but also with articles on design management in large corporations, portfolios of recent distinguished design in aluminum, reports on industrial and design trends, and, significantly, essays on themes such as creativity, innovation, and the phenomenon of change.to According to industry publications, the use of aluminum could be justified on the basis of its expressive properties as well as its functional performance criteria. In the hands of creative designers, aluminum could do more than solve technical problems involving strength-to-weight ratios; it could wed art and manufacturing, thus enriching the esthetic dimension of life while serving practical ends. The widespread application of aluminum at all levels of design activity after World War II was not the product of some vaguely defined but inexorable march of material progress. Historians should avoid accounting for change by advancing the romantic notion of the will-of-the-epoch reified in the form of aluminum foil. Nor can the stylistic analysis of aluminum objects alone reveal the root causes of their pervasive presence, because corporate not esthetic concerns exercised a determining role in the post-war history of aluminum. The federally mandated reconfiguration of the industry and its expanded productive capacity explains why the aluminum industry moved in the direction it did after World War II. But market conditions and production capacity alone cannot explain the form design activities assumed within the industry. The design efforts of the aluminum industry were informed by an intellectual and cultural world view as well as a technical one. Design historians must note not only the form and shape of objects but also the constituent elements of the intellectual climate within an industry if we ever hope to portray adequately the complexity of a design culture. The Age of Aluminum did not just happen; it was designed to happen, consciously designed by industrial designers working within the framework of the aluminum industry to provide technical information and to promote a climate conducive to a creative engagement with aluminum. ## For Further Reading Sterling Brubacker, Trends in the World Aluminum Industry (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1967). Charles Carr, Alcoa, An American Enterprise (New York: Rinehart, 1952). Alfred Chandler, Jr., "Technology and the Transformation of Industrial Organization," in Technology, the Economy, and Society: The American Experience, ed. Joel Colton and Stuart Bruchey (New York: Columbia University Press, 1987). E. Raymond Corey, The Development of Markets for New Materials: A Study of Building Nets End-Product Markets for Aluminum, Fibrous Glass, and the Plastics (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1956). Arthur Gregor, "Aluminum as a Design Material," Industrial Design 7 (May 1960): special issue on aluminum. Merton J. Peck, Competition in the Aluminum Industry 1945–1958 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1961). Robert Sheehan, "Look at the Reynolds Boys Now," Fortune 48 (August 1953): 107–13; 170–78. Section III Design in the Context of National Experience