# Reconsidering the Factory, Art-Labor, and the Schools of Design in Nineteenth-Century Britain James A. Schmiechen One of the most widely accepted notions about the relationship between art and labor in nineteenth-century Britain is that the introduction of the machine into industry resulted in the divorce of art from work. Craft disappeared, it is argued, as artisans lost control over production, tools, quality control, wages, and the work environment. Indeed, the disappearance of esthetic activity on the part of the industrial worker is part of the wider notion that the "dark and satanic mills," as the early factories were called, brought on the proletarianization of the working class and the problem of modern alienation. As the artisan fell victim to the division of labor and was replaced by mere machine tenders, designing and making were driven far apart. More and more workers became proletarianized, or, as one historian put it, "very few people designed for machine production." Design itself went from bad to worse and work "was bleaker than ever before in European history." Degenerate design and demise of the artisan were two sides of the same coin. Contemporary observers, including Friedrich Engels, Thomas Carlyle, and A. W. N. Pugin, wrote about and lamented the separation of art and labor; among them the classic statements on the subject came first from John Ruskin, the century's leading art critic, and then, of course, from William Morris, the socialist and founder of the movement to rescue art-labor from the evils of mechanization. Both held machine society responsible for the atomization of the whole man. As John and Barbara Hammond put it earlier in the present century, "the soul of man was passing into a colder exile." For a variety of reasons, some ideological and some connected to modern-day historians' distaste for Victorian design, this notion of proletarianization of the art-labor process has followed us into the twentieth century. It is generally held that nineteenth-century mechanization, by directly attacking workers' skills, led to a decline in the demand for skilled labor, including art-labor,' and not until the early twentieth century, with the founding of the German Werkbund and the work of Peter Behrens in Germany, do we see a working alliance between industry and art. Although recent design historians have begun to evaluate Victorian design within its own social context and not from within the context of twentieth-century modernism,' the notion of the proletarianization of art-labor nevertheless still stands tall. One recent reevaluation of design and the machine in the nineteenth century drops it back to the doorstep of an exploitive capitalist system. Most tenacious in their hold onto the proletarian thesis is that school of historians who see William Morris and the "craftsman ideal" as the antithesis to the machine society and bad design. The Morris-led Arts and Crafts movement has, of course, been seen as revolutionary because it was, it is argued, the antithesis of an esthetically bankrupt factory system. I propose to stand this proletarianization argument on its head; that is, I wish to set forth the notion that early nineteenthcentury technology, combined with some important demographic, economic, and cultural changes, induced both a dramatic expansion of art-labor employment and a new interest in art training for working people. All in all, the picture is less one of mass proletarianization than one of improvements in the work status and the job opportunities for workers in industries requiring art-labor. What follows is first a brief description of a dual upheaval in the 1830s and 1840s in Britain that set this expansion in motion—a design revolution of sorts-and then a longer discussion of the impact machinery and its concomitant changes had on the labor force. The first component in this design revolution of the 1830s and 1840s was a striking economic and demographic change whereby a large portion of the population—namely, the middle and lowermiddle classes—became increasingly urbanized and experienced a notable increase in disposable income. They became the first great mass of "consumers" in the modern sense and in so doing exerted enormous pressure on manufacturers to speed up production of cheap household and personal goods. Accompanying this was a second upheaval, a "bourgeois" social and cultural revolution that supported the idea of "design" as a way of communicating certain social ideals. It was precisely at this time that British society embraced the notion that a morally designed physical environment would create a moral individual. This moral component deserves more attention than it has received because it gave an enormous push to mass-produced machine "art" products, everything from teapots to floor coverings. Design (often mistaken for simple ornamentation) sought to convey certain historic truths and moral precepts, hence the values an object conveyed became just as important as its strictly utilitarian purpose. Design had become, by the 1840s, highly didactic in purpose and dedicated to the idea of the union of art and industry-a traffic in symbols whereby ornamentation assumed a social function, or, more precisely, it became an agent of certain "associations" that would serve a social purpose. As the 1849 Select Committee on the Schools of Design put it, the advantage of good design is that it attracts "the people" away “from degrading objects and pursuits." and optimism that the early Victorians envisaged the merger of art and technology as a way to uplift society. Contrary to the sentiments of Victorian social critics such as Ruskin, Morris, and Engels, many Victorians believed that machines were both the "friends of labour" because they eliminated "brute .. . and degrading labour" and 'brute intellect,"" and generators of new art-labor employment. This argument was lucidly set forth by the 1849 Select Committee on Design: Central to this design revolution—an age of design mania as it was called—was the machine. It was with a great deal of seriousness The value of design in its bearing on the interests of the labouring population is worthy of notice. . .. On the one hand, by the substitution of machine for hand labour, human labour is economized, and the cost of production of simple "products" is diminished, on the other hand, as soon as the public obtains plain manufactures cheap, it seems to desire, almost by a law of nature, to have them decorated and thus creates an employment for that labour which otherwise would appear for the time superfluous." The "otherwise superfluous" labor, of course, is art-labor— that is, labor which required a considerable degree of artistic skillu and judgment and which existed because of and alongside of the machine. The machine, in short, was design-intensive. By lowering costs and providing new design technologies, it allowed designer and manufacturer to add artistic "associations" (illustrations from the classical and medieval past, natural and rural images, and other historic or didactic symbolism) to the product—that is, create a new esthetic out of historicist forms—and in doing so create a mass of new art-labor jobs. The result was dozens of new industries which in Henry Cole's words became "governed by ornamental design," that is, manufacturing in which special knowledge of art is required and which relies on machinery, new materials, or division of labor. Cole's list is staggering (Table 1). It suggests that unlike the popular twentieth-century belief that technology was a way of simplifying product designs and bringing about universal design, in reality it made everyday products more varied and ostentatious. Because of the primitive nature of most early machines, artistic skill and esthetic judgment remained an integral part of the work process. Several examples suffice. The production of engraved etchings with photographic negatives became heavily dependent upon highly-trained etchers and engravers, while the new floorcloth industry (made possible because of cheap machine-made canvas) relied on a new class of designers, handblock printers, color mixers, and other art-labor jobs." Further, jobs arose in "architectural decoration" where a variety of machines cut, molded, and polished marble, thereby giving birth to mass merchandising of domestic fireplaces, mantles, door frames, railings, and sculpture for interior use, while at the same time generating a whole new class of sculptors, modelers, and designers." Table 1
<table><tr><td colspan="3">Ornamental Design Manufacture (&quot;Cole&#x27;s List&quot;)s</td></tr><tr><td>Cotton Woolen and</td><td>Silks Calicoes and Other</td><td>Brass and Cast and Hammered Iron</td></tr><tr><td>Worsted</td><td>Printed Cloth Velvet and</td><td>Products Gold and Silver</td></tr><tr><td>Silk and Velvet Flax and Hemp</td><td>Velveteen</td><td>Decorative Plate</td></tr><tr><td>Fabrics Muslins (sewed and</td><td>Floor Cloths Wallpaper</td><td>Electro-plated and Ormolu Products</td></tr><tr><td>embroidered) Patterned Woven</td><td>Japanning</td><td>Jewelry Toys and</td></tr><tr><td>Carpets</td><td>Porcelain and Earthenware</td><td>Ornaments Glass Products</td></tr><tr><td>Printed Carpets Shawls (and other</td><td>Painting Glass Painting</td><td>(blown, molded, pressed, engraved,</td></tr><tr><td>mixed fabrics) Bookbinding and</td><td>Enamelware Architectural</td><td>etc.) Ceramic Potters</td></tr><tr><td>Leather Embossing Mousseline de</td><td>Decoration for Wall and Ceiling</td><td>(hard and soft</td></tr><tr><td>Laine and Cashmere Fabric</td><td>Architectural Decoration in</td><td>porcelain, statuary) Porcelain,</td></tr></table> The expansion of the wallpaper industry is a case in point. Wallpaper imitation of tapestry had been popular for well over a hundred years before wallpaper was mass produced by powerdriven machinery in the 1830s. Here the adaptation of steam power to the roller and cylinder printing machines and then the removal (in 1836) of the tax on domestic paper made the 1830s the age of wallpaper. As Charles Dickens remarked, the rich could now throw out their ugly and dirty tapestries, and even those of small means had a chance of "a neat set of walls." Cheap wallpaper meant more designs—as manufacturers found it necessary to issue new designs every six months. As one observer said of wallpaper design in 1836, "the invention of the artist is kept in a constant state of activity for the production of new forms, new combinations, and new arrangements."" The number of paper stainers, as these workers were called, increased by 60 percent between 1841 and 1851, and between 1839 and 1847 alone over eighteen hundred new designs were entered on the patent rolls.® Because much wallpaper in these early decades was a combination of steam roller and hand-block work, or even, as in some cases, a combination of steam roller and hand-painted work," the traditional hand-block process of wallpaper making entered the factory and existed side by side with machine printing. The growth and expansion of art-labor in the metal goods trades is remarkably close to that in other art-intensive trades. Here 20 J Howell, fatry inspewtr, in SCAM 1836,103. 22 The best accounts of changes in calico printing are Geoffrey Turnbull, A History of the Calico Printing Industry of Great Britan, John G. Turnbull, ed. (Altrincham: 1941) and Edward Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great Britain (London: Fisher, Fisher & Jackson, 1835). Also see S. D Chapman, "Quantity versus Quality in the British Industrial Revolution, The Case of Printed Textiles." Northem History 21 (1984):175–-92, and M. G. Quimby and Polly Anne Earl. Technological Innovation and the Decorative Arts Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1974). The actual design process in this field has yet to have a good written history Most helpful is P. C. Floud, "The Origins of English Calico Printing,""The English Contribution to the Early History of Indigo Printing." "The English Contribution to the Development of Copperpiate Printing." Joumal of the Society of Dyers and Colourists 76 (1960): 285–91. 344-49,425-34 Considerable discussion of this topic can be found in PP Report of the Select Committe on Copyright of Designs. 1840 (IUP Industrial Revolution Design. vol. 2k; hereafter cited as SCCD. 1840. 23 Friedrich Engels, Tbe Condition of the Working Class in Engfand, trans. W. O. Henderson and W. H. Chaloner (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 196B). 219 24 PP Census Returns; 1841, 1851 too the 1830s and 1840s constituted the take-off stage. Mechanization and the evolution of new technologies such as electroplating (much of this process taking place in and around Birmingham and Sheffield) resulted in an explosion in the mass production of household goods such as iron stoves, tableware, and lighting fixtures. Between 1841 and 1871 the number of persons engaged in these trades increased from twenty-one hundred to thirty-seven hundred, while in 1846 alone over thirty-three thousand new designs were registered. The metal trades relied on a large number of new and traditional art workers: designers, modelers (those who made the design into a wax model), dye-sinkers, engravers, and those who applied ornamentation; to all, as one factory inspector observed, "proficiency in art is of the very highest importance."Indeed, the metal trades worker had the task of translating flat surface design into three-dimensional ornament and had to have an understanding of the changes in the metal when heated and how any particular form would "deliver from the sand."2 The early nineteenth-century interaction between machine, worker, and art-labor is perhaps best illustrated in the textile printing industry. Machine "calico" cloth printing by copper plates had existed under a small workshop system in the cotton textile industry since the later eighteenth century, but it was when the power loom caused a dramatic rise in the demand for printed cloth that mechanization in the print works took off. In the 1830s, the successful application of steam power to the engraved metal roller process together with a series of remarkable advances of dyestuff resulted in lowering the cost of printed cloth by about 75 percent, and this ushered in an age of cheap printed cloth, including that lovable old Victorian chintz, as well as thousands of colorful patterned calicoes to dress a fashion-mad (and color-mad) society." Engels, who argued in 1844 that steam-powered engraved cylinders virtually superseded skilled labor in calico printing, was most probably wrong. For one thing, the traditional blockprinting sector of the trade grew rapidly between 1815 and 1830 as the power loom caused an explosion in cotton cloth production. In reality, the number of workers in the textile print industry increased by 50 percent, for example, between 1841 and 1851, although it is difficult to say if the machine roller factory process involved any more or less art-labor skill than the pre-factory block print "table" process. The factory process appears to be more subdivided, although even under the artisan workshop system the subdivision of work tasks was common (such as the hand application of color by cheaper female labor). It is not to be denied that the factory and technology fostered considerable disequilibrium in employer-worker relations and, indeed, that the conditions of work for many (including children) in the trade were sub-standard to say the least. Nevertheless, it is fairly certain that the factory machine print process relied on considerable skill and that overall the number of jobs requiring artistic skill or judgment did not decline. Precisely the opposite appears to have occurred. While it is probable that with the new print factory the proportion of unskilled or semiskilled labor increased, the ratio of apprentices to journeymen seems to have dropped (to the favor of the journeymen) from 3:5 in 1804 to 1:3 by 1875, and the aggregate number of art-labor jobs most probably increased. Although the introduction of the machine and of cheap labor were bitterly attacked by the journeymen (a struggle which stirred up considerable public controversy in the period 1800-1815), by 1830 the journeymen had been transformed from workshop artisans to machine operators in print factories wherein they retained control over the supply of apprentice labor and enjoyed relatively high wages." What the art-labor duties of the machinist were is unclear, but his high wage (the same as a block printer in 1839) suggests that the machinist was a skilled worker. What is most contrary to the proletarianization thesis is that early mechanized textile printing consisted of several labor-intensive stages all of which required considerable skill in composition of design, drawing, understanding of scale, proportion, and color. First, of course, was the invention of the design, which in some cases took place on the manufacturer's premises, but was just as often done outside the factory itself. Inglis and Wakefield, the Glasgow printworks, for example, hired two in-house designers in their London office, other in-house designers at the Glasgow factory, and six out-of-house designers in the city of Glasgow.? Overall, for Britain, the number of pattern designers doubled between 1841 and 1851, and in Manchester in just one year (1840) five hundred designers turned out over a half-million textile designs." The machine itself invited more design, because it allowed for an increased draftsmanship not possible under the old system, while new dye stuff, including chrome yellow and dark green (heretofore unavailable), allowed the designer to avoid masking color misregistrations and to undertake greater use of shading and gradation of color; and, as in the case of the discovery of Turkey Red dye, opened the door to design possibilities (particularly for the export market) which had not previously existed. Next, the design had to be made to suit the cloth. Pattern-drawing consisted of making out or copying the pattern to paper by the drawer or sketch maker to the required scale. A worker then assumed the task of the putter on who transferred the pattern to the roller. Next, engraver engraved the roller itself, a process which often meant making alterations in the design before or after the printing took place. Finally, the color mixer selected the colors appropriate to the design and would, if necessary, adjust the color during printing. This was a skilled task, as indicated by the fact that color mixers' wages were higher in 1849 than those of the traditional block printers. Furthermore, the block printer found that because mass-produced factory printed cloth was very often a combination of machine and block printing, the block printing process became more design intensive, and therefore the block printer worked alongside the machine in the factory. Developments in factory weaving followed somewhat the same pattern. It was necessary for a larger number of workers to understand the entire design-execution process while at the same time they were acquiring more narrowly defined skills. Designing and other art-labor tasks in woven, as opposed to printed, textile design underwent significant change as a result of the introduction of the seam-powered jacquard loom, which in the 1840s made the traditional hand-drawn (or "harness") domestic and small workshop process nearly obsolete. Mechanization meant that not only could a patterned shawl, for example, be woven in one day as compared to the hand-loom shawl which took two weeks to weave, but equally important the mechanized jacquard, because it allowed for new design possibilities, was design and preparation intensive. The demand for art-labor at all thre stages of weaving, design, transfer, and application, increased. In the design stage, for example, the jacquard allowed for greater variety and versatility in design and permitted "finer definition" and greater imitation possibilities." As with printed cloth, a multitude of new patterns were designed each year as manufacturers used design to exploit new markets at home and abroad—not the least of which was the shawl trade that profited from a shawl fashion boom from about 1800 to 1870. After the initial pattern was designed, either by an in-house designer or contracted from the outside, the pattern had to be redrawn by the drawer onto lined paper, which was called "point paper." This, in effect, was both a mathematical and artistic process which demanded that the design be converted to the proper scale to fit the cloth. Next, another worker took this point-paper design and used it to make the punched cards (often many hundreds) which were hooked up to the jacquard loom. The jacquard was, in a sense, a sort of primitive computer. In France, this would have been done by the designer himself because it took considerable skill and understanding of the pattern. In Britain, however, the process was given to someone of lesser stature, thus providing the British a decided financial advantage, but creating yet another class of worker trained in particular artistic and mathematical skills while still having an understanding of the overall design. The last crucial task was to transfer the design to the actual loom—setting the loom by way of the punched cards. As was claimed in 1836, the person who sets the loom needs to be "imbued with the principles of design; he should have certain taste, and know what forms will have the best effect upon the tissue."The result of 34 Cole termed them "abortions and only fit for the fire." SCSD. 1849 xovii, 2032. 35 For a reference to the absence of design in domestic lacemaking, see SCAM. 2nd Report, 1836, 144-203. I am indebted to the late John Ward for allowing me to read his Textile Trade Unionism in Nineteenth-Cantury Scotland" (unpub lished paper, 1987). See also Turnbull Calico Printing. 93. 223. Certainly "masters" and "journeymen" alike in the traditional (prefactory) manufacturing process relied on guide books for some of their design and construction needs, but it appears that the new mass-production factory mode of production did not generate a new literature. The call for guide books and "principles" for designers and art-laborers is frequently heard in the early nineteenth century (see, for example, Architectural Magazine and Journal 2 [1835] 42) Curiously. the age saw a remarkable proliferation of cheap artistic reproductions which, in a sense, gave a mass of workers access to self-education in the arts. In recent years the study of apprenticeship has been important to labor historians because it raises the question of who controlled the workplace—employer or employee. Richard Price, "The Labour Process and Labour History." Social History8 (1983) has argued that control of the workplace was central to the conflict between classes For further discussion of Price's argument and the arguments of others on the subject, see Williamn Knox, "Apprenticeship and Deskilling in Britain, 1850-1914." Internatinai Review of Social History 31 (1986). 36The firm of Turmbull and Stockdale in Bury. 36 The firm of Tumbull and Stockdale in Bury for example, began in 1881 with William Tumbull working his own printing machine. Tumbull, Calico Pranting. 219. all this was that manufacturing centers specializing in patterned woolens built up a large design labor force. Such was the case of Paisley where one family in sixty was engaged in shawl design. It is, therefore, difficult to argue, as the proletarian thesis does, that with mechanization the range of skills narrowed and the degree or level of skill declined. What did happen is that within a process of highly uneven industrial-capitalist development, skill was redefined and the relationship between skill acquisition and the status of the worker changed; in short, over the course of the several decades after about 1830, mechanization was accompanied by a near revolution in how the art-labor force was formed and trained. This change was the heart of what we now regard as the Victorian design crisis. The gradual, uneven, and incomplete manner in which technology transformed industry created an awkward void in skill acquisition—a void that caused panic on the part of the Victorians who were convinced their system of art training for industry was grossly deficient and had led to bad design. Henry Cole, that ever-busy Victorian organizer of education, art, and industry, claimed to have studied all fifty-six thousand new designs between 1839 and 1848 and found them wanting." A busy Victorian indeed. Our knowledge of art-labor training and the transmission of skill is rudimentary, but I would like to suggest what may have happened. For many of these new or reconstituted industries engaged in "art-manufacture," a traditional patrimonial apprenticeship system had existed whereby the worker exercised not only a considerable amount of skill (including artistic skill) but also acted as part of a craft group or union, and exerted considerable control over production and working conditions. Wages and the number of new entries into the trade were, historically, upheld by the craft group (or even guaranteed by statute). The skill or craft aspect was passed from family member to family member (usually from father to son), although in some trades (such as lace manufacture) the old hand-production system served as a disincentive to design and art-labor. Many of these elements of the old system were still in place in the early Victorian decades, as work shifted from workshop to factory," although in some trades the cement of the old system, apprenticeship, was under attack and drying out. Because, as we have seen, the machine and its frequent companion, the subdivision of labor, open required either a different level or range of creative invention and esthetic judgment (i.e., skill), and because of the small scale of most of these new enterprises, the old apprenticeship system reappeared in the factory only in a weakened state. Although some manufacturers, as entrepreneurs, began their careers by physically running the production process on their own," most did not seek to control skill acquisition and therefore did little to train their employees. As one designer observed, art-labor workers "have scarcely any opportunity in life to make themselves generally acquainted with the various proportions of 38 James Crabb, "Education of the People." Leigh Hunt's London Joumnal 2B (November 1835): 424. 39 SCAM 2nd FReport 1836. 72–105. When the new Museum of Manufacture was opened in London in 1853. it attracted over eight hundred visitors a day, many of whom were workers, probably using the museum as an educational opportunity But by no means was the urban midle class unaware of the need for new means of art education. A Society for the Promotion of Practical Design was in operation by 1830.ffering classes to the public; and a remarkable number of new magazines, such as the Art Union and John C. Loudon's Architectural Magazine and Jouma/ were dedicated to the improvement of public taste and artlabor skil. By mid-century many of the industrial towns (such as Preston) boasted of public access to art collections-something unheard of several decades earlier (see, for example, the comments of The Builder 18 jJanuary 1851) 49) 40 Elizabeth Bonython, King Cole, A Picture Portrait of Sir Henry Cole, 1808-1882 London: Victoria and Albert Museum 1981), 7; othrer criticisms of the schools are found in N. Pevsner,"The Cole Circle." chapter 16 in his Some Architectural Writars of the Nineteenth Cantury (Oxford: Clarendon Press,. 1972) and Fiona MacCarthy, A History of British Design 1830-1970(London:Allen&Uwin 1979),17, who regards the schools "an aut-and-out fiasco." The standard history of the subject is Quentin Bell, The Schools of Desig (London: Routledge and Paul, 1963; although a valuable work, Beil's book approaches the history of the Schools of Design as one of "scandal, confusion, and disaster," 1. The most recent discussion of design education in early Victorian Britain is Adrian Rifkin, "Success Disavowed The Schools of Desig in Mid-Nineteenth-Century Britain (An Allegory)". The Jounal of Dlesign History l. no. 2 (1988); Rifkin sees the schools as allegory for the confusion and contradictions within Victorian design—an "ideal non sequitut "91. the human form, with animals, architecture, and especially botany, and the principle of combining colours so as to form pleasing effects." Simply "watching" the process, as in the case of much art-labor skill acquisition in the past, was no longer enough. The result was that the worker-apprentice had to go elsewhere—as both manufacturer and worker complained of the paucity of training opportunities. In Lancashire, in print manufacturing, for example, apprenticeship still existed but there was no art training for pattern drawers or designers. In porcelain-ware manufacture a shortage of artists meant that production slowed down, and in the metal trades where modelers had little or no access to educational opportunity art-labor training hardly existed. For example, the center of this trade, Sheffield, in 1836 had only four modelers. Across the industrial midlands and in Scotland much the same tale of woe was told by the workers themselves." This deficiency was an important development in art-labor history. Although apprenticeship lingered on as a way of controlling the labor supply and maintaining wages, and now and then we find a case whereby an employer set up his own in-house training system, generally speaking workers managed on their own. Significantly, it appears that rather than become victims of change as the proletarian thesis suggests, workers themselves took much of the initiative in what became a reorganization of art-labor training. In city after city in the 1830s and 1840s art-labor workers sought their own instruction outside the factory: setting up Mechanics Institutes which offered classes in drawing, mathematics, and so on; hiring their own drawing masters; and attending fee-paying lectures at local art societies. Workers in art manufacture, one observer found in 1836, were more interested in art education than were their employers and were not only picking up lectures and drawing classes wherever they could but were asking for the establishment of free public museums and free instruction in the applied arts." One result of this flurry of activity was the establishment in 1837 of the government Schools of Design (there were twenty-one by 1849). These schools have not fared well with historians and must stand as one of the most neglected chapters in the history of both Victorian reform and Victorian design. Usually viewed in much the same negative light as Henry Cole viewed the early schools, they remain one of the whipping boys for bad design in the nineteenth century. When addressing the schools, most historians simply repeat Cole's argument that the schools failed to pay attention to practical design and were, in effect, "enfeebled and hardly functioning." There are a number of reasons for this negative view, the most important perhaps is that Cole, the greatest art politician of the century, purposely exaggerated the negative features of the schools, particularly the early ones, in order to gain public support and funding for his 42 Students attended the Schools of Design for different time periods, at different times of the day (but generally at night). and at different times of life. For evidence of the schools in the workforce. see SCSD. 1849, app. 5. 441 For a discussion of the nature of nonapprenticed skill and the problem of identifying how workers moved from the less silled to the skilled grades, se Charles More. Skill and the English Working Class. 1870-1914 (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1960). 230–35. 43 The first of these surveys is found in SCSD, 1849, app 5. The Glasgow survey is trom PP Schools of Design. Reports and Papers Reiating to Head and Branch Schools, 1850 (IUP, industrial Revolution. Design, vol. 4); hereafter cited as Reports and Papers, 1850, 179. Charles Dickens found, in his visit to a wallpaper factory at about this same time, that the in-house designer had been trained at a School of Design. Household Words 14 (August 1853): 513. 44 SCSD, 1849, 1011–55. 45 SCS0,1849,1197 46 Stevens even had students from the school serving him without pay. Towndrow, Alfred Stevens, 98-100 proposed reforms of the schools." But the nearly constant attack on the schools was partly a result of the dilemma in which British industry had found itself as the pioneer in industrialization. The primitive nature of machinery and technological innovation (and the concomitant division of labor) required the workers to wear two hats: that of a specialist who could perform well and even invent a particular aspect of the process, and that of the generalist who understood the entire design and art-labor process. As a result the organizers of the schools, from the outset, could not decide whether to emphasize general art education or specialist skill training, and hence the schools became a center of controversy and considerable criticism. If Cole's motives were honorable, his views (and those of many twentieth-century historians) have kept us from looking at the schools in a more serious light. Evaluated in terms of the art-labor training system of the time, these Schools of Design look entirely different. Between 1837 and 1848, over fifteen thousand men and women attended them. In this period and the decade following, the schools went some distance in revolutionizing factory art-labor apprenticeship and training. Some workers were now selected on provable skill prior to employment and not on the patrimony basis of many of the old craft unions. For others, the Schools of Design became a way to move up in one's position to the point even of avoiding formal in-house apprenticeship. Whatever the case, some employers began to use school attendance as a prerequisite to employment or formal apprenticeship. By 1850 a notable proportion of Britain's art-laborers were using the schools to replace some or all of the traditional apprenticeship system, that is, to acquire nonapprenticed skill For example, an 1849 survey of forty-six "art-intensive" firms (ranging from carpet manufacture and glass manufacture to cloth printing and so on) found that 28 percent of the workers had attended or were attending a School of Design. Further, a survey of the students at the Glasgow School found that 47 percent were already employed in some sort of art-manufacture. Although the early Manchester School appears to have been less than a success, others proved to be fairly prodigious. The Glasgow School seems to have done what critics and historians say the schools did not do: use the classroom to bring about practical design solutions for industry." The Sheffield School was only a few years old when it was claimed that every firm engaged in the traditional Sheffield trades "had an apprentice, or a young man, or workman" in the School of Design. If the experience of the designer Alfred Stevens is typical, it may be said that it was common for designers in industry to take on assistants from the local school. Stevens, working for the Sheffield firm of Hoole, not only took on students from the school, but spent considerable time at the school studying and discussing design with the students." In the potteries, two Schools of Design, one at Stoke-on-Trent and one at Hanley, were established and in the first years trained hundreds of workers for the pottery industry. Mintons, for example, took four of its seven designers from the schools in addition to forty-two of three hundred fifteen of its total workforce. It was from the Nottingham School that designers produced the first original British lace designs, and in Belfast the school encouraged the birth of a new branch of art-manufacture in the linen industry. To say about machine production in the nineteenth century, as Pevsner has," that the shape and appearance of all products were left to the uneducated manufacturer, is to exaggerate the importance of the manufacturer and the machine and, at the same time, miss the fact that working men and women directed significant change in the face of technology. Such a view, as well, hides the fact that the first efforts to bring about the union of art and industry were in the period after about 1830, not in the decades surrounding 1920 as our "modernist" orthodoxy has so long held. Most important, these preliminary findings suggest that we reconsider some of our long-standing notions with regard to art-labor in the age of the factory. Was the only art-labor that took place that found in the Morris-inspired cottage workshops? The picture, as we have seen, appears to have been otherwise. Mechanization, as Raphael Samuel reminds us, "was a process rather than an event," a process "neither linear nor smooth but, on the contrary, discontinuous and subject to a whole complex of competing claims, pulling in opposite directions."" Overall, the flow of industrial art-labor activity in the nineteenth century was in reality toward and not away from the factory-first because the machine caused certain trades to become more art-labor intensive, and second because the traditional method of skill acquisition and transfer proved inadequate and was therefore augmented by a new system of art training under the public domain. It cannot be denied that technological change threw some artlaborers into proletarian status and made the artisanal workshop obsolete for the acquisition of skill; but, overall, proletarianization appears to be a less significant feature of the history of design during this seminal period in British design history than was the expansion of art-labor opportunities. Whereas under the preindustrial system, worker independence was symbolized by possession of personal tools and passage through a patrimonial and group-controlled apprenticeship, now much of that had been replaced by external education. If, indeed, proletarianization is "increased dependence upon the dictates of capitalist relations," it is possible that for those workers connected to art-labor industries, the machine generated not proletarianization but rather considerable new art-labor opportunities and new skill acquisition opportunities, both of which may have led some workers down the road of deproletarianization. Perhaps we need to squelch the din of the critic Ruskin and his tribe, refocus our perspective on the workplace and the Schools of Design, and listen to the workers themselves.