# Early Modern Design in Hong Kong Matthew Turner Whereas we may turn to historical studies of Chinese art or architecture, for example, and draw on a wealth of Chinese and foreign scholarship, a corresponding history of Chinese design is yet to be seen. There is no history of design in India or in a hundred other places that lie outside the triad of Western Europe, North America, and Japan. The effect is as though no significant design had ever taken place in the rest of the world, except in the remote sense of the vernacular, or in oases of Western influence. What distinguishes the history of design from the history of art or architecture is surely the narrowness of its geopolitical compass. The design literature is almost exclusively concerned with the First World, that is to say, with the industrial and commercial development of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) region. The extent to which this imbalance in historical resources gives rise to a certain chauvinism, enjoyed by contemporary designers within the triad, and to the difficulties faced by designers elsewhere is a question that ought to concern practitioners of design history. For it may be asked whether the discipline has become a form of neoimperialism? Most historians of dēsign, particularly those writing from a Marxist viewpoint, would be affronted by such a question. Pretending that the discipline's horizons are expanding or that it will follow the history of science and reach the Sinic world before long is unacceptable. Clive Dilnot argues that the teleological character of design history, its mission to pave the via regia of Western modernism, has had its day; Adrian Forty points out that factory production and standardization evolved contemporaneously, but independently, from mechanization John Heskett suggests somewhat radically that the study of design need not be predicated on modern sources of energy to the extent that third-century India may fall within the purview of the discipline; and Simon Jervis claims that the greater number of significant designers lived and worked before the period conventionally studied by design historians.' Why, then, does there seem to be no evidence that the First World's monopoly on the history of design is about to be shaken. The simplest explanations include that (1) nobody has yet looked for the history of design outside the modern, industrialized, capitalist nations, or (2) evidence is not readily available, and (3) by Western definitions, there can be no real history of design outside the First World. The first explanation is perhaps the most congenial to those who come to design history by way of art history. After all, is not the history of design a relatively new field, which has yet to establish itself even in many OECD nations, such as Yugoslavia? Perhaps the late Sir Nikolaus Pevsner should be regarded as a latter-day Vasari, and John Heskett, et alia, as figures such as Giordano Bruno ("There are only as many true rules as there are true artists"), or Zuccari ("Man forms within himself various designs . . . therefore his design is accidental")? Germany today, tomorrow the world? However, only the third explanation seems plausible. Appeals to the novelty of the subject or to the dearth of subject matter are not well-founded. After all, more than half a century has passed since Pevsner's Pioneers was published in the West and design, as well as design education, was established in many non-Western countries. Given the twentieth-century internationalization of communications and the global expansion of industrial forms of production, the complete absence of any but a Western history of design for three-quarters of the world cannot be explained away by a lack of interest or evidence. The proposition that, by Western definitions, there cannot be a history of design, properly speaking, outside the tradition of the First World has the merit of frankness and, moreover, offers greater explanatory power. In this form, the proposition does not deny that from ancient to modern times there was not a vast daily output of goods and images manufactured for domestic or export purposes, around the globe; it merely asserts that the planning and shaping of such goods and images should not be confused with modern, Western, industrial notions of design—for if everything is design, then design has no meaning. Entering into a review of definitions of design may not be necessary because the laconic and generalized definitions that have been made do not in themselves preclude application to almost any form of visualization or productive activity. But who, then, advances such a proposition? Indeed, nobody has seriously proposed that the history of design is the exclusive inheritance of the First World, yet neither has anybody seriously contested the terms of the inheritance or suggested it to be a modern forgery. Rather, in line with the old saw that history is written by the victors, the history of design seems to be written by the economically powerful. Japan, for example, was not equipped with a history of design (or with a workable system of management) until her emergence as an economic superpower made such a history inevitable. Until the late 1960s, Japan was assumed to have copied her way onto the industrial ladder; after that point, she was revealed to have possessed a long and complex history of innovation in design. The example of Japan suggests that the teleological current in design history runs deeper than merely the justification of whatever style currently happens to be in fashion or the provision of a hagiography of great names. The lineage it provides for modern industrial power may be on an altogether larger scale. Points of friction are instructive; for example, the interpretation of Russian design during the revolutionary period, the discussion of German design in the context of National Socialism or in the German Democratic Republic, and the accounts of design in developing countries. Talking about design in the context of Communism, Fascism, or poverty is never easy. Is this because the history of design is a discourse embedded in the ideological formations of the postwar, liberal, capitalist world? For some time, now, Occam's razor has been hovering over this tenuous thread of reasoning and, having entered into Discourse's hall of mirrors, only an investigation on the scale of a Foucault or a Said' would be sufficient. Such an investigation must demonstrate that the history of design has developed into a useful buttress of values central to the First World and, to such an extent, that its retrospective application elsewhere is problematic. Of course, what these central values might be is a question open to much speculation. Supposing that the history of design embodies a number of key beliefs about First World development seems reasonable. These beliefs are in economic growth and technological development, in progress through free competition and consumer choice, in aspirations toward the comforts and sophistications of affluence, in the importance of individuality, creativity, and innovation fused with the benefits of standardization and mass production. If a demonstration that design is less a description of a process and more a representation of an ideology (conveniently depoliticized and positive, filling the vacuum left behind by science, which has lost so much of its innocence since the 1950s) could be made, a fruitless search for essences might be avoided. After all, an essence being distilled from practices as varied as engineering, design, and fashion design has never seemed likely. Would such an investigation yield any positive result? Yes, for it would open a perspective on an immense, unexplored storehouse of knowledge about the developing world in the modern era. While enlarging the understanding of world design, valuable material for other disciplines would be provided and a much needed boost would be given to the growing confidence of designers working outside the First World. The following discourse represents a fragmentary contribution to this ambitious program, focusing on early twentieth-century design in Hong Kong. Other methodologies and perspectives will need to be forged because Hong Kong is in many ways atypical of the developing world. Hong Kong is one of the newly industrialized countries (NICs) of Asia, which, although outside the triad, share many of its values. South Korea and Taiwan' had a long colonial history of manufacturing under Japanese colonialization, and Singapore and Hong Kong were industrialized during the period of British colonial rule.? In addition, all four "little dragons" are well-known for their unique postwar rates of growth and for the volume and variety of goods exported from their factories. These issues, however, concern postwar Hong Kong design. The concern here is rather to investigate earlier developments, that began some time before the British landed at Possession Point in 1841. China's foreign trade had been concentrated in its coastal cities for many centuries, particularly in the Pearl River delta. This region had been a center for foreign trade since the Han dynasty (202 BC-220 AD) and for export manufacturing since the Sung dynasty (960-1279 AD), when vast quantities of mass-produced ceramics were made in the provincial kilns of Guangdong. When Emperor Qianlong closed all trading ports with the exception of Guangzhou in 1757, the Pearl River delta became the focus of China's commerce and export industry. If the Asian NICs lack of indigenous histories of design seem surprising, remember that the "inheritance" of design history is administered by the First World. Delaying recognition of competing economic power centers as long as possible may be in the interest of the triad, whether by trade protectionism or intellectual protectionism. The intellectual property laws in Hong Kong, for example, protect foreign firms far more than local firms. Uniquely, the trademarks and copyrights of all other countries are enforced within the Territory to attract foreign firms seeking a place to manufacture their goods. That such laws discourage local innovation (it is impossible for a company to check the registers in every country) has not been considered a disadvantage by those who frame the law. The colonial view never considered it likely that Chinese design would make a significant contribution to exports. The corresponding instruments of trade protectionism toward the NICs need no elaboration. ## The development of industry in China's Pearl River delta The economic strategy of this region was characterized by first, a labor-intensive system of serial or mass production; second, a strong export orientation; and third, a process of adaptive design. As the successive waves of foreign merchants brought with them new products, the early industries of the Pearl River delta became the crucible for export designs that adapted the world's goods to Chinese materials and manufacture. From the tenth to the nineteenth century, Chinese export ceramics were designed in a vast range of adaptive styles, from rough Southeast Asian kendi to refined Japanese imari wares and Dutch coffee pots. Decorations ran from Arabic to Latin and English, interlaced with Chinese motifs and symbols. The epitome of mimicry was reached when fanciful Western chinoiserie designs were self-consciously copied by Chinese artists for European markets. Design for manufacturing industries around the Pearl River delta, therefore, adopted a strategy unlike that developed by the textile manufacturers of Ahmedabad, where predominantly Indic designs were produced in varying quality to suit different markets. As industrialization gathered speed in Europe, the Chinese strategy of design adaptation, labor intensive production, and export orientation also ran counter to the strategies of manufacturers and traders in the West, preoccupied as they were with an integrated expansion of mechanization and empire From the perspective of a commercial and military power such as Britain at the turn of the nineteenth century, that all other systems of manufacturing should give way before the great partnership of machine production and expanded foreign markets must have seemed inevitable. Indeed, this situation became the fate of proto-industrialization outside the West. Traditional systems of trade and manufacture gave place to a colonial economy that depended on supplying raw materials to the West and importing machine made goods. The East-West flow in the world's circulation of goods was soon reversed. But the trading and manufacturing centers of the Pearl River delta, together with Japan, were an exception to the rule. This exception is more surprising because Japan enjoyed a favorable situation in relation to the expansion of empires in the nineteenth century, whereas a good part of the Pearl River delta came under effective foreign control. Indeed, the survival of design adaptation, labor intensive production, and export orientation into modern times became, as with imperial laissez-faire capitalism, an economic anachronism. Yet this combination later led to industrial "hypergrowth" in the modern Asian economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea. Hong Kong was the direct descendant of a unique system of design and manufacturing that had established itself over the centuries along the commercial thoroughfares of the Pearl River delta. The evidence for this may be found in the remarkable continuities of design, during more than a century, in product types and styles, manufacturing and printing companies, and families of artist-designers, that can stretch back to the earliest years of Hong Kong. If, a century later, Hong Kong artificial flowers were made of plastic and new products, such as radios and flashlights, had joined the list, the continuities rather than the new developments were more remarkable. To those who assume Hong Kong's industrialization was a postwar phenomenon, its long history of manufacturing is equally surprising. In 1846, the second governor, Sir John Davis, noted: A large number of Chinese are employed in their respective shops in the exercise of industrial trades and manufactures, and there are scarcely any wants of the inhabitants which do not meet with a ready supply within the town. By 1846, one-third of all Chinese properties were registered as factories. With a Chinese population of 20,338 by 1848, some 700 industrial enterprises must have been founded within the first 13 Turner, "A History of Export Design." 9. decade of Hong Kong's history. Records from 1853 suggest that more than 500 of these were ship chandlers, boat builders, and rope manufacturers, however, other arts and crafts also flourished. The 1865 census lists 44 silversmiths, 14 painters and photographers, 17 rattan furniture makers, 10 watch and clock makers, and 5 portrait artists. During the late nineteenth century, local industry expanded and diversified to include feather-dressing, match factories, soap, cement, coal, briquette and rattan works, sugar refineries, and spinning mills. In 1906, Sir Matthew Nathan promoted the first exhibition of industrial arts to provide visual evidence of what could be made in Hong Kong. A forerunner of the annual industrial products exhibitions, organized by the Chinese Manufacturers' Association founded in 1934, Nathan's Arts and Crafts show was, in the memory of Horace Kadoorie: A revelation of the artistic temperament of Chinese craftsmen in our midst. Above all, it showed the way in which local artisans sought to express their feelings for beauty in the works of their hands. ## Early modern Hong Kong graphic design Hong Kong design, particularly graphic design, also strongly developed during these years by synthesizing the widest variety of Chinese traditions and foreign influences. Chinese asymmetrical and diagonal composition, learned from the wood block prints in artists' manuals, for example, the Mustard Seed Garden (the blank areas were ideal spaces for commercial trademarks) provided a sound design basis. New, brighter colors were added, derived, in part, from the bold primaries of Guangdong New Year prints and, in part, from the more subtle, but equally colorful bird and flower painting of the Lingnan school. Drawing on the heritage of export porcelain decoration and the infinitely detailed techniques of Pearl River “China Trade" oil painting, early Hong Kong posters, labels, and packaging assumed a distinctly modern Chinese appearance. Foreign motifs, such as the wistful girls and flowers—especially roses—typical of late Victorian imagery, and European styles from art nouveau to art deco, both of which were of Oriental inspiration were easily adapted. Another source for commercializing tradition was derived from the mass-produced travel prints, calendars, and posters of late Meiji and Taisho Japan, in which national motifs were adapted to the sale of such modern articles as cosmetics, dry goods, and wine. To follow the history of the Kwan family is to trace a complete history of Hong Kong graphic design. In 1845, the China Trade artist Kwan Chuk Lam, known to the West as Lamqua, settled in Hong Kong. He was the only known pupil of the English painter G. Chinnery and had exhibited paintings at the Royal Academy in the style of his master. His "Handsome Face Painter" shop followed a system of serial production and a division of labor. His descendants, a family that currently numbers more than one hundred, followed this commercial principle, moving into the related fields of photography, lithography, poster design, and advertising. Kwan Wai Nung (b. 1880) learned Western painting from his family and Chinese painting from Gui Koo Chuen. Kwan was employed as a printer, producing the first five-color lithographic works in China. In 1911, Kwan became art director of the South China Morning Post, which he left in 1915 to found the Asiatic Lithographic Printing Press, Ltd. Art and business were wholly compatible to Kwan. ## The status of designers Many designers enjoyed considerable status as directors of companies, and not printing companies only. Fan Chai, a Shanghainesetrained designer of enamelware patterns, vacuum flask casings, and exhibition plans for the Chinese Manufacturers' Association, became a director of I-Feng Enamelling Co., (H.K.) Ltd. and Freezinhot Bottle Co., (H.K.) Ltd., the famous vacuum flask manufacturer. Cheng Ho, who trained in France and Germany and established his own design and manufacturing studio in Kowloon Tong after World War I was also a director of Union Metal Works, Ltd., where the American "Boss" cooker was redesigned for the Asian market. A number of companies set up their own studios. The Wing On Department Store studio, under the direction of Chan Chut Man from 1928, designed displays, advertisements, and stationery. Kwong Sang Hong, Ltd., the cosmetics company, founded in 1905, maintained departments specializing in the design and manufacture of their distinctive glass bottles and a lithographic printing department for pamphlets, labels, and advertising posters. In the early years Kwong Sang Hong, Ltd.'s posters were drawn by Kwan Wai Nung and printed by his Asiatic Lithographic Printing Press, Ltd.; later versions were printed by China Can Co., (H.K.) Ltd., a Shanghai firm that established a printed can and tin toy factory in Hong Kong in 1934. The art department of China Can Co., (H.K.) Ltd. was staffed by five Shanghai-trained designers who produced posters and packaging for major Hong Kong industries, such as Garden Co., Ltd. (bakers and confectionery), and Amoy Industries, (International) Ltd. (canned foods and preserves). ## Hong Kong's prewar industrialization The arrival of Shanghainese firms was a gradual process that quickened during the late 1930s as Japan bombarded Shanghai, but the influence of these firms was not decisive for Hong Kong's industrialization. Government Blue Books for 1927 record 1,523 manufacturing industries, whereas the Chinese Chamber of Commerce Directory, including more traditional industries, lists approximately 3,000 companies during the same year. A century after the founding of the colony, business directories such as the Hong Kong and Macao Business Classified Directory (1940), record 7,500 factories and workshops. The figures for domestic exports (excluding re-exports) for 1937 vary between the Government's estimate of HK\$ 400,000 and the Brilliance Cultural Undertakings Company's figures, of HK\$ 800,000, published in their A Century of Commerce. But for the year 1939, both sources agree on HK\$ 600,000. Postwar inflation raised the value of all manufactured products and textiles six- or sevenfold. The possibility exists that Hong Kong did not recover its average prewar real value of exports until two decades later, that is, at the beginning of Hong Kong's phenomenal hypergrowth. In other words, Hong Kong's "Industrial Revolution" began much earlier than is conventionally supposed. A comparison between Hong Kong's pre- and postwar domestic exports discloses much the same continuities noted above. The adaptive designs for products most associated with Hong Kong's modern industrial success story can be frequently traced to an earlier time. Of these companies, many of which still exist, the great majority were set up as branch factories of firms originating in Guangzhou, the Shanghai companies arriving during the 1930s. Two new postwar products, the 1952 alarm clock of Chiap Hua Manufactory Co., Ltd. (founded in 1947) and the 1957 Halina brand cameras by W. Haking Industries were both products of the two Cantonese companies. A great boost to Hong Kong industry came with the postwar establishment of Shanghainese spinning and weaving factories which made use of the abundant cheap labor of newly arriving refugees. However, the greatest diversification of Hong Kong products came with plastics, first introduced by China Plastics Co. (later, Wah Sun Hong) in 1947. The ease with which designers could adapt the form and pattern of plastic goods, the high degree of hand finishing combined with mechanization, and the opening of world export markets in the postwar boom years made these materials ideal for an economy based on design adaptation, labor intensive production, and export orientation. Plastics became the China Trade ceramics of the twentieth century, and design became an everyday expression. ## Concepts of design Although the term design and its Chinese equivalent first appeared in the context of registered design trademarks and advertising company productions (more than one dozen advertising houses existed in Hong Kong by 1941), design was more fully developed in furniture, interior, product, engineering, and exhibition work. Trade literature from the 1930s highlights design as a selling point in steel furniture, architectural services, dressmaking stands, printing machines, and in the industrial products exhibitions of the Chinese Manufacturers' Association. An advertisement from the Association's second exhibition catalog of 1939 uses design as a term associated with marketing, scientific production, artistic pattern, and new style—a comprehensive definition of modern design, wholly translated into Chinese long before reaching many other countries. ## Early modern Hong Kong industrial design Hong Kong industrial design during the first half of the twentieth century developed much the same adaptive and synthetic strategies as that of graphic design. The silversmithing of Wang Hing Jeweller and the furniture of You On Co., during the early 1900s, show the same articulation of Chinese, Japanese, and Western imagery, material, and technique. Wang Hing Jeweller's silver matchbox in the form of a dancing bear is part miniature of a contemporary Japanese wine bottle design (in detailed chasing as well as modeling) and part Western dancing bear with collar and chain. Equally, the Italianate dolphins supporting the cardholder of the same date are Sinicized by transforming themselves into Chinese dragons. In the same way, the enameled products or glass lamps of the 1930s not only combine Eastern and Western forms, but also include motifs and details drawn from their markets in Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. Until recently, few Western designers worked for such markets, but following the Ottawa Agreement of 1932, products manufactured in the British Crown Colony of Hong Kong could be exported to other colonies (and later to Commonwealth countries) without import duties. Hong Kong designers, as with designers anywhere else, had to work according to the demands and, more important, the limitations of their market." One of the founders of Star Industrial Co., Ltd., a large plastics company, explained that the use of bright red, blue, and yellow in their domestic plasticware was dictated by customers in Asia, the Middle East, and Africa who would not accept tasteful brown and cream; and the company had the failures to prove it. Much the same story was told by the son of the founder of Sunbeam Manufacturing Co., which produced flashlights in Hong Kong, beginning in 1930. Although Sunbeam formed an engineering and design department after World War II and experimented with modern styles, customers in Africa and Asia rejected the slightest changes in pattern, regarding them as inferior imitations. Thus, the earliest products built a reputation for Hong Kong design that effectively prevented any improvements. At the same time, Sunbeam's exports of aluminum ware to Europe now demand regular re-design. The quality of such Empire Made products was surprisingly good, For example, the "505" and "555" cotton singlets, manufactured by Chuen Sun Knitting Factory, Ltd., used expensive yarn imported from Switzerland, a three-stage fulling process, and hand cutting to ensure maximum durability and fit. Production of these items was scaled down after more than 40 years, because of competition from cheap American T-shirts. However, as Chuen Sun Knitting Factory, Ltd. began fashion production (Marco Polo brand), the American film star Bo Derek appeared in a publicity poster wearing a "555" singlet and little else. By then, the decline in traditional quality and manufacturing made the rush of American orders for this item difficult to meet. That the very symbol of modern Western glamour should wear a garment first produced in Hong Kong during the 1930s is a delightful irony of design history. ## The decline of early modern Hong Kong design With the decline of the British Empire, the stamp Empire Made became less significant, and the 1950s saw an attempt by the Chinese Manufacturers' Association to expand into new Asian markets. Trade missions were dispatched to Japan, Thailand, Malaya, Australia, Singapore, the Philippines, Korea, and Indonesia. By 1956, Asian countries were importing products Made-in-Hong Kong at a value level equal to that of the rest of the Commonwealth. But wider political changes were taking place in the world that would transform Hong Kong design. Although Hong Kong's domestic exports to China had been declining since the turn of the century, China had always been a major trading partner. With the Korean War, the United States effectively sealed off Hong Kong's trade with the new Peoples' Republic. Simultaneously, the Hong Kong government began to acknowledge the fact that Hong Kong was a major industrial society, as well as a trading port. U.S. foreign policy aimed at stimulating industrial and commercial development that was linked to its own economyparticularly in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and Vietnam. Hong Kong suddenly became favored by American importers. This relationship was in part facilitated by the Hong Kong government's new Federation of Hong Kong Industries, established in 1960; membership was open to all. Three significant changes followed: First, American trading companies appeared, armed with detailed specifications of designs to be manufactured at low cost by Hong Kong firms. Second, the federation assisted six American specialist designers to set up in Hong Kong in 1961. Soon, they were dominating the local design scene. Third, Chinese traditional crafts, no longer available to America or Europe, began to be produced, with suitable modifications, to fill the vacuum. These changes were not fundamental departures from the manufacturing strategies of the Pearl River delta, namely design adaptation, labor intensive production, and export orientation, but the quality of indigenous Hong Kong Chinese design rapidly declined. Increasingly, the design of export goods was carried out either in America or by Americans in Hong Kong. Local designers could not compete. For one reason, although many of the prewar generation of designers had received a solid art education in Guangzhou or Shanghai the younger generation had had no similar opportunity. Even though the well-known portrait painter Chan Hoi Ying's Hong Kong Academy of Fine Arts included a Design Department since 1955, and the Hong Kong Technical College, sponsored by the Chinese Manufacturer's Association, opened a Commercial Art and Design Department in 1960, they alone could not sustain the broad program needed to modernize the esthetic traditions once current in China's art schools. The subtle coloration, asymmetry, complex adaptations, sensitivity to the demands of non-Western markets, and achievement of an indigenous yet modern Chinese design were gradually lost to a younger generation that had no opportunity to assimilate its own tradition. Innovative companies, such as Tai Ping Carpets, Ltd., founded in 1959, which reworked traditional Tianjin carpets for semi-industrial export manufacture, employed British and American designers, even in the production of Chinese patterns. Their chief designer still recalls her early difficulties in drawing dragons. The design of embroidery, fashion garments and accessories, wood carving, and other crafts came to be dominated by foreign buyers. In the design and packaging of modern plastic and electronic consumer goods, Western concepts of design went unquestioned. ## The Western view of Hong Kong design In part, the prestige of Western design in the Hong Kong of the 1960s was derived from the West's prevailing belief that the modern style of design was one universal visual language, which had originated in the West and which, as with the English language, should be learned by everybody else as a key to industrial and commercial progress. That China lacked any useful design principles of its own was a belief that rested on almost two centuries of critical opinion in the West. In 1793, at the height of the Western fashion for chinoiserie, the failure of the British Macartney Mission to interest the Qing Court in Manchester carpets, Sheffield plates, Birmingham "toys," and Wedgwood pottery was ascribed by manufacturers to the failure of the Chinese to appreciate the high quality of British products, as well as to unfair Chinese trading practices. Emperor Qianlong replied to the English throne: "We possess all things, . . . have no use for your country's manufactures." By the mid-nineteenth century, British writers on world art, such as Fergusson and Owen Jones, were convinced that China was wholly devoid of either architectural design or ornament. In Owen Jones's encyclopedic Grammar of Ornament (1856) we may detect the economic threat of a competing export power coloring his esthetic judgment: In their ornament, with which the world is so familiar through the numerous manufactured articles of every kind which have been imported into this country . . . the Chinese are totally unimaginative, and all their works are accordingly wanting in the highest grace of art." In nineteenth-century commercial guides of Hong Kong, locally manufactured products are often described as "fantastic in design," "odd," "coarse," "peculiar," or "inferior." Hong Kong workers were capable of producing acceptable designs if, however, "copies are made of designs furnished from abroad." Thus, in 1904, the firm of Art and Crafts was established in Hong Kong by London furniture designers "due to the inability of Chinese people to grasp the fundamentals of European design." These views echoed through the postwar era and came to be widely accepted in Hong Kong. Speaking at the founding ceremony of the Hong Kong Technical College in 1955, the president of the Chinese Manufacturer's Association, Hui Ngok, had to remind his audience that: "We are sometimes criticised [sic] for producing low quality goods with old fashioned designs; however, our markets are in areas where the purchasing power is limited and where designs have a background in tradition."" By this date, Hong Kong products had established a reputation for quality in much of the world. Indeed, by 1955, Hong Kong manufacturers were complaining that Japan was exporting goods with fake Empire Made labels, and that Britain was substituting Made-in-United Kingdom labels on Hong Kong gloves and textiles, even while imposing voluntary restrictions on Hong Kong's textiles exports. Some manufacturers believed that the Chinese tradition had much to offer modern design. Horace Kadoorie had argued in a business symposium of 1957 for: "an amalgamation of Chinese art and Western productiveness in the development of goods for export ... such as the plastics industry where at times designers are borrowing forms from the East."7 Yet, by the 1960s, the designs and the designers of the early modern period of Hong Kong had begun to disappear as American markets and styles came to predominate. A few designers, such as Cheung Yat Man, son of the 1930s calendar artist Cheung Yat Luen, abandoned all attempts to modernize Chinese forms and imagery and became a successful designer in the Western manner. Through his designs of the 1950s and 1960s, Chinese motifs gradually disappeared and were replaced by American advertising imagery. As manufacturing and printing in Hong Kong increasingly came to depend on foreign buyer-supplied design, with specifications that left little room for creative adaptation, the tradition of adaptive design turned to mere copying, leaving many young designers with a sense of creative inferiority. At present, there are no signs that Hong Kong designers really believe in the existence of an earlier, Hong Kong Chinese design. True, a few have used nostalgic motifs (mostly for packaging), but these relate rather to the Western chinoiserie of Shanghai Surprise and The Last Emperor. No challenge to the authority of First World design, supported as it is by a plethora of design history from the West and Japan seems possible. Colonial/commercial education has further sealed local sources of originality, as Chinese culture, arts, and calligraphy (itself a plausible basic design course) have been progressively weeded out of curricula as irrelevant to the pursuit of excellence in design. Perhaps this is the fate of design in Hong Kong, which largely survives on translating the samples and specifications brought by foreign firms. When designs are successfully originated in Hong Kong, they are almost always marketed abroad under 16 Tumer, "A History of Export Design," 15 17 Tumer. "A History of Export Design." 15.