Achtner, Wolfgang, Kunz, Stefan, and Walter, Thomas (1998), Dimensionen der Zeit: Die Zeitstrukturen Gottes, der Welt und des Menschen, WBG-Bibliothek, Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. Aicher, Otl (1991), Die Welt als Entwurf, Hoboken: Wiley. Alexander, Christopher (1964), Notes on the Synthesis of Form, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Boccia, Maddalena, Piccardi, Laura and Guariglia, Paola (2015), ‘The meditative mind: A comprehensive meta-analysis of MRI studies’, BioMed Research International, Article ID 983086. https://doi. org/10.1155/2015/419808 Accessed 11 June 2022. Assmann, Jan (2006), Religion and Cultural Memory: Ten Studies (trans. R. Livingstone), Stanford: Stanford University Press. Althusser, Louis (2001), ‘Ideology and ideological state apparatuses: Notes towards an investigation’, in Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays, New York: Monthly Review Press, pp. 85-126. Baudrillard, Jean (1970), The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures, New York: Sage Publications. Bordal, Sidse (2018a), ‘Into the Unknown’. January 25. 2018. Available at: https://explorativeinnovation.wordpress. com. Accessed 11 June 2022. Andersen, Casper, Kratschmer, Alexandra R., Clasen, Mathias, and Nielsen, Trine Kellberg (2019), ‘Mennesket i biokulturelt perspektiv’, in T. K. Nielsen, C. Andersen, A. R. Kratschmer and M. Clasen (eds), Menneske, kultur, evolution – et biokulturelt perspektiv, Aarhus: Aarhus University Press, pp. 11–31. Bauer, Robert and Eagen, Ward (2008), ‘Design thinking: Epistemic plurality in management and organization’, Aesthesis: International Journal of Art and Aesthetics in Management and Organizational Life, 2:3, pp. 568–96. Bordal, Sidse (2018b), ‘Unfuzzing design: How progress is made towards unknown goals’, Ph.D. thesis, Denmark: Design School Kolding. Beck, Ulrik (1986), Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity, London: Sage. Beck, Don Edward and Cowan, Christopher (1996), Spiral Dynamics: Mastering Values, Leadership, and Change, Cambridge: Blackwell. Bragdon, Joseph H. (2006), Profit for Life: How Capitalism Excels: Case Studies in Living Asset Management, Cambridge: Society for Organizational Learning. Archer, Bruce (1965). Systematic Method for Designers, London: Council of Industrial Design. Bennett, Jane (2017), ‘Vegetal life and onto-sympathy’, in C. Keller and M.-J. Rubenstein (eds), Entangled Worlds: Religion, Science, and New Materialisms, New York: Fordham University Press. Bragdon, Joseph H. (2016), Companies That Mimic Life: Leaders of the Emerging Corporate Renaissance, London: Routledge. Bennis, Warren G. and Nanus, Burt (1985), Leaders: The Strategies for Taking Charge, New York: Harper. Brandt, Eva and Binder, Thomas (2016), ‘Med det sociale som designmateriale’, in L. Dybdahl (ed.), Dansk Design Nu, Copenhagen: Strandberg Publishing, pp. 354–61. Armstrong, Rachel (2014), ‘Space to think’, Architectural Review, 1406, pp. 30–31. Asher, Frederick (1997), Richard Warren Sears: Icon of Inspiration, New York: Vantage Press. Berger, André and Loutre, Marie-France (2002), ‘An exceptionally long interglacial ahead?’, Science, 297, pp. 1287–88. Accessed 1 January 2022. Brimblecombe, Peter (1987), The Big Smoke: A History of Air Pollution in London Since Medieval Times, London: Methuen. British Council (2021), Beyond Net Zero: A Systemic Design Approach. Published April 2021. https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/our-work/skills-learning/ tools-frameworks/beyond-net-zero-a-systemic-design-approach/ Accessed 11 June 2022. Chakrabarti, Amaresh and Blessing, Lucienne T. M. (eds) (2014), An Anthology of Theories and Models of Design: Philosophy, Approaches and Empirical Explorations, London: Springer. Csikszentmihaly, Mihaly (1997), Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life, New York: Basic Books. Csikszentmihaly, Mihaly (2008), Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, New York: Harper Collins. Broecker, Wallace S. and Stocker, Thomas F. (2006), ‘The holocene CO2 rise: Anthropogenic or natural?’, Eos, 87:3, pp. 27–29. Chan, Chiu-Shui (2015), ‘Style and creativity in design’, in Studies in Applied Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics, vol. 17, London: Springer. Delanda, Manuel (1992), ‘Nonorganic life’, in S. Kwinter and J. Crary (eds), Incorporations, ZONE 6, New York: Zone Books, pp. 128–67. Buchanan, Richard (1992), ‘Wicked problems in design thinking’, Design Issues, 8:2, pp. 5–21. Christensen, Bo Karl (2017), ‘Sådan kickstartede de græske filosoffer videnskaben.’ Videnskab.dk, 6 March. Available at: https://videnskab.dk/ naturvidenskab/saadan-kickstartede-de-graeske-filosoffer-videnskaben. Accessed 11 June 2022. Descartes, René (1637), A Discourse on the Method of Correctly Conducting One’s Reason and Seeking Truth in the Sciences, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Buchanan, Richard (1995), ‘Rhetoric, humanism, and design’, in R. Buchanan and V. Margolin (eds), Discovering Design: Explorations in Design Studies, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 23–66. Buchanan, Richard (2001), ‘Design research and the new learning’, Design Issues, 17:4, pp. 3–23. Christensen, Bo T. and Ball, Linden J. (2016), ‘Creative analogy use in a heterogeneous design team: The pervasive role of background domain knowledge’, Design Studies, 46, pp. 38–58. Coccia, Emanuele (2018), Life of Plants. A Metaphysics of Mixture, Oxford: Polity Press. Design af Relationer (2014), Et samarbejde om at designe relationer til nogle af velfærdssamfundets mest handicappede, Denmark: Design School Kolding, https:// issuu.com/designskolen\_kolding/docs/ rapport-ipaper\_enkeltside\_. Accessed 11 June 2022. Burcharth, Martin (2020), ‘Klimafilosof: Først når vi erkender, at naturen har en bevidsthed, kan vi imødekomme klimakrisen’, Information, January 18, 2020, sec. Moderne Tider. Available at: https:// www.information.dk/moti/2020/01/ klimafilosof-foerst-naar-erkender-naturen-bevidsthed-kan-imoedegaa-klimakrisen. Accessed 11 June 2022. Conner, Daryl R. (1993), Managing at the Speed of Change: How Resilient Managers Succeed and Prosper Where Others Fail, New York: Random House. Dorst, Kees (2004), ‘On the problem of design problems – Problem solving and design expertise’, Journal of Design Research, 4:2, pp. 185–96. Dorst, Keest (2005), Frame Innovation: Create New Thinking by Design, Cambridge: MIT Press. Cai, Linda Jingfang and Yates, Chris (2020), Share: How Organizations Can Thrive in an Age of Networked Knowledge, Power and Relationships, London: Bloomsbury. Cooperrider, David and Goodwin, Lindsey N. (2012), ‘Positive organization development: innovation-inspired change in an economy and ecology of strengths’, Research gate. DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199734610.013.0056. Accessed 11 June 2022. Dorst, Keest (2015), Frame Innovation: Create New Thinking by Design, Cambridge: MIT Press. Dorst, Keest and Cross, Nigel (2001), ‘Creativity in the design process: Co-evolution of problem-solving’, Design Studies, 22:5, pp. 425–37. Carlgren, Lisa, Rauth, Ingo, and Elmquist, Maria (2016), ‘Framing design thinking: The concept in idea and enactment’, Creativity and Innovation Management, 25:1, pp. 38–57. Cooperrider, David, Stavros, Jacqueline M., and Whitney, Diana (2008), Appreciative Inquiry Handbook: For Leaders of Change, Oakland: Berrett-Koehler Publishers. Droste, Magdalena (2006), Bauhaus, Cologne: Taschen. Carrington, Damian (2018), ‘Humanity has wiped out 60% of animal populations since 1970, report finds’, The Guardian, 30 October 2018, sec. The Age of Extinction. Available at: https://www. theguardian.com/environment/2018/ oct/30/humanity-wiped-out-animalssince-1970-major-report-finds. Accessed 11 June 2022. Drotner, Kirsten (1990), At skabe sig – selv: Ungdom, æstetik, pædagogik, Copenhagen: Gyldendal. Corazon, Sus Sola, Stigsdotter, Ulrika K., Jensen, Claudi, Grete, Anne, and Nilsson, Kjell (2010), ‘Development of the nature-based therapy concept for patients with stress-related illness at the Danish Healing Forest Garden Nacadia’, Journal of Therapeutic Horticulture, 20, pp. 34–51. Dunne, Anthony (1999), Hertzian Tales: Electronic Products, Aesthetic Experience, and Critical Design, Cambridge: MIT Press. Carson, Anne (2010), Nox, New York: New Directions. Chew, A. W. (2020), ‘Informed guessing: Enacting abductively-driven research’, International Journal of Research & Meth od in Education, 43:2, pp. 189–200. Ceschin, Fabrizio and Gaziulusoy, Idil (2016), ‘Evolution of design for sustainability: From product design to design for system innovations and transitions’, Design Studies, 47, pp. 118–63. Cross, Nigel (ed.) (1984), Developments in Design Methodology, Hoboken: Wiley. Dunne, Anthony and Raby, Fiona (2001), ‘Design Noir: The Secret Life of Electronic Objects' Basell: Birkhäuser. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/ environment/2018/oct/30/humanitywiped-out-animals-since-1970-majorreport-finds. Accessed June 19 2022. Cross, Nigel (ed.) (2006), Designerly Ways of Knowing, London: Springer. Crutzen, Paul J. (2002), ‘Geology of mankind’, Nature, 415, p. 23. Crutzen, Paul J. and Stoermer, Eugene F. (2000), ‘The “Anthropocene”’, Globa Change Newsletter, 41, pp. 17–18. Dunne, Anthony and Raby, Fiona (2013), Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming, Cambridge: MIT Press. Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly (1993), The Evolving Self: A Psychology for the Third Millennium, New York: Harper Collins. Dunning, John (1998), On the Air: The Encyclopedia of Old-Time Radio, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Einstein, Albert (1931), Mein Weltbild (‘The World As I See it’) (trans. Alan Harris), San Diego: Book Tree. Eliade, Micea (1987), The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion (trans. W.R. Trask), New York: Harcourt. Engholm, Ida (2011), ‘Positions in contemporary design research’, Design Research Journal, 2:11, pp. 48–63. Engholm, Ida (2017), ‘Reflecting contemporary design research’, Form Akademisk, 10:3, pp. 1–15. Engholm, Ida and Michelsen, Anders (1999), Designmaskinen: Design af den Moderne Verden, Copenhagen: Gyldendal. Eno. Bryan (2008), The Big Here and Long Now. https://longnow.org/essays/ big-here-long-now/. Accessed 11 June 2022. EPICA Community Members (2004), ‘Eight glacial cycles from an Antarctic ice core’, Nature, 429, pp. 623–28. Espino, Cinthia (2020), ‘Plants die, but what happens to the plastic pots?’, Noteworthy – The Journal Blog, 12 June. https://blog.usejournal.com/plants-diebut-what-happens-to-the-plastic-pots-7fcfe5d47b2e. Accessed 11 June 2022. Fallan, Kjetil (ed.) (2019), The Culture of Nature in the History of Design, London: Routledge. Favaro, Ken (2014), ‘Strategy or culture: Which is more important?’, Strategy and Business Blog 22, https://www.strategy-business.com/blog/Strategy-or-Culture-Which-Is-More-Important?gko=26c64. Accessed 11 June 2022 Fjordbak, Jan (2015), Den innovative medarbejder, Copenhagen: Kommuneforlaget. Folkmann, Mads N. (2016), Designkultur: Teoretiske perspektiver på design, Frederiksberg: Samfundslitteratur. French, Daniel (2017), When They Hid the Fire: A History of Electricity and Invisible Energy in America, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. Fry, Tony (2010), Design as Politics, London: Bloomsbury. Fry, Tony (2018), Design Futuring: Sustainability, Ethics and New Practice, London: Bloomsbury. Fuchs, Thomas (2018), ‘The cyclical time of the body and its relation to linea time’, Journal of Consciousness Studies, 25:7&8, pp. 47–65. Fuller, R. Buckminster (1961), ‘The architect as world planner: Congress of the International Union of Architects’, London. Available at: https://arch629eldridge.files.wordpress.com/2010/04/ wk13-bucky-architect-as-world-planner. pdf. Accessed 11 June 2022. Garbuio, Massimo, Lovallo, Dan, Porac, Joseph, and Dong, Andy (2015), ‘A design cognition perspective on strategic option generation’, Advances in Strategic Management, 32:1, pp. 437–65. Garbuio, Massimo, Dong, Andy, Nidthida, Lin, Tschang, Ted, and Lovallo, Dan (2018), ‘Demystifying the genius of entrepreneurship: How design cognition can help create the next generation of entrepreneurs’, Academy of Management Learning and Education, 17:1, pp. 41–61. Garner, Holly, Bruce, Mary Alice, and Stellern, John (2011), ‘The Goal Weel: Adapting Navajo Philosophy and the Medicin Wheel to work with adolescents’, The Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 36:1, https://doi.org/10.1080/01933922. 2010.537735. Accessed 11 June 2022. Giedion, Siegfried (1948), Mechanization Takes Command, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Goldschmidt, Gabriella (2014), Linkography: Unfolding the Design Process, Cambridge: MIT Press. Goodman, Nelson (1978), Ways of Worldmaking, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. Graeber, David (2015), The Utopia of Rules: On Technology, Stupidity, and the Secret Joys of Bureaucracy, Brooklyn: Melville House. Greyshield, Lisa and Castillo, Ramon Del (2020), Indiginous ways of Knowing in Counseling. Theory, Research, and Practice, Switzerland: Springer. Gropius, Walter (1919), ‘Bauhaus manifesto’, https://bauhausmanifesto.com. Accessed 11 June 2022. Halse, Joachim, Brandt, Eva, Clark, Brendon, and Binder, Thomas (eds) (2010), Rehearsing the Future, Copenhagen: Danish Design School Press. Hamel, Gary (2010), The Future of Management, Brighton: Harvard Business Review Press. Harari, Yuval Noah (2015), Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind, London: Harwill Secker. Haraway, Dona (2016), Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene, Durham: Duke University Press. Hassi, Lotta and Laakso, Miko (2011), ‘Design thinking in the management discourse: Defining the elements of the concept’, Conference paper at the 18th International Product Development Management Conference, ‘Innovate Through Design’, Delft, The Netherlands, 5-7 June 2011. Hawkins, Paul (2017), Point to Point: A History of International Telecommunications During the Radio Years, Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. Hersted, Lone and Laustsen, Louise (2011), Kreativ procesledelse: Nye veje til bedre praksis (ed. M.O. Høier), Copenhagen: Dansk Psykologisk Forlag. Hersted, Lone, Lausten, Louise, and Obel Høier, Mille (2011), ‘Kreativ procesledelse. Nye veje til bedre praksis’. Dansk Psykologisk Forlag. Hildebrandt, Steen (n.d.), ‘Ledelse som et etisk og åndeligt anliggende – et vendepunkt’, Ånd i hverdagen. Available at: https://aandihverdagen.vaekstcenteret. dk/oversigt/steen-hildebrandt/. Accessed 11 June 2022. Hildebrandt, Steen (2011), Ledelse ifølge Hildebrandt – Det handler om menneskelige relationer, Copenhagen: LibrisBusiness. Hildebrandt, Steen and Stubberup, Michael (2010), Bæredygtig ledelse: Ledelse med hjertet, Copenhagen: Gyldendal Business. Hill, Kim R., Walker, Robert S., Božičević, Miran, Eder, James, Headland, Thomas, Hewlett, Barry, Hurtado, A. Magdalena, Marlowe, Frank, Wiessner, Polly, and Wood, Brian (2011), ‘Co-residence patterns in hunter-gatherer societies show unique human social structure’, Science, 331:6022, pp. 1286–89. Hillgren, Per-Anders, Seravalli, Anna, and Emilson, Anders (2011), ‘Prototyping and infrastructuring in design for social innovation’, CoDesign, 7:3&4: pp. 169–83. Holloway, Ralph L. (1969), ‘Culture, a human domain’, Current Anthropology, 10:4, pp. 395–412. Hopkins, Terry (2008), The Transition Handbook, Paris: Hachette Books. Hopkins, Terry (2020), From What Is to What of; Unleashing the Power of Imagination to Create the Future We Want, Hartford: Chelsea Green Publishing. Hutchins, Giles and Laura, Storm (2019), Regenerative Leadership: The DNA of Life-Affirming 21st Century Organizations, Tunbridge Wells: Wordzworth. Ingold, Tim (2013), Making: Anthropology, Archaeology, Art and Architecture, London and New York: Routledge. Irwin, Terry (2015), ‘Transition design: A proposal for a new area of design practice, study, and research’, The Journal of the Design Studies Forum, 2:2, pp. 229–46. Irwin, Terry, Tonkinwise, Cameron, and Kossoff, Gideon (2013), ‘Transition d: Re-conceptualizing whole lifestyles’, Head, Heart, Hand: AIGA Design Conference, Minneapolis, 12 October 2013, http://www.aiga.org/video-HHH-2013-irwin-kossoff-tonkinwise. Accessed 11 June 2022. Jameson, Fredric (2003) ‘Future city’, New Left Review 21, https://newleftreview.org/issues/II21/articles/fredricjameson-future-city. Accessed 11 June, 2022. Jaworski, Joseph, Scharmer, Otto and Senge, Peter (2005), Presence: Exploring Profound Change in People, Organizations, and Society, Boston: Nicholas Brealey Publishing. Johansson-Sköldberg, Ulla, Woodilla, Jill, and Çetinkaya, Mehves (2013), ‘Design thinking: Past, present and possible futures’, Creativity and Innovation Management, 22:2, pp. 121–46. Jones, J. Christopher (1992), Design Methods, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. Joos, Fortunat, Gerber, Stefan, Prentice, I. C., Otto-Bliesner, Bette L., and Valdes, Paul J. (2004), ‘Transient simulations of holocene atmospheric carbon dioxide and terrestrial carbon since the last glacial maximum’, Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 18:2, p. GB2002. Julier, Guy (2013), The Culture of Design, New York: Sage Publications. Kemppainen, David, Kopera-Frye, Karen, and Woodard, Julie (2008), ‘The medicine wheel: A versatile tool for promoting positive change in diverse contexts’, Collected Essays on Learning and Teaching. DOI: 10.22329/celt.v1i0.3183. Accessed 1 June 2022. Kenny, Anthony (2010), A New History of Western Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Kimbell, Lucy (2011), ‘Rethinking design thinking: Part 1’, Design and Culture, 3:3, pp. 285–306. Kirtley, David Barr (2020), ‘Dystopian fiction’s popularity is a warning sign for the future’, Wired. Available at: http://www. wired.com/2014/12/geeks-guide-naomiklein/. Accessed 11 June 2022 Klein, Naomi (2020), ‘Dystopian fiction’s popularity is a warning sign for the future’, Wired, 20 December, http://www. wired.com/2014/12/geeks-guide-naomi klein/. Accessed 11 June 2022 Knapp, Jake, Zeratsky, John, and Kowitz, Braden (2016), Sprint: How to Solve Big Problems and Test New Ideas in Just Five Days, New York: Simon and Schuster. Kok, Jacobus and Van den Heuvel, Steven (eds) (2019), Leading in a VUCA world: Integrating Leadership, Discernment and Spirituality, London: Springer. Kolko, Jon (2010), ‘Abductive thinking and sensemaking: The drivers of design synthesis’, MIT’s Design Issues, 26:1, pp. 15–28. Kolko, Jon (2012), Wicked Problems: Problems Worth Solving, Austin: Austin Center for Design. Kotovich, Vasilije and Dorts, Kees (2016), ‘The art of stepping back: Studying levels of abstraction in a diverse design team’, Design Studies, 46, pp. 79–94. Krause Frantzen, Mikkel (2019), En fremtid uden fremtid. Depression som politisk problem og kunstens alternative fortællinger, Copenhagen: Informations Forlag. Laloux, Frédéric (2014), Reinventing Organizations: A Guide to Creating Organizations Inspired by the Next Stage of Human Consciousness, Brussels: Nelson Parker. Laloux, Frédéric (2018), Reinventing Organizations: An Illustrated Invitation to Join the Conversation on Next-Stage Organizations, Brussels: Nelson Parker. Lamarque, Peter (2010), ‘Wittgenstein, literature, and the idea of a practice’, British Journal of Aesthetics, 50:4, pp. 375–88. Lasso, Sarah Venturim, Cash, P., Daalhuizen, J., and Kreye, M. (2016), ‘A model of designing as the intersection between uncertainty perception, information processing, and coevolution’, in D. Marjanovic, M. Storga, N. Pavkovic, N. Bojcetic and S. Skec (eds), DS 84: Proceedings of the DESIGN 2016 14th International Design Conference, Zagreb: Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Naval Architecture, University of Zagreb, Croatia, pp. 301–10. Latour, Bruno (2004), Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences Into Democracy, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Latour, Bruno (2015), Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network Theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Latour, Bruno (2017), Facing Gaia: Eight Lectures on the New Climatic Regime, Oxford: Polity Press. Latour, Bruno (2018), Down to Earth. Politics in the New Climate Regime, Oxford: Polity Press. Laville, Sandra (2020), ‘Human-made materials now outweight earth’s entire biomass’, The Guardian, 9 December 2020, sec. Environment. https://www. theguardian.com/environment/2020/ dec/09/human-made-materials-now-outweigh-earths-entire-biomass-study. Accessed 11 June 2022. Lawson, Bryan (2005), How Designers Think: The Design Process Demystified, 4th ed., London: Routledge. Lears, T. J. Jackson (1981), No Place of Grace: Antimodernism and the Transformation of American Culture, 1880–1920, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Lenin, V. I. (1924), ‘Draft plan of scientific and technical work’, in Lenin’s Collected Works (ed. R. Daglish, trans. C. Dutt), vol. 27, 4th ed, Moscow: Progress Publishers, pp. 314–17. Lewin, Kurt (1947), ‘Frontiers in group dynamics: Concept, method and reality in social science; equilibrium and social change’, Human Relations, 1:1, pp. 5–41. Lewis, Simon L. and Maslin, Mark A. (2018), The Human Planet: How We Created the Anthropocene, New Haven: Yale University Press. Liedtka, Jeanne (2017), ‘Evaluating the impact of design thinking in action’, Academy of Management Proceedings, 2017:1, https://doi.org/10.5465/AMB-PP.2017.177. Accessed 11 June 2022. Lüttichau (2017), Calling Us Home, London: Head of Zeus. Maher, Mary Lou (1994). ‘Creative design using a generic Algoritm’. American Society of Civil Engineers. ASCE Library: https://cedb.asce.org/CEDBsearch/ record.jsp?dockey=0088820. Accessed 11 June 2022. Malm, A. (2016), Fossil kapital: The Rise of Steam Power and the Roots of Global Warming, London: Verso Manzini, Ezio (1991), Artefacts: Vers une nouvelle écologie de l’environnement artificiel (trans. A. Pilia), Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou. Manzini, Ezio (1992), ‘Prometheus of the everyday: The ecology of the artificial and the designer’s responsibility’, Design Issues, 9:1, pp. 5–20. Manzini, Ezio (2015), Design, When Everybody Designs: An Introduction to Design for Social Innovation, Cambridge: MIT Press. Maslow, Abraham H. (1966), The Psychology of Science: A Reconnaissance, New York: Harper Collins. Maslow, Abraham H. (1971), The Farther Reaches of Human Nature, New York: Viking. Maslow, Abraham H. (1998), Toward a Psychology of Being, 3rd ed., Hoboken: Wiley. McCann, Jack T. and Holt, Roger A. (2011), ‘Sustainable leadership: A manufacturing employee perspective’, SAM Advanced Management Journal, 76:4, pp. 4–14. McCarthy, Christopher, Fouladi, Rache T., Juncker, Brian D., and Martheny, Kenneth (2011), ‘Psychological ressources as stress buffers: Their relationships to university students anxiety and depression’, Journal of College Counseling. https://doi. org/10.1002/j.2161-1882.2006. tb00097.x. Accessed 11 June 2022. Meadows, Donella H. (2008), Thinking in Systems: A Primer (ed. D. Wright), White River Junction: Chelsea Green Publishing. Rumi, Jalaluddin (2918). Let silence take you to the core of life. Amazon Digital Services LLC - Kdp Print Us. https:// www.amazon.de/-/en/Pup-Wolrd/ dp/1086700511/ref=sr\_1\_1?crid-=31I2EX7XWNW0&keywords=let+sile nce+take+you+to+the+core+of+li fe&qid=1658055984&sprefix=let+sile nce+take+you+to+the+core+of+life %2Caps%2C62&sr=8-1. Accessed 11 June 2022. Meillassoux, Quintin and Badiou, Alain (2008), After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity of Contingency, London: Continuum. Ørsted, Christian (2013), Livsfarlig ledelse – forstå de psykologiske mekanismer, der styrer dit arbejdsliv, Copenhagen: Peoples Press. Meroni, Anna (2007), Creative Communities: People Inventing Sustainable Ways of Living, Milan: Edizioni POLI.design. Russell, Bertrand (1945), A History of Western Philosophy, and Its Connection with Political and Social Circumstances from the Earliest Times to the Present Day (Touchstone), New York: Simon & Schuster. Papanek, Victor (1985), Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change, Chicago: Academy Chicago Publishers. Micheli, Pietro, Wilner, Sarah J. S., Bhatti, Sabeen Hussain, Mura, Matteo, and Beverland, Michael B. (2019), ‘Doing design thinking: Conceptual review, synthesis, and research agenda’, Journal of Product Innovation Management, 36:2, pp. 124–48. Morin, Edgar (1973), Le paradigme perdu: la nature humaine, Paris: Seuil. Sanders, Elizabeth B.-N. and Stappers, Pieter Jan (2008), ‘Co-creation and the new landscapes of design’, CoDesign, 4:1, pp. 5–18. Pelegrin, Jacques (1993), ‘A framework for analysing prehistoric stone tool manufacture and a tentative application to some early stone industries’, in A. Berthelet and J. Chavaillon (eds), The Use of Tools by Human and Non-Human Primates, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 302–14. Morris, William (1884), ‘Art and socialism: A lecture delivered (January 23rd, 1884) before the secular society of Leicester’. Available at: https://www.marxists.org/ archive/morris/works/1884/as/as.htm. Accessed 11 June 2022. Prahalad, C. K. and Ramaswamy, Venkat (2004), ‘Co-creating unique value with customers’, Strategy & Leadership, 32:3, pp. 4–9. Purdy, Jedediah (2015), After Nature: A Politics for the Anthropocene, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Morton, Timothy (2007), Ecology Without Nature: Rethinking Environmental Aesthetics, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Sanders, Elizabeth B.-N. and Stappers, Pieter Jan (2014), ‘Probes, toolkits and prototypes: Three approaches to making in codesigning’, CoDesign, 10:1, pp. 5–14. Pyne, Stephen J. (1997), World fire: The culture of fire on earth. Washington: University of Washington Press. Ramirez, Rafael, Ravetz, Jerry, Sharpe, Bill, and Varley, Leila (2019), ‘We need to talk (more wisely) about wisdom: A set of conversations about wisdom, science, and futures’, Futures. Elsevier. February 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. futures.2019.02.002. Accessed 11 June 2022. Morton, Timothy (2010), The Ecological Thought, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Reed, Bill (2007), ‘Shifting from “Sustainability” to regeneration’, Building Research & Information, 35:6, pp. 674–80. Sanders, Elizabeth B.-N. and Stappers, Pieter Jan (2014), ‘Cover Story: From designing to co-designing to collective dreaming: Three slices in time. IX Interactions. XXL6 November-December. https://interactions.acm.org/archive/ view/november-december-2014/ from-designing-to-co-designing-to-collective-dreaming-three-slices-in-time. Accessed 1 July 2022. Richardson, Kathrine (2019), Hvordan skaber vi bæredygtig udvikling for alle?, Copenhagen: Informations Forlag. Richmond, Barry (1994), ‘Systems thinking/system dynamics: Let’s just get on with it’, System Dynamics Review, 10:2&3, pp. 135–57. Scharmer, Otto Claus (2003), ‘The blind spot of leadership: Presencing as a social technology of freedom’, Habilitation thesis. https://www.ottoscharmer.com/ sites/default/files/2003\_TheBlindSpot. pdf. Accessed 11 June 2022. Scharmer, Otto Claus (2007), Theory U: Leading from the Future as It Emerges, Cambridge: The Society for Organizational Learning. Rifkin, Jeremy (2009), The Empathic Civilization: The Race to Global Consciousness in a World in Crisis, Cambridge: Polity. Scharmer, Otto Claus (2018), The Essentials of Theory U: Core Principles and Applications, Oakland: Berrett-Koehle Publishers. Schein, Edgar H. (2017), Organizational Culture and Leadership, 5th ed., Hoboken: Wiley. Morton, Timothy (2013), Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World, Posthumanities, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Rittel, Horst W. J. (1973), ‘On the planning crisis: Systems analysis of the “First and Second Generations”’, Bedriftsøkonomen, 8, pp. 390–96. Schön, Donald (1983), The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action, London: Temple Smith. Morton, Timothy (2017), Humankind: Solidarity with Non-Human People, Brooklyn: Verso. Rittel, Horst W.J. and Webber, Melvin M. (1973), ‘Dilemmas in a general theory of planning’, Policy Sciences, 4:2, pp. 155–69. Senge, Peter (2006), The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization, revised ed., New York: Doubleday. Orr, David (2004), The Nature of Design: Ecology, Culture, and Human Intention, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Sharpe, Bill (2013), Three Horizons: The Patterning of Hope, England: Triachy Press. Shiner, Larry (2012), ‘“Blurred Boundaries”? Rethinking the concept of craft and its relation to art and design’, Philosophy Compass, 7:4, pp. 230–44. Simmons, Matthew R. (2000), Revisiting the Limits of Growth: Could the Club of Rome Have Been Correct After All?, Oxford: Mud City Press. Simon, Herbert (1969), The Sciences of the Artificial, Cambridge: MIT Press. Solnit, Rebecca (2004), Hope in the Dark. Untold Histories, Wild Possibilities, Chicago: Haymarket. Steffen, Will, Broadgate, Wendy, Deutsch, Lisa, Gaffney, Owen, and Ludwig, Cornelia (2015), ‘The trajectory of the Anthropocene: The great acceleration’, The Anthropocene Review, 2:1, pp. 81–98. Steffen, Will, Grinewald, Jaques, Crutzen, Paul, and McNeil, John (2011), ‘The Anthropocene: Conceptual and historica perspectives’, Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society, 369:1938, pp. 842–67. TeBrake, William H. (1975), ‘Air pollution and fuel crisis in preindustrial London, 1250–1650’, Technology and Culture, 16:3, pp. 337–59. Stokes, Patricia D. (2006), Creativity from Constraints: The Psychology of Breakthrough, London: Springer. Tharp, Bruce M. and Tharp, Stephanie M. (2019), Discursive Design: Critical, Speculative, and Alternative Things, Cambridge: MIT Press. Thomas, Daniel (2020), ‘Davos 2020: People still want plastic bottles, says Coca-Cola’, BBC News. https://www.bbc. com/news/business-51197463. Accessed 15 July 2022. Tobias, P.V. (1976), ‘The brain in hominid evolution’, in Encyclopaedia Britannica. Macropaedia, vol. 8, London: Encyclopaedia Britannica, p. 1032. Voelcker, John (2014), ‘1.2 Billion vehicles on Worl’s Roads now, 2 billion by 2035: Report’, Green Car Reports. Available at: https://www.greencarreports. com/news/1093560\_1-2-billion-vehicles-on-worlds-roads-now-2-billion-by-2035-report. Accessed 11 June 2022. Van der Ryn, Sim and Cowan, Stuart (2007), Ecolocical Design, tenth anniversary edition, Washington, DC: Island Press. Vogt, Eric E., Brown, Juanita and Isaacs, David (2003), The Art of Powerfu Questions: Catalyzing Insight, Innovation, and Action, Cambridge: Whole Systems Associates. VanPatter, G.K. (2020), Rethinking Design Thinking, New York: Humantific & Next Leadership Network. Venturi, Robert, Brown, Denise Scott, and Izenour, Steven (1972), Learning from Las Vegas: The Gorgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form, revised ed., Cambridge: MIT Press. Visser, Frank (2003), Ken Wilber: Thought as Passion, New York: State University of New York Press. Wahl, Daniel Christian (2016), Designing Regenerative Cultures, Charmouth: Triarchy Press. Wahl, Daniel Christian and Baxtor, Seaton (2008), ‘The designer’s role in facilitating sustainable solutions’, Design Issues, 24:2, pp. 72–83. Wallas, Graham (1926), The Art of Thought, Tuscaloosa: Alabama University Press. Watson, Julia (2019), Lo-TEK: Design by Radical Indigenism, Cologne: Taschen. Western, Simon (2013), Leadership: A Critical Text, New York: Sage Publications. Whitney, Diana Kaplin and Trosten-Bloom, Amanda (2003), The Power of Appreciative Inquiry: A Practical Guide to Positive Change, Oakland: Berrett-Koehler. Wilber, Ken (2010), Introduction to Integral Theory & Practice: IOS Basic and the AQAL Map, New York: Springer. Wohlleben, Peter (2016), The Hidden Life of Trees: What They Feel, How They Communicate Discoveries from A Secret World (trans. J. Billinghurst), Vancouver: Greystone Books. Zhang, Jia Wei, Piff, Paul K., Iyer, Ravi, Koleva, Spassena, and Keltner, Dacher (2014), ‘An occasion for unselfing: Beautiful nature leads to prosociality’, Journal of Environmental Psychology, 37, pp. 61–72.