This book could not have been written without help, inspiration and support from the following people. I am particularly grateful for my wonderful external editor and translator Sophus Helle, who during his work on the manuscript sharpened the book’s language and argument. I also owe a huge thanks to Associate Professor at the University of Copenhagen Anders Michelsen, who read and commented on early drafts of the chapters. I would also like to thank my former Head of Research and good friend Thomas S. Rasmussen, who helped me translate the final sections of the book that were added after peer-review and suggestions from friends and colleagues. Thomas also suggested a number of cuts where I had strayed into digressions. A heartfelt thanks also go to my colleagues at The Royal Danish Academy’s School of Design for their helpful suggestions; particularly to Professor Mads Quistgaard, whose sharp questions about the premise of the book helped me refine my claims and models: thanks for your bird’s eye view and your original thinking. Thank you also to Henriette Melchiorsen for your insightful comments about the zoom model, to Associate Professor Bodil Bøjer, doctoral student Anna Skaarup, and Assistant Professor Christina Funder for your great suggestions and your participation as guinea pigs for the DesignWISE tool. I would also like to thank all my students – both my graduate and continuing education students – for whom I presented the ideas and models of the book and who helped me get to the heart of the project. Thank you also to Charlie Breindahl for his help getting the reference list and alternative picture text for the e-book version in place and to Claudia Rebecca Juul for her help providing permissions for illustrations. Thanks especially to my collaborator and friend Sune Kjems, without whom this book might not have been written: he was the one who suggested that I should write a book about planet-centred design drawing on indigenous wisdom traditions, which we discovered together at the Academy’s summer school and also with great help from Gry Guldberg. Thank you to Outi Kuma, earth wisdom keeper and Maya reader, for your wise and vital comments on Chapter 6. I also owe a great debt of gratitude to Dean Mathilde Aggebo and former Head of Department Martin Sønderlev, who provided indispensable financial support for the book. Last but not least, my greatest thanks go to my love and husband Nils Vinding, who not only supported me personally along the way, but who has also been my most valuable sparring partner about the book’s idea and progression, and who helped me develop several of the book’s models, including the revised hierarchy of needs and the DesignWISE tool.