# Foreword and Acknowledgments

Teaching at the Bauhaus is the updated and in part substantially revised new edition of my book Bauhaus-Pädagogik, which was first published in 1982 by DuMont and enjoyed four printings. The fact that it met with the success of a sleeper hit, despite the increasingly rocky market for books, gave me and Hatje Cantz the confidence to present the book again to the interested public.

The book owes its origins not to a fashionable and nostalgic interest in the so-called Golden Twenties but rather to the realization on the part of an art historian and educator—first in the schools and later in universities—that the Bauhaus continued to have an effect long after its historical conclusion, either through conscious or unconscious use of its ideas about the pedagogy of art and design or through critical, even antithetical, stances toward it. As a rule such recourse to the Bauhaus and its pedagogy is marked by a tendency to isolate partial aspects from a more complex context, with the result that a distorted picture results that neither corresponds to the fundamental idea of the Bauhaus nor does justice to its development over time. Consequently, a false pars pro toto approach to Bauhaus pedagogy has led to gravely misleading assessments, for example, reductively identifying it with the name of Johannes Itten or misinterpreting it as merely education in formal and aesthetic aspects of design and thus overlooking its potential for emancipation.

The goal of this book is not only to present the various—sometimes complementary, sometimes conflicting—pedagogical conceptions at the Bauhaus in terms of their historical context but also to shed some light on them against the background of the aesthetic practices and theoretical reflections of the individual artist-teachers active there. This should give some sense of the educational utopia at the Bauhaus that sought to create a new human being in a new, more humane society. Such utopia expectations of salvation remained unfulfilled, indeed they were doomed to failure by their ambition alone, but that has certainly done little harm to the lasting interest in the Bauhaus, its educational philosophy, and its conceptions for the pedagogy of design. If, following Jürgen Habermas, we consider modernism to be an “unfinished project," and if, with the art historian Selim O. Khan-Magomedov, we inquire into the “unrealized legacy" of modernism, then there is reason to assume that even in the digital age at the start of the twenty-first century, Bauhaus pedagogy—to use a term that is problematic because it is so undiscriminating—still comprises a number of approaches that deserve our attention.

Apart from the numerous changes in the illustrations presented, the revisions mentioned above primarily affect the discussion of the influence on Johannes Itten of both Adolf Hölzel, a teacher at the Academy of Art in Stuttgart, and Ernst Schneider, a reform pedagogue who directed the teacher's seminar in Bern, as well as a somewhat more comprehensive presentation of the Hochschule für Gestaltung (College for design) in Ulm, which initially saw itself as the only legitimate successor to the Bauhaus in Germany after 1945. Although the chapter on the reception of Bauhaus pedagogical approaches in the Weimar Republic, the Third Reich, and after World War Il has been greatly expanded, it must still be emphasized that it in no way represents an all-inclusive presentation of the aftereffects of the teachings of the Bauhaus on arts education in the schools or in the professional training of artists, designers, and architects. Rather, it is simply a very rough sketch that of necessity had to leave out many details, and hence it can at most serve to provide some orientation and perhaps a starting point for future research. The book has been made significantly more valuable by Gabriele Diana Grawe's willingness to present aspects of her dissertation, "Call for Action: Bauhausnachfolge in Nordamerika," in a concluding chapter on the reception of the pedagogical conceptions of the Bauhaus in North America. I wish to thank her deeply for that.

I would also like to thank everyone who supported my work on previous editions of this book. First, I wish to mention the following former Bauhaus teachers and students who have since passed away: Eugen Batz, Herbert Bayer, Ruth Hollos-Consemüller, Kurt Kranz, Jean Leppien, Georg Muche, and Hajo Rose. A special thanks is owed to Anneliese Itten and Eckhard Neumann. I would also like to thank Peter Hahn and Sabine Hartmann (both of the Bauhaus-Archiv in Berlin) as well as Magdalena Droste (formerly of the Bauhaus-Archiv in Berlin, now at the Technische Universität in Cottbus). For the revision that resulted in the present edition, 1 would like to thank my colleagues in the Department for the Pedagogy of Art and Culture at the Bergische Universität Wuppertal for their technical assistance: Christoph Hegerath, Falko Semrau, and Frank Tischer.

Last but not least, I wish to thank those at Hatje Cantz Verlag who contributed to the publication of the present book: above all, Annette Kulenkampff, who took a particular interest in the project. l also wish to express my thanks for Michael Epperlein for his professional design and Stephen Mason and Simon Lèbe for their translations.

In conclusion, it should be noted that the manuscript was completed in July 1999, and consequently important publications on the Bauhaus and its pedagogical concepts appearing after that date could be included in the bibliography but could now longer be workedinto the text. This was the case, for example, for Egon von Rüden's groundbreaking exploration Zum Begriff künstlerischer Lehre bei Itten, Kandinsky, Albers und K/ee (Berlin: Gebr. Mann, 1999), as well as for the catalog Paul Klee: Die Kunst des Sichtbarmachens; Materialien zu Klees Unterricht am Bauhaus (Pfäffikon Kulturzentrum Seedamm, 2000).

Bornheim, 10 August 2000