# 1 Pedagogy at the Bauhaus: A "Phantom Theme"?

The Bauhaus was one of the most significant and consequential cultural initiatives of the twentieth century. There has long been consensus about this assessment, and it was strengthened and affirmed again in 1999 at the ceremonies commemorating the founding of the Bauhaus eighty years earlier. The Bauhaus has occupied a prominent place in the public consciousness as a seed for the crystallization of a new practice of art and culture of form, indeed, as a new blueprint for existence,1 or at least as an attempt to “give order to life."2

During the twentieth century the Bauhaus made its mark on the history of art, or rather on the history of aesthetic education, as the “art school of modernism." And yet, as recently as 1976 the Bauhaus expert Claude Schnaidt could remark with astonishment that there was still “no in-depth study on the pedagogy of the Bauhaus. The preliminary course (Vorkurs), individual teaching activities, and certain origins and differences have been treated, but the educational theory of the Bauhaus as a whole has hardly been touched upon at all. Could it be a phantom theme? Did the members of the Bauhaus reject everything that took place in other schools?" Schnaidt continued by noting that Walter Gropius, the founder of the Bauhaus and its director for many years, had provided evidence to the contrary in 1923 when he integrated the pedagogical efforts of the Bauhaus within the larger context of reform pedagogy. This was, in Schnaidt's words, “interesting terrain in which to explore the uncharted foundations of the Bauhaus."3

We must, however, at once declare a somewhat modified stance: the "educational theory of the Bauhaus as a whole" that Schnaidt tried to conjure up was no more real than the Bauhaus style that Walter Dexel characterized as "myth" in 1964.4 The background behind what is here being subsumed under the phrase “Bauhaus pedagogy" is too richly faceted——and the pedagogical practices of the artist-instructors active at the Bauhaus too varied—for it to make sense to search out the educational theory of the Bauhaus. To do so would be to flatten out differences rather than to register them without prejudice and to analyze their significance for a school like the Bauhaus. To do so would be to reduce a complex whole to an overly simple outline. If we were to replace the term “Bauhaus style" in Walter Dexel's essay “Der Bauhausstil: Ein Mythos"(The Bauhaus Style: A Myth) with the phrase “Bauhaus pedagogy," it would reveal both the critical approach and the real concern of this book:

after 1945 an all-too-convenient journalism did not take the trouble to really study the history of the twenties. . . . It is high time that we stop using the cliché "Bauhaus style," which only ignorance of the most elementary facts of the 1920s could have allowed to become current. Far more important than the endless repetition of this phrase would be finally a historical enumeration and specification of the thoughts and principles of design that come from almost all of Europe. One can no longer simply cover over a broad range of phenomena that grew from many roots with the catchword “Bauhaus style." That phrase fosters a myth: it is an inadmissible over-simplification.⁵

In the case of Bauhaus pedagogy, the discrimination adequate to solve this problem would require a fastidious use of language emphasizing plurality—e.g., phrases such as "the pedagogical conceptions at the Bauhaus"—in a way that is not really feasible linguistically. In the case of Bauhaus pedagogy, then, it was not a lazy form of journalism that led to these impermissible simplifications but rather a lazy form of pedagogy in the arts that over years and decades sketched a one-sided, and thus incomplete, picture of what took place at the Bauhaus with respect to didactics and methodology. It becomes clear that the term "Bauhaus" or "Bauhaus pedagogy" and the name Johannes Itten have become all but synonymous. Clearly, this has happened against the background of a selective interest in exploiting individual aspects of Bauhaus pedagogy, in particular a focus on instruction in the arts at the primary-school level. Without any pretense of completeness, this observation can be demonstrated by means of two quotations from the literature on the pedagogy of art that are separated by twenty years. Erich Parnitzke wrote in 1953:

Natter's "Artistic education on the strength of inherent laws" (1924) . . . is a branch of what was being developed at the “Bauhaus" from 1919 on, where Itten set the example with his school of "expressive" and “impressive," material, structural, and constructional studies, an example that in many variants has been taken over by the professional training courses of the factory schools in particular.⁶

In 1973 Helmuth G. Schütz observed with respect to a supposed opposition between “art education"(Kunsterziehung)and“art instruction" (Kunstunterricht):"

Art instruction is not a unified concept that can be precisely distinguished from art education. ... The strongest impulse... derived from the efforts of individual Bauhaus artists toward a pedagogy in the arts. . . . One of the greatest proponents of this was Johannes Itten.8

Although this is a very one-sided view of Ittenas an advocate ofa rationally conceived pedagogy in the arts, which neglects the clearly irrational aspects of his approach, his role as a "great proponent" and a source of the impulses behind it is thus rightly acknowledged. It is, however, astonishing, even disturbing, to note that names such as László Moholy-Nagy, Josef Albers, Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Oskar Schlemmer, and Joost Schmidt, without whom Bauhaus pedagogy is all but inconceivable, have not drawn the same attention as Johannes Itten, to say nothing of the pedagogical ideas of architects such as Walter Gropius or Hannes Meyer. As a rule, pedagogy in the arts tends to be equally heedless of the extremely complex set of circumstances surrounding Bauhaus pedagogy and the institutional framework of the school.

This means that the set of questions with which the pedagogy in the arts and also in design has generally approached the Bauhaus is, either implicitly or explicitly: What can the design principles established by individual teachers at the Bauhaus achieve for present-day instruction in schools and universities? It seems obvious that Bauhaus pedagogy thus drops out of view as a historical phenomenon and that its context is unacceptably disregarded. Gunter Otto (1927-99), who since the sixties was one of the most influential teachers in the arts in Germany, recognized this problem with complete clarity when he took a critical stand against the professional didactics of those who attempt to derive from the Bauhaus

"courses of study" that mirror in excerpted form the system of the Bauhaus—and . . . thus not only overlook a series of artistic phenomena that are important to the present but also the very "plan" of the Bauhaus, whose inherent system cannot be grasped in "excerpts."9

This book does not intend to subject Bauhaus pedagogy to the sort of ideological criticism in which—following a pattern beloved in arts pedagogy, especially in the seventies—more energy is devoted to the denunciation of opponents than to the formulation of objective arguments. Rather, the goal here is a monograph presenting the pedagogically significant concepts and practices of the Bauhaus in their historical context in order to achieve a picture that is as discriminating and as free of the usual clichés as possible. This goal will include, for example, dismantling the still unbroken myth that a utilitarian and instrumenta! conception of design and education dominated everything, pointing out instead the emancipating implications in the pedagogical practices of individual teachers at the Bauhaus. The goal will also include showing that Bauhaus pedagogy is significantly more complex than one might be led to expect from the frequently highly abridged depictions one finds of the preliminary instruction given by Itten or of particular theories of design that developed at the Bauhaus.

Despite the expectation of those teachers and docents in the arts and design who are always calling into question the relevance of Bauhaus pedagogy,1º the focus of this book is neither on the question of how useful this or that particle of Bauhaus theory might be to arts instruction in schools nor on the question of how open Bauhaus pedagogy is to being adapted to present-day instruction for artists and designers, but rather on whether and to what extent the pedagogical practices of individual teachers at the Bauhaus contributed to realizing the goals of the Bauhaus itself. To answer this question, we will begin by examining the background of the ideas and social history of the Bauhaus in chapter 2, and then sketch in chapter 3 the main lines of the historical development of the institute from 1919 to 1933. Chapter 4 is concerned first with demonstrating that Bauhaus pedagogy does not represent a singular, historically isolated phenomenon but rather stands within a specific tradition in the history of the training of artists and, moreover, that parallel developments in Russia after the October Revolution suggest one could in fact speak of a “Moscow Bauhaus." That is followed by a brief overview of the goals and the organizational structure of the teachings of the Bauhaus. The very fact that over the course of the institute's history one can detect changes here, some far-reaching, ought to be sufficient proof for the thesis that Bauhaus pedagogy was not a self-contained monolith impervious to historical processes and that such a picture is a myth.

This thesis becomes even clearer in the ensuing treatment of the pedagogical concepts of the Bauhaus revealed in the individual portraits of Bauhaus teaċhers in chapters 5 through 11, which constitute the true core of the book. The goal of these individual portraits is not only to show what and how specific Bauhaus teachers taught but also to illuminate the interdependencies between artistic and pedagogical practices and to assess the influence of contemporary discussions of more general theories of education on the instruction given by particular teachers at the Bauhaus.

An autonomous theme in this research is the aftereffects ofBauhaus pedagogy,a question that, although it has been addressed by many individual studies, still lacks the necessary integration and synthesizing overview.11 This is an ambitious goal, perhaps even an unachievable one, as may be clear from the simple fact that the fascism of Hitler led to a diaspora of Bauhaus teachers and students whose concept of instruction very quickly became a globalphenomenon whose many branches and transformations make a comprehensive overview all but impossible. Consequently, the book concludes with a mere summary overview of the effects of Bauhaus pedagogy in the Weimar Republic, a few remarks on its continued influence under the Third Reich, and a look at the reception of Bauhaus pedagogical concepts in Germany after 1945 that is by no means comprehensive but nevertheless demonstrates that, long after the effective end of what was without question the most famous and significant “art school of modernism," its pedagogical impulses still carry a virile and vital force.

This depiction is supplementedby a final chapter in which Gabriele Diana Grawe shows how Bauhaus pedagogy was received in North America and the extent to which it changed under dissimilar sociocultural conditions. In doing so, she explicitly limits her analysis to central figures within the Bauhaus——namely, Gropius at Harvard, Albers at Black Mountain College and Yale University, and Moholy-Nagy in Chicago.12

## Notes

1 See, for example, Volker Thurm-Nemeth, ed., Konstruktion zwischen Werkbund undBauhaus: Wissenschaft—Architektur——Wiener Kreis (Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 1998).

2 See the interesting study by Konrad Wünsche, Bauhaus: Versuche, das Leben zu ordnen (Berlin: K. Waqenbach, 1989).

3 Claude Schnaidt, "Was man über das Bauhaus weiß, zu wissen glaubt undignoriert,"Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Hochschule für Architektur und Bauwesen 5–6 (1976): 499.

4 Walter Dexel, "The Bauhaus Style: A Myth," in Eckhard Neumann, ed., Bauhaus and Bauhaus People: PersonalOpinions and Recollections of Former Bauhaus Members and Their Contemporaries, trans. Eva Richter andAlba Lorman, rev. ed. (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993). The following quotation may serve to make clear how undiscriminating the view of Bauhaus pedagogy often is: "In the fourteen years of its existence the Bauhaus passed through several transformations.... Only its pedagogical training program remained unchanged in its substance." Brigitte Lohkamp, "Malerei," in Erich Steingräber, ed., Deutsche Kunst der 20er und 30er Jahre (Munich: Bruckmann, 1979), p. 157.

5 Dexel, "The Bauhaus Style" (note 4), p. 115.

6 Erich Parnitzke, "Zur Geschichte des Zeichen- und Kunstunterrichts," in Herbert Trümper, ed., Handbuch der Kunst- und Werkerziehung, vol. 1 (Berlin: Rembrandt-Verlag, 1953), p. 104.

Kunsterziehung (education in the arts) is implicit in the pedagogical concept of "musical education" that dominated in the fifties, which was focused primarily on irrational and emotional aspects; by contrast, the concept of Kunstunterricht (instruction in the arts) that dominated in the sixties emphasized rational aspects more strongly and started with the premise that artistic processes can be taught.

8 Helmuth G. Schütz, Kunstpädagogische Theorie (Munich: Reinhardt, 1973), p. 36; and similar remarks on page 39.

9 Gunter Otto, Kunst als Prozeß im Unterricht, 2d ed. (Braunschweig: Westermann, 1969), p. 35.

10 See also, among others, Rainer Wick, ed., Ist die Bauhaus-Pädagogik aktuell? (Cologne: König, 1985).

11 For Germany after 1945, see the study by Christian Grohn, Die Bauhaus-Idee: Entwurf—Weiterführung —Rezeption, 2ded., Neue Bauhausbücher (Berlin: Gebr. Mann, 1991).

12 The basis for this sketch is Gabriele Diana Grawe's unpublished dissertation, "Die Mitglieder des Bauhauses in Nordamerika" (Berlin, Hochschule der Künste, 1998).