# What Is Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence?

1 Introduction: High Expectations

2 How Does Rationalism or Empiricism Provide Sound Foundations?

3 Are People and Computers in the Same Category?

4 Will Automation, AI, and Robots Lead to Widespread Unemployment?

5 Summary and Skeptic’s Corner

esearchers, developers, business leaders, policy-makers, and others are expanding the technology-centered scope of artificial intelligence (AI) to include humancentered AI (HCAI) ways of thinking. This expansion from an algorithm-focused view to embrace a human-centered perspective can shape the future of technology so as to better serve human needs. Educators, designers, software engineers, product managers, evaluators, and government agency stafers can build on AI-driven technologies to design products and services that make life better for the users, enabling people to care for each other. Humans have always been tool builders, and now they are supertool builders, whose inventions can improve our health, family life, education, business, the environment, and much more. The remarkable progress in algorithms for machine and deep learning during the past decade has opened the doors to new opportunities, and some dark possibilities. However, a bright future awaits AI researchers, developers, business leaders, policy-makers, and others who build on AI algorithms by including HCAI strategies of design and testing. This enlarged vision can shape the future of technology so as to better serve human values and needs. As many technology companies and thought leaders have said, the goal is not to replace people but to empower them by making design choices that give humans control over technology.

James Watts’ steam engine, Samuel Morse’s telegraph, and Thomas Edison’s electric light were technology breakthroughs that were put to work to open up new possibilities for transportation, communications, business, and families. They all moved beyond the existing and familiar technologies to demonstrate new products and services that enhanced life while suggesting ever more potent possibilities. Each positive step is also embraced by malicious actors such as criminals, hate groups, terrorists, and oppressive rulers, so careful attention to how technologies are used can reduce these threats. The human capacity for frontier thinking, to push beyond current examples, is amply visible in the Wright brothers’ airplane, Tim Berners-Lee’s World Wide Web, and Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier’s genome editing. Now, as new technologies blossom into ever more potent breakthroughs we have a choice to make about how these technologies will be applied.

The high expectations and impressive results from AI, such as the AlphaGo program winning at the game of Go, have triggered intense worldwide activity by researchers, developers, business leaders, and policy-makers. The promise of startling advances from machine learning and other algorithms energizes discussions while eliciting huge investments in medical, manufacturing, and military innovations.

The AI community’s impact is likely to grow even larger by embracing a humancentered future, filled with supertools that amplify human abilities, empowering people in remarkable ways. This compelling prospect of HCAI builds on AI methods, enabling people to see, think, create, and act with extraordinary clarity. HCAI technologies bring superhuman capabilities, augmenting human creativity, while raising human performance and self-eficacy. These capabilities are apparent in familiar HCAI applications such as digital cameras that have high levels of human control but many AI supports in setting aperture, adjusting focus, and reducing jitter from hand movements. Similarly, HCAI navigation systems give walkers, bikers, drivers, and public transport users control over the many choices that are derived from AI programs which use real-time data to predict travel times.

Extending the power of AI-driven algorithms, Human-Centered AI shows how to make successful technologies that amplify, augment, empower, and enhance human performance. This expanded mindset should please readers as it describes a safer, more understandable, and more manageable future. A human-centered approach will reduce the out-of-control technologies, calm fears of robot-led unemployment, and give users the rewarding sense of mastery and accomplishment. Beyond individual experiences, HCAI will enable better control of privacy/security to limit misinformation and counter malicious actors. The dangers from AI and HCAI systems are legitimate concerns—any technology that empowers people to do good also empowers those who would do evil. Carefully designed controls, audit trails, and supervised autonomy are some of the strategies that stakeholders can adopt to achieve, reliable, safe, and trustworthy systems.

This book makes a coherent presentation of the fresh HCAI methods with numerous examples to guide researchers, developers, business leaders, and policy-makers. It ofers an HCAI framework to guide innovation, design metaphors to combine disparate views, and governance structures to advance a human-centered approach. Benefitting people becomes the driving force for making ever more potent supertools, tele-bots, active appliances, and control centers that empower users with extraordinary capabilities.

Reframing established beliefs with a fresh vision is among the most powerful tools for change. It can liberate researchers and designers, building on the past while allowing them to adopt new beliefs. The vast number of people embracing AI technologies are beginning to align with HCAI themes with an openness to human-centered thinking. I hope that the traditional AI technology-centered community, who have made so many important breakthroughs, will take in the human-centered perspectives, which ofer a diferent vision of human destiny. A human-centered strategy will bring AI wider acceptance and higher impact by providing products and services that serve human needs. By encouraging a passionate devotion to empower people, enrich communities, and inspire hope, Human-Centered AI ofers a vision of future technologies that values human rights, justice, and dignity.