CHAPTER 4

# Will Automation, AI, and Robots Lead to Widespread Unemployment?

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>third</sup> <sup>discussion</sup> <sup>is</sup> <sup>over</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>issue</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>whether</sup> <sup>automation,</sup> <sup>AI,</sup> <sup>and</sup>robots will lead to widespread unemployment. Many books, includ- robots will lead to widespread unemployment. Many books, including Martin Ford’s 2015 book The Robots Are Coming,<sup>1</sup> spread the fears raised by an Oxford University report that 47% of US jobs were automatable by 2030.<sup>2</sup> These preposterous claims, suggesting widespread unemployment, were clearly wrong, as unemployment in the United States dropped to below 4% in 2020, even as automation, AI, and robots spread. Then the COVID-19 crisis arrived and unemployment rose because of the tragic and widespread epidemic. By 2021 the vaccine began to control COVID-19 cases and unemployment began to decline again.

Amazon bought Kiva Robotics in 2012, leading many to believe that it would trim its 125,000-person workforce, but by 2021, even with increased use of robots, Amazon employed more than a million people. The dramatic increase in demand, made even more extreme during the COVID crisis, led to much expanded labor needs in its supply chains, fulfillment centers, and delivery networks. Amazon’s well-designed e-commerce websites and low prices brought benefits to many, thereby increasing demand. While Amazon has been criticized for its labor practices and its opposition to labor unions, it has led many companies by ofering a \$15 minimum wage, although often with reduced benefits.<sup>3</sup> Reports about demanding working conditions and higher rates of injuries than other companies have led many consumers to avoid shopping with Amazon. The controversies remain with protesters appearing at Amazon fulfillment centers, even as long lines of potential employees respond to job opportunities. The unknown factor is how many small store employees have lost their jobs and how many local suppliers and manufacturers have added jobs because of their capacity to sell by way of Amazon’s extensive network. Yes, these changes have been disruptive, but the impact on employment is less clear and the benefits to consumers have increased sales.

Another dilemma is that unemployment is an imperfect measure since it does not count those who have dropped out of the job market and fails to tabulate the increasing fraction of minimum wage workers who have fewer benefits. Corporate owners may care more about market valuations than profits, so their goals are sales growth by way of low prices rather than better treatment of their workers.

Automation appears to increase concentration of wealth that produces evergrowing inequalities, with poorly educated workers sufering the most. The focus on growth at the cost of poor employee treatment is a serious danger of increased automation. Amazon has fought the introduction of labor unions, which have in the past enabled workers to get better wages, working conditions, health insurance, and benefits such as child care, sick pay, vacations, and pensions. The central question is how to distribute the benefits of automation more equitably.

Automation eliminates certain jobs, as it has for hundreds of years, from at least the time when Gutenberg’s printing presses put scribes out of work. However, automation usually lowers costs and increases quality, leading to vastly expanded demand, which triggers expanded production to serve growing markets, bringing benefits to many people. The expanded production, broader distribution channels, and novel products lead to increased employment. Lowcost book production led to larger markets, growth of book distribution and sales networks, and greatly increased literacy. Another benefit of increased book production is the demand for authors to write books, leading to creative expressions, religious controversies, and political upheaval. Printed books were a powerful disruption but they are generally seen as an accelerator of education, business, better health, and much more.

Disruptions from AI-based automation follow a familiar historical pattern, leading to fear-provoking descriptions of never-before-seen widespread unemployment. The claim that this time the impact will be worse than ever before seems weak to me and to many economists. Agriculture accounted for 40% of employment in 1900, but now is only 4%, yet we don’t see 36% unemployment. Instead of working on farm food production, employment has grown in suppliers for agribusinesses, vast food distribution networks, and processed food manufacturers. New jobs have been generated in supermarkets that are now stocked with diverse produce and packaged goods at afordable prices. In addition, restaurants selling to rich and poor all create new employment possibilities. Here again, a troubling concern is how much the vast growth in automation increases inequality, which has surged to troubling levels.

As excitement about social robots matures, the latest surge of interest and fear is around robotic process automation (RPA), which continues the long history of accounting and back-ofice automation that did away with stock market trading and check-clearing clerks who filled vast halls on Wall Street and Main Street. RPA automates still more accounting and clerical jobs, which are painful disruptions for those afected, but well in line with the scale of previous waves of automation. The pressures of competition are a reality, but the reduced costs of transactions are a benefit to many. Respected socially responsive corporations can help these displaced workers share in the benefits of automation by providing training for better jobs in their corporations or helping them find job elsewhere.

The exaggerations about dramatic technology revolutions go back at least to the early days of telegraphy, automobiles, and aviation. Strong language was used in 1970 when Alvin Tofler’s international bestseller, Future Shock, declared that “What is occurring now is, in all likelihood, bigger, deeper, and more important than the industrial revolution. . . . nothing less than the second great divide in human history, comparable in magnitude only with . . . the shift from barbarism to civilization.”<sup>4</sup> Yes, it was true that tumultuous changes were happening in the 1970s, but similar periods of turmoil have and will continue to occur. The lessons of history are familiar and clear:

• Weaving machines led to the Luddite revolt early in the eighteenth century, which produced a dramatic drop in textile prices, triggering much greater demand. The expanded production of cloth, the growing fashion industry, and new clothing distribution channels increased employment, while enabling more people to own more clothes.

• When Louis Daguerre announced photography in 1839, famed French artist Louis Delaroche declared that “from today painting is dead,” but the flourishing impressionist and other movements showed that there was much creative work to be done beyond photo-realistic landscapes and portraits. Photography, video, and visual communications expanded creative possibilities to become big businesses, enriching the lives of many people.

• In the 1960s, automated teller machines were supposed to put bank employees out of work, but the number of branches has increased as more people have taken advantage of expanded services such as mortgage loans and credit cards, thereby raising employment in banks. Now as online banking spreads, local branches may be disappearing, but bank and financial services employment keeps rising.

The main efect of automation is typically to lower costs and increase quality, which increases demand and expands production, bringing benefits to customers while increasing employment. Automation is also disruptive by making certain skills obsolete, so there are substantial challenges to technology innovators and policy-makers, especially in helping those whose jobs are destroyed and in ensuring greater fairness in distributing the benefits of automation so that workers can make a living wage and receive better treatment.

The need to ensure more equitable sharing of the benefits of automation was stressed in the thoughtful 2020 report from the MIT Work of the Future project, which called on policy-makers to build “a future for work that harvests the dividends of rapidly advancing automation and ever-more powerful computers to deliver opportunity and economic security for workers.”<sup>5</sup> The report author team, led by David Autor, David Mindell, and Elisabeth Reynolds, recognized that changes would not come naturally, so pressures had to be put on business leaders: “to channel the rising productivity stemming from technological innovations into broadly shared gains, we must foster institutional innovations that complement technological change.”<sup>6</sup>

The report reafirmed that the future of work was bright:

we anticipate that in the next two decades, industrialized countries will have more job openings than workers to fill them, and that robotics and automation will play an increasingly crucial role in closing these gaps . . . innovations bring new occupations to life, generate demands for new forms of expertise, and create opportunities for rewarding work.<sup>7</sup>

While disruptions for those who lose their jobs is severe, the report goes on to say that “new goods and services, new industries and occupations demand new skills and ofer new earnings opportunities.”<sup>8</sup>

The US Bureau of Labor Statistics lists occupations that are expected to grow, especially in medical care, which has increased from 12% to 22% of employment with jobs such as home healthcare aides, registered nurses, medical therapists, medical managers, mental health counselors, and nursing assistants. Other growth areas are in starter jobs for younger, poorly educated, or immigrant populations such as food distribution, fast food workers, and warehouse staf. Better jobs are in technical fields such as software engineering, financial management, and renewable energy systems installation.

What forms of public pressure, corporate social responsibility, and government regulation will push business leaders and policy-makers to share the benefits of automation through higher minimum wages, better medical insurance, and expanded child care? How can these leaders be convinced that they will benefit if employees have better lives and become active participants in a growing economy, thereby reducing the harmful efects of growing income inequality? Ambitious eforts to create new opportunities for displaced workers, increase access to education, and develop job training with local businesses should be part of the response. Some workers may need skills training and encouragement to explore new possibilities. New jobs can help those ready to learn something new: healthcare, equipment maintenance, delivery services, and renewable energy installation. Growth will also come in the leisure, restaurant, personal services, and entertainment industries. These changes will take resources and imagination to realize, so technology companies and regulatory agencies have a responsibility to be more active in making serious commitments to worker welfare, while mitigating the efects of growth on environmental concerns.