CHAPTER 6

# Introduction: Rising above the Levels of Automation

Unlike machines, human minds can create ideas. We need ideas to guide us to progress, as well as tools to implement them . . . Computers don’t contain “brains” any more than stereos contain musical instruments . . . Machines only manipulate numbers; people connect them to meaning.

Arno Penzias, Nobel Prize in Physics (1989)

T<sup>his</sup> <sup>chapter</sup> <sup>opens</sup> <sup>up</sup> <sup>new</sup> <sup>possibilities</sup> <sup>by</sup> <sup>way</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>a</sup> <sup>two-dimensional</sup>framework of human-centered artificial intelligence (HCAI) that sepa- framework of human-centered artificial intelligence (HCAI) that separates levels of automation/autonomy from levels of human control. The new guideline is to seek both high levels of human control and high levels of automation, which is more likely to produce computer applications that are reliable, safe, and trustworthy. Achieving these goals, especially for complex, poorly understood problems, will dramatically increase human performance, while supporting human self-eficacy, creativity, responsibility, and social connections. This chapter focuses on the reliable, safe, and trustworthy goals, which may help to achieve other important goals such as privacy, cybersecurity, economic development, and environmental preservation.

I share the belief that computer autonomy is compelling for many applications. Who wouldn’t want an autonomous device that would do a repetitive or dificult task reliably and safely? But what if it does that task correctly only 98% of the time? Or if it catches fire once in a hundred times?

Autonomy may be fine for some tasks, but dangerous for others. In consumer applications, like making recommendations, unusual films, or ofbeat restaurants might lead to a welcome discovery, so the dangers of errors are low. For other tasks, like sensor-based pattern recognition for flushing a toilet in a bathroom, incorrect activations or failure to activate are minor annoyances. However, if the task is driving you to work, would you accept a car that once a month took an hour to start or a car that occasionally parked itself a mile from your workplace? For lightweight tasks like toilet flushing, failures are just an annoyance, but for transportation, health, financial, and military applications higher levels of reliability, safety, and trustworthiness are needed to gain the high levels of user acceptance that lead to commercial success.

But maybe there are designs of recommender systems, toilet flushing, or car driving in which users can take more control of what the machine does, prevent failures, and take over when user intent is not fulfilled. In a study of a news recommender system, users were given three sliders to allow them to indicate their interest in reading politics, sports, or entertainment articles. As users move the sliders, the list of recommended articles changes immediately so users can explore alternatives, leading to users clicking on recommendations more often and expressing “a strong desire for having more control.”<sup>1</sup> A second study of two diferent control panels for a news recommender showed similar strong results favoring user control.<sup>2</sup>

Some recommender systems allow users to register their dissatisfaction with a recommendation, so that over time the recommender systems become more accurate. Automated toilets typically have a button to push to force flushing when the system has not activated automatically.

Despite many good designs, there is room for improvement in existing systems. I had an annoying experience at a swimming pool I go to regularly. While I was getting dressed, the changing room toilet flushed unnecessarily eight times, but I could see no way of stopping the automated device that used pattern recognition technologies from AI’s early days. By contrast, I often had trouble activating the sink and the hand dryer, which became a nuisance. These pattern recognition devices were neither reliable or trustworthy. A remedy would be a standard icon, approved by all manufacturers, placed just at the spot where the pattern recognition sensor would be sure to spot it or a button to turn the sink or dryer on.

The black mats in front of automatic doors are usually not the sensor, but they are a clear indicator that stepping on to the mat will put you in the place where the camera sensor will pick up your image. Override buttons for users with handicaps enable them to activate the door on demand and keep the door open for longer, so they can get through safely. Greater user control, even in these relatively low-tech applications, make for a more reliable, safe, and trustworthy system.

In summary, automated systems can be wonderful, but strategies to ensure activation when needed and prevent inadvertent activations contribute to reliable, safe, and trustworthy operation that increases user acceptance. Good design also includes ways for maintenance staf to gather performance data to know whether the operation is correct and adjust controls to make sure the device functions correctly.

These issues become vital in life-critical applications such as airbag deployment. Airbags explosively deploy in two-tenths of a second to save about 2500 lives a year in the United States. However, in the early years more than 100 infants and elders were killed by inadvertent deployments, until design changes reduced the frequency of these tragedies. The important lesson is that collecting data on unsuccessful and inadvertent deployments provides the information necessary for refinements that make systems reliable, safe, and trustworthy. When autonomous systems’ failures and near misses are tracked to support improved designs and when public websites enable reporting of incidents, quality and acceptance increase.

For consequential applications such as car driving, safety comes first. I might be willing to buy a car that would not let me drive if my breath alcohol was above legal levels. I would be even more eager to require that all cars had such a system so as to prevent others from endangering me. On the other hand, if that system made an incorrect measurement when I was excitedly getting in my car to drive my injured child to the hospital, I would be very angry, because the car was not trustworthy.

The first lesson about autonomous systems, which we will return to later, is that user controls to activate, operate, and override can make for more reliable, safe, and trustworthy systems. The second lesson is that performance histories, called audit trails or product logs, provide valuable data that lead to continuous design refinements. Maybe the most important lesson is that humility is an important quality for designers, who will be more successful if they think carefully about the possibilities of failures.

Enthusiasm has long been high about automated/autonomous systems using technologies such as machine learning, neural nets, statistical methods, recommenders, adaptive systems, and speech, facial, image, and pattern recognition. The goal of computer autonomy was central in the minds of MIT professor Tom Sheridan and his graduate student William Verplank in 1978 when they wrote about ten levels from human control to computer autonomy (Table 6.1).<sup>3</sup> Their widely cited one-dimensional list continues to guide much of the research and development, suggesting that increases in automation must come at the cost of lowering human control. But this zero-sum assumption limits thinking about ways to increase human control and the level of automation. There is a better way.

Table 6.1 Summary of the widely cited, but one-dimensional levels of automation/autonomy
<table><tr><td>Level</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>The Computer:</td></tr><tr><td>10 (High)</td><td>decides everything and acts autonomously, ignoring the human</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>informs the human only if the computer decides to</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>informs the human only if asked</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>executes automatically, then necessarily informs the human</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>allows the human a restricted time to veto before automatic execution</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>executes the suggestion, if the human approves</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>suggests one alternative</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>narrows the selection down to a few</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>offers a complete set of decision-and-action alternatives</td></tr><tr><td>I (Low)</td><td>offers no assistance; the human must take all decisions and actions</td></tr></table>

Adapted from Parasuraman et al.<sup>4</sup>

Sheridan and Verplank’s ten levels of autonomy have been widely influential, but critics noticed that it was incomplete, missing important aspects of what users do. Over the years, there have been many refinements such as recognizing that there were at least four stages of automation: (1) information acquisition, (2) analysis of information, (3) decision or choice of action, and (4) execution of action.<sup>5</sup> These stages open the door to thinking about whether users might have greater control during some of the stages, especially during the decision-making stage. Computers could present choices to the human operators, who might select the option for the computer to carry out. This nuanced approach was on the right track towards identifying the combined strategy that gives human control for decisions and supports automation when it is reliable. The human operators may also make a note to suggest additional options or clarifications that could be added to the next software update.

The four stages were an important refinement that helped keep the levels of autonomy alive, even as critics continued to be troubled by the simple one-dimensional framework, which assumed that more automation meant less human control. Shifting to the two-dimensional framework for HCAI, presented in Chapter 8, could liberate design thinking so as to produce computer applications that increase automation, while amplifying, augmenting, empowering, and enhancing people to apply systems innovatively and creatively refine them.

Table 6.2 Persistent, but still misleading, one-dimensional thinking about levels of autonomy for self-driving cars<sup>6</sup>
<table><tr><td>Level</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>5 (High)</td><td>Full autonomy: equal to that of a human driver, in every driving scenario.</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>High automation: fully autonomous vehicles perform all safety-critical driving functions in certain areas and under defined weather conditions.</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Conditional automation: driver shifts &quot;safety critical functions&quot; to the vehicle under certain traffic or environmental conditions.</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Partial automation: at least one driver assistance system is automated. Driver is disengaged from physically operating the vehicle (hands off the steering wheel AND foot off the pedal at the same time).</td></tr><tr><td>I</td><td>Driver assistance: most functions are still controlled by the driver, but a specific function (like steering or accelerating) can be done automatically by the car.</td></tr><tr><td>0 (Low)</td><td>No automation: human driver controls all: steering, brakes, throttle, power.</td></tr></table>

Even Tom Sheridan commented with concern that “surprisingly, the level descriptions as published have been taken more seriously than were expected.”<sup>7</sup> Robert R. Hofman and Matt Johnson provide a fascinating history of how researchers struggled to preserve the levels of autonomy idea.<sup>8</sup> However, despite the many critiques, the one-dimensional level of autonomy, which only represents situations where increased automation must come with less human control, is still widely influential. For example, the US Society of Automotive Engineers adopted the unnecessary trade-of in its six levels of autonomy for self-driving cars (Table 6.2).<sup>9</sup> A better approach would be to clarify what features could be automated, like collision avoidance or parking assist, and what activities required human control, like dealing with snow-covered roads, sensor failures, or verbal instructions from police oficers.

Critics of autonomy have repeatedly discussed the ironies,<sup>10</sup> deadly myths,<sup>11</sup> conundrums,<sup>12</sup> or paradoxes<sup>13</sup> of autonomy. The strong team of Jef Bradshaw, Robert R. Hofman, David D. Woods, and Matt Johnson from the Institute for Human and Machine Cognition wrote a sharply worded article: “The Seven Deadly Myths of Autonomous Systems.”<sup>14</sup> They point to myths such as “once achieved, full autonomy obviates the need for human machine collaboration,” which they mock as an obvious misunderstanding of how teams collaborate in interdependent ways. The “Deadly Myths” article cautions designers who “have succumbed to myths of autonomy that are not only damaging in their own right but are also damaging by their continued propagation . . . because they engender a host of other serious misconceptions and consequences.”<sup>15</sup> Their article and many others make the strong point that humans must monitor what autonomous systems are doing, so design efort is needed to let humans know what an autonomous system is doing and what it will do next.

The US Defense Science Board report describes the ten levels of autonomy this way: “though attractive, the conceptualization of levels of autonomy as a scientific grounding for a developmental roadmap has been unproductive.”<sup>16</sup> A later US Defense Science Board report described many opportunities and dangers with autonomy.<sup>17</sup> Cognitive science researchers like Robert R. Hofman and his colleagues point to the failures and costs of autonomous weapons, which have had unintended deadly consequences.<sup>18</sup> A clear example of excessive autonomy with deadly outcomes was with the Patriot missile system, which inadvertently shot down British and American aircraft during the 2003 Iraq War.<sup>19</sup>

Another tragic case of excessive automation was the two Boeing 737 MAX crashes in October 2018 and March 2019 causing 346 deaths.<sup>20</sup> While there are many problems that led to these crashes, I choose to focus on the autonomous control system which failed because of a malfunctioning sensor, causing the control system to point the plane’s nose down. The frantic pilots tried to pull the plane up more than twenty times in the minutes before the crash. The developers of the autonomous control system believed it was so reliable that pilots were not even informed about its presence in their training or user manuals, so they could not figure out what to do to restore their control of the aircraft.

Autonomous systems and humans can both fail, so recovery from failures, such as loss of power, communication, mobility, or sensors, needs to be a primary concern.<sup>21</sup> Until highways become controlled spaces like elevator shafts, there will likely be a need for a human operator to deal with fallen trees on roadways, construction crews that halt trafic, or vandals who spray paint over sensors.

The problems brought by autonomy are captured in Texas A&M professor Robin Murphy’s law of autonomous robots: “any deployment of robotic systems will fall short of the target level of autonomy, creating or exacerbating a shortfall in mechanisms for coordination with human problem holders.”<sup>22</sup>

Critics of human control make two strong claims. The first claim is that humans make mistakes, so automation can prevent such mistakes, working tirelessly and consistently. There is value in this concern, so designers include interlocks and other safety-ensuring features where possible from safety razors to nuclear reactor control rods. Understanding mistakes and how to prevent them takes research, which leads to design of appropriate features. There can always be unanticipated human mistakes, changing contexts of use, and adversarial attacks, so design vigilance is needed continuously over the lifetime of a product or service. The second claim is that even if controls are included, only a small number of users will learn how to use them and bother to use them. While some controls are of little interest to users, many controls are poorly designed, making them dificult to use. When controls are desired and well-designed, they are widely used, as in the case of adjustments for car seats, driving wheel positions, and rear- and side-view mirrors. Environmental controls in cars are necessary to set preferences for lighting, radio volume, window-opening position, and heating, ventilation, or air-conditioning level. The large number of controls in word processors, spreadsheets, and photo, video, and music editing programs add evidence that when features are desired and well-designed they are used.

Fortunately, there is growing awareness by leading artificial intelligence researchers and developers that human-centered designs are needed. Fei-Fei Li, a Stanford University computer science professor and the chief scientist for AI research at Google Cloud, wrote in a March 2018 New York Times opinion piece about the need to “make AI that’s good for people.” She sees a “trend toward automating those elements of jobs that are repetitive, error-prone and even dangerous. What’s left are the creative, intellectual and emotional roles for which humans are still best suited.” Professor Li concludes: “However autonomous our technology becomes, its impact on the world—for better or worse—will always be our responsibility.”<sup>23</sup>

Fei-Fei Li also aligned behind the term “human-centered AI,” which became the name of the Stanford University Institute that she co-founded with John Etchemendy, a Stanford philosophy professor who served as provost. They wrote: “As creators of this new technology, it is our collective responsibility to guide AI so that it has a positive impact on our planet, our nations, our communities, our families and our lives.”<sup>24</sup>

Michael Jordan, a top machine learning researcher at the University of California-Berkeley, wrote a powerful statement in April 2018, saying that “the principles needed to build planetary-scale inference-and-decision-making systems of this kind, blending computer science with statistics, and taking into account human utilities, were nowhere to be found in my education.”<sup>25</sup> He claimed: “What we’re missing is an engineering discipline with its principles of analysis and design,” which surprised me because he surely knows about human–computer interaction. He goes on to rightly question whether “working on classical human-imitative AI is the best or only way to focus on these larger challenges?” Jordan recommends that, what seems like a wise path forward: “We will need well-thought-out interactions of humans and computers to solve our most pressing problems. And we will want computers to trigger new levels of human creativity, not replace human creativity.”<sup>26</sup>

Chapter 7 discusses the strategies for achieving reliable, safe, and trustworthy systems. Chapter 8 lays out the novel two-dimensional HCAI framework, describing diferent design objectives and the path to high levels of human control and high levels of automation. The HCAI framework rises above the belief in the one-dimensional levels of autonomy, which has been widely used for the past forty years. Chapter 9 provides design principles that guide thinking about novel systems plus examples to clarify what has been done and what is needed. Chapter 10 summarizes the HCAI framework and its limitations.