# Assured Autonomy and Control Centers

omputer autonomy is an attractive science goal for many AI researchers, developers, journalists, and promoters. Past descriptions of computer autonomy are giving way to discussions that feature stronger statements about assured autonomy, which contrast with the increasing use of control centers (see Figure 11.1).

Computer autonomy has become a widely used term to describe an independently functioning machine, not directly under human control. The US Defense Science Board makes this definition:

Autonomy results from delegation of a decision to an authorized entity to take action within specific boundaries. An important distinction is that systems governed by prescriptive rules that permit no deviations are automated, but they are not autonomous. To be fully autonomous, a system must have the capability to independently compose and select among diferent courses of action to accomplish goals based on its knowledge and understanding of the world, itself, and the situation.<sup>1</sup>

## However, the US Defense Science Board cautioned that:

Unfortunately, the word “autonomy” often conjures images in the press and the minds of some military leaders of computers making independent decisions and taking uncontrolled action . . . It should be made clear that all autonomous systems are supervised by human operators at some level, and autonomous systems’ software embodies the designed limits on the actions and decisions delegated to the computer . . . Autonomy is, by itself, not a solution to any problem.<sup>2</sup>

This warning highlights the reality that humans and machines are embedded in complex organizational and social systems, making interdependence an important goal as well. Since humans remain as the responsible actors (legally, morally, ethically), shouldn’t computers be designed in ways that assure user control? The combined design position is that some features can be made autonomous if they are comprehensible, predictable, and controllable, while giving users control over the features that are not reliable and those that are important to them.

While enthusiasm for fully autonomous systems remains high and may be valuable as a research goal, the realities of usage have been troubling. Autonomous, high-speed financial trading systems have produced several billion-dollar financial crashes, but more troubling are deadly outcomes such as the Patriot missile system shooting down two friendly aircraft during the Iraq War<sup>3</sup> or the 2016 crash of a Tesla while on autopilot.<sup>4</sup> Maybe the most dramatic examples are the late 2018 and early 2019 crashes of the Boeing 737 MAX, caused by the autonomous maneuvering characteristics augmentation system (MCAS) system, which took over some aircraft controls without even informing the pilots.<sup>5</sup>

Some of the problems caused by autonomy are captured in Texas A&M University professor Robin Murphy’s law of autonomous robots: “any deployment of robotic systems will fall short of the target level of autonomy, creating or exacerbating a shortfall in mechanisms for coordination with human problem holders.”<sup>6</sup>

Those who faced the realities of dealing with innovation goals have repeatedly described the dangers of full computer autonomy. An early commentary in 1983 gently described the ironies of autonomy, which instead of lightening the operator’s workload increased their workload because continuous monitoring of the autonomous computer was necessary.<sup>7</sup> These operators are in the unhappy situation of being unsure of what the computer will do, yet they are responsible for the outcome.<sup>8</sup>

Other concerns were the dificulty of humans remaining vigilant when there was little for them to do, the challenge of rapidly taking over when problems arose, and the struggle to maintain skills for the times when they need to take over operations. These ironies of vigilance, rapid transition, and deskilling of operators remain relevant because the operators are responsible for the outcomes.<sup>9</sup>

The team of Jef Bradshaw, Robert R. Hofman, David D. Woods, and Matt Johnson make forceful comments in a strongly worded paper: “The Seven Deadly Myths of Autonomous Systems.”<sup>10</sup> They make the bold statement that “there’s nothing worse than a so-called smart machine that can’t tell you what it’s doing, why it’s doing something, or when it will finish. Even more frustrating—or dangerous—is a machine that’s incapable of responding to human direction when something (inevitably) goes wrong.” These authors also make the devastating remark that believers in full computer autonomy “have succumbed to myths of autonomy that are not only damaging in their own right but are also damaging by their continued propagation . . . because they engender a host of other serious misconceptions and consequences.”

Even human factors leaders, like Mica Endsley, who support the autonomy goal describe conundrums: “as more autonomy is added to a system, and its reliability and robustness increase, the lower the situation awareness of human operators and the less likely that they will be able to take over manual control when needed.”<sup>11</sup> Endsley’s work on situational awareness in autonomous systems allows for some kinds of supervisory control, a blend that seems like a realistic combined design. Peter Hancock, another leader in human factors, raised further danger signs in his strongly worded 2022 opinion piece: “Avoiding Adverse Autonomous Agent Actions.”<sup>12</sup> He fears that autonomous devices are “virtually inevitable,” leading him to call for their elimination or severe restrictions on their capabilities.

A consequential debate continues around the dangers of lethal autonomous weapons (LAWS) which could select targets and launch deadly missiles without human intervention. A vigorous efort to ban these weapons, much as land mines have been banned, has attracted almost 5000 signatures.<sup>13</sup> A regular United Nations Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons in Geneva attracts representatives of 125 countries who are drafting a treaty restricting use of LAWS. Their case is bolstered by reports from cognitive science researchers,<sup>14</sup> who document the failures, dangers, and costs of autonomous weapons. However, some military leaders do not wish to be limited when they fear that adversaries will adopt autonomous weapons. Progress has been slow in making any agreement to limit application of autonomous defensive or ofensive weapons.

I share the belief that computer autonomy is compelling for many applications. I would be eager to have an autonomous device that would do repetitive, dangerous, or dificult tasks reliably and safely. I wish I had a self-driving car that would have avoided my scraping our car on a pillar in a narrow garage. This and other human slips could be avoided by designs that prevent human errors. A safety-first approach seems to be the wise choice in consequential and life-critical applications.

The notion of assured autonomy is increasingly discussed, such as at the Computing Research Association workshop on the topic that I participated in during February 2020 in Phoenix, AZ. The spirited discussion led to a balanced report that retained the term “assured autonomy” and advocated human-centered approaches, formal methods for proving correctness, extensive testing, and independent certification.<sup>15</sup> The report accepts that “since legal and moral responsibility for failures of autonomous systems resides only in humans and organizations, designers and developers should be trained to understand the legal doctrines of liability and accountability.”

I supported these balanced statements, but I prefer to use the term “supervised autonomy,” implemented as control panels and control centers. Supervised autonomy signals that humans are monitoring performance by way of visual control panels on devices or at remote control centers, so that they can intervene in a timely manner to ensure vital outcomes. Another component of supervised autonomy is that audit trails and product logs are collected to support retrospective failure analysis (see the section “Audit Trails and Analysis Tools” in Chapter 19). In some situations, a remote control center monitors operation of many cars or trains, hospital intensive care units (ICUs), or communications networks.

The term assured autonomy continues to gather support, as indicated by the formation of the Johns Hopkins Institute for Assured Autonomy.<sup>16</sup> Its website states that “the trustworthiness of future autonomous systems will depend on reliable technology, rigorous systems and human engineering, and principled public policy.” The UK’s Research and Innovation Council has given major funding to several universities to pursue “Trustworthy Autonomous Systems.”<sup>17</sup> My worry is that the terms assured or trustworthy autonomy promise more than is possible, misleading developers to believe that they can construct a reliable, safe, and trustworthy system with minimal human supervision.

By contrast, terms like supervised, flexible, shared, parallel, and distributed autonomy suggest that human autonomy is an equally important goal. An alternate vision is that control centers can provide human oversight, support continuous situation awareness, and ofer a clear model of what is happening and what will happen next. Control centers provide information-abundant control panels, extensive feedback for each action, and an audit trail to enable retrospective reviews. Supervisory control, tele-robotics, and automation were extensively described by Sheridan,<sup>18</sup> who sought to define the space between detailed manual and fully automatic control, thereby clarifying human responsibility for operation of industrial control centers, robots, elevators, and washing machines.

The control center metaphor suggests human decision-making for setting goals, supported by computers carrying out predictable tasks with low-level physical actions guided by sensors and carried out by efectors. Automobile automatic transmissions are a familiar example of a successful mature autonomous system that largely operates on its own. In electronic systems, such as the social media or e-commerce, users carry out their tasks of posting messages or ordering products, getting feedback about what has happened, with alerts about posts from friends or if a product shipment is delayed. In mature systems, users have a clear mental model of what the device or system is doing, with interlocks to prevent unintended actions, alerts when problems arise, and the capacity to intervene when undesired actions occur or goals change.

Contemporary versions of control centers imply even more ambitious ideas. For example, in commercial aviation there may be several forms of human control, which begins with aircraft pilots and co-pilots, includes air-trafic controllers working in local centers (terminal radar approach control, TRACON) and extends to twenty regional control rooms (air route trafic control center, ARTCC) that coordinate the US national airspace. Further supervision of autonomous systems includes FAA certification of each aircraft, reviews of pilot training and performance, and retrospective analysis of flight data recorder information to study failures and successful recoveries from near misses. Similarly, hospital, transportation, power, stock market, military, and other complex systems have multiple control centers, within which there may be many AI-guided components.

Support grows for combined solutions such as the vision of Daniela Rus, who leads an MIT research group devoted to cars that have parallel autonomy, which means that humans are in control of the vehicle, with computers intervening only minimally during normal driving. However, the computer will act to prevent accidents by braking or avoiding collisions with cars, obstacles, or pedestrians.<sup>19</sup> This notion, the safety-first car, makes sense in other computer applications, especially with mobile and social robots, discussed in Chapter 16.

In summary, there is enthusiasm for the notion of assured autonomy, but for many applications control centers may provide more opportunities for human oversight. When rapid response necessitates autonomous activity, great care and constant review of performance will help make for safer operation. It may be that the terminology does not matter, as long as the designers find a reliable, safe, and trustworthy design strategy with adequate testing, feedback from users, audit trails, and open reporting of problems.