CHAPTER 2 2

# Government Interventions and Regulations

overnment leaders around the world have recognized that AI is a vital technology for economic growth, national security, and community safety. While there is principled resistance to government interven  
tion and regulation, there is a growing recognition that it could be helpful and   
maybe necessary (see Figure 18.2). The United States is seen as a leader in   
AI research and development, but major eforts have also come from the   
United Kingdom, Europe, Canada, Russia, China, India, South Korea, and   
other countries. National policies from these and other countries have outlined   
their plans, but most impressively China’s Next Generation Artificial Intelli  
gence Development Plan has set ambitious goals to become the top center for   
AI basic research, product development, and commercial applications by 2030.

China’s large and well-educated population gives the country advantages that make its plans for leadership in AI a realistic possibility. The Chinese government’s centralized national economic policies and commitment of more than \$100 billion means that their plans can have broad impacts. Their plan has little to say about HCAI or responsible AI, but a follow-on document from China’s Ministry of Science and Technology does address some of the familiar principles of HCAI, such as fairness, justice, and respect for privacy, while adding open collaboration and agile governance.<sup>1</sup> China’s large Internet companies such as Alibaba, WeChat, Tencent, and Baidu are huge successes in e-commerce, banking, social media, and communications, in part because of their strength in AI.

China’s cultural diferences lead to some advantages in broad application of AI. While privacy is stated as a Chinese value, so is community benefit. This means that government collection of personal information, such as medical data, is expected. The data from individual healthcare are used to support public health practices that will bring the greatest benefits to all. This contrasts with Western practices, especially in the European Union, which prioritize individuals and strongly protect their privacy. Similarly, widespread surveillance in China via a vast system of cameras enables local and national governments to track individuals. These data contribute to a Social Credit System, a national system for personal economic and social reputation for each individual. While some see this as an invasive surveillance system, it gives China huge databases that enable rapid progress on AI machine learning algorithms and scalable implementation techniques.<sup>2</sup>

However, the United States has strong assets in its academic centers, major companies that currently dominate several markets, and an innovative start-up culture. A high-level policy statement comes from a 2019 US White House report which emphasizes the need to “[e]nsure the safety and security of AI systems. Advance knowledge of how to design AI systems that are reliable, dependable, safe, and trustworthy.”<sup>3</sup> The report stresses research to achieve these goals “but does not describe or recommend policy or regulatory actions related to the governance or deployment of AI.” A related report retreats still further from government regulation: “The private sector and other stakeholders may develop voluntary consensus standards that concern AI applications, which provide nonregulatory approaches to manage risks associated with AI applications that are potentially more adaptable to the demands of a rapidly evolving technology.” While such statements indicate past resistance to regulation, changes to policy are likely.

A broad review of US policy-making by Brookings Institution’s Darrell M. West and John R. Allen pointed to AI’s distinctive features of intentionality (capacity to form goals), intelligence (cognitive functioning approaching or exceeding human abilities), and adaptability (capacity to change behavior based on new data). The authors saw these as distinct enough from past technologies, so that new initiatives from government were needed.<sup>4</sup> They make familiar arguments about the need for responsible AI, transparency, and ethical principles, but their language becomes stronger when supporting oversight through AI impact assessments and advisory boards of relevant stakeholders for federal agencies. While their advice is more generic than specific, they speak up for HCAI by writing that “there needs to be avenues for humans to exercise oversight and control of AI systems.”

Government research agency leaders are already making choices about what kind of AI research they should support. The US National Science Foundation’s (NSF) \$100M+ program for National AI Research Institutes seeks to accelerate “research, transforming society, and growing the American workforce.” The request for proposals requires investigators to address foundational AI research while conducting “use-inspired research” that “drives innovations in related sectors of science and engineering, segments of the economy, or societal needs” while working with “external stakeholders such as industrial partners, public policy-makers, or international organizations.”<sup>5</sup>

This vision breaks from much of the NSF’s past that was guided by Vannevar Bush’s 1945 manifesto, Science, the Endless Frontier, which argued for research funding to be curiosity driven, rather than focused on societal needs. Bush’s widely influential manifesto has been challenged by many, but remains a firm lodestone for many researchers who seek to separate themselves from practitioners, societal needs, and policy topics.<sup>6</sup>

The encouragement for AI researchers to raise their emphasis on useinspired research is aligned with the growing awareness of the benefits of partnering with non-academic organizations and researchers. When AI researchers partner with those who are close to realistic driving problems, the quality of foundational research is likely to increase, as are the benefits to society. Diverse organizations, such as the Center for Advancing Research Impact in Society,<sup>7</sup> HIBAR Research Alliance,<sup>8</sup> and the University–Industry Demonstration Partnerships,<sup>9</sup> support these principles, while growing evidence shows the increased impact of such partnerships.<sup>10</sup>

The NSF program for National AI Research Institutes includes as one of its eight themes “Human–AI Interaction and Collaboration.” The commentary supports human-centered design by encouraging attention to “ethics, fairness, privacy, lack of deception, explainability, protection of vulnerable and protected populations, and participatory and inclusive design” so as to produce “trustworthy and safe” HCAI systems.<sup>11</sup>

Many nations, regional alliances, and international organizations are also funding research and addressing AI policy implications. The Canadian government promotes responsible use of AI by way of an algorithmic impact assessment to “mitigate the risks associated with deploying an automated decision system.”<sup>12</sup>

European nations, especially the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Italy, have put forward their statements, often aligned with European Union reports. The European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) requirement of a “right to explanation,”<sup>13</sup> discussed in Chapter 19’s section “Explainable User Interfaces,” covers all industries, but there is a growing awareness that industry-specific oversight may be more appropriate. In the UK, the Royal Society recommended that existing industry-specific agencies should address AI systems, rather than having “an overarching framework for all uses of machine learning.”<sup>14</sup> A useful strategy comes from the UK’s Information Commissioners Ofice and the Alan Turing Institute, which released a carefully considered set of guidelines about how agencies should develop their industry-specific policies.<sup>15</sup>

The European Commission’s White Paper on AI<sup>16</sup> proposes regulatory approaches and specific checklists for developers and managers.<sup>17</sup> The European efort, through its High-Level Expert Group, stresses seven principles for trustworthy AI:

1) human agency and oversight,

2) technical robustness and safety,

3) privacy and data governance,

4) transparency,

5) diversity, non-discrimination, and fairness,

6) environmental and societal well-being, and

7) accountability.

However, for now these principles are left for voluntary use by developers and deployers of AI systems.

An example of what regional alliances can accomplish, the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development’s (OECD) developed a set of “Principles for responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI” that labeled their work as a human-centered approach.<sup>18</sup> These principles were supported by the Group of Twenty (G20), which includes nineteen countries and the European Union, to promote economic development and financial stability and then endorsed by more than fifty countries, making it the most widely shared principles. The OECD’s HCAI principles, adopted in May 2019, begin with familiar values such as inclusive growth, sustainable development, well-being, transparency, explainability, and accountability.<sup>19</sup> Beyond these, the OECD principles encourage policy-makers to invest in research and development, build human capacity, deal with labor market transformation, and foster international cooperation.

The authors of the OECD principles recognized that follow-up eforts were needed to disseminate information, track implementation, and monitor outcomes. In 2020, they established a Policy Observatory with dashboards for sixty countries to track their policy initiatives, budgets, and academic research leaders. Then, by way of a Canadian and French partnership, the OECD convened a Global Partnership on AI (GPAI) to encourage policy-makers to pursue the principles. The GPAI makes a special mention of the COVID-19 crisis, with the hope of applying HCAI to respond and recover more efectively.

International initiatives, especially through the United Nations (UN), could also add weight to national HCAI policy eforts. The UN has generally been seen as a positive force in regulating atomic energy by way of monitoring of the 1970 Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty. The UN’s International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) sends inspectors to nuclear facilities in many of the 190 countries who signed the treaty to verify that they are not using their reactors to produce nuclear weapons. Critics point out that even after massive reductions, there are still more than 20,000 nuclear weapons in the world, although none have been used in warfare since 1945. Another concern is that a small number of nations with nuclear activities have not signed the treaty, so there are still serious threats that nuclear weapons might be used.

The UN’s role as a potential regulator of HCAI stems from its international eforts on health, communications, food, agriculture, and other technologies. The UN’s International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is active on AI topics with its annual AI for Good Global Summit.<sup>20</sup> That event focuses on supporting the UN’s seventeen Sustainable Development Goals (see Figure 1.1),<sup>21</sup> but the ITU’s efort so far is only to be helpful in bringing researchers, corporate leaders, and government policy-makers together to discuss their eforts. There is no enforcement or regulatory efort, even on issues such as lethal autonomous weapons systems (LAWS). Progress on outlawing LAWS has been slow, hampered by nations that oppose it, diferences in attitudes about defensive and ofensive weapons, and the dificulty of making enforceable policies. More vigorous eforts, akin to the IAEA, would have to be put in place to make the UN efective with HCAI.

Examples of enforcement or regulatory efort may emerge from individual countries. In the United States, government agencies already play key roles in improving automated systems, so they could begin to address HCAI systems.<sup>22</sup> The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) has a long history as a trusted investigator of aviation, ship, train, and other disasters, in part because the US Congress funds it as an independent agency outside the usual executive branch departments. Their skilled teams arrive at accident scenes to collect data, which become the basis for thoughtful reports with recommendations for improvement.

For example, the NTSB report on the deadly May 2016 Tesla crash criticized the manufacturer’s and operator’s “overreliance on the automation and a lack of understanding of system limitations.” The report recommended that future designs include audit trails in the form of “a standardized set of retrievable data . . . to enable independent assessment of automated vehicle safety and to foster automation system improvements.”<sup>23</sup> Furthermore, the report cautioned “this crash is an example of what can happen when automation is introduced ‘because we can’ without adequate consideration of the human element.”

It is reasonable that deadly automobile accidents gain government regulatory attention because there are so many of them and that airplane crashes are investigated because there are so many deaths. Government interventions and regulations are also likely in life-critical businesses such as medical device production, pharmaceutical manufacturing, and healthcare or eldercare facilities.

Resistance to government regulation is understandable, but for consequential and life-critical applications, some form of independent oversight seems likely to reduce harm and accelerate the continuous improvement of products and services. Oversight for consequential applications, such as in finance and credit granting, is important because so many people are afected. For lightweight recommender and many consumer applications, government regulation could be modest, except when these are used to limit competition or take advantage of vulnerable populations, such as users with disabilities, children, or older adults.<sup>24</sup>

Skeptics also point to regulatory capture of government agencies, the practice whereby corporate leaders having close connections with government agency staf gain appointments in regulatory agencies for their own industry. These corporate leaders who work in government may be informed professionals, but many people doubt that they will take strong positions which would anger their former colleagues.

A broad National Algorithms Safety Board proposal has provoked discussions,<sup>25</sup> but adding HCAI expertise to existing oversight and regulatory agencies is a more practical approach. This makes sense since existing regulatory agencies will push to extend their oversight role and because the policies need to be attuned to the needs of diferent industries. This is just what several

US government agencies have done in their current eforts to review HCAI projects.

A good example is the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which wrote a carefully considered plan for regulation of AI and machine learning software updates in medical devices, such as intensive care units (ICUs) and skin lesion image analysis apps. They invited discussion of how these approaches “have the potential to adapt and optimize device performance in real-time to continuously improve healthcare for patients” and recognized that the FDA had to act “to ensure that safe and efective technology reaches users.”<sup>26</sup>

Similarly, the US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Software and Systems Branch has been dealing with AI-based adaptive software in cockpit systems that changes its behavior based on current data from aircraft sensors. Advocates see opportunities to improve safety and performance, but pilots, air-trafic controllers, and regulators worry about unpredictable behavior. The European Union Aviation Safety Agency pushed forward in 2020 with a fifteen-year roadmap for a “human-centric approach to AI in aviation,” which emphasizes the need for trustworthiness based on accountability, oversight, and transparency.<sup>27</sup>

Starting in 2019, the US National Institute of Standards and Technology was given a major role in assessing AI trustworthiness and explainability. Their workshops, reports, and websites provide useful information.<sup>28</sup> Another major efort is the Final Report of the US National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence,<sup>29</sup> which makes extensive recommendations about dramatically expanding research and implementation of AI systems to support national security. This report warns of the competition with China, seeking to preserve US leadership in AI, but it would have been stronger if it gave more credibility to partnerships, collaboration, and diplomatic approaches. The report suggests directions for implementing potential regulation, oversight, education, and substantially increased funding to pursue explainability, visualization, and enhanced human–AI interaction.

Another US government agency active in AI and algorithms is the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). It claims familiarity with automated decisionmaking, which goes back to their work on the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970, so it claims to be ready to deal with AI and machine learning. The FTC fights unfair and deceptive practices with strong and clear advice to financial and credit-granting companies that they must be transparent and be able to explain their AI-based decisions to consumers who are denied services. Their guideline for companies states: “This means that you must know what data is used in your model and how that data is used to arrive at a decision. And you must be able to explain that to the consumer.”<sup>30</sup> Skeptics may question how strongly these guidelines are enforced, but their website provides data and visualizations that report on the return of more than \$1 billion to more than 7 million consumers in the past two years.

Critics of the major technology companies have raised concerns about AI-based surveillance systems, which violate personal privacy using facial recognition and analysis of voluminous data sets of personal data. Harvard Business professor Shoshanna Zubof and others use the term “surveillance capitalism” to describe the practices by which major companies, especially Facebook and Google, profit from their vast resources of personal data by selling targeted advertisements.<sup>31</sup> Their AI algorithms are especially efective in using personal data to predict which group of people will buy a product, respond to a political advertisement, or share a fake news story.

Zubof claims that the business models of large technology companies are built on practices that invade privacy, surreptitiously persuade readers, and covertly reduce their choices. HCAI design strategies might give users better user interfaces with clearer choices about protecting their privacy so they can limit the data collected about them and can have easiser control over what information is presented to them. However, as Zubof points out, the business models of these companies would be shaken by giving users more control, as shown by Facebook’s fierce reaction when Apple gave their users ways to limit what data was sent to Facebook. While the European Union has taken steps to regulate some of these companies, the UK and United States are more reluctant to use regulatory powers.

Many AI industry leaders and government policy-makers fear that government regulation would limit innovation, but when done carefully, regulation can accelerate innovation as it did with automobile safety and fuel eficiency. A US government memorandum by Russell T. Vought, Director of the Ofice of Management and Budget, for Executive Branch Departments and Agencies ofered ten principles for “stewardship of AI applications.”<sup>32</sup> The memorandum suggests: “The private sector and other stakeholders may develop voluntary consensus standards that concern AI applications, which provide nonregulatory approaches to manage risks associated with AI applications that are potentially more adaptable to the demands of a rapidly evolving technology.”

A 2020 White House report seeks to “ensure that regulations guiding the development and use of AI are supportive of innovation and not overly burdensome.”<sup>33</sup> The principles were to “ensure public engagement, limit regulatory overreach, and promote trustworthy AI.” Vought later updated his memorandum to reiterate this limited role of regulation: “Federal agencies must avoid regulatory or non-regulatory actions that needlessly hamper AI innovation and growth.”<sup>34</sup> On the other hand, there is a need to protect the public from biased systems and regulatory capture, in which industry advocates set weak regulations.<sup>35</sup> Without regulation of social media platforms, hate speech, misinformation, and ethnical and racial attacks have spread widely because it serves the business interests of the platforms, rather than the public good. In some countries, regional, state, or local governments could become influential in trying fresh ideas that become valuable precedents. The future is likely to bring increased regulation of the companies and practices that are used in HCAI systems to ensure fair business practices, promote safe use by consumers, and limit misinformation and hate speech.