CHAPTER 2 3

# Summary and Skeptic’s Corner

As soon as algorithms—and especially robotics—have efects in the world, they must be regulated and their programmers subject to ethical and legal responsibility for the harms they cause.... Only human reviewers with adequate expertise and power can detect, defuse, and deflect most of these harms.

Frank Pasquale, New Laws of Robotics (2020)

H<sup>uman-centered</sup> <sup>artificial</sup> <sup>intelligence</sup> <sup>(HCAI)</sup> <sup>systems</sup> <sup>represent</sup> <sup>a</sup>new synthesis that raises the importance of human performance new synthesis that raises the importance of human performance and human experience. The fifteen recommendations for governance structures to create reliable, safe, and trustworthy systems will enable designers to translate widely discussed ethical principles into professional practices in large organizations with clear schedules. These recommendations are summarized in the four levels of governance structures: (1) reliable systems based on sound software engineering practices, (2) safety culture through business management strategies, (3) trustworthy certification by independent oversight, and (4) regulation by government agencies (Figure 18.2).

These diverse concerns mean that drawing researchers and practitioners from diverse disciplines is more likely to lead to success.<sup>1</sup> These HCAI systems will be well received if industry leaders go beyond positive statements about fairness, transparency, accountability, security, and privacy to support specific practices that demonstrate success in addressing the genuine concerns of many observers. Fairness is easy to say but hard to ensure, especially as contexts of use change. Transparency can be paraded by allowing access to code, but the complexity of real programs makes it dificult or impossible to know what it will accomplish. Beyond preventing failures, business leaders would do well to commit themselves to raise human self-eficacy, encourage creativity, clarify responsibility, and facilitate social connections. They should recognize that fairness, transparency, and other attributes are competitive advantages that will be increasingly valued.

The proposed governance structures face many challenges. No industry will implement all fifteen recommendations in the four levels. Each recommendation requires research and testing to validate efectiveness, and refinement based on the realities of each implementation. Another complexity is that real HCAI systems have many components from diverse providers, which means that some recommendations, such as software, data, and user experience testing can be accomplished for a component, but may be more dificult for a complete system. Formal methods and thorough testing may be possible for an airbag deployment algorithm, but independent oversight reviews may be more relevant for a self-driving car system.

Just as each home evolves over time, HCAI systems will be adapted to meet changing desires and demands. Adaptations will integrate new HCAI technologies, the needs of diferent application domains, and the changing expectations of all stakeholders.

Global interest in HCAI systems is demonstrated by the activities of the United Nations International Telecommunications Union and its thirty-five UN partner agencies. They seek to apply AI to the seventeen influential UN Sustainable Development Goals,<sup>2</sup> all of which combine technology developments with behavioral changes, to improve healthcare, wellness, environmental protection, and human rights. Global eforts on HCAI are tracked by the OECD Policy Observatory and the Michael Dukakis Center for AI and Digital Policy, which publishes an annual Social Contract Index documenting how well twenty-five countries pursue democratic policies for HCAI systems.<sup>3</sup>

The massive interest in ethical, social, economic, human rights, social justice, and responsible design is a positive sign for those who wish to see HCAI applied to social good and preserving the environment. Skeptics fear that poor design will lead to failures, bias, privacy violations, and uncontrolled systems, while malicious actors will misuse AI’s powers to spread misinformation, threaten security, expand cybercrime, and disrupt utility services. More dire predictions come in discussions of lethal autonomous weapons systems, undermining of democratic institutions, racial bias, and surveillance capitalism. Critics, like Microsoft’s Kate Crawford, see the extractive nature of AI, which threatens the environment, fosters unhealthy working conditions, and mistreats users.<sup>4</sup>

These are serious concerns that deserve ample attention, but the intense eforts by well-intentioned researchers, business leaders, government policy makers, and civil society organizations suggest more positive outcomes are possible. The new synthesis will take decades to be widely adopted, but humancentered design thinking can help to build successful future societies in which human values of rights, justice, and dignity are advanced. This book is devoted to fostering positive mindsets and constructive actions that support human self-eficacy, creativity, responsibility, and social connections.