# Assessing Trustworthiness

T<sup>he</sup> <sup>scientific</sup> <sup>instrument-makers</sup> <sup>of</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>eighteenth</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>nineteenth</sup> <sup>cen-</sup>turies dramatically advanced the human ability to measure size, du- turies dramatically advanced the human ability to measure size, duration, temperature, and weight, leading to rapid advances in many disciplines. Their twentieth-century disciples went still further, broadening access to precision measurement for surveyors, physicians, carpenters, cooks, and many others. Lord Kelvin promoted measurement with his memorable statement: “If you cannot measure it, you cannot improve it.”

Lord Kelvin’s admonition is taught to business school students with the variation that “if you can’t measure it, you can’t manage it.” However, success of business processes, capabilities of job candidates, and safety of manufacturing processes are not as easy to measure as a patient’s temperature or a pumpkin’s weight.

Equally challenging are evaluations of social systems, psychological attitudes, educational theories, wine vintages, and theatrical performances. In fact, for all our vast abilities to measure physical properties, our methods are limited when it comes to assessing, ranking, or comparing attributes of processes and systems.

The current challenge is to assess the attributes of HCAI systems. There is a great deal of discussion of ethical principles and attributes such as the attributes in Table 25.1, but very few suggestions about how to assess these attributes.<sup>1</sup> As described in Part 2, this book focuses on reliable, safe, and trustworthy attributes by describing how they might be achieved. This chapter focuses on trustworthiness, which is a stronger notion than trust, since trustworthiness emphasizes that the HCAI system deserves the trust that stakeholders grant it. However, trustworthiness is dificult to assess because it varies across applications contexts and over time as algorithms and training data sets are

Table 25.1 Frequently mentioned attributes of HCAI systems organized into five categories
<table><tr><td colspan="2">General virtues of the system itself</td></tr><tr><td>Trustworthy:</td><td>Can users trust the system to perform correctly?</td></tr><tr><td>Responsible/humane:</td><td>Has the system been designed, developed, and tested in a responsible way?</td></tr><tr><td>Ethical design:</td><td>Were stakeholders involved in the design?</td></tr><tr><td>Ethical data:</td><td>Were the data collected in an ethical manner?</td></tr><tr><td>Ethical use:</td><td>Will the system&#x27;s outcome be used in an ethical manner?</td></tr><tr><td>Well-being/benevolence:</td><td>Does the system support human health, comfort, and values?</td></tr><tr><td>Secure:</td><td>How vulnerable is the system to attack?</td></tr><tr><td>Private:</td><td>Does the system protect a person&#x27;s identity and data?</td></tr><tr><td>Performs well in practice</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Robust/agile:</td><td>Does the system perform well when inputs change?</td></tr><tr><td>Reliable/dependable:</td><td>Does the system do the right thing?</td></tr><tr><td>Available:</td><td>Is the system running when needed?</td></tr><tr><td>Resilient/adaptive:</td><td>Can the system recover from disruptions?</td></tr><tr><td>Testable/verifiable/ validatable/certifiable:</td><td>Can the system be tested to verify adherence to</td></tr><tr><td>Safe:</td><td>requirements? Does the system have a history of safe use?</td></tr><tr><td>Clarity to stakeholders</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Accurate:</td><td>Does the system deliver correct results on test cases and</td></tr><tr><td>Fair/unbiased:</td><td>real world cases? Are the system&#x27;s biases understood and reported?</td></tr><tr><td>Accountable/liable:</td><td>Who or what is responsible for the system&#x27;s outcome?</td></tr><tr><td>Transparent:</td><td>Is it clear to an external observer how the system&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>Interpretable/explainable/</td><td>outcome was produced? Can the system explain the outcome?</td></tr><tr><td>intelligible/explicable:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Usable:</td><td>Can a human use it easily?</td></tr></table>

## Continued

<table><tr><td colspan="3">Table 25.1 Continued</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Enables independent oversight</td></tr><tr><td>Auditable:</td><td colspan="2">Can the system be audited by others for retrospective forensic analysis of failures?</td></tr><tr><td>Trackable:</td><td colspan="2">Does the system display status and next steps so human intervention is</td></tr><tr><td>Traceable:</td><td colspan="2">possible? Is the system designed to allow tracing back from an outcome to the root</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">cause? Redressable: Is there a process for those harmed to request review and compensation?</td></tr><tr><td>Insurable:</td><td colspan="2">Does the design permit insurance companies to offer policies?</td></tr><tr><td>Recorded:</td><td colspan="2">Does the system record activity for retrospective forensic review?</td></tr><tr><td>Open:</td><td colspan="2">Are code and data publicly available for others to review?</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Certifiable: Can it be certified and approved for use?</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Complies with accepted practices</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Compliant with standards:</td><td>Does the system comply with relevant standards,</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Compliant with accepted software Was a trusted process used?</td><td>e.g. IEEE P7000 series?</td></tr></table>

updated. Recognizing that HCAI systems can never be 100% trustworthy should inspire humility among those who develop, manage, and use them.<sup>2</sup>

A recent hike gave me a good lesson about the diference between trusted and trustworthy. At the trailhead a professionally drawn map with detailed elevation data showed the trail going straight up to a scenic viewpoint. I trusted this professional map, but a half-hour into the hike, I came upon an unexpected split in the trail that was not shown on the professional map. A hand-drawn map at the split suggested I should turn left to reach the scenic viewpoint. Since I trusted the professional map, I went straight ahead, but it was not trustworthy. The hand-drawn map turned out to be the trustworthy one. Appearances can be deceiving, so validations of trustworthiness are needed.

Parts 3 and 4 of this book ofer design metaphors and governance structures that support other attributes, such as traceability, auditability, explainability, and fairness, but researchers and developers are still struggling to assess how well an HCAI system scores on these attributes. This chapter focuses on assessing trustworthiness. Other scales are needed for the other attributes.

It would be useful to be able to compare two HCAI systems to guide designers by letting them know which changes would do the most to improve the ratings on these attributes. A useful approach would be a form of nutrition label for all the attributes, as is common on food packages, so that consumers can compare products, which is the goal of IBM’s Factsheets, Microsoft’s Datasheets, and Google’s Model Cards.

System tests to validate and verify performance are helpful in identifying errors, but do not assess how reliable, safe, or trustworthy an HCAI system will be when it is put in diverse real-world contexts. Bias testing for the training data and usability testing for user interfaces are also positive steps for identifying problems, but they do not yield measures or complete system assessments or scores. Something like ratings of consumer products or rankings of universities, flawed as they are, would be helpful to decision-makers.

Some research proposals address particular attributes; for example, human factors experts Robert Hofman and Peter Hancock ofer an approach to measuring resilience by way of twenty-seven development procedures, such as tracking anomalies and evaluating data quality.<sup>3</sup> Similar proposals have been made for reliability, availability, and some other attributes, but they all need refinement to gain wide acceptance.

For some attributes, scoring can be accomplished by objective assessment or by subjective assessments of components. Beyond these methods, social processes and independent oversight could become useful for assessing the many attributes of HCAI systems. Table 25.1 has a list of more than thirty frequently mentioned attributes which I compiled and organized into five categories. The categories roughly indicate attributes of the system, how it performs in practice, how the stakeholders perceive it, how aligned it is with independent oversight, and how compliant it is with accepted practices. This chapter concludes with my proposal for an HCAI trustworthiness scale based on subjective judgments.

There are many approaches to evaluation but this chapter focuses on objective measurement, scoring by components, and assessment by social processes. The goal is to find evaluation approaches which are widely accepted, repeatable, and useful.

## Objective Measurement

Many researchers take for granted that it is possible to get accurate, objective measures of physical properties, such as size, duration, temperature, and weight. To ensure objective measurement, the rules for measuring have to be agreed on; for example, are patients weighed with clothes on or naked, before breakfast or after daily meals? Is blood pressure measured standing, seated, or lying, and is there a two- or ten-minute quiet period before measurement? Some objective assessments are ordinal, such as gas, liquid, or solid. Others are binary, such as pregnancy and COVID-19 tests, which yield YES or NO answers, although there may be false negatives and false positives. The HCAI attributes cannot be objectively measured, yet.

<table><tr><td colspan="2">5 4</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>I</td></tr><tr><td>Appearance</td><td>Clear, appropriate color, brilliance, no off colors</td><td></td><td></td><td>Cloudy, off colors</td></tr><tr><td>Aroma</td><td>Complex, many detectable aromas, intense</td><td></td><td></td><td>Little or no aroma, off aromas</td></tr><tr><td>Body</td><td>Perfect texture &amp; weight feel in the mouth</td><td></td><td></td><td>Too little or too much texture or weight feel in the mouth</td></tr><tr><td>Taste</td><td>Good balance, structure, several flavors detectable</td><td></td><td></td><td>Little balance &amp; structure, few flavors</td></tr><tr><td>Finish</td><td>Flavors linger after swallowing, smooth &amp; rich aftertaste</td><td></td><td></td><td>Taste and flavors end abruptly, no after taste</td></tr></table>

Fig 25.1 Wine tasting scoring scheme with five qualities: appearance, aroma, body, taste, and finish.  
Source: https://winecountrygetaways.com/

## Scoring by Components

Some attributes like wine quality are subjectively scored by human judges. The goal of subjective scores for something like wine quality would be useful when comparing two wines to decide which bottle to buy. There is no wine-o-meter that gives a numeric value for wine quality, but there are scoring systems such as that used by the magazine Wine Spectator that ranges from 50 to 100. In their scoring system, above 90 is “Outstanding: a wine of superior character and style,” while above 80 is “Good: a solid, well-made wine.” These scores originate from the subjective judgments of wine experts who give ratings to twenty or more wines in a day, without knowing which wine they are tasting. These ratings have large impacts on marketing, but they are less than scientific.

Other wine scoring schemes, meant to be used by everyday drinkers, may have five qualities such as appearance, aroma, body, taste, and finish, where each quality is given 1 to 5 points, for a maximum score of 25 points (Figure 25.1).<sup>4</sup>

More nuanced ratings or rubrics come from wine research centers, such as the University of California-Davis, located near the Napa Valley wine country. Their more rigorous rating scale has ten components, each getting 1, 2, or 4 points, but each is a subjective rating that comes from a human judgment.<sup>5</sup> The components include clarity, color, bouquet, acidity, flavor, sweetness, and body. Each component has a guide to rating, such as for flavor of the grape variety: complex (2.0), simple (1.5), agreeable (1.0), and non-descript (0.5).

Other complex scoring or rating systems use groups of raters. For example, the Code of Points was developed for Olympic figure skating, diving, boxing, and gymnastics. A panel of judges rate performance by components on a numeric scale, with the combined score determining the gold, silver, and bronze medal winners. This subjective judging is very diferent from events such as track or skiing, where speed is objectively assessed and turned into numeric scores.

One final example of scoring by components is the widely used APGAR scale for newborn health, created by Dr. Virginia Apgar in 1952.<sup>6</sup> Each of the five components (carefully chosen to spell APGAR) is rated at 0, 1, or 2, giving a 0 to 10 scale:

• Appearance (skin color: blue to pink)

• Pulse (absent to 100 bpm)

• Grimace (reflex irritability: no response to cry on stimulation)

• Activity (muscle tone: none to flexed arms and legs that resist extension)

• Respiration (absent to strong, robust cry)

These relatively simple examples of wine quality and newborn health may be helpful in developing scoring methods for assessing job candidates, retail store location choices, or software package purchase decisions. These are consequential decisions, but more challenging are life-critical decisions such as medical treatments, military options, or aircraft certification. These decisions raise the importance of improving the reliability of a scoring, ranking, or comparison. A good scoring method will have high inter-rater reliability, which means that diferent judges come up with fairly similar scores. Another expectation is that a scoring method will be repeatable, which means that when a judge is called on to rate a component they choose similar values.

Most scoring by components strategies depend on individual judgments, sometimes aggregated to form the final judgment, such as by a panel of Olympic judges or a hiring committee. Other strategies rely on social processes that involve discussion among panels or committee members, possibly followed by revision of individual scores or a joint assessment.

More elaborate versions of scoring by components include detailed questionnaires with more than 100 items, using semantically anchored Likert-like scales that may range from 0 to 10 or from strongly agree to strongly disagree. Usability questionnaires have become widely used in human–computer interaction research and product evaluations.<sup>7</sup> These questionnaires form a kind of checklist that also guides designers and developers in reviewing their own work. HCAI attributes might be scored by components, which is the basis for the HCAI trustworthiness scale proposed at the end of this chapter.

## Assessment by Social Processes

Because consequential and life-critical decisions are so important, these decisions are often made by group processes, which bring together experts, as with most National Transportation Safety Board reviews or non-experts, as in a jury trial of peers of the defendant. These social processes may complement scoring by components with qualitative methods and social processes, such as structured discussions, two or more rounds of voting, and adversarial debates with rules of evidence and cross-examinations of witnesses. HCAI systems could benefit from social processes incorporated into internal reviews and external independent oversight methods.

Familiar uses of social processes for assessment are hiring committees, which use scoring methods to review the many applicants, selecting a shortlist of candidates to interview more carefully, and requesting reference letters from independent reviewers. Then there may be a group discussion, often with voting to rank the remaining candidates. In academic environments, papers and grant proposals are reviewed, typically with written comments, followed by a group discussion which yields an accept or reject decision. Sometimes conference committees, journal editorial boards, or grant agency managers alter the decisions to satisfy diversity requirements, policy restrictions, or budgetary limitations.

Corporate boards of directors or state legislatures are further forms of making complex decisions where objective measures and scoring by components is supplemented by ample deliberation to generate a consensus or force a decision by voting.

Some organizations apply structured processes, such as the Delphi method, that have multiple rounds of discussion, often led by a professional facilitator who impartially elicits positions, even if they are far from the normal ones. Another popular method of assessment is the SWOT analysis that focuses on the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats of an idea, plan, or organization. This simple four-way structure helps participants think through some of the qualities of what they are assessing.

The research funding bodies in the United Kingdom developed a research excellence framework (REF) to assess the impact of university research projects. Instead of using only quantitative measures such as numbers of papers published, students graduated, or citations received, the REF convened thirty-four expert panels in diferent research areas. Two controversial aspects were how strongly research should be assessed by academic outputs or societal impacts and how well the expert panels represented the wide range of universities. Although an important goal was to encourage self-reflection among academics so as to improve future research, the evidence was used by newspapers and other organizations to rank universities.

Another inspiration might be river or forest environmental reports, which describe components, such as water, soil, or air quality, and/or recent activities, such as restoration eforts. These reports can be produced internally or by an external panel of experts. These assessments can make comparisons to previous years, highlight innovative eforts, and caution about emerging threats. Assessment reports often give grades from F for failing to A for excellent, to recognize successful eforts or highlight where greater efort is needed.

Rather than a panel of experts, the US Conference Board conducts a monthly Consumer Confidence survey of 5000 people.<sup>8</sup> The University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index conducts a similar monthly consumer confidence index.<sup>9</sup> The index is normalized to have a value of 100 in December 1966. Each month at least 500 telephone interviews ask fifty core questions to a random sample across the contiguous United States sample.

Independent oversight is among the social processes for assessing consequential business, academic, and government systems (Chapter 19). Independence suggests that the reviewers are unbiased by past history or current afiliations with those who developed the systems. Corporations are required to have annual audits by internal committees as well as external audits, typically by respected accounting firms, such as Price Waterhouse Coopers, KPMG, Ernst and Young, and Deloitte. These firms, and many small ones, are prohibited from serving as consultants to the corporations at the same time as they are the independent auditors. Of course, independent oversight is imperfect as the Enron and other failures have shown. Independent oversight can also be conducted by insurance companies, consumer groups, journalists, and nongovernmental organizations.

As Chapter 19 describes, there are three common forms of independent oversight:

1. Planning oversight: proposals for new systems or major upgrades are presented for review in advance so that feedback and discussion can influence the plans.

2. Continuous monitoring: this is an expensive approach, but continuous or period reviews ensure that even if context shifts, there will be a review to ensure quality.

3. Retrospective analysis of disasters: when disasters occur, a knowledgeable independent oversight review can give public assurance that the problems that led to the failure are being addressed.

Skeptics point to failures of independent oversight methods, sometimes tied to a lack of suficient independence, but the value of these methods is widely appreciated.

Independent oversight boards are intended to provide careful reviews of documents and interviews with key personnel to produce well-documented reports whose assessments are respected by all stakeholders. In most cases these reports have recommendations for short- and long-term remedies for identified problems or serious accidents, with some provision to verify that the recommendations were followed in three, six, or twelve months. The goal is performance improvement. Since board members have experience in doing multiple reviews, they transfer knowledge across organizations and sometimes across industries, while providing information that guides design of future systems and becomes included in educational curricula.

## Assessing HCAI Trustworthiness

Applying the scoring and assessment methods to HCAI systems will require innovative approaches to enable transparency and better define the desirable qualities. A growing circle of researchers, developers, managers, and policy-makers has proposed strong ethical foundations to ensure responsible or trustworthy AI, seeking fairness, accountability, transparency, explainability, and interpretability. Many more attributes have been proposed, such as those listed in Table 25.1, but measures, scoring methods, or assessment processes are yet to be agreed.

It’s alarming that consequential systems have been fielded with few means to assess them. The pressure for innovation is enormous, with bold claims of success, but when research systems come out of the lab to be applied in real world contexts, failures often result. Past failures are widely known, such as the misleading predictions of Google Flu Trends, financial flash crashes, facial recognition bias, and ofensive chatbots. These problems continue, as described by a group of thirty-three Google employees and seven external researchers who put out a troubling, yet refreshingly honest, report about how machine learning “models often exhibit unexpectedly poor behavior when they are deployed in real-world domains.”<sup>10</sup> Their openness is a positive sign, since it encourages more attention to assessing the trustworthiness and other attributes of HCAI systems.

Many of the HCAI system attributes are closely related. Responsible, safe, secure, accurate, and fair are all faces of a multiheaded creature. Similarly, transparent, explainable, and usable seem to describe the same attribute, yet each term has a devoted community who use these terms. At least four steps need to be taken to develop a credible assessment process: definitions, methods, assessors, and audience (Table 25.2). All of these steps will take time for consensus to emerge, but that is the challenge for researchers and developers.

Advocates of formal methods and proofs of correctness during development believe these methods could improve trustworthiness for a complex HCAI system. Similarly, advocates of static analysis and testing methods believe they would be helpful, but assessment of the trustworthiness of a system is probably only credible if the system’s performance is shown to be safe and efective in repeated use over periods of months and years. While early faults are tolerated, these problems should taper of over time, so that stakeholders come to see what becomes known as a trustworthy mature system.

Will Grifin, a Harvard-trained lawyer and Chief Ethics Oficer of Hyper-Giant, suggested during a phone interview that the viable measure of trustworthiness is the degree of transparency of an HCAI system.<sup>11</sup> Grifin makes the point that adding ethics should bring a competitive advantage for companies. He sees an analogy to nuclear non-proliferation reviews, in which trust is tied to the degree which a country is transparent about its nuclear eforts. The countries that allow inspections of their nuclear facilities are trusted. Support for this idea comes from the committee developing the IEEE Standard P7001 for Transparency in Autonomous Systems.<sup>12</sup>

<table><tr><td colspan="2">Table 25.2 HCAl trustworthiness assessment process</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1) Definitions Agree on a smaller set of terms with clear definitions that could be assessed, possibly with scoring by components.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2) MethodsConsider how to do assessments with at least these methods:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Static analysis of the code itself and the machine learning training data</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Performance of the system in benchmark testing</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Performance of the system in practice</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Subjective perceptions of stakeholders</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Reviews by internal or external experts</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3) Assessors Decide who does the assessment and how many are needed in each group.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Candidate assessors include those capable of contributing to an assessment:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Developers of the system, although they are likely to have precon-</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>ceived beliefs</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Knowledgeable developers of similar systems who were not involved</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Managers of projects that use the system</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Users of the system who are affected by its actions or predictions • Independent oversight reviewers who are familiar with similar</td></tr><tr><td>4) Audience Decide who the audience is for the assessment. Candidates include</td><td>applications</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>stakeholders who might benefit from an assessment:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Developers of the system, who might be able to improve it</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Knowledgeable developers of similar systems who might benefit from lessons learned</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Managers of projects that use the system who might revise their usag process</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>• Users of the system who are affected by its actions or predictions, or</td></tr></table>

The general principle behind the P7001 standard is that “it should always be possible to understand why and how an autonomous system made a particular decision.”<sup>13</sup> This principle is refined by having five stakeholder audiences that might review a system: users, general public, certifying agencies, incident investigators, and lawyers. For each audience there is a 1 to 5 rating scale for transparency with detailed descriptions of what each rating means, accompanied by examples. This is a useful first efort, which could be developed into a practical assessment tool.

Table 25.3 Proposed HCAI trustworthiness scale
<table><tr><td>Up to I point for openly available thorough report Up to I point if report has positive results</td></tr><tr><td>1) Internal independent review prior to implementation</td></tr><tr><td>2) Audit trail has been implemented</td></tr><tr><td>3) Training data was collected and assessed (e.g. Microsoft&#x27;s Datasheets)</td></tr><tr><td>4) Software was verified and validated</td></tr><tr><td>5) Fairness was tested</td></tr><tr><td>6) Explainability was implemented and tested 7) Performance in first two months of usage</td></tr><tr><td>8) Performance in first six months of usage</td></tr><tr><td>9) Stakeholders make suggestions, raise questions, and report on incidents, near misses,</td></tr><tr><td>and failures</td></tr><tr><td>10) Internal review process for incidents with redress for failures II) Continuous reviews to support refinements</td></tr><tr><td>12) External review by an independent oversight body</td></tr></table>

One final inspirational example is the AI Social Contract Index from the Dukakis Center for AI and Digital Policy.<sup>14</sup> The index rates twenty-five nations as to how strongly their national policies support democratic values. The twelve attributes, each rated on a 0 to 1 scale, record whether the government has endorsed and implemented foundational documents such as the OECD’s AI Principles and the UN’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Then the index gives points for algorithmic transparency, accountability, public participation in forming policy, and public documents describing policies. In the 382-page report, Germany comes out on top with 10.5 out of a possible 12 points. Nine countries were in the second tier with scores from 8.5 to 9.5.

I propose a scoring method with twelve factors to produce an HCAI trustworthiness scale for assessors to give up to one point if there is an openly available thorough report and up to one more point if the report has positive results. That makes for a scale of 0 to 24 points for consequential large applications (not research or prototype systems) (Table 25.3). Issues such as the criteria for each item, expertise level of assessors, and number of assessors from each of the assessor groups will have to be described.

This proposed HCAI trustworthiness scale, which ofers a subjective rating approach that scores by components, will require testing and refinement. Other items could be added to expand the scope. The scale emphasizes transparency by way of reports for each item, which will require organizations to provide more information to stakeholders. The process fits the safety culture approach of getting organizations to develop consistent processes to conduct reviews and make reports.

The European Union commissions, US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and many companies are working to develop assessments for HCAI trustworthiness.<sup>15</sup>

In summary, assessing attributes of HCAI systems would be a strong stimulus for rapid improvement. Current discussions of important attributes like ethical, responsible, explainable, or fair will deepen if rating scales become widely accepted. The HCAI trustworthiness scale is a proposal to move these discussions forward.