# Summary and Skeptic’s Corner

Trust is the foundation of society. Where there is no truth, there can be no trust, and where there is no trust, there can be no society. Where there is society, there is trust, and where there is trust, there is something upon which it is supported.

Frederick Douglass, “Our Composite Nationality” (December 7, 1869), Boston, MA

E<sup>arly</sup> <sup>in</sup> <sup>the</sup> <sup>book,</sup> <sup>I</sup> <sup>promised</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>deliver</sup> <sup>a</sup> <sup>guidebook</sup> <sup>to</sup> <sup>hope</sup> <sup>and</sup> <sup>a</sup>roadmap to realistic policies. The guidebook calls for human-centered roadmap to realistic policies. The guidebook calls for human-centered thinking that integrates disciplines, such as science, engineering, design, art, social sciences, and humanities. Combining disciplines will speed the creation of technologies that respect human values of rights, justice, and dignity, while supporting individual goals of self-eficacy, creativity, responsibility, and social connections (Figure 1.2).

The design aspirations are for reliable, safe, and trustworthy systems that support progress in racial justice, greater income equality, and environmental preservation. Working together, we may be able to follow the roadmap to reach worthy destinations such as healthcare/well-being, economic growth, broad education, food safety, and the other UN Sustainable Development Goals.

While one eye should be on the admirable values, goals, and aspirations for the many stakeholders who are afected by HCAI systems, the other eye should be alert to the threats from malicious actors, bias, and flawed software. External threats from criminals, hate groups, terrorists, and oppressive politicians deserve attention from researchers, developers, managers, and policy-makers, but equally important is awareness of the dangers of biased data, unconscious biases that emerge in critical decisions, and flawed software. Assets in making a safe journey are an attitude of humility about our abilities, openness about the possibility of failure, and readiness to take in fresh ideas.

Other assets will be the courage to do the right thing when the going gets rough, while balancing the desire to be bold with the need to be cautious. The journey may be helped by faster, better technologies, but the destination is human welfare and environmental preservation.

These many goals at diferent levels of specificity leave room for wide participation and many opportunities to contribute. Skeptics may question whether researchers and technology innovators will revise their eforts to support HCAI ideas and methods. This is a legitimate concern, but the growing interest in HCAI is a positive indicator. Researchers are coming to recognize that they must consider the positive and negative impacts of their work. Conference program committees and journal editorial boards are increasingly evaluating papers from an ethical point of view. Controversies in technology companies and liability for damages are forcing a growing awareness among business leaders that ethical practices and trustworthiness are competitive advantages. Government bodies around the world are stepping up their eforts to make business responsible for their systems moving towards regulatory approaches and independent oversight. Maybe my call to action needs blaring trumpets or even a whole brass band, but I hope it can gain attention with an orchestral synthesis of the gentler violins of realistic policies and rhythmic drumbeats of actionable agendas.