between thick and thin strokes, vertical rather than slanted shading or stress of letters, and greater uniformity in the width of all thick strokes. Following Fournier, the Didot family of printers in Paris, beginning with François-Ambroise (1730-1804) and spanning several generations from the later eighteenth to the early nineteenth centuries, also mastered the new concerns with typography, page design, and the overall quality of production. The portability of books and the printers' practice of publishing specimen books of their typefaces and fleurons for publishers and workshop use (or for posterity in the more luxurious examples) created a good deal of communication and cross-fertilization both in Europe and across the Atlantic. The reputation of the Didot family, for instance, was recognized by the American printer and statesman Benjamin Franklin, himself a printer, who apprenticed his grandson to a branch of the Parisian firm in 1785.

Generally, historians of typography, such as Philip Meggs, view the late eighteenth century as “an epoch of typographic genius." Examining a leather-bound volume published by the firm of Didot more than justifies this claim. The reduction of crowding between letters as well as lines, the ample margins, and the precise contours of letterforms result from careful planning and execution, and from attention to the role of each element both sepa rately and in relation to one another. Letters of the Didot typeface, illustrated in a volume of the poetry of Virgil (fig. 1.14) published in 1798 by Pierre Didot (François-Ambroise's son, 1760-1853), are crisply cut and employ hairline serifs and a distinct contrast between thick and thin strokes of uniform width. Uniformity was also applied to the height of each line of text (sometimes known as the x-height, the heights of capital letters being the same as lower-case ascenders) and to the repetition of shapes among the bodies of individual lctterforms. Careful examination and comparison with earlier eighteenth-century books also shows that faces such as Didot increase the length of lower-case letters like “g” or “d” that reach above or below the x-height, creating the impression of wider space between lines and less crowding of the text. Pierre Didot and other typographers also devoted attention to the serifs or letter endings of their fonts. While retaining curved brackets on capital letterforms such as the horizontal arms of the “L” or “E," such transitional elements were eliminated at the bases and tops of other letters. These changes are usually attributed to the printers' desire to reduce the calligraphic character of fonts and their association with the inconsistency of handwritten letters. Considered together, the characteristics of the Didot font are usually described as “Modern" (or “Didonic" in another system of classification), whereas less contrast between thick and thin strokes, shortr ascenders and descenders,

# AENEIDOS LIBEROCTAVUS.

Uτ belli signum Laurenti Turnus ab aree Extulit, et rauco strepuerunt cornua eantu, Utque acres concussit equos, utque impulit arma; Extemplo turbati animi; simul omne tumultu Conjurat trepido Latium, sævitque juventus Effera. Ductores primi, Messapus, et Ufens, Contemptorque deâm Mezentius, undique cogunt Auxilia, et latos vastant cultoribus agros. Mittitur et magni Venulus Diomedis ad urbem, Qui petat auxilium, et Latio consistere Teucros, Advectum Aenean classi, victosque Penates Inferre, et fatis regem se dicere posci, Edoceat, multasque viro se adjungere gentes Dardanio, et latè Latio increbrescere nomen: Quid struat his cœptis, quem, si fortuna sequatur, Eventum pugnæ cupiat, manifestiùs ipsi, Quàm Turno regi aut regi apparere Latino.

Talia per Latium: qua Laomedontius heros Cuneta videns, magno curarum fluctuat æstu, Atque animum nunc huc celerem , nunc dividit illue, In partesque rapit varias, perque omnia versat. Sicut aquæ tremulum labris ubi lumen ahenis, 23

1.14 Page from Virgil's Bucolica, Georgica, et Aeneis, Paris (Pierre Didot), 6 / x 3 /= in (15-3 × 8.9 cm), 1798. Hagerty Library, Drexel University, Philadelphia.

angled shading or stress, and bracketed serifs are features associated with “Old Face" (Humanistic and Garaldic). Both families of fonts belong to the broad category of typefaces known as “Roman," based in the upper case upon the carved inscriptions (epigraphy) known from Roman Imperial monuments such as the Pantheon and Trajan's Column and in the lower case upon early medieval scripts revived by writing masters and carly printers in Italy at thc end of the fifteenth century.

Historians of typography have also noted that printers were interested in achieving a balance between the elegance of the letterforms, the organization of the page, and the leg. ibility of the text. This in turn may be seen as a parallel to transformations in other crafts where specialized expertise and experiment led to new levels of practical as well as aesthetic achievement. Increasing the amount of white space on a page of printed type tends to make it more inviting to the reader - something that appears to have been taken into account by the printer in the design of the page layout. On the other hand, thin strokes may lack the strength to stand out on the page and consequently may tire the reader's eye. Creating the desired effect – the balance between delicate effect and legibility – constitutes an important part of the printer's art and has remained a subject of debate among typographers and typographic historians.

As mentioned above, a number of eighteenth-century printers published extensive specimen books exhibiting the range of their achievement and providing models for others to follow. Among the most comprehensive is Giambattista Bodoni's (1740-1813) Manuale Tipografico, published in two volumes in 1818 (fig. 1.15) by his wife after the printer's death. Recruited as court printer to the duke of Parma (who was at the same time acquiring an important collection of books for his private library), Bodoni enjoyed the creative freedom to produce the Manuale as a luxury work, with examples of dozens of typefaces in standard and italic fonts, as well as alphabets in Greek and Hebrew. The text of each page is framed by a bold double band with very wide margins on all sides. Other contemporary printers often employed borders around their texts, but also developed a vocabulary of patterned geometric or floral patterns (fleurons) that complemented the visual weight of the typeface, and recalled the intricate decorative flourishes of medieval scribes who copied their texts by hand in manuscripts Bodoni limited this practice in his Manuale, concentrating more upon the letterforms themselves and the overall design or architecture of the page.

Other typographic innovations were meant to ensure consistency in measurement and standards among the fonts developed by different printers. Drawing upon earlier initiatives to create families of type (fonts) in standardized sizes of uniform quality, François-Ambroise Didot further developed a standard system of measurement in which the sizes of letters were referred to by points, 72 to an inch. The point system gained currency in France, was later adopted in Britain and in Germany, and is still in use today (the type sizes that we effortlessly manipulate on our computer screens are based on the same system). Innovations in eighteenth-century printing occurred in an exclusive milieu dominated by wealthy patrons with discriminating and exclusive taste. It is hardly surprising that the model for so-called “Modern" or “Didonic" typefaces emerged from the court of Louis XIV and was yet another aspect of the monarchy's effort to brand the products of the court, control their production and use, and monitor printed materials and their dissemination through official channels of production. Even in his admiration for the King's Roman, Fournier had to be careful not to raise the eyebrows of government officials by imitating too closely the types of the National Printing House (Imprimérie Royale). Modern typefaces, like the contemporary crafts of the ébéniste or worker in precious metals (ciseleur), exemplified the progress of the mechanical arts through specialization, skill, and rationally developed methods of professional design and practice.

Quousque tandem abutêre,Catilina, patientiâ Quousque tandē abutêre, Catilina, patientiâ Quousque tandem abutêre, Catilina, pati-

1.15Specimen of Ducale in three weights, detail from Manuale Tipografico del cavaliere Giambattista Bodoni, Parma. 1818.

Fine printing, as practiced and perfected by Fournier, Didot, or Bodoni, was not the only achievement of eighteenth-century publishing. While it is difficult to trace and study the history of decorative arts for a non-elite audience during this period, the existence of a popular art for a broader public can be appreciated in the practice of printing. While perhaps less aesthetically refined and not always exhibiting the highest levels of craftsmanship, more topical forms of print, such as newspapers or broadsides, almanacs, or the expression of controversial religious and political opinions in the form of pamphlets or inexpensively bound volumes, reached a broad and increasingly literate public during the eighteenth century and constitute an equally important and inspiring legacy of printing as a popular, accessible medium for expression and communication. Such material reminds us that the mechanical arts, however rudimentary, reached beyond the authority of official policy and served needs beyond those of a cultural elite. Works such as Joseph Moxon's Mechanick's Exercises on the Whole Art of Printing, published in England in 1683-1684 to provide an illustrated guide to the practice of printing, informed readers that knowledge was something to be shared rather than too closely guarded. These democratizing views will be treated in relation to the American colonies, where the press was less regulated and printed opinion circulated more freely and publicly (see page 39 and fig. 2.10).