In the eighteenth century, the printing industry was geared primarily to the production of books for a limited readership. Newspapers, broadsides, and other ephemeral material, such as Benjamin Franklin's Poor Richard's Almanac (see fig. 2.1o), are examples of more popular kinds of printed information, and existed at the fringes of the traditional printing industry. During the early nineteenth century, printers and typographers greatly expanded the range of their production to meet the needs of an increasingly literate public that read daily and weekly broadsides, and to compete for public attention in advertising. Larger type sizes, new fonts, wood rather than metal type, and the introduction of the process of lithography to create or transfer images for illustrations exemplify the inventiveness in materials and production techniques that transpired during this time. Such changes affected both the printed word and the printed image, laying the groundwork for new professions in the printing industry such as illustrators, cartoonists, and eventually designers who could effectively combine type and image to fulfill new purposes and reach new audiences in the expanding industries of advertising, journalism, and other forms of printed communication.

Printers in urban centers, and particularly in the commercially active city of London, designed a wide variety of new display typefaces and a wide range of sizes for signs, handbills, and newspaper advertisements in an effort to grab the attention and interest of consumers or to influence public opinion. Casting large letters in metal proved expensive and unwieldy, so typographers cut type in wood By the second half of the nineteenth century, wood type was cut with the help of templates and routing machines that cut grooves more quickly and precisely than handheld knives and chisels. Wood type was a response to the expansion of trade, free enterprise, and competition. Printers seized the opportunity of meeting the needs of businesses to print ephemeral materials to attract a buying public, inventing an array of new letterforms designed to communicate with immediacy and expression.

If the terminology used today by historians of the printing industry seems arcane, there is good reason. Much of this specialized vocabulary has not changed since the early expansion of the industry. For example, new faces developed in the early nineteenth century were generally called "fat," and are characterized by very large letters with proportionally thicker heavy strokes, often contrasted with thin strokes. The extreme contrast between thick and thin strokes recalls the new and rational later-eighteenth-century “Modern” faces (see pages 28–29), but on a scale much larger than that of the printed book. Fat faces appeared

# MILTON, Burnham. 12345790 V.FIGGINS.

3.11 Vincent Figgins, six-line pica no. 1 (fat face), cast type and matrices, from a specimen book, London, 1821.

# R.THORNE £126780 diminishing

3.12Williamn Thorowgood, six-line pica Egyptian (slab serif), from a specimen book, London, 1821.

early in the nineteenth century, often accompanied by simplified bracketed serifs that looked triangular and tended to make letters appear dense and closely spaced (fig. 3.11). The term "Egyptian" is also often used to refer to fat faces. One type of “Egyptian" face uses “slab serifs," heavy letter endings that anchor the letters to an insistent horizontal line as well as reduce the space between them, strengthening the immediate impact of each word (fig. 3.12). Designers in the twentieth century returned to such slab serif lettering for visual impact in developing corporate logos (see figs. 11.82 and 11.83). Perhaps for this reason it is common to refer to such letterforms as "display faces,' as distinguished from “text faces” for use in books.

Also appearing during the same period are threedimensional letters featuring shadows to one side, or faces that appear in the white of the paper against a border of pure black (fig. 3.13). Finally, the most varied faces are those where the fat letterforms are filled with scrolls and other patterned decoration. A number of British printers contributed to these developments. Specimen books from this period feature several of the new typefaces, though even these are quite conservative when compared with a watercolor painting by John Parry from 1835 of a wall