# Introduction to Part III

In the second half of the nineteenth century, the activities of the early design reform movement dovetailed with other reform initiatives both in Europe and in the United States in elevating the significance of the applied arts. Beginning in the later 185os in Britain, the writings of John Ruskin and the activities of William Morris placed the issues of design and production within a new ethical framework based upon an almost religious attitude that united craft, art, social, and political reform. Ruskin and Morris criticized the dehumanizing aspects of mechanization and the increasing division of labor in factories, and their ideas provided inspiration and models for workshops, crafts organizations, and crafts communities on both sides of the Atlantic dedicated to the human and social benefits of handicraft as an antidote to the often alienating effects of the modern urban and industrialized world.

Only slightly later, both in the United States and throughout Europe, a number of architects and fine artists became increasingly involved in many aspects of interior design and decoration. Their activities called attention to the aesthetic and expressive character of the home and its furnishings as a total work of art, emphasizing originality and the unity and integration of all the visual arts. At the same time, a number of younger designers sought to consider issues of manufacturability and to form organizations and publish journals to promote improvement within the craft industries and the elevation of public taste. The broader scope of these initiatives found a place in the increasing number of well-attended international exhibitions both in Europe and in the United States.

In the United States, printed advertising and illustrated mail-order catalogues in the 188os also spurred demand for manufactured goods and furnishings, accompanied by new initiatives in methods of rationalized and mechanized production as well as national distribution. The success of the department store beginning in the 186os also stimulated the manufacture and marketing of the products of design to an expanding consumeroriented middle class. Such democratizing tendencies involved a wide variety of historicizing styles such as the Renaissance and Rococo Revivals as well as more original or "modern" approaches to design recommended by tastemakers such as Charles Eastlake in his Hints on Household Taste, first published in 1868 and directed toward cultivating a discriminating taste among a female readership.

Finally, with Germany playing an important role, design organizations, schools, and exhibitions sought to reconcile what were seen as conflicting attitudes toward technology, standardization, and the scientific management of production on the one hand and individual identity and self-expression on the other, aimed at reforming the tastes of middleclass consumers by establishing and reinforcing more standardized and socially responsible forms for modern manufactured goods. Amid various debates and activities, the aesthetic, commercial, and social meanings of the applied arts enlarged the scope of the activity of design in the years leading up to World War I.