# Introduction to Part V

Design initiatives took root internationally amid a cultural environment of reconstruction and strong economic recovery following the end of World War Il. The role assumed by the United States in this expansion was paramount, both in terms of its own elastic market for manufactured goods as well as its national interest in stimulating the industrial production of European countries through rebuilding initiatives such as the Marshall Plan (1948-52). Such initiatives fostered capitalist enterprise in response to Soviet expansion into Eastern Europe and emerging Cold War tensions. Out of these particular economic and political conditions arose broader constituencies for the products of international modern designers as well as competing and sometimes overlapping visions for the role of design in contemporary life. Clients included large multi-national corporations such as IBM and CBS and their conscious development of prominent visual identity and image programs, as well as efforts to link their products and services with economic, social, and cultural progress through compelling and informative exhibitions and publications.

At times there was a didactic, even polemic tone accompanying the promotion of international design in the early postwar years. Advocates embraced familiar paternalistic themes of improving and educating the public to appreciate the aesthetic, social, and practical advantages of modern design and to embrace contemporary living that harmonized individualism with the self-imposed responsibility of citizens and businesses toward the wider community, in effect expressing what was referred to as a “new humanism." At other times criticism was leveled against a narrow and monolithic view of the commercialism of mass media and what designer Brooks Stevens termed planned obsolescence, both of which implied the absence of responsible standards and the exploitation of consumer desire. Standards for postwar design combined new industrial materials such as plastic, fiberglass, and plywood with production technologies such as molding to create furniture and furnishings that implied comfort, technological innovation, and the forms of modern abstract art. This is seen most clearly in the relationship between furniture and abstract sculpture associated with the movements of Automatic Surrealism and Constructivism, and in the international success of artists such as Henry Moore and Alexander Calder (1898-1976), whose sculptures appeared not only in museums but also as monuments in large urban public places and parks. Graphic designers in the United States such as Alvin Lustig and Paul Rand also adopted a sophisticated approach to advertising and magazine cover design that showed affinities with the symbolic associations of abstract art, while in Germany and Switzerland graphic designers often saw their task as simplifying and clarifying information using the discipline of a two-dimensional grid system.

Expanding beyond earlier design concerns with economy and efficiency in relation to minimur working-class needs, industrial designers and advocates in the postwar period often characterized their approach more broadly as "fitness to purpose." This term embraced ergonomics and anthropometry, defined as the science of designing for the ease and comfort of human use. Research of this kind attempted to place the profession of industrial design within an empirical,"problem-solving" context and to enumerate criteria, beyond profits and sales, by which products might be judged successful and innovative. Such views shifted the designer's role from that of mere “product stylist" whose intentions were subverted or compromised by fashion and commercialism to one whose focus was more on the product user, and upon meeting specific human needs. Advocates for modern design promoted the tenets or standards of modern international design as being in the public interest and distinct from the relativism and hedonism implied by fashion. Shared standards and limits to the expression of individual will, whether in product design, graphic design, or in political or moral attitudes, were viewed as bulwarks against manipulation by advertisers, especially in an age of mass communication and amid lingering fears of totalitarianism and propaganda. Indeed, mass media, whether as a vehicle for marketing products or for disseminating political views, permitted an unprecedented expansion of the ability of corporations and governments to influence public opinion. The pervasive power of totalitarian propaganda prior to and during World War Il suggested that responsible standards went well beyond the issue of mere “taste." embracing politics and the role of design in shaping and strengthening shared cultural values and democratic ideals. As mentioned above, large and diverse corporations with global interests were among the strongest advocates and clients for modern design: their headquarters, office interiors, products, organization, and promotional materials both expressed and shaped shared values of efficiency, rationalism, progress, dependability, responsibility, and public education. A design policy, or “house style," not only informed the look of products, but bred familiarity and trust through a more generalized brand identity. It also reinforced loyalty and conformity among employees. At the same time, fears of manipulation and the concentration of power in the hands of too few emerged in United States President Dwight Eisenhower's farewell address in 1961, where he noted the connection between industrial technology and the arms race, also in the context of Cold War tensions between the competing superpowers of the United States and the Soviet Union.

Postwar design, promoted as “good design" or “Gute Form," was effectively marketed through museum exhibitions seeking to raise awareness and increase the level of public discrimination, and through international events such as the Milan Triennale, which included competitive awards. Postwar modern design also was the subject of articles and illustrations in journals such as Domus, Industrial Design, and Design Quarterly, and was supported by organizations such as the Council of Industrial Design (COID) in Britain and their counterparts in Japan and Scandinavia. Also important were schools such as the Hfg (Hochschule für Gestaltung) at Ulm in West Germany.

Yet for many consumers, the “good design" model was not understood as a universal set of standards that raised general cultural awareness or instilled responsible democratic values. Rather its products and promotion simply offered one among many possibilities for individual fulfillment in an age of increasing affluence and possibilities for leisure, a matter of “both .. and" rather than “either ... or." Perhaps seeking to escape the shortages and government-imposed restrictions on materials and manufacturing during the years of World War Il, the expanding American middle class in particular responded enthusiastically to constant novelty, fantasy, and instant gratification, as manufacturers and advertisers of household goods recognized a seemingly insatiable appetite for products or gadgets that offered to reduce housework and expand leisure. In the early 195os, photographs of modern interiors and advice for modern, suburban, informal living through design also appeared in mass-circulation magazines such as House and Garden and Better Homes and Gardens. In the course of this decade, however, this "mass" design (marketed through the mass media and in particular through the increasing role played by television) went considerably beyond the boundaries of a rational "new humanism" and its standards, which included the aesthetics of abstract art, technological development, cultural education, and ergonomics.

In terms of products, mass design is perhaps best exemplified in the popularity of the Detroit-manufactured automobiles of the 195os and their prominence in Hollywood Technicolor films and in television, stimulating desire through the identification of materialism and consumer choice with freedom, leisure, luxury, power, and social mobility. Another medium that stimulated mass taste was popular magazines, whose images and product advertisements promised a better life for the American family and vicarious thrills for a generation of youthful consumers. Almost immediately such images were appropriated by the Pop Art movement in the United States, Britain, and elsewhere in Europe. The allure of mass culture for artists ranged from the pure visual excitement of bold aesthetics to a recognition of the seductive power of idealized mass-media images of beauty and fulfillment supplied by commercial artists, photographers, and illustrators.

Housing was also an area in which such attitudes toward modern design emerged. Architects and interior designers concentrated upon accommodating new and efficient patterns of family life through simple construction, central heating, open plans, large expanses of glass, and avoiding decorative moldings and other features of more traditional construction methods. Postwar suburban housing communities were another part of the broader idealism embodied in mass design, and a vision of life sometimes referred to as the American Dream. Many Americans moved from inner-city neighborhoods to newly created suburbs, where the availability of land for development and affordability of automobiles helped to define postwar lifestyles. Inexpensive gasoline prices, made possible by Americanbased corporate control of Middle East oilfields and refineries, made commuting affordable and reasonably comfortable. At the same time, mass-produced methods of construction for detached housing, initiated in communities such as Levittown, New York, offered alternatives to city apartment living and featured conveniences such as automatic washers, dryers, and modern kitchen appliances. For many Americans, individual home ownership brought with it the promise of leisure, green space, independence, security, and the freedom of personal mobility.

The emerging mass culture was criticized during and after World War Il from a number of perspectives. Some commentators complained about consumers' lack of discrimination and questioned the morality of conspicuous consumption in encouraging submission to manufactured ideals of beauty and health, and in which superficial differences and consumer choice masked an underlying conservatism and conformity. Others viewed mass culture as a form of social control reinforcing traditional family and gender roles of the white middle class. Still others dismissed popular culture as "kitsch," debased massproduced imitations of authentic culture standing at the lowest common denominator of taste, that is, of pure physical sensation renewed and manipulated by a commercial culture industry. In this view, culture is synonymous with leisure and entertainment rather than with more abiding values that contribute to well-being, enlightenment, self-realization, and active participation in a responsible democracy.

Eventually the monolithic view of mass culture derided by social critics and educators crumbled, as it was insufficiently narrow to embrace a strain of vitality, popular expression, subversion, and irrationality found in comic books, film noir, tailfins, and rock 'n'roll. At the same time, proponents of rational standards and research in design were less able to justify and defend the inflated claims for design as a vehicle for broad social progress and enlightenment. The dualism between “good" design and mass taste, between high design and popular culture, reflects a limited viewpoint that demands a broader and more nuanced cultural perspective. The attitudes and artifacts of both movements emerge as expressions of capitalist expansion emanating from Cold War tensions that made consumer goods one of the battlegrounds of competing ideologies for a democratic society.

In sum, despite an acknowledged critical dichotomy between the new humanism and mass taste, both strains of postwar design coexisted, and both came to express a form of democratic expression directed against the threat of Communism and state control of housing, manufacturing, as well as patterns of collective living. Whether conditioned by a new and broader set of criteria for a discriminating international audience or giving inventive form to popular images of power, dissent, freedom, and luxury for the American middle class, design thrived in the prosperity of the postwar period amid the emergence of new technologies, unprecedented increases in production, and escalating levels of consumption.