# Introduction to Part VI

Fulfilling the promise of the partnership between technology and progress through design in the postwar period has proven to be a challenging, often elusive goal, as the social, moral, economic, and political tensions that characterized the somewhat turbulent 196os continue to be felt in the new century and millennium. Food processors, microwave ovens, compact disks, personal and handheld computers, MP3 players, interactive videogames, cellular phones, and global positioning systems are only among the most obvious examples of technologies affecting contemporary lifestyles, extending the range of our powers and redefining the relationship between work and leisure in the industrially developed nations of the world. Personal computers and the Internet have not only stimulated the marketing and merchandising of these and countless other products, but also have increased the emphasis upon design as an expanding sphere of activity that encompasses all fields of information and communication. The growth of the Internet is a clear indication of an emerging post-industrial age in which information, intellectual property, and a wide range of human services are increasingly the sources of economic power, and where manufacturing often takes place in the less developed nations of the world.

The expansion of markets for commodities has been further stimulated by the deregulation and privatization of communications industries, by the growth and sophistication of credit buying, by computerized techniques of product development and manufacturing, and by advertising, telemarketing, and electronic or e-commerce. The breakup of the Soviet Union in 1989 and the emerging independence of former Eastern Bloc countries have further extended the hegemony of market-based capitalist economies and their dependence upon innovation and expanding the production and consumption of commodities both domestically and internationally. China is the latest example of this movement, and the 2oo8 Summer Olympic Games in Beijing as well as the “Design China Now" exhibition (also in 2oo8) at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London and other venues attest to the role of design in promoting tourism and a modern image for the country.

While design consultancies such as Smart Design or IDEO are often identified by the products for which they are responsible, products only account for a relatively small percentage of their activity, which also includes corporate identity and organizational systems to facilitate communication. The visible form of products today is often the result of a lengthy process of dialogue and compromise among viewpoints representing client interest, user experience, development and production costs, aesthetics, materials, and market research. Design practice appears to be as much a model for non-hierarchical organizational behavior generally as a strategy directed toward producing physical objects.

This is certainly the case for the well-known Pentagram Design group (1972), founded in London and now operating with seventeen partners in five cities internationally. Primarily known for graphic design and high-profile corporate clients such as Citicorp, Pentagram's services also extend to products and architecture, involving teamwork and group rather than individual ownership of complex design projects.

Yet the connection between design and new or “improved" consumer goods continues to create an ever-increasing flood of products that appears at times to make us victims as well as beneficiaries of both technology and the information age, defining us perhaps too narrowly as little more than machines for programmed consumption, reducing the exercise of freedom to the choice between endless varieties of products that complicate and fragment our lives. At the same time, concerns with environmental as well as for social responsibility on a broader global scale undermine at least some of the confidence in the future we are designing. Sustainability has certainly shifted from the fringes to the mainstream, and is now the focus of corporate advertising strategies and interdisciplinary awareness in universities, presenting tremendous challenges to design that extend beyond innovation to rethinking basic assumptions about our relationship to the goods we produce and consume. Green design may have triggered a broad-based consciousness that informs shared attitudes toward new products in relationship to the environment, but to be effective that consciousness must extend to patterns of consumer behavior that are difficult to break or alter, especially when consumer spending remains a basic indicator of economic health. The specter of terrorism and cost of counter-terrorism in the wake of the attacks of September 11, 2oo1 threatens the safety we take for granted and often view as the bedrock of our freedom and confidence in shaping our future. Awareness of these contradictions and uncertainties, of the combination of hopes as well as fears for the future of design, form the basis for this final part of our study.