# ABCDEFGHIJK MNOPQRSTU abcdefghijklmnopq ABCDEFGHIJKLM OPQRSTUVWXY abcdefghijklmnopqrst formed. But in spite of the prodigious labour involved in the design and eutting of The Times type, he found time to push through a projeet very elose to his heart, the reinstatement of the fame of the newspaper owner, publisher and type founder John Bell (1745- 1831), whose types he had admired for many years. At the Bibliothèque Nationale, at the beginning of 1925, he had eome aeross a prospeetus issued by Bell's British Library in 1788, set in a type whieh he reeognised as the same as one used by Updike at the Merrymount Press, ealled Mountjoye, and by Bruee Rogers at the Riverside Press in Boston, where it was ealled Brimmer. Brimmer had been bought as type in 1864 by Henry O. Houghton, of the publishers Houghton Mifflin, who owned the Riverside Press. Updike in 1903 bought strikes from Houghton's suppliers, Stephenson Blake of Sheffield, who eould not, however, tell him where the type eame from. Morison's diseovery at the Bibliothèque Nationale led to his researches into Bell's eareer whieh resulted in a book, Fohn Bell, printed and published by the Cambridge University Press in 193o, where it was hand-set in type newly east by Stephenson Blake from the original matriees. The book's sueeess, and an exhibition of Bell's publications put on to eclebrate the centenary of his death the following year, persuaded Burch to recut Bell for Monotype eomposition, and Stephenson Blake gave their permission. With the pressure of work on Times, nothing more was done until the end of November 1931, when the Monotype works was told to go ahead. Morison eonsidered Bell's type the first modern faee and, while influeneed by Freneh types of the period, patriotieally and deliberately British. Bell's puneheutter Riehard Austin eut a sharper letter than any hitherto attained, and twenty years later moved to Edinburgh to cut the so-ealled Seoteh romans whieh had sueh an influenee on type design in the nineteenth eentury. Morison was unusually satisfied with the Monotype eutting, ealling it an admirable reproduetion.' There was a gap of five years before the last major type revival Morison undertook, Ehrhardt, Series 453, whieh was one of the most useful. Ehrhardt eame out in 1937, a few months after the death of Frank Pierpont, to whom, in spite of their differences, Morison's programme owed so mueh. Work on The Times kept Morison busy, but by 1936, with the first volume of his History out, he was in a position to give more time to a fifteen-year-old enthusiasm. This was for a seventeenth-eentury type, thought to have been of Duteh origin, and resembling the Oxford University Press's Fell types (another of his passions); it was cast by the Stempel foundry of Frankfurt from materials formerly belonging to Drugulin of Leipzig, and known as Janson. In one of his earliest letters to Updike, in 1921, Morison asked if he knew of the type, and Updike revealed that he had had some at Merrymount sinee 1903, having bought it from Drugulin. Morison eontinued to worry away at the type's history, and through the printing historian Gustav Mori (1872-1950) loeated a 1710 speeimen of the type from the Ehrhardt foundry in Frankfurt. (It was not until the 195os that the typographieal scholars Harry Carter and George Buday revealed that it was originally the work of Hungarian puneheutter Nieolas Kis.) In 1936, when both Mergenthaler Linotype (1933) and Lanston Monotype (1935) had issued recuttings of Janson, English Monotype were under pressure to do the same, and had eut a trial size. Morison found it too heavy and rotund, and issued new instructions for the drawing offiee in January 1937 for a type made larger on its body and more condensed. As a result,