ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQ RSTUVWXYZ&., ';:!?- \$1234567890 # ABCDEFGHIJKLM NOPQRSTUVWX YZabcdefghijklmnopqrst uvwx y z The and & of AE E £\$(]-?..;,!'1234567890 Ransom at Park Ridgc, outsidc Chicago. The matriccs of the type were engraved pantographically by Robert Wiebking. In spitc of its dcbt to the English private press types, in particular to Charles Ricketts's Vale type (What an ancestry for an advertising face!’ commented Goudy while it was still intended for thc Kuppenheimer store), and the consequcnt quaintness of appcarancc in our eycs, Goudy considered Village as the first of his types to show maturity. Within a ycar, Goudy read about a crafts society at Hingham, a small town outside Boston, Massachusetts; he was himself bccoming increasingly fircd by craft ideals, and although he had built up a regular clientele in Chicago, hc moved to Hingham in 1904. He was joined shortly by Dwiggins, whom hc had taught at thc Frank Holme school, but whereas Dwiggins stayed on for thc rest of his life, Goudy found it difficult to break down Bostonian social barriers and to cstablish himself profcssionally, and movcd to New York in 19o6. Here, on 1o January 1908, his workshop and the Village Press's equipment were destroyed in the first of two disastrous fires he suffcrcd in his lifetimc. Paradoxically, howevcr, the destruction of the Village Press, which had been a drain on his pocket, left him financially bctter off. Goudy now turned almost exclusively to the design of typc. He was commissioned to produce a roman for the American Lanston Monotype Company, his initiation into working with the limitations of the Monotype diecase; the typc was briefly called Goudy Old Style against his wishes, a name which was given to another face before attaching itself to the type we know by it today. This first face was later given the unromantic title of 38-E. Next, Goudy was given the opportunity of designing his first major typeface. In 1911 the New York publisher Mitchcll Kennerley invited him to design an edition of H. G. Wells's story The door in the mall. They had spccimen pages set in 18pt Caslon, but Goudy was dissatisfied with them, and suggested to Kennerley that he should design a new type for the book, which they could market later to help with the costs. Kenncrley agreed, and Goudy, inspircd at first by the Oxford University Press Fell types, but later shedding the influence as he bcgan to draw, produced Kennerley Old Style, engraved and cast by Wicbking, and sold in founts by Goudy at his Village Type Foundry. In 192o it was bought by thc Lanston Monotype Company for mcchanical setting, and by the Caslon foundry for sale in Britain and the rest of Europe. Together with Forum titling, de- IT WAS THE TERRACE OF God's house That she was standing on,— By God built over the sheer depth In which Space is begun; So high, that looking downward ABCDEFGHIJKLMN OPQRSTUVWXYZ& \$1234567890.,';:!?- FWG SAYS: THE OLD FELLOWS STOLE ALL OF OUR BEST IDEAS. ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOP QRSTUVWXYZ&EEC] abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz xœffffflfflctst.,;!?-\$1234567890 Speaking of earlier types Goudy says: The old fellows stole all of our best ideas. ## ABCDEFGHIJKLMN OPQRSTUVWXYZ& 1234567890., FWG SAYS THE OLD FELLOWS STOLE ALL OF OUR BEST IDEAS signed at the same time, it established Goudy's reputation both abroad and at home, though he always deplored the faet that his worth was reeognised in England before his native land. Both Kennerley and Forum were in use at Franeis Meynell's Peliean Press in 1921, and mueh admired. The year after Kennerley, another eommissioned type was abandoned, this time beeause of the death of the sponsor, and so Goudy marketed it himself. Although this type was first ealled Goudy Old Style, it should be confused neither with Monotype 38-E already mentioned, nor with the faee we now eall by the same name, whieh was designed two years later. On the appearanee of the later type, it was renamed Goudy Antique (another name whieh was used again later), and then, when eut by Ameriean Monotype, Goudy Lanston; and as if eonfusion had not already made its masterpieee, Caslon in England issued a version and ealled it Ratdolt. Goudy was unhappy with Caslon's cutting and their name, but nevertheless he went to England in 1914, intending to visit them and interest them in eutting his next type. Although Caslon eould not undertake the work, beeause of the approaehing war and the likely requisitioning of their faetory for munitions work, they were interested in buying Goudy's designs, and their enthusiasm so impressed Clarenee Marder of ATF, who was with Goudy, that on their return to the United States he persuaded Robert Nelson, the president of ATF, to commission a new Goudy type. Thus at last the faee now known as Goudy Old Style was designed and eut. Goudy was at pains to restrain the desire of the ATF drawing offiee to modify his design, and Nelson baeked him, although in the end he was persuaded to allow shorter deseenders than his judgement suggested, to the detriment of the type. With a eharaeteristie mixture of braggadocio and modesty he wrote, 'The faee, as finally produeed, was almost as great an innovation as my Kennerley . . . I am almost satisfied that the design is a good one.' It was eertainly the most suecessful of his types, though one of its best variants, Goudy Catalogue, was aetually drawn by Morris Benton. It still shows the rather fluid outlines of his early letters, but there is enough tautness to give it strength. Over the next few years Goudy eontinued to show his eurious ability to design good types side by side with bad ones; indeed, it is improbable that any distinguished designer has produeed more awful ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOP QRSTUVWXYZ&.,;:!?, abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwx yzfiffiflfflctææ\$1234567890 Speaking of earlier types, Goudy says: The old fellows stole all of our best ideas. ABCDEFGHIJKL MNOPQRSTUVW XYZabcdefghijklm n o p q r s t u v w x y z \$ &