# DEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWX abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 1234567 # abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 123456789 ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUV Goudy Old Style (1915). types. Two faces drawn for ATF to fulfil a contractual arrangement, Booklet Old Style and the unattractively named Goudytype, were competent, and the latter rather better than its author secmed to think it; but National Old Style for the National Biscuit Company has little to recommend it. Two display types followed, both in 1918: the handsome, classically inspired Hadriano, and the refined Goudy Open. The second was an inline type based on lettering engraved on a French print, and had the unusual result of prompting an unadorned version, Goudy Modern. Decorated faces normally follow the plain parent design, not the other way about. Goudy Modern is a crisp and distinguished lctter, and one of his best; when cut by English Monotype in 1928, it was wcll uscd by Francis Meynell at the Nonesuch Press. In 192o Goudy was askcd by J. Maury Dove, president of the Lanston Monotype Company of Philadelphia, to advise thcm on design, thus anticipating by about three years the similar decision of thc English company to appoint Stanley Morison. Thc first fruit of the partnership was the Garamont already described; the second was Italian Old Style. Monotype had a customcr who was prcpared to buy their machinery, but wanted to be able to set in Morris Benton's Cloister, designed for ATF. Dove wanted to adapt ATF's design for the Monotype. Goudy argued that this was unethical, and Dove that it was common practice; but he eventually yielded to Goudy's suggestion of a new face based freely on the same Venetian models. The result was Italian Old Style (a different face from English Monotype's own earlier type of the same name, Series 1o8), which is one of Goudy's best book faces. On his own behalf he designed Goudy Newstyle (1921), suggested originally by the writings on phonetics of the English Poet Laureate Robert Bridges. The type was equipped with twenty alternative sorts intended to clarify the noriously illogical spelling of the English language; but, like most such experiments, it did not catch on, and the unaugmented type, handsome though it is, was used only by a few private presses, most magnificently by the Grabhorn Press of San Francisco in their edition of Whitman's Leaves of grass (1930). Newstyle was the last major face engravcd for Goudy by Robert Wicbking, who died in 1927. In 1923 the Goudy family moved from New York to a watermill up the Hudson river at Marlboro, and with