Hadriano titling (1918), Goudy Modern (1918), Goudy Newstyle (1921), here used in the Grabhorn Press, Leaves of grass'(1930), and Italian Old Style (1924). the enlarged workshop spaee here Goudy eould make the Village Foundry a foundry in fact as well as in name. He first looked round for a matrix engraving maehine. Beeause foundrics in the United States usually had machine shops whieh could build the cquipment thcy nceded, he could not find one for sale at home, and so he went to Europe and through the ageney of Stempel he was able to buy one in Frankfurt. With the help of Dovc at Monotype, he put in a Monotype easter with adaptations to the mould to take Wiebking's and his own matriees. He was thus sct up to cut his own patterns and supcrvise every stage of the production of his typcs. As hc wrote in Typologia:\* 'I feel that an artist is unjust both to himsclf and to his public when he is contcnt to present merely good mechanical reproduetions of his work - reproductions which may not eonvey thc vitality and personality of his own handling of them – and it is to make sure that my matriccs are earried out in the spirit in whieh the lettcrs themselves were designed, and to retain in them those infinitesimal Frederic W. Goudy, Typologia, studies in type design and type making, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1940. (Paperback edition, 1977.) qualities of fecling which only the designer may give, that I engravc thcm personally.' Goudy had a native American immunity to the austere European view of typography as outlined by Stanley Morison inFirst prineiples of typography' (1930). ‘Type design moves at the pace of the most conservative reader', Morison wrote. ‘The good type-designer therefore realises that, for a new fount to be successful, it has to be so good that only a few recognise its novelty. If readers do not notice the consummate reticence and rare discipline of a new type, it is probably a good letter. But if my friends think that the tail of my lower-case r or the lip of my lower-case e is rather jolly, you may know that the fount would have been better had neither been made. A type which is to have anything like a present, let alone a future, will neither be very “different” nor very “jolly”.' Goudy drily observed in Typolologia, I am not sure that I accept his dictum completely'. In fact he did not aeeept it at all: Goudy's types are individual, always recognisable, with charaeteristies which can sometimes become irritating. But his drawings were extremely beautiful and full of subtle curves, and when the types were being eut by ATF or Monotype, ABCDEFGHIJKLMN OPQRSTUVWXYZ. 1234567890G FWG SAYS: THE OLD FELLOWS STOLE ALL Come, said my Soul, Such verses for my Body let us write, (for we are one,) That should I after death invisibly return, Or, long, long hence, in other spheres, # GOUDY MODERN ROMAN & ITALIC There to some group of mates the chants resuming, (Tallying Earths sol, trees, winds, tumultuous waves,) FIRST CUT FOR HAND COMPOSITION 1918 Speaking of earlier types, Goudy says: The old fellows stole all of our best ideas. he resisted every attempt by their drawing offices to tame the letters. When working with Wiebking, or engraving his own matriccs, he could get cxactly what he wanted. The first type for whieh he cut matrices was intended for the private press run by Spencer Kellogg. He began in 1925, and his efforts to master the new technique took so long that Kellogg tired of printing and cancelled the order. This design, originally ealled Aries, was later reworked and recut and called Franciscan, the private type of the Grabhorn Press (1932). It was the first of a linc of blackletter and semi-blackletter faccs which Goudy worked on intermittcntly for the rcst of his life, and which he often confessed to preferring to his romans. The best known of these is Goudy Text (1928), inspired by the type of Gutenberg's Forty-two-line Bible', of which he had bought a singlc leaf, and perfeeted in various hand-drawn vcrsions in earlier publications. Originally called Goudy Black when issued by the Village Foundry, it was seen by Harvey Bcst, who had succceded J. Maury Dove at Lanston Monotype in Philadelphia, and when cut for the Monotype was renamed Text. It was followcd by Medieval (193o), which he thought onc of his most original designs, and the bâtarde Tory Text (1935), one of my favourite types and I enjoyed every minute of its making'. There was also Friar (1937), influeneed by the uneials of Victor Hammer, and the series eulminatcd in the curious and original 'posthumous'type, Goudy‘Thirty', (1942), whcn Harvey Best asked for a design that would be cut after Goudy's death (it was finally issued in 1953). Goudy was aggrieved to find it described as his last typc, but it is hardly surprising. While he was enjoying himself with blackletter, Goudy was also designing more romans. In 1927 he cut Deepdene, having first offered it to Monotype, who were not then intercsted in a new book face. William Edwin Rudge, the great printer and publishcr of Mount Vernon, New York, saw and liked the type, and wanted it for his own use; but he would necd to be ablc to set the text sizes by machine. As he was a consultant to the Mergenthaler Linotype Company he was naturally anxious for them to cut the typc for their maehines, but Goudy pointed out that he was under contract to Monotype, who must be approaehcd for permission. When Rudge did so, Harvey Best misunderstood the situation and thought that Goudy was deserting to Linotópe. Eventually an agrecment was reachcd whereby Deepdene was cut by Monotype, although Goudy was annoyed that the drawing ## often to be working, and both should be gentlemen, in the best sense. As it is, we make both ungentle, the one envying, the other despising his brother; and society is made up of morbid thinkers and miserable workers. 138. LEAVES OF GRASS|COMDRISING ALL THE DOEMS WRITTEN|BY WALT WHITMAN|FOLLOWING THE ARRMNGEMENT|OF THE EDITHON OF|1891/'2|[wood cut]|RANDOM HOUSE, INC., NEW YORK|1930 1 4½ x 9%. Síx blank leaves; pp. (í/x); pp. 1/424; fivc blank lcaves: consísting of title p. (í), page of limítation p. (ií), table of contents pp.(/viii), half title p. (íx), verso blank, text pp. 1/423, p. 424 blank. The stars are a bítter seasoníng over íce. Look to a difficult tíme, líttle moments líke snapped pípes that will break you, and unnotíced heroícs: waking, walking, kindness. Thís ís the month the Romans gave two faces. Look to water and snow to explaín thís. Bundle. Buffer. Tell wínter stories: A man walks ínto a tavern, orders bítter, cold soup and slaps hís coín down. —Face up, though.That's my advíce. offiee adapted the type for the diecase without consulting him. He admitted that the design was influenced by ‘a Dutch type whieh had just been introdueed into this country', and it eertainly shows the eharaeteristies of Lutetia, only slightly Goudyfied'. After two more romans, Village No.2 and Saks for the famous department store, both of whieh pleased their author more than on the whole they have pleased posterity, Goudy designed one more major type. This was originally eommissioned as a proprietary face by the University of California Press at the end of 1937, though mooted earlier. Goudy eut patterns for puneheutting by Monotype in the eomposition sizes, planning to engrave matriees for the display sizes himself and supply finished type to the Press. Fortunately he had sent the master patterns to Monotype when on 26 January 1939 his workshop was burned to the ground in a seeond disastrous fire. He overeame this setbaek with remarkable fortitude. Monotype eut all the type sizes, and it was first used for Goudy's own aecount of its ereation in Typologia. This book is one of the best and most thorough accounts of type design ever written. Deseribing his type, Goudy wrote, lt is hardly possible to create a good type face that will differ radically from the established forms of the past: nevertheless it is still possible to secure new expressions of life and vigor. The types in daily use, almost without exception, betray too fully the evidences of their origin, and do not always follow the best traditions. It requires the skilled hand, the appreciation and taste of the artist, and the trained mind of the student to select suitable models which may be adapted to our use and to which we may give new graces suited to our times. I have made designs that reverted for their inspiration to the lapidary characters of the early Romans; others that were based on the classic types of Jenson, Ratdolt, Aldus; still others that were suggested by the scribes' hands which were also the source of the types of those masters; and now, in the autumn of my labors, I draw with practically no reference to any of the sources mentioned; relying largely on the broad impressions of early forms stored up by years of study and practice, and governed by a technical knowledge of the requirements of type founding and typography, 1 attempt to create those impressions into new designs of beauty and utility.' In his Typophile Chap Book A half-century of type designs, Goudy wrote, University of California Old Style is one faee for whieh I have no regrets.’ He ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOP QRSTUVWXYZ&. ,'; :!?- ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ& abcdefghijklmnopqrstuv wxyzfffff71234567890 Speaking of earlier types, Goudy says : The old fellows stole all of our best ideas. ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRS TUVWXYZ& abcdefghijklm nopqrstuvwxyzffffffla.;;:!?- ABCD&GMPRI kzg gg gg gy Speaking of earlier types, Goudy says: The old fellows stole ll of our best ideas.