# Alte Burgen und Städte am Khein # The Life & Death ofMr. Badman ambition to be an artist grew, and before his four year apprenticeship was completed, he returned to Nuremberg to study to be an art teacher at the arts and crafts school, of which he later wrote that it was rather a refuge for aged but deserving professors than an institution for the education of young people'. He moved to Munich, but shortly before he was to take his examinations he found that his apprenticcship, being outside Bavaria, could not count towards his qualification; so, in 1898, he went to Leipzig to work as a designer with various printers and binders, and from 1902 on as a freelance. His style at that time was the Jugendstil then in fashion, which he quiekly left behind. May God forgive me for the things I produced in those ycars', he commented afterwards. In the autumn of 1905, Koch saw an advertisement in the magazine Kuust uud Dekoration for a post at the Rudhard foundry, shortly to be renamed Klingspor. He joined them in 19o6, and stayed there until his death in 1934. He began in a relatively humble capacity, but Karl Klingspor soon recognised his talents as a penman, and he began to design types. At the same time hc was appointed as a teacher of lettering at thc Offenbach technical institute, where later, in 1921, he set up an important workshop for students. All Koch's types were designed for Klingspor, with the exception of the Deutsche Anzcigenschrift family done between 1923 and 1934 direetly for Stempel, who had a controlling interest in Klingspor from 1918 onwards. In 1929, when he was being wooed by an Amcrican foundry, Koch paid this tribute to Karl Klingspor: 'If I have produeed a useful type design, it is in large measure due to the proprietor of the Klingspor foundry, whose advisory rôle in cach task I have undertaken for the firm has amounted to a collaboration. My relationship with Klingspor goes far beyond a question of business, and I will never seek another.' More than half of Koch's types were blackletter faces, to which he brought a rough calligraphic strength rarely seen before in type. Almost all of them grew from his own styles of writing, practised for long periods of preparation before the type itself was designed, frequently in quotations from the Bible, sinee Koch was a deeply religious man who, like Erie Gill, tried to unite life and work in an harmonious whole. His first type, called simply Deutsche Sehrift, was a bold blackletter which occupied him until 1910, and its narrow version until 1913. A medium weight appeared in 1918, and the attractive decorated form Qie Seitgmnife Sdpft N24