Fruhling (1914), Maximilan (1914), and Neuland (1923). Deutsehc Zierschrift, wcll uscd in England by Franeis Meynell at thc Nonesuch Press, in 1921. It showed from thc start thc powerful graphie imagiation of its creator. In 1914 a light-wcight Fraktur, Frühling, appeared, of which Koeh wrote, everything in this letter is conventional, so it looks new', and in the same year he began thc dcsign of Maximilian, whieh entailed a long series of type trials whieh ended when hc was called up for war scrvicc in 1915. Maximilian was the first blackletter for which Koeh drew matching roman eapitals. Although no designer knew, or exploitcd, better than he the graphie potcntial of blackletter eapitals, he also realised their illegibility when used together, and his later experiments with combining blackletter lowercase with romanised capitals greatly helped the non-Gcrman reader to read texts set in his typcs. At this stage, however, the decorativc inline Maximilian Antiqua capitals were intendcd for display, not for word eombinations with the lower-casc; but they showed the way his mind was working, and werc the first of his types to be widely used abroad. Koch's army serviee as a grenadier was a painful timc for him. He saw action on the Frcnch and Russian fronts as a privatc soldier, spent seven months in an army hospital in Offenbach during 1916 before being sent baek to the front, and finally was diseharged because of ill health in October 1917. Thc war years saw the dcsign, and the next fcw ycars the cutting, of a new and original development in his work, the delieate roman and italic called Koeh Antiqua and Kursiv. (Outside Germany, whcrc it is his bcst known type, it is called Locarno, after the optimistie treaty signcd there in 1925, whieh guaranteed Gcrmany's western frontiers.) One of thc most sueeessful advcrtising faees of the intcr-war period, still often uscd to suggest the vanishing luxury of ocean lincrs, it neverthelcss grew dircetly from Koeh's calligraphy, whieh he uscd in texts eelebrating the joys of domesticity. As well as the roman and italie, there was also a Grobe, or heavy weight. After thc war, Koch's most productive period began. He started work on a ncwspaper Fraktur type for the Ullstcin publishing group, which was intended for foreign as well as native readers and, although thc type was not put into produetion, it must have given morc food for his thoughts on the legibility of blackletter. Next, basing the design on his boldly hand-written text of thc Beatitudcs, he produccd the magnificent Wilhelm Klingspor Schrift (1924-6), Lu cienenenihaungelust und Röpfen das Zustandekommen eínes das weckt mehe Semeinschaftsgefühl als alle ## Buch,ja irgend eine Drudsache anzusehen.PETER JESSEN # DIE DEUTSCHEBUCHKUNST the summit of his achievement in a purely Germanic blacklettcr tradition, which confined him largely to local audiences, and Klingspor to local sales. But this blackletter tradition was being ehallenged within Germany from a powerful ncw quarter: not the humanist roman designs of the Italian Renaissance, but the modernists of the Bauhaus, who advocated the universal aeeeptance of sans-serif types. The kind of gcometrical design proposed, which found its eomplete expression in Futura, was on thc face of it antithetical to Koch's intuitivc approach, and he refuscd on principle to draw one. For his own reasons, however, he rclentcd, and designcd the interesting and elegant Kabcl (1926-7), with an inline companion called Zeppelin (1 929) and, most remarkable of all, thc striated vcrsion called Prisma (1931), which looks as fresh today as when it first appeared. As Georg Haupt wrote in his study of Koch's work, So it happcned that the master of vcrnacular script also created the clcarest, most logical, and at thc same timc the most vital, eonstrueted alphabet'.\*