# ABCDEFGHIJKLMN OPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrlstuvwxyz chckhfffiflftiftßat& ABCDEFGHIJKLM NOPQRSTUVWX abcdefghijklmnopqrlstuvwxyz Die Euns s ein ernsthaftes Gescháft,am ernsthaftesten, Die Klugheit ilt zwar lehr geeignet, zu erhalten was man belitt, aber allein die Kühnheit läßt gewinnen. Die Reden Friedrichs des Großen Wir wollen jedem Menlchen und jedem Ding die Ichuldige Ehre erweilen, aber nichts fürchten, als das Tun des Bölen. Ralph Waldo Trine ## DAS TALENT ARBEITET, DAS GENIE SCHAFFT. SCHUMANN ## NEUES THEATER IN FRANKFURT Kabel (1926–9), with two decorated versions, Zeppelin (1929) and Prisma (1931). Koch felt the need to stretch bcyond the blackletter tradition in other directions, and also to try his hand at cutting his own punches. As a first attempt which would not stretch his punchcutting skills too far, hc produced Neuland (1923), a brutal sans-serif again based on his rough pen-drawn lettcring, again a popular advcrtising type (imitated by Monotype and callcd Othello), and again used with imagination by Francis Meynell, in thc Noncsuch Prcss Genesis (1924), wherc it goes well with Paul Nash's powerful woodcuts. In the Pctcr Jessen Schrift, called aftcr thc director of the Berlin muscum of arts and crafts whose lecturcs had influcnccd many Gcrman graphic designers, Koch returncd to a simplificd blackletter, with romanised capitals for usc with the gothic lower-case for the first time. The initial impetus for the type was a great edition of the four Gospcls printcd at the Klingspor Press in 1926. It remaincd a popular face in the Koch circle, and was bought by the Grabhorn Press of San Francisco, who called it Koch Bibcl Gotisch, and first used it for thcir handsome edition of Mandeville's Travels for Random House in 1928. Koch himself cut the punches of two sizes, except for the 12pt capitals, which were cut by his son Paul; thc other sizes werc cut by Gustav Eichenauer. Koch's experiments with capitals continucd with Wallau (193o), called after a Mainz printcr who in 1885 had anticipated William Morris in suggesting the rcvival of the round blackletter script known as Rotunda, common among the printing types of the first centuries after the invention of printing, and including those of Anton Koberger, thc great printer of Koch's native Nuremberg. This kind of design had prompted Morris's Troy and Chaucer types, and latcr influenced Eric Gill's Jubilee (1935), but none of those can match the calligraphic verve of Koch's drawing. For Wallau he made two sets of capitals, blacklctter and romanised, and the latter were used more often. They and the lighter Offenbach roman capitals (193o), designed to accompany a blackletter lowcr case, were of a pcn-formed sans-scrif design which strongly influenced the capitals of pupils and admirers. Although their lower-case characters were quite distinct, ATF Lydian (1938-46) by the American Warren Chappcll, who had studied with Koch in the early 193os, and Monotype Klang (1955) by Will Cartcr, who had spent some months at Paul Koch's workshop in 1938, both show Koch's clear influcnce. Hans Kühnc's Stahl, produced for Klingspor in Die Wallau-Schriften von Gebr.Klingfpor, Offenbach erwerben fich immer mehr Freunde 十

EoangelíumJohannes 15.Kapitel Ich lage hinfort nicht,daßihr Knechte leid; denn 15 ein Knecht meiß nicht, was lein herr tut. Euch aber habe ich gelagt,daß ihr freunde leid; denn alles,mas ich habe oon meinem Vater gehört, habe ich euch kundgetan. Ihr habt mich nicht er= 16 mählt, londern ich habe euch ermählt und gelekt, daß ihr hingehet und Frucht bringet und eure Frucht bleibe, auf daß, lo ihr den Vater bittet in meinem Namen, er’s euch gebe. Das gebiete ich 17 euch, daß ihr euch untereinander liebet.