Ten years younger than Rogers, and fifteen younger than Goudy, Dwiggins also camc late to the dcsign of books and type. He was an original and exuberant graphic artist with an instantly reeognisable style, who ncvertheless, when he came to type design, produced a handful of faees which are remarkable for thcir comparative sobriety.\* Dwiggins was born in Martinsvillc, Ohio, in 188o, the son of a doetor. His interest in art took him at the age of ninetecn to Chieago, where he went to Frank Holme's sehool and studied lettering with Goudy. After a brief, unsucccssful spell as a jobbing printer in rural Ohio, he followcd Goudy to Hingham, Massaehusetts; and when Goudy moved on to New York, he stayed on at Hingham for the rest of his life, though for many years he also had a studio in Boston. A prolific worker, he was, aecording to his wife, ‘a man who loved his work so mueh, that no day was long enough'; indeed he often maintained that his aim was to campaign for a forty-eight hour day. In addition to his lettering and illustration, he ran an ambitious marionette theatre, for whieh he made stage, sets and east, and wrote the plays. Dwiggins's early graphie work was for advertising, but he came inereasingly to prefer designing books. In 1923 he met the publisher Alfred Knopf, for whom he was to design close on three hundred books over the years, and established the Borzoi visual stylc indelibly. But it was for another publisher, Random House, that he designed his most celebrated edition, H. G. Wells's The time machine (1931), full of his characteristic vignettes, whieh wcre built up by thc skillcd application of stencilled elcments. Many of his books and jaekets werc decorated with his vcry individual ealligraphy, whieh was an eclectic amalgam oflate eighteenth and early nineteenth century scripts and romans frcely redrawn with a flcxiblc nib and a lot of dash. In view of his interest in lettering and also in rcpetitive steneilling teehniques, it is surprising that he took so long to take up type design, but he was in his late forties before a chance observation in his manual Layout in advertising (1928) led to an invitation from Harry L. Gage of the Mergenthaler Linotypc Company. In the book, Dwiggins eriticised eontemporary sans-scrifs, espeeially the capitals, and wrote, the type founders will do a serviee if they will provide # ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUV WXYZGAEææ 1234567890 abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz [(\$£,.:;‘-'?!\*†}§Ⅱ)] # ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUV WXYZ&EEæ∞ 1234567890 abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz [(\$£, :;-'?!"+≠§)] Alternative Characters AGJMNVWWaegvw,;' AGJMNVWWaegvw,; a Gothic of good dcsign.'Gage challenged Dwiggins to do better, and he responded with trial drawings for a sans-serif which was accepted, cut, and called Metro (1929-30), with the various weights of the family eallcd Metrolite, Metroblack, and so on. It is an interesting rather than a successful type, with a lower case whieh is too idiosyncratic for the generation of constructed sans-serifs to which it belonged, and not eonvincing enough to establish its own tradition. The association with Linotype lasted twenty-seven years until Dwiggins's death, and his contact was ehiefly with C. H. Griffith, the vice-president in eharge of typographical development, with whom he kept up a busy and lively correspondence. His first book type, Electra, appeared in 1935. It was equipped with both a sloped roman and a slightly cursive italic, and is a kind of calligraphic modern faee. In a charaeteristic and amusingly schizophrenic essay introducing the type (in Emblems and Electra, 1935), Dwiggins argued with an alter ego, not for onee Dr Hermann Pütersehein, his regular fictional doppelgänger, but a Japanese sage Kobodaishi, who insisted that the type refleet the modern age of speed and steel, while Dwiggins replied, ‘if you don't get your