## JOHNSTON This broadsheet is set in Johnston type. Edward Johnston (1872-1944) was one of the followers of William Morris (1834-1896) who took a leading part in reviving an interest in good lettering after the decadence of the late-Victorian fashions. In 1916 Johnston was commissioned by Frank Pick (1878-1941) to design a special fount for the exclusive use of London's Underground and its associated companies. The resulting Johnston sans-serif type was the forerunner of many sans-serif founts both in England and abroad, including that of Eric Gill (1882-1940) who was Johnston's friend and pupil in this specialised field of design. Johnston is the standard type used for all official signs and notices throughout the London Transport system, and it is also used, where appropriate, for much of London Transport's general typographical publicity. 193o Fleuron, Gill also drew a delightful deeorated capital N. Morison asked him to design the complete alphabet for Monotype, but he deelined: Robert Harling\* suggested he thought the design too freehand for the mechanieal proeess of Monotype reproduetion. In 1936 he ehanged his mind, and these Floriated Initials were eut as Series 431. For while Perpetua was making slow progress through the works, Gill was beginning to make typography very mueh his country. As early as 1925, he had designed some bloek letters for the Army and Navy Stores, and used similar forms for signs at Capel-y-ffin to warn off uninvited visitors. Then in Oetober 1926 he was asked by a young bookseller in Bristol ealled Douglas Cleverdon (who later published several books of his) to paint his bookshop name in these same capitals. While in Bristol he developed 'flu, and to pass the time in bed he drew some alphabets for Cleverdon to use as models for lettering in his shop, ineluding the sans-serif eapitals. A few weeks later, Morison was staying with Cleverdon, and was interested in the alphabets. Earlier in the year he had tried to interest # ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRST abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUV abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz £1234567890.,;:!?"