O Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. So is the great & wide sea also, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small & great beasts. There go the ships and there is that Leviathan, whom thou hast made to take his pastime therein. These wait all upon thee, that thou # PAGES FROM THE FOUR GOSPELS prefer blondes. Solus was designed and cut in 1929, and was intended for the publieations of the Empire Marketing Board, but never used. It is also surprising that in 1928 he entered into an agreement with Robert Gibbings by which he was to design types exclusively for the Golden Cockerel Press, although the agreement was a friendly one and not rigorously enforced. Caslon was the standard type face of those private presses that did not design their own, and Gibbings had inherited it when he bought Golden Coekerel in 1924. He soon became unhappy with the italic, and asked Gill to design one to replaee it. Vcry quickly, however, thc plan grew to design a completely new faee, strong enough in weight to aeeompany the wood engravings, by Gibbings, Gill himself, Eric Ravilious and others, which were Golden Cockerel's primary interest in the Gibbings years. Although Gill first suggested that Monotype might give Golden Coekerel exelusive rights to Perpetua for five years, and then eonsulted Morison on the details of the new type, Golden Cockerel Roman was eut by the Caslon foundry under the supervision of J. Collinge. The drawings were eompletc in April 1929 and the type finally delivered in January 193o, in two sizes, 14pt with an italie, and 18pt without. There were also two titlings, a 24pt which was enlargcd from the 18pt capitals, and a 36pt for which Gill made new drawings: these latter are the most beautiful capitals he produced. The Golden Cockerel Roman\* is clearly related to Perpetua, but is in many ways a more convcntional old face: the angle of stress is greater, and some details, sueh as the lower case d, less idiosyneratic. In its 18pt size it was used for The four Gospels (1931), the Golden Cockerel masterpiece and one of the most magnifieent books of the century. In 1928, the remoteness and diffieulty of life at Capel-y-ffin, added to the inereasing amount of time Gill had to spend in London, led to his last movc, to Pigotts, a farm-house near High Wyeombe. In 193o his youngest daughter Joan married René Hague, who wanted to set up as a printer, and as a result the firm of Hague & Gill was established at Pigotts. For it Gill designed Joanna, begun in March 193o and first used in his own Essay on typography, which came For if the sinewy thread my brain lets fall Through every part, Can tie those parts, and make me one of all ; These hairs which upward grew, and strength and art Have from a better brain, Can better do 't; except she meant that I By this should know my pain, As prisoners then are manacled, when they're condemn'd to die. Nevertheless, as in the first days of printing the printing types were as close imitations as possible to the handwriting which preceded them (for letters are letters and A is A whether you write it by hand or dent it in by metal type), so in the first years of factory production every attempt was made to produce things which looked the same as the things made before. And this was by no means a matter of commercial deceit even if, as some hold, commercial deceit had been the motive of the first printers. A is A whether written or printed, and tables and chairs and all other things are like letters in this respect. They are an accepted convention. A chair for the parlour is recognised as being a certain kind of chair, different from a kitchen chair, different from an office stool. It is not only different in architectural shape, it is different in the kind of decoration which is applied to it. Decoration is what is decorous. The trappings of the drawing-room are indecorous in the kitchen. So a factory-made chair had to conform to the conventions. If it differed in workmanship it out the followingJune.\* Although he had talked of his planned design to Monotype in 1929, and although he wrote of it as a type without frills, intended to echo the nature of machine production, it was cut and cast by the Caslon foundry, and always hand set at Hague & Gill. However, the business was badly hit by the Depression; the publishers J. M. Dent bought the rights to Joanna in 1938 and commissioned Monotype to cut it for machine composition for their exclusive use for a period of thirty years. Gill made some changes to the italic for the Monotype cutting, and also introduced italic capitals which had not existed in the foundry version. Joanna was finally issued to the trade in 1958. In form Joanna has most of the expected Gill features, given a crisp, slab-serifed finish. The italic, extremely condensed and upright, is to all intents and purposes the sloped roman Morison originally wanted for Perpetua. But in general Gill seems in Joanna to have left behind the quirks of Perpetua, and the result is his best type. In 1932 Gill designed Aries, a privately commissioned type for Fairfax Hall's Stourton Press. Cast at the Caslon foundry, Aries is a condensed roman, which because of its private press usage has been little seen. Then in 1934, for Stephenson Blake, Gill designed his only type consciously intended to fill a perceived gap in the market for advertising types: first called Cunard, but when issued in 1935, twenty five years after the accession of George V, rechristened Jubilee, it is a rotunda in the tradition of Morris's Troy, with more of the feel of penmanship, but without the verve of Koch's Wallau. Gill's last roman type, Bunyan, dates from 1934. It was designed for an edition of Sterne's A sentimental journey which Hague & Gill printed for George Macy's Limited Editions Club of New York, and is a cross between Joanna and Golden Cockerel Roman. It was cut once again by Caslon, and remained a private type until 1953, when Linotype introduced an adaptation called Pilgrim, first used in a posthumous edition of Gill's Ferusalem diary, with an italic based on one which Gill had prepared for Bunyan but never cut. Pilgrim was an extremely successful text face, more comfortable than Perpetua, and deliberately promoted by Linotype as a rival. To accompany Pilgrim, Linotype commissioned a