# ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 1234567890 1234567890 ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz The type from which this edition of 'A Sentimental Journey'will be printed is a new 14-pt Roman designed by Eric Gill and cut by H. W. Caslon and Co. Ltd. The paper has been made by hand by J. Barcham Green and Son, Hayle Mill, Maidstone. The 8 Illustrations are etched in copper by Denis Tegetmeier. The size of the book is Demy 4to, about 1 50 pages. The binding will be in full linen with gilt top. The printers are Hague and Gill, High Wycombe, England. display faee from the distinguished wood engraver Reynolds Stone (1909-79),\* whieh was ealled Minerva (1954). As a young man, Stone had spent a fortnight working at Pigotts under Gill's instruetion, but Gill had said there was nothing he could teaeh him, and sent him away; eertainly, Stone's lettering in wood is unsurpassed, by Gill or anyone else. Nevertheless, Minerva laeks the vigour of Gill's types. This eompletes the eatalogue of Gill's types, designed by a man whose prineipal aetivities lay elsewhere. He was extraordinarily aetive, and any one of his oeeupations eould easily have filled an ordinary life. In his writing, and possibly in his engraving, he may have spread himself too thin, though his best works exeuse the more routine ones; but his type designs are elear, distinet, and neeessary, and among the few whieh have been appreeiated by not just the speeialists, but also the general publie. Erie Gill died on 17 November 1940 at Harefield Hospital in Middlesex.