editor) to consider the design of a new typeface for the paper. In a notc to Lints Smith, Morison wrotc, These ncw types, or type, sincc with minute variations they would all be of the same root design, would be selccted not with a vicw to thcir bcing of striking, but rather of subtlc allurc. The face would bc chosen for its effectivcness as much as for its “beauty"; the critcria of thc effectivcness bcing a maximum of clearness in imprcssion and a maximum of lcgibility to thc readcr who neither knows not cares, one way or thc other, for the mysterics of typographical minutiac.' To put his case to the committee, Morison compiled a memorandum which was printcd in an edition of twenty-five, and thc first mecting had to be deferred for the members to digest it. In it Morison oncc again reviewed thc historical background, but lcft thc choices open. His conclusions, though they sound delightfully vague as befits a mcmo for a committec, actually dcfine quite closely thc type that eventually emerged: ‘The new types proposcd for The Times will tcnd towards thc “modern", though the body of thc lettcr will be more or less old-face in appearancc.' Two, if not three possible models wcre kept under rcview. Baskervillc was dropped fairly soon as being too round and wasteful of space; trial cuttings wcre # PBRS PBRS actually made by Monotypc of Perpetua on a smaller body with rcduced extenders; but Plantin remaincd thc front runner. At a meeting on 28 January 1931, the committee instructed Morison to prepare specimens of ‘modernised Plantin'and thickened Pcrpetua', and cxpressed a preference for Plantin. Morison followed the prcference, since Perpetua suffered from the same disadvantage as Baskerville, of not bcing condensed enough. According to his own account, in A tally of types (1953), he sketchcd thc outlines of the revised lctters and gave them to Victor Lardent, a skilled draughtsman in Tle Times's publicity department at Printing House Square, who prepared finished drawings. Lardent's story, told before he died in 1968 to James Moran, was that Morison gave him a photograph of ‘a page of a book printed by Plantin'as a model. Most probably both accounts are true, and Morison gave Lardent photographic cnlargcments and also drcw examplcs of the kind of adaptations he wanted made to thcm. Lardent was reportedly bitter that his contribution to thc type was insufficiently recognised; but he was unfamiliar with type design, and Morison, who could sketch, but not make finishcd drawings, uscd him as an extra hand to put thc image in his mind's eye down on paper, bcfore taking the drawings to Monotype to bc turned into working patterns. Even so, over a thousand punchcs had to be recut by the works bcfore the typc was right, an unusually high numbcr. It is charactcristic of Morison that although he was producing a work-horsc type, and had bccn cmpowered by The Times committee to adapt Plantin, he wcnt back even beyond the model used by Monotype for Plantin in 1913. As we have seen, this was thc type uscd for thc 1905 Index characterum of thc Plantin-Moretus Museum, Granjon's Gros Cicero (large face 1 2pt); the Moretus family, who bought this typc aftcr 1652, introduccd wrong-fount sorts over the ycars, which wcrc copied in the Monotype recutting. Nicolas Barker, in his lifc of Morison, dcmonstratcd convincingly that he returned to the purc form of the Granjon type, probably in some sixtccnth ccntury source. Three sizcs of Series 327 were cut in spccimen form and at a committec mccting on 4 Junc 1931 thc ncw type was recommendcd for acceptancc. However, it was not put into usc for anothcr sixteen months, first bccausc of obdurate opposition from somc membcrs of The Times board to Morison's othcr Diagram comparing Plantin (above) with Times capitals.