Idem mon premier testament mon ciel brisé Par-dessus les paysages et les ports de mauvaise mine Idem les pavés échaudés et creusés de roues de buggys THE GOSPELACCORDING TOSAINTJOHN In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by # ABCDEFGHIJKLMN OPQRSTUVWXYZ Fleuron 6 (1928), recalled that the roman made a stir when it appeared because it was not copying an old design but was freshly drawn from reasoned canons of design. This was truer of Van Krimpen's later types: with the perspective of sixty years the roman seems to us to have something in common with the Doves type, particularly in the sloped cross-bar of thc e and the exaggcratedly kicked-up-and-over dot on the i and j. These and other details were noticed by thc American printer Porter Garnett when he ordered the type in 1929 for his Laboratory Press, and Van Krimpen co-operated with him in making revisions to several of the sorts, levelling the e's cross-bar, bringing home the dots, and modifying the proportions of several other letters. When in 1928 Burch and Morison asked Van Krimpen if he would allow Lutetia to be adapted for the Monotype, he at first refuscd, doubting that a version could be made that would satisfy him. However, as Burch offered him an unlimited power of veto over the trial cuttings, he reluctantly agreed, and in the end was as pleased as he was ever likely to be with the results. Of the type in general, he wrote charactcristically darkly: Après coup I think I knew what I wanted; and I am sure that, after a short time, I knew that I had wanted a number of things I did not want any longer'. The revisions that Garnett made went some way towards satisfying Van Krimpen's second thoughts, but he resisted making extensive changes to a type already in general use. The Monotype version was cut before the Garnett revisions, though the level-bar e was offered as a special sort. If the unrevised roman looks a little quaint to today's eyes, the same cannot be said of the beautiful and original italic, of which Morison wrote, Pcrhaps the only serious criticism that need be made here is that Lutetia italic is so good in itself that it cannot combine, with the proper self-effacement, with its roman'. Walter Tracy, in his critiquc of Van Krimpen, considered this a serious flaw, though it has not prevented successful use of the italie on its own for poetry. A handsome set of inline capitals was also made by Rädisch, working with a graver on existing sorts under Van Krimpen's supervision, and called Lutetia Open. After the success of Lutetia, Van Krimpen was asked by Enschedé to serve as their house designer, and he stayed with them until his retirement. Apart from types, he designed many books, beginning with handsome and literate specimen books of the firm's