# SIGNATURE THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO STJOHN # ABCDE GHJKL MPORS Van Krimpen's lettering for 'Signature'(1947), Open Capitals (1928), and initials for the Curwen Press (1929). type holdings, and continuing with many fine editions whose publishers were attracted by Ensehedé's growing reputation. He also kept a friendly eye on other people's designs going through the press, sueh as the Nonesuch Press Homer for Franeis Meynell. Frederie Warde visited Haarlem in 1927, and this led to eommissions for the Pleiad and Pegasus Press publieations in Paris, and later for the Limited Editions Club of New York. Van Krimpen also designed a lovely set of deeorated eapitals for Oliver Simon at the Curwen Press (1929), and an immaculate headline for Simon's periodieal Signature (1947). Meanwhile, his type designing work eontinued. He drew a Greek type, Antigone (1927), and the elegant Open Capitals, in both roman and greek alphabets, which rendered in type the forms he had used often and well in his hand lettering. In passing, he later mentioned the remarkably similar Columna titling, designed in 1952 by the Swiss Max Caflisch and issued by Bauer. Neither Caflisch nor his foundry had seen Van Krimpen's capitals, and the similarity may be explained by a shared debt to Hubner's Exempla scripturae epigraphicae latinae. Van Krimpen's next roman type had a most unusual raison d'être. Ensehedé's 1768 specimen book showed a roman and italie, called Kleine Text No.2, attributed to the eelebrated Duteh type designer Christoffel van Dijck (16o1-72), although Van Krimpen came later to doubt the attribution when advising Monotype on the eutting of their Van Dijck. Punehes survived for only the italie, and so in 1928 Van Krimpen produced a roman to aeeompany it. The search for a name for this type, helped along by a bottle of good Burgundy, yielded the name Romanée; it followed the seventeenth-century model quite closely, but so to speak Van-Krimpenised it. As a result, the roman and italic, though an interesting partnership, have different flavours, so that they were not often used together. Twenty years later, in 1949, Van Krimpen added an italic of his own design, whieh proved to be his last type: Romanée italic is a development of Speetrum, deseribed below, but is even more upright in slant, so that it has no eapitals of its own but uses roman ones, and has a somewhat obtrusive f, modelled on Arrighi. In 1931, Van Krimpen produced his most successful face so far, called Romulus at the suggestion of Beatriee Warde. He smoothed out the quirkiness of Lutetia, made the proportions attractively four-square and the stress vertical, and drew a sinewy letter which ## THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TOSAINTJOHN In the beginning was the Word, & the Word was with God, & the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; & without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not. THE GOSPEL ACCORL In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him ; and without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not. Light. That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: Which were born, not of blood, nor