THEGOSPELACCORDING TOSAINTJOHN In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; & without him was not any thing # THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SAINTJOHN In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; & without him was not any # OPEN KAPITALEN &T Cancelleresca Bastarda looks as fresh today as when it first appeared. The accompanying italic' has been criticised. Van Krimpen was influenced by his friendship with Stanley Morison, and particularly by Morison's essay ‘Towards an ideal italic', in giving Romulus not a cursive italic but a sloped roman. This, thought A. F. Johnson writing in Signature (194o), may be logical, but results in a stiff and monotonous letter'. It is also less than wholly successful in its intended purpose of textual articulation since it is not quite distinct enough from the roman, and Van Krimpen later repented of it. The type seems nevcrtheless to have survived these criticisms with ease, and had it not been supplantcd by Spectrum, would have been its author's major achievement. Conversations with Morison on script types led to an alternative italic being designed, a hybrid version of chancery italic called at Morison's suggestion Cancelleresca Bastarda', a rcmarkably elaborate fount with a wide range of ligatures, swashes and alternative sorts. Because the calligraphic flourishes on the extenders needed more spacc than the relation of x- to body height of Romulus roman allowed, Cancelleresca Bastarda was cast on a larger body than the roman by a proportion of fivc to four, and Van Krimpen devised an claborate and impractical scheme of leading so that the types would line up when used together, which ensured that they virtually never were. Likewise the type's ungainly name, for which we must blame Morison, has helped make it a rarity. Throughout thę 193os, Van Krimpen continued to design additions to the Romulus family, making it the first type intended primarily for book work to be so supplied: previous type families had been developed for jobbing work. To provide for thc needs of learned printing, Romulus was givcn a companion Greek (less successful than Antigone), as well as various bolds and semi-bolds, and even a family of sans-serifs. Romulus was adapted for Monotype composition in 1933. During World War II, Dutch printing went incommunicado as far as Britain and the United States were concerned. Under the occupation Van Krimpen and two colleagues, W. G. Hellinga and A. A. Balkema, produced fine work under the imprint of Thc Five-pound Press, called after the maximum wcight of paper allowed for unlicensed printing by the occupying forces. But these difficult years saw the birth of Van Krimpen's best type, designed originally for the Spectrum publishing company of Utrecht between 1941 and 1943, and later adapted for