(1882-1956) was later the designer of two wellknown types, Schneidler Mediäval (1936) with its italic Amalthea issued in the year of his dcath, and Legend (1937), both cut by Bauer; but he also influenced the development of type design through his school and its pupils, who included Imre Reiner and Walter Brudi as well as Trump. A corncrstone of his teaching was that other graphic disciplines should be followed alongside lettering, and each would benefit the other. This certainly has remained the case with Reiner (born 19oo), who is a highly distinguished wood-engraver as well as the designer of types such as Corvinus, and a bevy of scripts such as Matura (1938), Stradivarius (1945) and Pepita (1959). Trump too remained a talented illustrator, although his major work was in type. After spending the years 1923-6 designing ceramics in southern Italy, Trump returned to Germany to start a graphics department in the school of arts and crafts in Bielefeld, in Westphalia, which rapidly established its own style and attracted attention. An exhibition in Cologne of the department's work in 1928 was noticed by Paul Renner (1878-1956), the designer of Futura, whose Meisterschule für Deutschlands Buchdrucker (advanced Cheodor Heuss Das Buch ist der Bote, der zum Gespräch einlädt. Wir wissen: das gilt shon unter uns. AABBCDDEEF&GHHII OPQRRSSTCUVWX abedefshijklmnopqrstuuwxyz Types by Erust Schneidler. Schneidler Mediäval (1936) with Amalthea italic (1956), and Legend (1937). Fashions change, and each tastes. That is to say, of the WHICH THE ARTIST CAN # HIIKLMNOPQRST abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvivxyz 1234567890 school of book printing) had recently been established in Munich. He invited Trump to come to Munich in 1929 to teach lettering and typography, alongside the younger, and then considerably more radical, Jan Tschichold. The teaching of the school was outstanding, despite the harsh economic climate of the time, and was combined with much creative work by the staff. Renner was busy designing Futura, and Trump began work on his first faces, both for the Berthold foundry in Berlin: City (1931) was a mécane Egyptian taken to its ugly limits, much less attractive than the later Monotype Rockwell (1933), and Trump Deutsch (1935) was a blackletter. Meanwhilc, Trump was appointed director of the school of arts and crafts in Berlin, to which he was able to devote his energies for only a brief period. For in 1933, with the rise of Hitler, Renner was dismissed from the Munich school, since the new typography' was now considered subversive. Renner, anxious that the dircctorship should not go to a Nazi appointee, persuaded Trump to take it on, and Trump thereby undertook the diplomatic and administrativc burden of steering the school through thc difficult years which followed. Under these circumstances it is surprising that he managed to design any typcfaces at