ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrsstuvwxyz äöü chckβ # ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abedefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz &»« ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz & all, but he began his lifelong association with the C. E. Weber foundry in Stuttgart with the Sehadow family (1937-45), a far more assured and attraetive performanee than City, which begins to show Trump's qualities of preeision mixed with flair. The shaded capitals designed later for the family in two weights and called Forum I and II (1948-52) should not be confused with Goudy's capitals of the same name. At the outbreak of World War II, Trump was again called up into the army, served as a company commander, and was wounded in the stomach during the last days of the war. Apart from the pain of his wound, the problem which faced him on his return was daunting. The Munich sehool had been almost completely destroyed by bombing in January 1944; rebuilding at a time of general shortages was slow; and the administration had to be reorganised as well. Nonetheless, Trump continued to produee typefaees: after the somewhat nondeseript eondensed modern faee Amati (1951) he began work on a series of faces which owed their inspiration to his ealligraphie skill and the lingering influence of Sehneidler: the beautiful free italic Delphin, in two weights I and II (1951-5), Codex (1953), a roughly brush-formed roman, Palomba (1955), a chunky seript elose to Sehneidler's ## Signum ABCDEFGHIJ abcdefghijkl hbcimeidnrop šqaklgzhstvw ixy123456789 1234567890 ELZ2XJB OQLOEEO VIIRchckace ffMERCKfi Georg Trump's drawing for a script type, Faguar (1964). By courtesy of the Klingspor Museum, Offenbach. Photograph by Michael Harvey.