# ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz # ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz others to create the simplified faces the new typographical style demanded. Most of the nineteenth century English sans-serifs were jauntier, and retained more details from roman faces (such as the eyeglass g), than the Venus and Akzidenz group, which took morc seriously the implied constraints of bloek letters, that the strokes should always be of equal thiekness. (Where strokes join, however, compromises are always made to counteraet both the optical impression that converging strokes are thieker, and the danger of clogging with ink.) The German faces abolished the eyeglass g, and straightened the tail of R, which was usually eurved in the English types; they tidicd up many details, though they kept the double-bowled a and the curve in the tail of y, and chiefly the comfortable modern face proportions, in which the O is an oval, not a eirele. The new generation of sans-scrifs, which began with the Ludwig & Mayer foundry's Erbar (1922-30), designed by Jakob Erbar, included Rudolf Koch's Kabel (1926-7), and culminated in Paul Renner's Futura (1928 on) for Bauer and the very similar Stempel design Neuzeit (1928), took the cireular O as their proportional norm, as Edward Johnston's London Transport face had done a decade before. All straightened the tail of the y, though they varied in many other details. Futura and Neuzeit went furthest in geometrical purity, and had a single-bowled a. In the final analysis, the most construeted sansserifs are vitiated by their own geometry, becausc the letters are isolated by it: they lack the sense of flow from one to the next which there is in the traditional letterforms and proportions. This onward movement is guided by details so subtle they go unnoticed, but they are the result of practical opties, not geometry. After his first exposure to the Bauhaus in 1923, Tschichold changed his own style completely. He Russianised his name temporarily to Ivan, to identify himself with the left-wing stance of the new movement, he adopted an uncompromising new typographical’ manner, and in a special number of the printing trade journal Typographische Mitteilungen in October 1925 he eombatively announeed his new ideas under the gencral title of elementare typographie' (all in lower-case on the cover), in company with Bayer, Moholy-Nagy, Kurt Sehwitters and the Russian El Lissitzky. He then followed this up with a beautifully designed, rational yet radical, and above all practical series of manuals: Die neue Typographie (‘the new typography', 1928), Eine Stunde Druck-