Fan Tschichold gestaltung (‘a lesson in design for print', 1930), Schriftschreiben für Setzer (lettering for compositors’, 1931), and Typographische Entwurfstechnik ('typographieal layout method', 1932). These made the new style not just a broadside against the bourgeoisie and blacklettcr, but a comprehensivc method eapable of day-to-day applieation. Mueh of Tschiehold's writing was prompted by his activities as a teaeher, for after a brief spell as a freelanee designer in Berlin he was invited by Paul Renner in 1926 to join thc Munich printing school of which Renncr was direetor. He stayed there until 1933, when he was arrested and interned by the Nazis, and his teaehing contract cancelled. (Renner was dismissed, it will be remembered, and his plaee takcn by Georg Trump.) Tsehichold decided to leavc Germany, and moved to Basle, whcre he survived by teaching and some work for publishers; he beeame a Swiss eitizen during World War II. Thc discipline of designing books on a variety of subjects, not just typographical manuals, for eonservatively minded publishers on whom he depended for a livelihood, began Tsehichold's seeond, slower, conversion, to classicism. His style was becoming less doctrinaire before he left Munich, and two display # abcdefqhi jklmnopqr s tuvwxyz FUr dEN NEUEN MENSChEN EXISTiErT Nur das glrichgæwicht zwisch&N NATUr UNd G&IST ZU JEd&M Z&ITpuNKT dEr VErgANgENheiT WarEN alle VariaTiON&N dES alT&N >NEU< # LeCapital FONDERIE SASKIA frohe Farben in das sonnige Bild des Sommers zu tragen, und alle modischen Pastelltõne finden die anderen, die für ihre Erscheinung types he designed in 1931 are deeorative rather than rational: Transito, for thc Amsterdam type foundry is a bold stencil letter, and Saskia for the Leipzig foundry of Sehelter & Gieseeke a calligraphie sansserif. He also produeed some faees for a photosetting system, Uhertypc of Berlin, but the only one to have survived, Uhertype-Standard-Grotesk, is as near to Gill Sans as makes no diffcrenee. After his move to Switzcrland he eontinued for a while to lay typematter out in an asymmetric way, and showed a distressing penehant for mixing Georg Trump's unattraetive type City with spidery seript faecs, as on the title page of his famous book Typographische Gestaltung (1935).\* In thc same year he was invited to visit England by Lund Humphrics, the firm who printcd and published The Penrose annual; he restyled their letterheading, and later designcd the 1938 Penrose, both in a elean asymmetrie manner. But his experience in publishing gradually eompelled him to adopt a more elassieal style, and he aceompanied this shift with a running