# ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUV WXYZAECE abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 1234567890f&æœ ## Banks's Artists and his Endeavour Collections matrix disks for the Lumitype machine, and thcn designed Méridien and Univers for both the Lumitype and for foundry metal type for hand setting. Univers was quiekly recognised as an important facc by John Dreyfus at Monotype, and cut for hot metal composition, and also put in the Monophoto repertoire, and in 1962 Dreyfus commissioned Frutiger directly to design Monotype's first face freshly conceived exclusively for film composition, Apollo. Monotype followed this with Albertina (1964) by the Dutchman Chris Brand, and with Photina (1971), by José Mendoza y Almeida. Mendoza is a French designer of Spanish descent who had to abandon his typographical training because of the early death of his father in 1944. After an apprentieeship with the photo-engraving firm of Cliehés Union in Paris, he was introdueed by Maximilien Vox to Roger Excoffon, and worked from 1954 to 1959 as his assistant at the Olive foundry, after which he beeame a freelance. In 1959 the Amsterdam foundry issued his Pascal, a most attraetive stressed sans-serif. Photina was the most original and successful of the Monophoto designs, with a particularly interesting italic, frcely designed yet disciplined by Mendoza's skill in cutting lettering in wood. Two more recent Monophoto faces have been a variation on the Mécane theme, Margaret Calvert's Calvert, and on Century, Robin Nicholas's Nimrod, both in 1980. Because of the particularly resolute adherence of the English newspaper industry to hot metal setting, particularly in Fleet Street, English Linotype undcr the direction of Walter Tracy went on producing designs for metal types into thc 197os, as we have seen in an carlier chaptcr. In thc United States, however, books werc more commonly set on Linotype machines and ncwspapers were converted earlier to filmsetting. Mergcnthaler Linotype, where C. H. Griffith's position was takcn by Mike Parker, undertook an advcnturous policy of design for film, and in 1965 Matthew Carter was brought in as designer. Matthew Carter was born in England in 1937, the son of Harry Cartcr, the printing historian. In 1955 he went to study at the Haarlem firm of Enschedé, where he learned punehcutting from Van Krimpen's assistant P. H. Rädisch. He returned to England in 1957, and after some freelanee work in London went to design typefaees for the Lumitype at Crosfield Eleetronics, the English distributor of the machine, and then joined Mergenthaler Linotype in New York. His early work there was largely in drawing seripts, in which, as we have seen, Linotype had some catehing up to do now that filmsetting made kerning possible. Snell Roundhand (1966) was based on a seventeenth century copperplate script, and used to the full the Linofilm's ability to overlap characters. In the same year he produced the more conventional brush drawn Cascade Seript, and in 197o Gando Ronde, partauthored with Hans-Jörg Hunziker. In the same year came Auriga, a Mécane with some subtle details of interest rather than beauty, and he began work on the handsome Olympian, a newspaper face which has already been referred to. In 1977 he produced Video, an uncomplicated sans-serif. In the middle 197os Mike Parker and Carter turned their attention to the fresh design of an old style face for film composition, and decided to base it on the types of thc French puncheutter Robert Granjon (1513-89), which had already been the starting point of two classie types of the twentieth century, Monotype Plantin in 1913 and Times New Roman in 1932. Carter's Galliard, which appeared in 1978, is, as its name suggests, a far more dashing interpretation of the Granjon letter, based on no partieular size but, as Carter put it, an anthology'. Granjon was celebrated especially for his italies, and Carter's italic was drawn with partieular verve.\* In the same year as Galliard, Carter designed Bell Centennial, as deseribed in the Introduction to this book, and more recently both he and Parker have left Linotype to form Bitstream, a design ageney in Cambridge, Massachusetts, concentrating on the digitisation of typefaces for laser printers and other newer ways of generating visible language. The other established manufacturer to take seriously the challenge of filmsetting was the Berlin foundry of H. Berthold AG. Founded in 1858, it first showed its Diatype photosetter at the DRUPA printing exhibition in its centenary ycar; over the suecceding years it introduced modifications and new models, and took over Alphatype in 1981. It also adopted an enterprising design policy under its Charles Bigelow, Galliard', Fine print, 5, 1, 1979. L. W. Wallis, Type design developments, 1970–1985, a brief revien, Arlington, Virginia, National Composition Association, 1985. (Distributed in Britain by Keith Hogg, Tenterden.) The basic character in a type design is determined by the uniform design characteristics of all letters in the alphabet. However this alone does not determine the standard of the typeface and the quality of compositions. The basic character in a type design is determined by the uniform design characteristics of all letters in the alphabet.