# In former days the shape a new book In former days the shape a new book In former days the shape a new book type director Gunter Gerhard Lange (born 1921), appointed in 1973. Lange was an original designer whose Solemnis (1952) has already bcen referred to, and whosc Concord was issucd by Berthold in 1969; and also a sophisticatcd adaptor of classic faccs such as Baskerville, Caslon, Garamond and Walbaum. In 1976 Berthold produced Hermann Zapf's Comenius, the most handsomc of thc batch of film faces that Zapf, whosc work is described in a later section, based on his metal Hunt Roman. At the same time as the oldcr firms were adjusting to the changed conditions, newer organisations were appearing to markct filmsetters and CRT machines. Not all had any pretensions to typographical distinction, but among those who did was the Swiss company Bobst Graphic, set up in 1972 and ten ycars later absorbed by Autologic of Lausanne. Several of their faces, Media, Signa and Haas Unica, were designed by the team of André Gurtler, Christian Mengelt and Erich Gschwind, and among the others were Robert Norton's Else, and Bram de Docs's Trinité, which both appeared in 1982. De Does occupies the position at Enschedé formerly held by Jan van Krimpen, and his predccessor's influence is detectable, though not In former days the shape a new book was to take In former days the shape a new book was to take In former days the shape a new book was to take In former days the shape overpowering, in his work. The commission for Trinité bcgan in 1978 with a request from Bobst to Enschedé for permission to adapt Van Krimpen's Romanée for filmsetting; De Docs's advice was that since the conversion of a design from metal to film was just as complicated a matter as designing afresh (an opinion which Van Krimpen would have endorsed, as we havc seen), the latter option was preferable. As a result he was asked to design Trinitć as a joint commission from Enschedé and Bobst. 'The name rcflected the unusual feature of the type, that there were three alternative lcngths of extenders. Long extenders were earlier supplicd on dcmand for some Monotype faces, but it was unprecedented for a typc to come equipped with three such standard versions. There were also two widths of roman and italic, a medium and a bold. Trinité is a handsome and original face in the tradition of excellence associated with Enschedé, and while the italic seems to lack a certain degree of bite, the roman is admirable. The other new manufacturcr to produce faces of distinction was the firm of Rudolf Hell of Kiel in Germany, who developed the Digiset machine in the middle 196os. For them Hermann Zapf produced four types between 1976 and 1983, to be described in the scction dcvoted to his work; and since 1978, the Dutch designcr Gerard Unger has produccd a series of excellent faces. Demos (1978), Praxis (1979) and Flora (198o) were conecived as a eombinable family, Dcmos being a squarely drawn workhorsc roman and italic, and Praxis a sans-scrif vcrsion of thc samc skcleton letter. Flora can bc used as the italic for Praxis or independently, and although its idea sprang from Sehneidler's Grafik (1934), it is by far the most original face of the three. In it the sans-serif form eomes as close to a true eursive as is possible. Although its strokes arc vertieal, it givcs an extraordinary effeet of movement and calligraphic flow, and is one of the most interesting, individual and attractive faccs to have appeared rcccntly. Gerard Unger's Demos (1978), Praxis (1979) and Flora (1980). The prolifcration of typesetting systems has produced a wide variety of availablc faces of widely varying quality, which was unhelpful to typographers who were oftcn designing jobs for which two or more printers using different equipment were tendering. (They were finding it difficult enough to estimate correetly the length their work would make with thc dearth of adequatc copyfitting tables supplied by the manufacturcrs.) Because many manufacturers werc concerned more with thc engineering of thcir machincs White space is not a mere residue. It is an active force. It is vital in the detail of text White space is not a mere residue. It is an active force. It is vital in the detail of text White space is not a mere residue. It is an active force. It is vital in the detail of text than the appearancc of the types they produeed, while users wanted the same typefaces irrespective of the machine used to set them, agencies quiekly grcw up to try to sell designs to all the manufacturers. Foremost among these has been the International Typeface Corporation of New York, foundcd in 197o by Aaron Burns, Herb Lubalin and Ed Rondthaler, to design and eommission faces, promote them energetically through their lively house magazine Ulc, and distribute them to their subseribers as finished artwork, fitted and rcady for immcdiate adaptation to their various machines. ITC havc been rcsponsible for many of the most commercially successful faces of reccnt years. Some of them are redrawn revivals such as Franklin, Century and Berkeley/Californian, (and some of these werc best not revivcd, such as the awful Korinna and the worse Souvcnir), but others are new faccs like Avant Garde Gothic, designed by Lubalin and Tom Carnase, and three faees by Hermann Zapf; Book, Intcrnational and Chancery. Thcy also buy up and put under licence other faces, such as Matthew Carter's Galliard, which was designed for Mergenthaler Linotype, and Novaresc (198o), dcsigncd for the Haas foundry by the Italian Aldo Novarese. White space is not a mere residue. It is an active force. It is vital in the detail of text White space is not a mere residue. It is an active force. It is vital in the detail of text White space is not a mere residue. It is an active force. It is vital in the detail of text