# House of Representatives Pictures of the week Manual of modern advertising Brunswick Map Printers its repertoire of faces after the devastation of the war. Already in 1946 he had begun work on a pen-formcd roman called Novalis, which was not dissimilar to Warren Chappell's pre-war Trajanus for the same foundry, but was never issued. This work was quickly overtaken by a new face based on Renaissancc forms for which the first drawings were ready in 1948, and which made its first appearance in the introduction to Feder und Stichel the following year. It was called Palatino. Palatino has proved so universally popular that its remarkable qualities tend to be taken for granted. Zapf himself wrote in About alphabets,\* The studies and sketches of my Italian visit were converted into the Palatino type family, thcir very names suggcsting their Italian modcls', and ccrtainly the type's classical sensc of proportion shows evcry sign of the powerful impact made by the experiencc of his first visit to Italy on an impressionable young man who had hitherto been working in the Koch tradition. Palatino is so completely unlike such characteristic pre-war German roman types as Weiss Antiqua and Koch's Marathon that the direct influence of Italian lettering seems needed to explain it. Ncvertheless, the fact is that Zapf did not go to Italy until the Autumn of 1 950, by which time Palatino and Michelangelo, those miraclcs of Renaissance grace, were already cut. Only Sistina, the more robust titling fount, was based on sketches actually madc in Italy. Together with this extraordinary and apparently instinctive absorption of classical letter forms, Palatino still shows beneath its surface the stirrings of penmanship learned from Koch, which leaves small but vital traces on the contours of the letters. While this is never allowed to dominate the shapes, it givcs the type its crispness, and prevents it ever becoming bland. The earliest cuttings were more calligraphic in some details, such as the absencc of serifs on thc tails of p and q, but these were added later. Palatino was immediatcly adapted for Linotype composition, since Stempel had held the contract for making matrices for the German branch of Mergenthaler Linotype since 19oo, and it has since been adapted for virtually cvery typesetting system in the West. As it was found somewhat heavy in weight for text setting in the smaller sizes, Zapf designed a lighter version, called Aldus, for Linotype composition sizes (1952-3). At the same time as Palatino, Zapf was at work on a ncwspaper faee, ealled Melior, a modern and sophisticated addition to the lonic family with the curves drawn on a principle which foreshadows the superellipse, a mathematical eonstruction described fifteen ycars later in Scientific American. At the same time, the det.ls of Melior were earefully designed to withstand as far as possible the various processes, rotary letterpress, offset and gravure, which would use it, and Zapf was able to study the technical requirements of such types at Linotype's Brooklyn headquarters during his first visit to the United States in 1951. Melior appeared in 1952, and its originality can be gauged by comparing it with Zapf's far more conventional Mergenthaler Antiqua of two years later, whieh was intended for specialist scientific work, and presented technical rather than aesthetic challenges. We can get an idea of the amount of work Zapf produced in these years when we realise that between 1948 and 1954 he designed not only Palatino, Aldus and Melior, with their titlings and bolds, italics and swashes, but also many other faces. There were the elegant Virtuosa scripts (1952-3), and several Greek alphabets, some made to accompany existing Stempel faces such as the sans-serif Neuzeit, but ineluding the beautiful Phidias (1953) to partner Michelangelo, Frederika (1953) to go with Virtuosa, and the exeellent all purpose Heraklit (1954). He drew the Mergenthaler Antiqua already mentioned, as well as handling the drawings for the German Linotype Janson (1952), based on the Stempel Janson types (which have already made their appearance in conncction with Monotype Ehrhardt), and for Stempel's cutting of a missing 24pt and a new 48pt. He designed the attractive Saphir decorated capitals (1952) and the vigorous jobbing face Kompakt, and a successful Persian script as well as many ornaments. And as if this were not enough, he began work on a new type which at its devclopment stage was called significantly Neu-Antiqua (‘new roman’), but was later christened, as a linguistically logical suecessor to Melior, Optima. Optima is in many ways Zapf's most original design, in that it established virtually on its own a new type category, which its ereator was careful to call a serifless roman', to distinguish it from stressed sansserif. He tells us that it was inspired by Florentinc lettering he had seen on his Italian visit, which ## Inks for Quality Printing Italian Architecture Famous Painters of Italy Horse Race at Ascot ## ABC HENSTUWWYXYE 121456%891 FAHRENHEIT KINGDOM BERNARD SHAW Saphir (1952), and the two EDINBURGH titlings for the Palatino family, Michelangelo and Sistina (both 1950).