# ABCDEFGHIJKLMMNN abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwx # ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 1234567890 dispensed with serifs; it is also more originally an extension of the development of roman book types, taking the comfortably round proportions of a transitional faee sueh as Baskerville's and shedding the serifs with no distortion of its essential nature and no sense of anything missing. Although Optima was not originally eoneeived as a book face, beeause of the widespread opposition to sans-serif for text setting, Zapf's eonversations with Monroe Wheeler of the New York Museum of Modern Art eonvineed him that its roman infleetions made it legible enough for eontinuous reading. Time has proved Wheeler right. Optima appeared at the DRUPA printing trade fair at Düsseldorf in 1958, and has been extremely popular ever sinee. A serifless italie defies imagination, and so in eommon with most sans-serifs a sloped version was produeed to aeeompany the roman. Various bolds followed, with the boldest forms growing vestigial serifs on some letters to help with their artieulation. The logie of produeing Optima at this time was eonfirmed by the almost eontemporary history of Zapf's straight' sans-serif, Magnus, designed without mueh enthusiasm for English Linotype, of whieh the trial size was eut in 1957. The projeet was abandoned in 196o after the appearanee of Adrian Frutiger's Univers. At the end of 1956, Zapf resigned from the type direetorship of Stempel, although he kept very elose links with the foundry. The administrative burden was threatening to outweigh his ereative work, and he wanted to develop his talents in book design, ealligraphy and other graphie techniques. The portfolios and books of typographieal design and lettering he produeed over the years have been outstanding. Beginning with Feder uud Stichel, already deseribed, and eontinuing with the magnifieent landseape-format Manuale typographicuin of 1954, Typographische Variatiouen of 1963, the seeond upright volume of the Mauuale in 1968, and the privately issued Orbis typographicus of 198o, the books are an extraordinary outpouring of graphie ereativity. It is unfortunate that the projeeted Manuale phototypographicuu of the late 196os was abandoned for finaneial reasons: the first two Mauuale volumes were set in metal, the first by hand and the seeond with some additional meehnical eomposition, and it would have been suitable to produee a third with photosetting to represent Zapf's eontinuing and passionate involvement in the developing teehnology of type