# The Rampant Lions Press salutes Hermann Zapf, designer Jack Stauffacher, first mover George Lawrence, patron & the Stempel foundry, makers of the Hunt Roman composition. For although he has continued to value metal type and design for it, he has at the same time both overseen the transfer of his faces to film and digitisation, and also given his attention to designing for the new typesetting systcms. Nevertheless, threc of Zapf's best designs for cold composition, Comenius for Berthold, Zapf Book for the International Typeface Corporation, and Marconi for Hcll Digiset, all dating from 1976, are children of what must be one of the last instances of a typc commissioned for private usc and cast in mctal by a commercial foundry. In 196o, hc was invited as visiting professor of design to the Carnegic Institute of Technology at Pittsburgh, and the following ycar was commissioned by the Hunt Botanical Library there to design a face for use in the Library's publications, chiefly as a display letter to use with their standard text typc, Monotype Spectrum. He developcd his design from a pcn letter he had occasionally used, in which the stress was almost vcrtical, and drew an alphabet which was transitional in origin but of its time in appearance. Hunt Roman was intendcd for hand setting only, and so Zapf was able for oncc to dcsign without having to worry about the unit systems of mechanical composition, and because it was to be used in the Unitcd States it did not have to conform to thc standard base-line of German types. With this freedom he produced a beautiful facc, with enough calligraphic crispness to make it lively, and enough strength to discipline that liveliness. It was cut in four sizes by Stcmpel, and thc 18pt pilot size was completcd in May 1962.\* The only disadvantages of Hunt werc that it had no italic, and was unavailable to thc tradc. Comenius, Zapf Book, and Marconi, of fourtecn years later, wcre by no means exact adaptations, but thcy bear a close family resemblancc, and both madc good these deficicncies. Comenius is the supcrior vcrsion, but all lack the sharpness of Hunt, possibly in unconscious recognition of the softness of the medium for which they wcre designed, by contrast with metal. In Zapf International, which ITC brought out the next year, 1977, the absence of sharp-edged features was actually requircd in its design brief. One other typeface for ITC should be noticed: the popular italic Zapf Chancery (1979), which turned