the arguments about italie versus sloped roman by providing a slightly inelined italie in plaee of roman', and an italie of greater inelination for emphasis. As Kris Holmes\* has pointed out, Zapf Chaneery has distinetly more bite, almost a touch of blackletter, by eomparison with most faees for cold composition (ineluding Zapf's two carlier designs for ITC), though if, as she says, tongue-in-eheek, the x has the vigour of Gene Kelly in his prime', Gene Kelly is about to fall əver. Zapf Chaneery's first extended showing was in a eatalogue designed by Carl Zahn for the Boston Museum of Fine Art, but its ehief rôle is elearly as an advertising display faee. In 1966, Zapf was appointed a typographical eonsultant to Hallmark International, the makers of greetings cards. Here he devised training sehemes and manuals for their lettering eraftsmen, eollaborated on an edueational film ealled The art of Hermann Zapf (1968), and also designed a handful of proprietory faees, covering most of the stylistie range from scripts to roman. Between 1967 and 1972, there appeared at roughly annual intervals: Jeanette, a script, Firenze, a chaneery italic, Textura, a blaekletter, Hallmark Comenius (1976). Kris Holmes, Zapf Chancery', Fine priut, 6, 1, 1980. Uncial, Missouri, a ealligraphie roman, Seriptura, another seript, and, also in 1972, Crown, a roman book type for use in Hallmark's own Crown Editions. The types eould also be used in combinations: for example, Winehester used Uneial Capitals with Textura lower case, and Charlemagne mixed Uneial capitals with lower case from the Shakespeare designed by Zapf's wife Gudrun Zapf-von Hesse. After leaving Stempel in 1956, Zapf also became a eonsultant to Mergenthaler Linotype in New York. For their Linofilm typesetter he designed in 1969 the seript Venture and the italie Medici. (The latter was also the name of Palatino during the development stage, but the two types should not be eonfused.) At the end of his advisory term in 1974, he drew Orion, a deliberatelv neutral text face. For the Digiset digital typesetter manufactured by the Rudolf Hell company of Kiel, he has designed Mareoni (1 976), another variation on the Hunt theme done in the same vear as Comenius and Zapf Book, Edison (1978), a ehunkier workhorse type for newspapers and technieal publieations, Vario (1982) and Aurelia (1983). (Aurelia was also the provisional name for Sistina, and as with Mediei the two should not be confused.) # regularComeniusnormal abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ äåæö0œßüEAÅÖØEU1234567890% (r-;:!i?¿-)·[""»«]+—=/\$£十\*&S italicComeniuskursiv abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvnxyz ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ äåæö0æßüAEÄAÖ∅EU1234567890% (-;:!i?¿-)·[""""»«]+—=/\$£十\*ES Marconi Text, Marconi kursiv, Marconi halbfett und Marconi halbfett kursiv – eine neue Digiset-Schrift im klassizistischen Stil von Hermann Zapf. Die Marconi hat ein großes Schriftbild mit einer hohen Mittellänge. Die Strichstärke für den Grundschnitt wurde ebenso wie die Serifen kräftig gewählt. Um die Schrift etwas weicher und ausdrucksvoller zu machen, wurden die Schnittpunkte von Senkrechten und Serifen leicht gerundet und die Schrägen etwas verlaufend ausgeführt. Die diagonal auslaufenden Köpfe machen die Schrift elegant. Hermann Zapf entwarf die Marconi direkt in der Rastertechnik des Digiset. Er konnte deshalb Idealformen entwickeln und somit alle Vorteile des Systems nutzen. Marconi (1976). Zapf's lifclong concern with non-roman types has continued, with Greek and Cyrillic versions of many of the faces so far mentioned. For the University of Wisconsin, at the suggestion of Walter Hamady, he produced a Sequoia alphabet (1984-7), and in 1983 he began to work on a roman-based Pan-Nigerian type to accommodate the nine chief languages of that country. In 1977, Zapf was appointed Professor of Typographic Computer Programs at thc Rochester Institute of Tcchnology in New York State, and in 1983 his work with the Metafont design program developcd by Professor Donald Knuth at Stanford University produced the Euler type family for the American Mathematical Society. The basic roman is, like Zapf Chancery, really an upright italic, with rounded contours rathcr in the manner of Goudy; and there are script, italic and even Fraktur versions, as well as many mathematical sorts. At the samc time as this design, drawn on a screen without the aid of cven a pencil and paper, let alone a file, Zapf has recently returned to the original technique of making type, and designed a Civilité script for which the punches were cut by hand by Paul Hayden Duensing and cast at his private foundry at Kalamazoo, Michigan. Thus Zapf's first ambition to become an electronic engineer has been realised by the most round-about route imaginable. Unquestionably we are the richer that the political barriers put up against his early training in electronics forced him into printing, where he cxpericnced, compressed into one career, the whole history of type manufacture so far, from hand punchcutting at the Haus zum Fürsteneck, through the industrialised foundry at Stempel, mechanical and film composition at Linotype, to the computerised design and character generation of today. We are doubly fortunate that he had both the technical ability to make the new machines work for him, instead of relinquishing control to the engineers, and also the graphic genius to make them work to such advantage.