In 1784, 'The Marriage of Figaro' (Mariage de Figaro), by Beaumarchais, came out at Paris, where it was acted with astonishing success. Thomas Holcroft no sooner received notice of this piece, than he formed the instant resolution of going over to France to procure a copy of it, in order to translate and adapt it to the English stage. He arrived in Paris the latter end of September, 1784, and proceeded to the lodgings of his friend Bonneville, to whom he immediately communicated the object of his journey. They both set about the accomplishment of it directly; but they found it attended with greater difficulty than they had expected. The comedy had not been printed: therefore, their first plan was to procure a manuscript copy, either at the theatre, or through some friend of the author. This attempt, however, they found fruitless, from the jealousy with which the managers of the French theatre prevented any copies from getting abroad. The only resource now remaining, # Zeichen erkennen Zeichen gestalten breathe life into a conventional form. If it is possible for a transitional face to dance, then Iridium dances, yet it always remains in formation. At the same time as his work on Iridium, Frutiger was at work on lettering for directional signs at the new Paris airport, Charles de Gaulle, at which the first terminal opened in 1975. Much of his work has been in the non-typographical but related field of sign alphabets, notably for Electricité de France and Gaz de France. For Charles de Gaulle a sans-serif was chosen as being practical and sensible, and a deliberate choice was made of a design that would not look as clinical’ as the sans-serifs of the previous decades, such as Univers, and also would echo the curves of the terminal's architecture. The result was codenamcd Roissy, after the village where the airport was built, and when adapted by Linotypc as a typefacc was called after its ercator. Frutiger (1976) is an efficient but cheerful facc which shows that it is still possible to draw new forms of sans-serif. Yet, paradoxically, in spite of its origins in a modern airport, it has something of thc timeless about it, of the lettering scratched in stonc at the dawn of seript, and the universal sign language which Frutiger has studied so carefully. It is his concern with the larger concept of abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRST 1234567890 .,;:"«»&!? Håmbûrgefönstiv iam admodum mitigati raptarum d earum parentes tum maxime sordida veste # abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRST 1234567890 ,;:"»&!? Håmbûrgefönstiv iam admodum mitigati raptarum d earum parentes tum maxime sordida veste Adrian Frutiger