## Events on theSkin Let's think a little about the human senses. They're often signified with terms like "the five senses" or "the five sensory organs." I gave the HA PTIC Exhibition the subtitle “The Awakening of the Five Senses." But who on earth came up with the figure five? Is it meant to apply to the simple icons of eyes, ears, nose, mouth and hands? As for the sense of touch, brushing softly against something with the fingers is not the same as grasping a doorknob tightly with the whole hand.“The sense of pressure" would be a better description for the latter. And as for the sense of taste, the feeling of licking whipped cream with the tip of the tongue is completely different from that of packing a whole slice of bread into the mouth. Minutely examined, the senses would number at least a hundred, not five. On the other hand, we might be able to limit the senses more by narrowing them down. If we think of the sense of taste as a combination of smell and the oral sense of touch, the sense of taste becomes part of each smell and touch. If we set the hurdle for discerning separate delicate stimuli as language, then sight, hearing and touch could pass, but smell and taste are a little iffy. The physicist Hermann Ludwig Helmholtz (1821-1894) said, "Everything is an event on the skin."Come to think of it, the sense of sight is a response to the stimulus of light on the retina, a circular membrane 4 cm in diameter. The sense of hearing is likewise a response to movement of air that's perceived by the eardrum, a membrane only 8 mm in diameter set deep in the ear. The senses of smell and taste are responses to the components of matter that touch the surface of the mucous membranes in the nose and tongue. So membrane perceptions are not limited to those occurring on the skin. All human perception originates in the responses of membranes to things physical, stimulation transmitted to the brain through the nervous system. A human being is like a rubber ball wrapped in an extremely delicate membrane. Different areas on the ball's surface elicit different senses. Our image of the