world is based on the multifarious stimuli that are perceived on the membrane and transmitted to the ball's nucleus, the brain. Design is a service for these sensitivemembranes. In a way, the five senses are interrelated. The sense of sight is not self-contained, but works in conjunction with the senses of hearing and of smell. Now that I think about it, our senses have developed in concert. If we think about the process by which the senses of newborn babies gradually begin to function, we might be able to understand their interrelation. We often say that babies can't see, but it doesn't mean that their eyelids are shuttered. Surely the light comes through the lenses of their eyes and the retina is exposed to the light, and then transmits communication signals to their brains via their optic nerves. Therefore, saying that babies can't see is really saying not that their eyes don't function properly, but that their brains can't understand the meaning of the signals that are transmitted. In the same way, babies who can't see also can't hear or distinguish flavors. The sensors of humans who have just come into the world do function, but their brains are unable to discern the meanings of the stimuli. By “meaning," here, I mean the value to the person himself or herself. This is something that is understood by and by. A baby instinctively suckles his mother, drinks her milk, hears her voice, and feels her skin, gaining in experience until the visual stimuli of his mother and the scent of her milk, the feel of her breasts and so on are bundled up together, acquire value, and develop into awareness. This is how I think consciousness comes about. Furthermore, experiences in hearing, touching, seeing, tasting, and smelling acquire meaningall together. It seems to me that hearing, touching and seeing are interrelated, so come to fruition simultaneously. This might resemble the way a three-dimensional object becomes clear with"binocular vision." Theinstant the brain manages to interpret the composite visual impression captured by the eyes, which are working together, the image abruptly becomes a vivid solid figure. Likewise, when sensory stimuli assembled by more than one sense come together, fitting tightly in the