brain, an image is born. Neuroscientists term these qualities of sensory experience“qualia." Mossy geta soaked with water appeared in the previous section. We come to a general idea of what it would feel like to wear them, without actual experience. If you were to lick the table you're using right now, what would it taste like? You can pretty much imagine the taste, even without following through with the action. Even if you did lick it, there shouldn't be much of a difference between the actual result and your speculation. Or what would it feel like to have the mike you're using to give a speech fill your mouth? This too would feel much as we expect. Why can we assume without actually doing? Because since infancy, we have had a tremendous number of sensory experiences through which they have built up interrelations. Our experiences and memories of licking, touching, smelling the world, through whichwe have attached meaning to it, have given us the background for our senses. There is a famous question in the field of sensory research. If a person were born blind, then suddenly gained the ability to see, and you placed before him both a cube and a ball, could he tell the difference, just by sight, without touching them? The researchers say no. If it were a shape that the subject had understood through touching, the shape might be interconnected with sight due to the occurrence of a certain“synaesthesia"(a sensation that normally occurs in one sense modality when another is stimulated). But the meaning of a visual stimulus experienced for the first time has no ties to any other sensory perception. The meaning of the stimulus of the light that is received by the eye has not yet been evaluated in relation to other sensory perceptions. It is not until one has touched the shape, or tried smelling it, that there is created a correspondence with other sensory stimuli, the person begins to understand the meaning of the light stimuli and the ability to seeis established. I used to believe that design was information architecture, and also that this architecture was built in the brain of an information recipient. Recently I've come to think that, although the materials of that architecture's