construction are indeed the information brought from the outside by the sensory organs, at the same time some very important building blocks are also the recollected experiences, the memories, awakened by these external stimuli. People imagine the world and interpret it when outside stimuli awaken the mountain of their internally stored memories. The action of walking is the forward motion of the body created by the pendulum-like swinging of the limbs and the body's balance with gravity, but we do not undertake each instance of this activity in any planned manner. Except when we think to, say, step on every crack in the sidewalk or take care not to step on any ants, we usually don't examine every external stimulus involved in walking before we take the next step. It's morelike we are recalling the walking that's stored in our memory, while not paying much attention to the actual walking we're doing. Basically the same can be said of seeing and hearing, too. When you meet someone new, you don't reserve a fresh look for his face, voice and features, but focus your attention only on the disparities you discern from an internal collation of the vast number ofmemories about human beings in your recollection; you look at him as, after all just a human being, save for those disparities. The parts you can bundle into the idea of human being are represented by the memories you've stored up. A huge amount of information is transferred to the brain through the sensory organs, yet our interpretations of the world are not based on new information alone, but on the collation of new information with copious memory. Our sensory perceptions are incessantly fusing together in the brain, amalgamating and interrelating. Design is not only concerned with color and form. Research into how we sense color and form, or research into the senses, is a critical subject of design. And observations of how the human senses work will give design newpointers.