of the more mature lodge covered a vast area, dotted with cottages and paved with old stone in every direction. Guests walk barefoot there, and I was rather surprised to find myself enjoying the feeling. When I thought about why that was, I realized that the stone pavement was worn away by decades of barefoot travelers, polishing the stones as they tread. My feet rejoiced at the feel of the stones. It was a wonderful feeling of familiarity-like cuddling my old cat-that came to me through the soles of my feet. When I think about it, I sense an extreme delicacy in the feeling I got from stones worn away by the walking of fellow human beings. It's hard to explain, but it's probably a composite of minute discrepancies from stone to stone. Intuitively, I felt that the stones held a great amount of information. If I were able to input into my computer all theinformation coming from those stones, I'm sure it would freeze. I realized something then; although today's society is said to be in a state of information overload, in fact it may not be an excess. It's just an overflow of odd and fragmented information in the media. The amount of information in each fragment is in fact quite small. In this slew of half-baked information, isn't the brain oppressed? The stress on the brain isn't because of quantity, but because of limitedquality. Against the backdrop of the evolution of media and its powerful gathering of news material and data, all of the world's happenings are trimmed like a lawn by a mower, with fragments of information flying about from place to place through the media as grass flies through the air. These broken pieces of information adhere to our tofu-like brain like spices sprinkled so thickly that they obscure the entire surface. For a moment, this makes us think we're quite knowledgeable, but information tacked on the surface of the brain doesn't amount to much when you add it all together. Conversely, the amount of information we receive through a sensual, pleasant experience via the soles of our feet is enormous. The human brain likes anything that entails a great amount of information. Its extensive capacity waits eagerly to perceive the world by completely exhausting its great receptive powers. That potential power, though, remains today in a state of extreme constriction and is a source of the information stress we're all under.