# A DIALECT IN DESIGN Dissecting Kenya Hara Li EDELKOORT Chairwoman, Design Academy Eindhoven and Trend Forecaster, Trend Union He is a person of character. He is a tall man formed by rigor and exacting good taste. He is ageless. He acts as an agent of tranquility and is dressed like a priest in dark, apparently simple, yet superbly cut clothes, or on weekends, like a monk, in hooded sweatshirts over soft drawstring pyjama pants. He is an arresting person with piercing all-seeing birdlike eyes that observe the world from behind intellectual, round-rimmed spectacles. For an instant, you might mistake him for a Swiss modernist designer of the last century, all red and white and angular. Yet he is completely the contrary, all white andred, with a softer edge. Precise and rigorous, he discusses design like a philosophy of life while continually shifting his awareness of the process, always with a work in progress somewhere, challenging and changing his own wisdom. He is both the timely delivery-boy of communication and the inventor of exformation, struggling and toying with acquiring knowledge and deleting excess in both disciplines. He is a truly Japanese creator grown from shadows and darkness, his soul bleeding from the scars of recent history, concerned with the roots of his culture and the DNA of its design discipline, and promoting its existence in the face of the other emerging countries of Asia. Therefore, he focuses on the islands' own special values and strives for the survival of paper, print and recently textiles, infusing tradition with contemporary content. He is inventing a dialect in design, blending global ideas with local and regional color and taste. He is an idealist when it comes to the identity of Nipponese culture. He becomes a samurai in his pursuit of nothingness, an acupuncturist to cure visual excess. He preaches contentment with emptiness and simplicity and sees Japan as an extreme hybrid that absorbs all other influences, neutralizing all chaos, huddling alone on the edge of