to create new posters. The abstraction of paper and its timeless tranquility make him believe in a future when books will carry information with the appreciation and added value of touch, weight, smell and memory. For him, paper is food, white is a concept, printing is a process and design is oxygen. As an architect of brand strategy in a truly contemporary and collaborative way, he teaches his clients to reconsider and redirect their image in a softer and almost more natural mode, more fluid too, with the whole process running like a river, shifting in perception silently, without any apparent effort. He pushes his partners to work with excellence and introduces them to the best thinkers, photographers and designers; he is a networker avant la lettre, stimulating his peers to ever newer explorations in the field of the design of emotion. As a prophet in the wisdom of nature, he turns to small ideas and examples to let nature speak. He will transform the contemplation of a vast and empty horizon in order to invite us to experience freedom of choice and liberation from the bondage of consumerism, and he will imagine our own human hands as a vessel for drinking water, as if being the first and most perfect example of the discipline of design. He is in fact a perfectionist with an eye for the imperfect and the decayed, the depleted nature of things, the random beauty of the changing seasons as well. Although he believes that foretelling the future (which is my profession!) is a futile occupation, he has, to my mind, a natural talent for it; he becomes an oracle when he speaks of our life in the 21st century and the task he lays before us is vast and all encompassing. He sees the Japanese aesthetic and way of life as a role model for the Western world, with its modesty, symbolism, tradition and darkness, discarding overconsumption to experience another joy, the joy of being a