## Sense-driven Long ago technology began to lead society and the economy. We describe this situation of technology motivating the progress of all sorts of things with the term“technology-driven." Design and technology have faced one another on the question of how to utilize the media and materials produced by progress in scientific technology: Web design for the Internet, the competition in architecture to use new materials, impressive forms in product design using new materials and technologies, computer graphics generated by numbers. This may just be the appropriate form of design for an era in which technology has been a driving force for development. And we've also enjoyed plenty of superb designs thanks to our technology-driven society. But if we were to reseat the motivation for the manufacture of objects on the side of the senses, we would have a design process that begins not from technology, but from sensory perception, which would progress parallel to the various scientific disciplines. From this we can imagine a world that would be called “sense-driven." We are not able to make our bodies abstract and we should not forget the fact that the greater part of science is about human existence. We used to fill our imaginations with the glamour of achieving happiness by sending a virtual self to live in cyberspace, but we've realized that virtual happiness cannot become real happiness. In time, dust will cover even modern structures designed to be aesthetically light, and products made of new materials will gradually evolve into antiques. We don't know what to do with our physical bodies, which need massages as much as messages. ## The Progress of Technology and the Deterioration of the Senses Technology has no point unless it subtly awakens and activates the senses of its recipients. Looking around, I notice that on the contrary, people today have been gradually developing thick skins because of technology. They wear elasticized or fleece clothing, sit on comfortable sofas and eat potato chips while