watching large-screen TVs. They don't take lessons in cooking or the tea ceremony. They can't even be bothered to arrange flowers in a vase. Thanks to the calculator, they've ceased doing math in their heads or on paper, and are losing the ability to think quickly, and in Japan, the word processor has diminished their memory for the kanji (Chinese characters)we use in our written language. Because there's e-mail, they've stopped writing letters by hand. Common greetings used in written correspondence slip their minds. Losing these phrases means they also lose compassion for others. Even the skill of peeling an apple in one long strip, once common proof of dexterity in Japan, has deteriorated because it's such a nuisance to use a knife. Leonardo da Vinci created magnificent paintings. There is absolutely no one today who can paint this way. We must believe that this fact is due to the loss of sensitivity and wisdom so obvious in his work. The same can be said of the skills of skinning apples or writing letters by hand. The necessary sensory perceptions and receptivity have begun to fade away. Marketing is the business of scanning and analyzing the various aspects of peoples’ desires. And these aren't only positive desires, but also the unconscious desire towards idleness: slacking off. In convenience stores and supermarkets, products are in constant competition. Only those that sell survive. The development of POS technology has spurred this trend. Not long ago, people would buy roasted coffee beans at a shop, grind them with a coffee mill at home and percolate it through a flannel bag. This is now a rare scene, thanks to the spread of electric coffee makers. But today people are too lazy even to make coffee with these. There's been a gradual increase of disposable single-use “cassette-type" coffee products. Basically, consumers unknowingly move in whatever direction allows them to lead an idle life. We can't always claim that everything that's convenient is no good, but certainly the human tendency to slack off has intensified remarkably, due to marketing backed by technology. Some are of the opinion that we gain far more than we lose. It's true that newly invented technology and media have immense possibilities for