spiritual individual at one with the sun and the moon, the river and the city, the forest and the animals, including ourselves. The emergence of the growing well-being industry can be seen as an early sign of this philosophy. As an artist, while drawing hieroglyphics, characters, scribbles or letters, his typography looks like raindrops, rice grains, snowflakes and butterflies... conveying the poetry in nature by a delicate rhythm alone. Therefore, he also seems to have a particular liking for dots, which comes as no surprise to me. Only recently I discovered why the dot is so powerful and prominent at this point in time; I found out that the dot is narrative when it represents an apple, wheel, balloon and moon, as well as abstract when expressing stain, drop, pebble and moon, and therefore has become symbolic of the major movement of the future which will merge everything that stands in stark contrast today: young and old, minimal and decorative, healthy and naughty, ecology and technology, craft and industry, natural and synthetic, abstraction and narrative. The dot hereby perfectly embodies the idea of the hybrid and is almost symbolic of his body of work. Thus, I can only think of him in his own terms: archaic form, heightened touch and escapist color, seeing a snow white, absorbent, slightly irregular, soothing and immaculately blank piece of paper punctuated with a burning and passionate red heart in the form of a perfect circle. His national identity is embedded in his body and rooted in his soul.