cultivating wisdom and our senses. Anything that matures changes shape. Human beings and cultures both mature and metamorphose. But our desire is to metamorphoseinto better beings. “Sense-driven" describes a situation in which progress pivots on our sensory perceptions. Let's pit this concept against that of the technologydriven world. Reviewing the world based on our senses would be sound and meaningful for technology as well. In the past, graphic designers had to acquire the skill of drawing ten lines in between two lines one millimeter apart, as training for writing the kanji characters. Not long ago, we practiced this skill using a bow pen or drafting pen. I belong to the generation a little younger than the one that carried out this training to its fullest extent, but I remember that our generation's graphic design programs included similar training. Today, thanks to the computer, in theory we can draw a hundred lines, or a thousand in between those two lines. And so we can laugh off as nonsense the training of the old designers. But this isn't a matter of skill. It's a matter of sensory sophistication, or enhancement. The ability to draw ten lines in the width of one millimeter proves that the individual's eye is so enhanced that he or she can perceive the width of one millimeter divided into ten parts. There are senses that are absolutely unattainable without undergoing the necessary training. The union of such a highly sophisticated sensory perception with the computer would bring into existence a stupendous power. As it is, it's meaningless if a person who has completely inept eyes also has a tool for drawing a hundred lines within the width of one millimeter. Of course, the computer can bring us sensations that were beyond the reach of designers of the past. It inspires in us such a dynamic and uplifting motivation that we're persuaded to abandon our antiquated sensory approach. The computer develops our sensory dexterity on a different stage than the one cultivated with our conventional method. On the other hand, however, unless we intentionally keep our senses active as well as receptive, software will only blunt them. Fettering the senses to an overweight body that