has neglected physical activity not only means giving up the extremely delicate sensitivity accumulated over a long period of time, it also threatens to destroy the possibility of a new field of design in which delicate senses and technology are encouraged to interrelate. A situation in which we awake one day to find that what is active is not our senses but only software, is not some kind of science fiction tale; it's already here, and it is prevalent. Before high technology began to drive society, there had been a balanced tug-of-war between technique and sensory perceptions. We used to judge issues and phenomena based on our sensory perceptions. If the motivation for driving the world turns into something aiming at an even higher technology, human senses may degenerate just as inactive muscles lose strength. If we don't quit this ongoing generation, we should at least work harder to awaken our sensory perceptions. It would be better if high technology were to evolve in a more delicate manner, subtly correlated with the periphery of sensory perception. I use the word “haptic" to describe this way of thinking. ## Spreadingthe World Atlas of the Senses In the world of design, color and shape are at the apex. Every time some product with a striking shape or made of extraordinary materials comes along, we're dazzled. We're amazed by the metamorphosis that a different shape can give an ordinary utensil. This power to bewitch the consumer at first glance with our solutions is one of the allures of design. But it's not just that. The field of design is human perception. As I stated at the beginning of this chapter, there is another possibility for design besides focusing on color, shape and texture. This is in the quiet observation of how to sense and how to make the viewersense. And so I wonder, in this context, if there may be something yet dormant in our sensory perceptions, an undiscovered American Continent of the senses. Has no one begun the work of exploring this undiscovered continent on the world atlas of the senses? I am eager to set sail for this hidden realm of