the most important awakening of the senses in human history. Here lies a peculiarity of this image, glittering strikingly in the history of culture. Today paper's role has been metamorphosed by the progress of electronic media. These days we even hear people say things like, “The Gutenberg Galaxy has come to an end." The world of communication, a synergistic result of paper and printing technology, is related to the eruptive birth of a universe, but does this Galaxy really have a severely limited time to live? The metaphor sounds interesting, but I believe that the thinking that ponders the end of the Galaxy in paper as a medium grips the material in a smaller sense. Paper is senseware; it serves, more than a material for writing and printing, as a perpetual medium of intelligence inspiring the human senses. Even if the invention of paper were to occur after that of electronic technology, still our imagination most likely would have been greatly inspired by an encounter with white sheets of paper that tickle the senses and foster our creativity. ## CommunicatingwithMateriality It's true that the medium is the message. In our history and culture, media have shouldered the reality of communication realized by media themselves. However, on top of this, media are simultaneously senseware, an everlasting facilitator of our creative activities which acts directly on the senses. Electrons are also expected to build such similar relationship with thehuman senses. Electrons are among the examples of senseware that carry no tangible medium, in which we envision a plethora of possibilities. Unlike electrons, paper has an essence that lurks in the medium itself. By incessantly communicating with its whiteness as well as materiality, we have been able to nurture and secure a constant domain of representation. The book is an example of a tool that has come into beingin our culture as a communicator with paper. Today, even as we explore the meaning of diversified media, it seems necessary to reevaluate via the senses the meaning of media that have been as close as air, incessantly giving us strength. My work as a designer is done at the far reaches of this idea.