# The Aesthetics of Invisibility JohnMAEDA Associate Director of Research, MIT Media Lab Kenya Hara is a complex man. He views the world through his many lenses of seeing, tasting, smelling, erasing, evaporating, and all forms of construction and deconstruction as Japan's preeminent art director at the beginning of the 21st century. His potential is boundless, yet if there is one boundary that he has not yet broken, it is the international appeal for his work. For as in the case of many great Asian designers that are unknown on the world stage, Hara's work is tied directly to the language and culture of a non-English speaking nation.With this new book, the world now stands to benefit from decades of Hara's research into the unknown territories of new Japanese design. The first book I ever read by Hara was his treatise on the relationship of macaroni and architecture. At firstI thought that the work was some sort of odd joke. But Hara is a fairly serious man and as I flipped through the pages I enjoyed the mix of dry Japanese humor and serious dialectics about the state of architecture and humanity. There is a spirit of “serious play" in Hara that I find to be common among his similarly aged and empowered peers in Japan, but Hara's ability stands out among the rest. I would say that to Hara, "play"is not really part of his vocabulary. It is by some cosmic accident that within Hara's serious design work there's always an element of silliness or humor that seems to peek out within the perfection.