ture of information because generating this aggregate image is intentional andcalculated. Another illustration demonstrates the same thing with a completely different conceptual expression (see page 157). It looks almost like the meridian diagrams used in acupuncture and Eastern medicine. The mind is not singular and seated within the head; it exists throughout the body, like a system of tsubo, or acupoints. We approach our work by targeting this multitude of brains. If information architecture is aWestern, analytic concept, this may be an Eastern interpretation. I don't know which one is real, but either way, this illustration is a personal conceptual diagram of the field in which we work: the human being as information recipient. ## The Programs for the Opening and Closing Ceremonies of the Nagano Winter Olympic Games Designing Paper I'd like to continue my story of information architecture by quoting some practical examples, beginning with my design solution for the opening and closing ceremony programs for the Nagano Winter Olympic Games, held in 1998. My task was to represent hospitality to visitors around the world with modern graphism that still rests on Japanese tradition. The basic role of the program was to interpret the contents of the ceremonies along with their procedures I graphically represented the steps of the opening ceremony, beginning with the sound ofthe gong of Nagano Prefecture's symbol, Zenko-ji Temple. This was followed by the ritual of tate-on-bashira, in which four pillars are raised to create as well as celebrate a holy space; the entering of the champion sumo