store their exciting experiences. This idea is consolidated in the cover material. That is to say, I designed the very paper—one befitting the winter festivities, one that would evoke the images of snow and ice. I did this by asking a paper manufacturer to develop a white, puffy paper that allows the characters and letters on the cover to be debossed, a process by which a heated mold is applied and the fiber of the concave, debossed area is partially melted, becoming translucent like ice. Thanks to the paper manufacturer, a company highly motivated to take on this design project, I was able to realize my initial goal of “a paper of snow and ice." Here I am only able to show you a photograph, but please view it with your tactile perception switched on! On puffy, white paper are imprinted concave letters of French and English, and Japanese characters, all limpid, like ice. ## Invoking the Memory of Treading on Snow I'm sure we all hold in some corner of our memory a scene like this, one that may have taken place on the grade school playground, or on our town's main street the morning after an overnight snowfall. Before you lay a white, puffy plane, covered with untouched, new-fallen snow. You worked your way forward, step-by-step, on the new-fallen, cotton-ball snow. Your footprints showed through to the dark soil beneath like semi-translucent ice. Behind, you left dotted prints. For anyone touching this paper, this is the memory that is invoked and enmeshedwithin the images in his mind. The "paper of snow and ice" is a trigger. This contrivance is design. Seated roundly in the center of the puffy snow is a brilliant red flame, created with a foil-stamp imprint. The cover is made complete by with this tactile contrast, an aggregate image that opens the program, and continues into the graphics introduced in the previous section. Of course, the program itself is not the architecture of information. That will come into existence only in the minds of those who handle the information series we call the program.