# Signage System for a Clinic Signage System for the Umeda Hospital The Umeda Hospital in Yamaguchi Prefecture in western Japan is a specialty hospital for obstetrics and pediatrics. The architect Kengo Kuma, who designed the building, introduced me to its director, who then asked me to design its signage system. From this project as well Igained some insight into the architecture ofinformation. The most distinctive feature of the clinic's signage is that all of the signs are made of cloth. The first reason for this choice was my desire to create an affable space. Most of the people who spend time in this clinic are not “patients" per se; this is a place where pregnant women and nursing mothers spend time before and after childbirth. Places meant for the sick or injured necessitate an atmosphere so tense you could prick it with a pin, one reflecting a high level of reliable medical skills, supported by doctors and nurses and inspiring a sense of ease for the patients, who have entrusted their injured or sick bodies to a hospital. Some people like the idea of medical care in which the patients are treated in a friendly manner, but I wouldn't be about to submit to an operation in a hospital that felt like a country inn. The excessive intensity with which a fastidious, responsible head nurse executes her duties is essential to hospitals. But for those relaxing before and after childbirth, I figured I might be able to look at the environment from a slightly different angle. On the one hand, today's low-fertility society has instigated changes affecting even hospital management. The dwindling number of pregnant women has become a challenging market. Clinics trading on hotel-like service and furnishing luxury-brand everything, from bed sheets to vanities, have stimulated customer discrimination. I've even heard of pregnant women flying all the way to some beautiful southern island to give birth to their babies underwater. Delivery seems to have become some great, extraordinary event.