ButIwasn't asked by the Umeda Hospital to do anything unusual. Both UNICEF and WHO accredited the clinic as a “Baby-Friendly Hospital," due to its efforts to encourage breastfeeding and, should the natural method not work out, bottle-feeding emphasizing frequent physical contact between mother and child. This clinic uses advanced techniques and provides progressive thinking on maternity healthcare. The management's request to me was to create signage that conveys the clinic's concepts to both adults and children ina naturalmanner. ## The Communication in KeepingWhite Cloth Clean So I used white cotton for the signage of the Umeda Hospital. The supports are affixed to the wall or ceiling, while the signs themselves, carrying the necessary information on rooms and the facility, are made of white cloth. Some of the signs are easy to attach and remove, like socks, and others are like bed sheets. Cloth is basically soft. So a space with cloth signage has a soft countenance. But there's a more important point to this design solution; signage made of white cotton is easily soiled. If there are cloth signs hanging down, curious kids are going to try to touch them. And naturally, they've got to touch them with fingers from which they've just eaten chocolate. In this case, I've used white cotton with full knowledge of its tendency to soil easily. All of the signs are designed for easy attachment and removal, like shower caps. The elastic band makes it simple. So as soon asit's dirtied, it can be replaced with a clean one and laundered. But why did I resort to such a troublesome solution? If soiling is the problem, isn't it common sense to begin with a material like vinyl that's hard to dirty, or a color that doesn't show stains?That might be the normal way to approach the problem. But I threw my mind into reverse. I thought, a friendly atmosphere is nice to have in an obstetric clinic, but what's more important is supreme cleanliness. I dared to choose white, a color easily soiled, because I wanted to demonstrate the actual practice of keeping clean something that