In this project, by using the physicality that is the destiny of signage towards another purpose, I tried to produce communication different from that achieved by mere guidance signage; through the use of white cotton signs, I meant to imprint the message “cleanliness" upon the minds of those experiencingtheUmeda Hospital. ## Katta Civic Polyclinic SignageSystem I would like to introduce one more clinic signage system. The Katta Civic Polyclinic is a horizontally expansive three-storied complex with a very spacious footprint of 100 square meters. Unlike hospitals in crowded cities like Tokyo, this compound is situated in a luxuriantly verdant northeastern Japanese town on a plateau with an extensive view and makes sumptuous use of this space. On the first floor is the outpatient department, including the reception desk, consultation rooms, laboratories and a dispensary. The second floor is used for operating rooms, doctors' offices, etc. The third floor, benefiting from brilliant sun, is the medical ward for inpatients. The complex was very rationally designed, thanks to the collaboration of three architects. The flow line for the most crowded area, the consultation space, is as economically planned as if it were for an airport. And so the design of the signage system went relatively smoothly. The distinguishing feature of the signage system hinges on the use of larger type so that even the elderly can clearly recognize the signs. As far as was possible, I avoided using complicated support structures jutting out of the walls and ceilings, instead setting it up so that the type was laid directly on the floors and walls. Floor signage had to be very large to maintain an unobstructed view, even as people walk over it. To eliminate the problems of fading and erosion from foot traffic, whichwould surely arise if we had printed directly on the floor or lining the floor with some kind of adhesive sheet, I came up with the solution of inlaying red linoleum type and symbols into the white linoleum of the floor. We were able to do this thanks to a laser-cutting