# Matsuya Ginza Renewal Project PalpableMedia Between 2001 and 2006, the Matsuya Department Store, occupying an entire block of the central street of Tokyo's Ginza district, carried out a multi-phased renewal project. Ginza Street is one of central Tokyo's main thoroughfares, with a long history, but the successive establishment of storefronts here by international brands like Chanel, Cartier, Prada and Apple Japan has ushered in a new stage. Over these five years, through the gradual renewal of its interior and exterior, during which it continued to conduct business, the venerable Matsuya Department Store metamorphosed into a new, white Matsuya. This was both an integrated design project encompassing a variety of fields (commercial space, packaging, and advertising, amongothers) and an effort to imbue each of these aspects with texture, which could also be termed “character." For publicizing as a fresh message such a well-known commercial environment as a department store, conventional methods wouldn't have had much impact. I thought that rather than resorting to cheap operations like conventionalmedia campaigns or video displays in the windows, it would be really efficient to restructure the department store, which exists as a physical object, as “palpable media." Department stores are not virtual shops, but places people go to the trouble of visiting in person, to physically experience shopping. This is why I thought that I could, by designing a tangible texture to the space, create the presence or impression of an entirely new shop, one that had never existed before. The focus of the renewal project was shifting the axis of the department store's image. Matsuya's existing image was centered on a true picture of a high-quality life, or design for daily life, rather than fashion. The common impression was that people visited Matsuya to look for a high-quality