lifestyle, not to experience the forefront of fashion. I thought this was a fine precedent, but the management team had determined to introduce droves of fashion brands. What's more, before the renewal got underway, Louis Vuitton opened a shop on the corner of the Matsuya block. Basically, Matsuya was bound to be involved in fashion bothinside and out. At the beginning of the project, I was asked to plan advertising to announce the renewal. However, as I mentioned before, it's doubtful that advertising alone could replace the conventional image that is a department store with fresh information. I felt that itwas essential to consolidate the design of everything, includingspace and supplies, within the renewal project. The concept model appears in the photograph (see page 176). If we hew to the theme of this chapter, we would call it a model of the architecture of information. The structure is simple. I piled up fine white paper embossed with theMatsuya logo as deep as the thickness of a sofa cushion and associated this white mass with the building. I made nine square holes in it and into each inserted a translucent acrylic cube, each representing one of the nine intended fashion brands. Each of these carried on its back a photo of a brand image. Thanks to the refraction of the acrylic, the photos seemed mysteriously solid. Making the base out of white paper has a symbolic meaning. It suggests the change of Matsuya's corporate color from bright blue to white. It would have been impossible to bring fashion into a place so deeply dyed with the department store's previous image of lifestyle design. The worst scenario that could arise from the combination of fashion and that image would have been the birth of an image like that of a duty-free shop. Hadthe base had to play second fiddle to the brands, it would have obscured any reason to call this commercial zone “Matsuya." The challenge was finding a way to create an identity that was one size larger, one big enough to include all of the brands. As for“white,"as I will explain in the next chapter, it is bestowed with a special quality. In this project, I designated white because of its function as a backdrop, its power of inclusion, its modernity and its dignity, as well as the balance ofall ofthese.