# Message Received JasperMORRISON Product Designer I knew something about Kenya Hara before I ever heard his name mentioned. It was the Matsuya department store in Ginza which communicated it to me on an early trip to Japan. It hasn't often happened to me, but this time in particular I was drawn to the store by its graphics; something almost magnetic pulled me into the shop, a mixture of curiosity and expectation. If I think of Matsuya now I think of the graphics; the two are inseparable. I remember thinking at the time “whoever made the graphics knows what he's doing." When graphic design is very good it's easy to know that it's good, even if we know nothing about graphic design. Good graphic design surpasses all requirements of education and sophistication, and delivers the message so simply that we receive it without registering that a communication has been deliverered. In the case of the Matsuya department store, it told me everythingI might expect of the attitude behind the shop without my having to think about it. It's a good department store, there's no doubt, but sometimes I wonder if the graphics express Kenya Hara's idea of what Matsuya should be, and the store itself has to work hard to stay level with its graphics. The first real meeting I had with Kenya was at his office in Ginza; by that time I had seen some books he had designed, in particular RE-DESIGN, and together with the product design Naoto Fukasawa had been doing, I had the very strong impression that Japan was way ahead of Europe in terms of what each presented as being modern. The work of both seemed icy cool and tasty, and, I felt, shared something in the way it communicated itself on some primary level of human response. Rather than alienating an audience unfamiliar with design, it seems to invite us all to see how easy and natural design can be when it's done right.