The embossed texture of the paper suggests the use of a white that has both physical texture and tangible depth. In other words, it's based on the idea that the roots and trunk of the new Matsuya image are sustained by a "tangible white." The proposal I presented using this model was accepted, and the plan was moved into the implementation stage. From here evolved a multitude of practical matters, such as the change in the store's visual identity, including the corporate color, the innovation of signage, shopping bags and gift wrap, the arrangement of color tones in the interior, ad planning, the design of a temporary enclosure for the store, and in addition, the design of patterns for the exterior walls. ## The Collaboration of Tactile Designs The first part of the project to be translatedinto reality was a temporary enclosure for the construction phase(see pages 178/179). In urban Japan, scaffoldingis erected around buildings that are under construction and then draped with material, both to conceal the disarray and protect passersby from debris and danger. This temporary enclosure covered the colossal area of 100 meters in width and five meters in height, facing GinzaStreet. To illustrate this surface, I designed animage of a huge zipper, horizontally running the length of the building. As the construction progressed, the temporary enclosure panels were rotated to the right, step by step. The leading, closed-zipper image was replaced with a panel showing the zipper at the beginning of unzipping, a Vshaped opening revealing type stating the opening date. As this image gradually proceeded to the right, more opening-date graphics were revealed in its path, until one day all imagery and graphics were removed, exposing the new