Following pages: Posters with embroidered illustrations on felt-like paper, 2001 White unifies the renewed interior, and the walls and flooring are close to white. All of the signs are new. The signage system emphasizes pictograms, and its white, plain material subdues the physicality of the signs. ## Information as an Event The photo shows two posters (see pages 186/187). Except for the letters, all of the patterns here were created with embroidery on a felt-like paper. With the advances made in computerization, industrial sewing machines and a largescale embroidery machine for sewing sheets can be used like a printer. Depending on the quantity, embroidered posters can be produced at a lower price than printed ones. And so as with our textural message, we used embroidered posters for the advertising. Since department stores are situated in specific locations, in many cases it is more effective to make deliberate use of localmedia rather than mass media covering a wide area. It's much better for a department store in Ginza to aim its striking message at those who are actually walking in Ginza. This message is delivered as “a Ginza happening," an event that can't be experienced anywhere else but on this very spot. These posters have a zipper sewn onto either end, and the pieces of the message announcing the store's opening were fastened together in a series, spreading over various areas, lengthwise on walls and columns in the underground markets. Zippers used for the temporary enclosure again took an active part, this time in the posters. The series must have been entertaining for the Ginza-going crowd, because they transcended simple visual information to become“events." And that's how the new Matsuya Ginza performedits renewal in the minds of the customers who visited this particular place.