At that meeting Kenya showed me other projects he'd worked on, in particular his proposal for the Chinese Olympics. The idea was very clever, as you'll see for yourself in this book. Take a Chinese seal or stamp, the type which prints in red with a circle containing many complex Oriental characters, develop a new set of characters or pictograms, each representing an Olympic pursuit or sport, which can be used individually as signage and which can also be combined inside a circle to form a motif for the games. We all know the heavily systemized pictograms developed in the '70s to represent Olympic sports, but who would have imagined a way to update them in such an elegant and friendly fashion and at the same time create an image for the games which, to my eyes at least, appeared so Chinese? I’m still puzzled that this project wasn't accepted right away as the perfect communication for the Chinese Olympics. My latest contact with Kenya has been at MUJI, where for some time now he has been art director in charge of visual communication. Not an easy job when you consider that MUJI is a brand that prides itself on not being one, but Kenya's concentration on communicating the spirit of MUJI has created a unique advertising campaign and the perfect complement to the company's philosophy. Since formulating the advertising concept he has completed a detailed system of labeling perfectly tuned to the products MUJI offers. The MUJI project is a great graphic work, but the great skill of Kenya Hara is not limited to the ordinary visual role of graphic design communication, but seems to reach us on some natural level where we don't need to ask ourselves the meaning of his graphic messages, wejustreceive them.