# Swatch Group: Signage System for Nicolas G.Hayek Center The Watch Hovering in the Air The Nicolas G. Hayek Center building, the Swatch Group's branch office in Japan, designed by Shigeru Ban, was completed on Tokyo's Ginza Street in 2007. Plans call for this building to be afforded quite some weight as a showroom for the Swatch Group's brand. Like a continuation of the street, the ground floor, being without walls, is an open environment. The showrooms are each on separate floors, and visitors reach them directly via dedicated elevators. There is the same number of transparent cylindrical elevators as there are brands. This means the visitor doesn't step onto the elevator and then select the button corresponding to the desired floor, but chooses instead, the right elevator. Visitors are then transported nonstop to their preferred destination The name “Swatch Group" brings to mind casual wristwatches, but in fact it is the world's largest wristwatch conglomerate and the umbrella company for such high-quality Swiss watchmakers as Breguet, Blancpain, Jaquet-Droz and Omega. It's as if the casual Swatch brand was createdas a business structure designed to protect these mechanical watches. At one time Swiss watches played second fiddle to Japanese quartz watches as far as accuracy was concerned, but Swatch has garnered a new position by redefining for the world the appeal of mechanical watches as well as the meaning of wearing a wristwatch. Certainly, compared to wearing a watch that, while supremely accurate, is also dowdy, it may make life more fun to sport one that attracts affection, or does a fair job of reflecting our status, especially if it's one that gives us some enjoyment on the fashion front.