The signage system for this project needed to precisely explain both the mechanism of the elaborate showroom complex and the elegance of the brands. However, my solution goes further than addressing these basic issues. It absorbs them and creates an identity in which the image of the building is positively imprinted on the minds of visitors. ## A Watch in the Hand It might make more sense to call these “floating watches" than signage. A projector embedded in the ceiling projects a simple image the size of a wristwatch. The reflected image is such that when it reaches something far enough from the ground that it will appear in focus, it becomes an analog watch that tells the time. On the floor, which is of a rough stone texture, it remains a dim red light, but when someone comes along and catches the reflection on his body, he sees something, briefly, that looks like a watch. The passerby puts out his hand and the bright, clear image of a watch appears in his palm. It is the experience of physically catching time. In this instant, communication is complete. A new identity as a famous spot on GinzaStreet could easily be born from this plan, as it's very likely to be used as a meeting point. Some may wonder about the use of digital technology in the signage, since Swatch makes mechanical watches, but taking strength from the poetics of expressing time, I'd like these doubters to consider the fact that mechanical watches have survived in the marketplace because they draw their strength from the lyricism of “articulating time." The nucleus of this communication is“how best to present time."