as a neutral, white surface, whether we were writing a letter with a fountain pen, or printing out a photograph from a computer. A white screen that is efficiently sized (in Japan, at one to the square root of two), its materialistic aspect paid scant attention, paper was understood as an abstract medium that carries images and letters. The esteem we place in paper, one of the world's three greatest inventions, is also no doubt because of this very nature as a neutral medium and not for the materiality that so pleases the fingertips when they brush against something natural. So it was when monitors became the norm that people, completely disregarding the appeal and nature of paper, started using the term “paperless." If we look at it from this perspective, it may be that today, paper, stepping down from the principal role of medium and freed from practical duties, can once again be allowed the charming behavior of its intrinsic nature: as material. ## Information Is a Single Soft-Boiled Egg When you think about it, books as a medium for stocking definite information may be inconvenient. They're heavy, they're bulky, they get dirty and they fade with time. Their size is specifically tailored, yet they house an amount of information that could be easily contained in a tiny digital memory. But information is not just something to store in bulk or transmit at high velocity. If we coolly observe the relationship between information and the individual, what becomes important is how deeply we can appreciate information. As far as books go, we may have a more pleasant user experience and be more satisfied with information presented on a material of moderate weight and texture than with information whose presence has become rarified through compression into a tiny space. This may be like the relationship between food and human beings. Our ancestors put their abundant experiences and insights to work to figure out how to best enjoy the taste of an egg. Just think about the enormous number of instruments to prepare eggs, the diversity of recipes to cook them,