and the myriad methods and tableware invented to serve them. A device that cooks a thousand eggs at a time or a warehouse that stores 500,000 may be useful, but our “personal appetite" for an egg is not at all concerned with these. When we want to eat a soft-boiled egg, we use a pan to cook it to the degree of firmness that we prefer. Then, we really should put it in an eggcup, peel it diligently with our fingers and, after shaking salt onto it with an elegant saltcellar, eat it with a silverspoon. Even when it seems too much of a bother, we will absolutely enjoy the egg most when served this particular way. The relationship between human beings and information is something like that between humans and food. To choose paper, with an understanding of the quality and nature of the material, is to enliven, relish, and appreciate that. ## Information Sculpture I'm still convinced that the book is an effective medium, and I don't think that its efficacy has declined as much as society thinks it has. That goes as well for the book you have in your hands now. If putting as many words as come into your head in some place that's convenient and easy to access is your goal, you can house them on the web or on something like a CD. But here I'’ve chosen the medium called a book. That's because I want people to enjoy this information as letters printed on paper, and because I want to hand it to people as an object with a resistant weight. And it's because, after you've taken it from your bag on the train, I want you to be able to turn the pages at your own pace, and because I think it would be nice if it faded with the passage of time and became an antique. Of course, as a designer, I am exercising my ingenuity to the end that this book may create a pleasant atmosphere in the palms of my readers; I am conscious of the appeal of the book from the perspective not of transmitting information from left to right, but of cherishing information. It is not that I favor paper because I'm fettered to nostalgia. It is not that I dislike electronic media. I’m already so deeply dependent on information technology that if I lost my email service I'd get pretty upset. In fact, this is why when I do use paper media, I want to deal with this not uncon-