sciously, but with clear intentions. Thanks to the rise of electronic media, paper can finally behave as it can and should—as an intrinsically charming material. If electronic media is reckoned a practical tool for information conveyance, books are information sculpture; from now on, books will probably be judged according to how well they awaken this materiality, because the decision to create a book at all will be based on a definite choice of paper as the medium. How fortunate an issue this will be for paper. ## Not Future but Present I don't think it's cool to spend the present anticipating the future. The entire 20th century was filled with these sorts of discussions and projections. Reading old magazines, we come across pages of bold predictions about the future, but they don't excite us today. At the time, it might have seemed fashionable to be predicting the future, but whether their predictions hit the mark or missed, and even if by some chance something they said was right on the money, the whole attempt strikes us as superficial and arouses neither wonder nor respect. What we're likely to recognize instead is the great value of the achievements or attitudes that felt what needed to be felt in each era, and put into the appropriate form that which could only be expressed in those circumstances. The society of the future will probably be like something out of a story from science fiction. But I want to be proud of the fruits of my existence, as those from a life lived fully in my own era, in which I have mobilized all of my senses, regardless of which stage of the future they may be reviewed. Just as Leonardo da Vinci left to posterity paintings that reflected his era, I resolve to leave behind information sculpture indigenous to my times, fully conscious of its materiality (made rather conspicuous with the arrival of the computer). To this individual that I am, books are a highly esteemed medium. The evolution of electronic media is still on the rise. For the time being, electronic media and books will continue to influence one another, in parallel paths that grow deeper together.