# WHITE White as aDesign Concept Design is the controlling of difference. But while working through countless projects, I came to realize that I was weaving meaning not out of the big differences, but out of the first, smallest ones only. That results in a much more delicate tapestry. Particularly with the abundance of color in the streets, with the ability to freely manipulate hundreds and thousands of colors on paper or on the computer, I've grown less enchanted with the easygoing use of color. When I'm laying out the necessary materials, the colors have fallen into order before Ieven realize it. Of course, colors are wonderful. Monochrome photos are beautiful, but how desolate would we feel if color disappeared from the earth? I also wouldn't say that artificial colors are ugly. In fact, I actually feel envious of some people's talent for liberally using a variety of primary or vivid colors. And I do see the possibilities in the world of color computing, where it is possible to purely manipulate colors within a virtual reality that is void of the feeling of real life. And, of course, in my usual design work, I don't shun color either. I am neither a designer who likes white nor one who doesn't use color. As a professional graphic designer, I naturally use color. However, when I do so, it's with a consciousness of its function, or because it represents an emotion I'm after: the red of emergency call buttons, brand colors that have to be remembered, color-coded indexes.... But if there's no particular reason for them, you'll find no extra colors on my design table. Whether it's a high-tech