or a natural material, I always look at the color of the material itself. Doing this, I gradually became conscious of white. White is a color from which color has escaped, but its diversity is boundless. When I encounter a really good white, I get this feeling that the collection of senses stored in my brain has increased by one. White is not just a color. White must be called a design concept. ## DiscoveringWhite White is not white. The receptivity that senses white is what gives birth to whiteness. So we cannot look for white. We need to search instead for a way of feeling that will sense white. Depending on this search, for the receptivity that senses white, we will be able to aim our consciousness towards a white that is a little whiter than the average white. With that ability, we willbecome conscious of white. And then we will become aware of white enmeshed in an incredible diversity in the world's many cultures. We will become able to understand words like “tranquility," or “emptiness," and discern the meanings dormant within them. As we turn our attention toward white, the worldgathers more light, and shadows deepen in degree. The black of type is not born of the blackness of the letters, but the black coupled with the white of the paper. The red cross in the Red Cross logo is red not only because of the red of the cross. The red glimmers by dint of the quality of the white on which it is placed. A margin, be it blue or beige, inherently comprises white. A margin is neither a mere absence nor a remainder. It is white that has come into existence as the result of the filling in of a space. Sometimes, because of the margin's necessity for existence, its nonexistence imports a stronger presence than an actual margin. Furthermore, white is easily soiled and is hard to keep clean. White impresses us as more beautiful still thanks to our feelings of empathy towards anything transient. When I act in concert with a consciousness that is subtly receptive to white, and in thatstate of mind look at architecture, spaces, books or gar-