dens, I feel as if I am able to make sense of all kinds of things. I believe white is a special message meant just for the roots and trunk of human sensibility. ## The Implicit Color Is white a color? It could be said to be like a color, but not a color. So what is color? As a result of modern physics, today we have clear systems by which the mechanism of color is organized: the Munsell and Ostwald color systems, established by Albert H. Munsell and Friedrich Wilhelm Ostwald. Their systems represented in three dimensions based on value, chroma, and hue (the degrees of lightness and hue, as well as a scale of hue in circular form) lead us to an easy understanding of color's structure as a physical phenomenon. But we don't sense color in terms of these systems. The glossy freshness of a deep yellow yolk spilling out of a broken eggshell, or the russet color of tea in a cup are not only colors, but also textures, with materiality, in which taste and smell are also deeply enmeshed. People sense color as an amalgamation. So color is not just visual, but something relating to all of our perceptions. The standard color systems are only orderly arrangements created by taking the physical and visual characteristics out of color, which is intricate and complex. Today, color sample books are used to indicate and specify colors for printing, textiles and industrial products. Most of the books reflect the Munsell or Ostwald color systems, which are convenient for practical location and specification of colors. As the systems offer both order and objectivity, they help us communicate necessary colors with absolute certainty. On the other hand, one of the color sample books I use a lot is called "Traditional Japanese Colors." This book is compiled from the names of the traditional colors of Japan. Because a consistent system was not the goal of this compilation, it isn't always suitable for strict specification of color, but is highly reputed for its power to lightly evoke images of individual colors. Leafing through the pages of this book, I easily and naturally recognize the characters of the colors, indicated by terms invented to describe them. At the same