time, I feel enlightened, as if every infinitesimal bit of my sensory perceptions were awakened, and then I get a sense of security, like when I hear my native dialect spoken. On top of that, I feel a little twinge of melancholy. Why? What are the roots of these emotions? The book does express the subtle emotional aspect of color, but it's not just that. Perhaps the nucleus of my deep emotions is partly my awareness that color is something that is detected by each person, and partly the impression ofsharing this point of view with others. Color is not something that exists independently in nature, but is a property exquisitely outlined in words that portray the vicissitude of subtle changes of light. I greatly admire this apt diagnosis. Traditional colors are in fact a way of treating color, a way of savoring color that has been retained, as the words that name them, within a particular culture. The traditional colors of Japan originated in the court culture of the Heian period (794-1185). It was during this period that there developed a culture in which people carefully observed the transitions of nature, made these a pretext in the colors of clothing, goods and furniture, as well as in common expressions and greetings. Today we refer to the four seasons, but in those days a person was considered cultured if he could appreciate with heightened perception the delicate transition of natural phenomena in a year divided into 24 solar terms or 72 pentads (five-day cycles). Shorthand for this transition was the term setsugetsuka (snow, moon, flowers). Words depicting nature's changing hues in grass and trees sound dainty and weak, but that very frailty is what allows the perfect infiltration into the innermost recesses of human sensibility. A thin needle threaded with the supremely delicate thread of a color's name flawlessly stitches one subtle portion of our perceptions to another. What overwhelms me, no doubt, is the pleasant sensation or empathy that is sensed only when the intended target within is shot straight through. It is a sensation that involves some melancholy, as I simultaneously recognize the reality that this sort of delicate sensitivity has deteriorated under the circumstances of modern life.