Just as an entire limestone cave is formed only upon an inconceivable repetition of dripping droplets, the names of colors have come into being through mental imagery, generated little by little through our accumulated interactions with nature's twinkle and the world's many transformations. While some of them have ceased to exist, and others have undergone a metamorphosis, these images have developed, unnoticed, into the great system of consciousness called color. I suppose that the number of color systems called “traditional colors" equals the number of the world's languages and cultures. Japan's is only one of them. The white I will write about here is one of these traditional Japanese colors, but a strikingly distinctive one. In ancient Japan, the term kizen was used to describe a situation of implicit action, the moment before something happens, and thus becomes explicit in the real world, in response to a particular impulse. White, the very possibility of the introduction of color, is then the color of kizen. ## Escaping Color If you mix together all the colors of light, they become white. If you discard all the colors in paint or ink, they also become white. White is a synthesis of all colors and, at the same time, the lack of color, achromatic. As a color that escapes color, it is a special one. Put another way, color is no more than a single aspect of white. Insofar as it avoids color, and thus more strongly awakens physicality, it is a materiality; like empty space or a margin, it is pregnant with time and space. It even entails abstract concepts like absence and absolute zero. It goes without saying that the white to which we refer does not have the attributes of ordinary trendy colors, colors that are consumed, nor does it serve as an object of color theory. Neither can its features be elucidated according to the genealogy of traditional colors. White has always been a concept and a resource underpinning aesthetics, which is an invariable object of human consciousness.