## Original Forms of Information and Life The world is a chaos of jumbled colors. The invigorating freshness of trees, the glitter of the surface of a lake, the color that conveys the epitomized presence of a piece of fruit, the color of a crackling fire: I love each and every one of these. However, just as we say that everything returns to the earth, an infinite number of activities and inspiring experiences mingle in the accumulation of time, eventually swirling into brown, seen from a macroscopic perspective of time. From this viewpoint, the earth appears in camouflage. Mix it even more and the colors connoting life change into a chaos of gray. But chaos is not death. The energy of the dazzling colors will quicken, and from within the chaos, a completely new color will be born again. Let's superimpose white onto this image of regeneration and transmigration. In an extremely strikingimage white occupies a special position, standing out as it does, from the chaos. Running counter to the negative principle of mixture, white becomes explicit by breaking through the gravity of degeneration that tends towards a return to gray. White comes into existence as the ultimate of idiosyncrasy. It is neither a mixture, nor even a color. There is a concept called “entropy." Referring to the degrees of chaos, it is described in the second law of thermodynamics. This law states that all energy is eventually equalized. The coffeein the cup in my hand is now steaming hot, but over time, it will cool, eventually reaching the temperature of its surroundings. Cold coffee in a similar situation will neither boil nor freeze. Thanks to the activity of the earth, like that of a living organism the temperatures in Tokyo, Siberia and the Congo basin differ, but from a macroscopic temporal perspective, these differences tend to equalize over time. The temperature of the earth as well, interrelated with that of the surrounding universe, will eventually and infinitely approach a mean value. An increase in entropy means a decrease in idiosyncrasy, tending to a maximum of equalization. Just as all colors merge into gray, there is a complex world of great amounts of energy as the result of the increase in entropy.