Pictured are the leg bone of a large mammal and the skull of a small monkey. The Chinese character for "white" is said to have developed from the hieroglyph for "skull."In ancient societies, the objects most naturally engraved as "white" in the consciousness of our ancestors were the bones of animals and fellowhumans. All thermal energy, whether it is the temperature of a coffee cup or of Tokyo or of the earth, is preserved as one huge average. Yet this chaos is neither death nor nothingness. Perhaps the energy that has become no particular entity but at the same time is potential itself—the potential to become anything, the thing that juts out of this immense chaos as it decreases entropy—is both life and information. These are the taking of flight by shaking off the gravitational field of entropy. White has risen from chaos and is the original form of life and information. White is the extremity of negative entropy, driven to cleanly escape from every sort of chaos. Life glitters as color, but white is the inclination to reach the pole opposite from chaos, and in purity, escape even from color. Life is born into the world wrapped in white, but from the moment real, exteriorized life sets foot on the soil, it takes on color, just as life in the form of a yellow chick begins with the hatching of an egg. White is something that cannot be realized in an actual world. We may feel as if we have seen or touched white, but this is an illusion. White in the real world is categorically soiled; it is merely the trace of the aspiration towards white. White is delicate and easily damaged. Even at the moment of its birth, it is not a perfect white.It is already soiled to a degree that we cannot even sense it when we touch it. And yet this gives white all the more prominence in our consciousness. According to Doctor Shizuka Shirakawa, one of the leading scholars in the field of ancient writing symbols, the Chinese character for white is the ancient symbol for skull. In the early daysofwriting, the image of white that captured the imaginations of the people was a skull abandoned in a field, weather-beaten and exposed to the sun. If they walked through the desert, they would have found the bones of beasts, and if along the seashore, the bones of sea animals, or shells, would have dotted the sand, so these skulls, bones andshells gave the impression of white as a trace of life. White exists on the periphery of life. First, milk is white. Giving suck, for animals, is a vital activity, one that passes the life of a parent to its offspring. The whiteness of breast milk is a shared trait among human beings