of the object's very essence, through the search for the optimal shape and optimal material, screening out the egoism of the creator and the designer. The product then would not be due to omission but to ultimate design. In the beginning “no design" was the MUJI slogan. Gradually, it has become obvious that if we are to firmly realize the MUJI concept, a very high level of design isindispensable. ## Acceptance, not Appetite By the way, just what is the level to which MUJI products aspire, to what extent are our customers satisfied with the products? As a brand, MUJI has neither striking idiosyncrasies nor specific aesthetics. We don't want to be the thing that kindles or incites intense appetite, causing outbursts like,“This is what I really want," or “I simply must have this." If most brands are after that, MUJI should be after its opposite. We want to give customers the kind of satisfaction that comes out as “this will do,"not"thisis what I want."It's not appetite, but acceptance. Even within acceptance, however, there is an appropriate level. Our goal is to elevate it as high as is possible. The remark “I must have this" is characterized by a candid attitude that makes clear one's will. When you are asked what you would like for lunch, it feels better to reply, "Spaghetti is what I really want," not, "Spaghetti will do." Besides feeling better, the latter extends a certain courtesy to the dish. The same applies to tastes in fashion or music, lifestyle, and so on. Like the value of individuality, the attitude of clearly expressing likes and dislikes has been unnecessarily esteemed. Desire and freedom may carry similar values. Now that I think about it, in the modern era, we have constructed a society in which every single person has been able to express his or her desire. Once, only kings and aristocrats could voice their appetites, but now everyone enjoys articulating his likes and dislikes; I like Paris; I love Tokyo; I want to visit Buenos Aires. I want to be a baker, a businessperson, a musician. Which is to say that the modern era is a society that can decide everything, based completely on individual subjectivity: domicile, occupation, nutrition. At the risk of being misunderstood, I believe it can be said that the management of desire is democracy, and the competition of desire, the free market economy. For some time now, the world has evolved following this sense of value.