Still, I would like to recognize the fact that desire sometimes involves obsession, causes egoism, or strikes a sour note. I wonder if humankind, having rushed after desire, has finally reached an impasse. Both the consumer society and individual cultures, chasing after desire and driven by appetite, are hitting a wall. In this sense, today we should value the qualities at work in acceptance: moderation, concession, and detached reason. Might acceptance be a form with one more level of freedom? Acceptance might involve resignation and slight dissatisfaction, but raising the level of acceptance thoroughly eliminates both. To generate "this will do," by creating this very dimension of acceptance, one that is clearly self-confident and also truly competitive in a free economic society: this is MUJI's vision. The sense of value that MUJI holds now can be an extremely useful concept for the entire world in the days ahead. We could call it “global rational value,"a philosophy that advocates the use of resources and objects according to an exceedingly rational perspective. As many have noted concerning the environmental problems that overshadow the future of the earth and mankind, we have already passed the point of any revolution in consciousness or enlightenment; it's time to take the most effective practical measures to counter the situation in our daily lives. One of our world's grave problems today, the clash of civilizations, reveals two truths. First, the quest for profit, once guaranteed by the free market economy, is at the beginning of the end. Second, the stubborn insistence on cultural individuality probably acts as an obstacle to global harmony and mutual benefit. What will become indispensable to our future generations is not attaching the highest importance to the monopolization of profit or the values of individual cultures. No, it will be the rationalmind, which controls the egotistical one by working from a truly global perspective. If I say, “a critical spirit and conscientious actions," it may sound too ethical, but in order to balance the world, we definitely need a flexible rationality, and unless such a sense of value serves as the world's driving force, it will cease to revolve in harmony. I believe that in the hearts of all people, the concern and the prudence to counteract this situation have already begun to act. From the company's inception, this ultimate efficiency, or rationality, has been incorporated within the MUJI concept. Right now, the products that envelop our living environments seem to fall into two categories, idiosyncratic + expensive and ordinary + cheap.