Objects in the first group compete through distinctions, using innovative materials, startling shapes, and scarcity, raising the value of the brand, and expanding a fan base that honors high prices. The second group, made up of products that are as inexpensive as possible, come into existence through mass manufacture, with the most simplified production processes possible, in countries with the least expensive labor costs. MUJI belongs to neither of these groups. Searching for the most compatible materials, production methods and forms, MUJI gives birth to a new sense of value or aesthetics from within "simplicity." Furthermore, although we omit any production process that we find unnecessary, after detailed investigation, we also introduce rich and varied materials and processing technologies. MUJI works to bring into existence not the lowest-priced products but instead the naturally low cost of affluence and the inexpensive range ofgood judgment. The MUJI concept is to point out the “basics" and “universality" of everyday life. This sense of value will be important to the world in the time to come. I would like to call this “global rational value." ## World MUJI Through MUJI, I want to consider life culture and economic culture on a global scale. And with a global perspective, I want to help create products that most people will accept, saying “this will do." Fortunately, we have learned that there are many immensely talented individuals around the world who empathize with MUJI's way of thinking. For instance, most savvy designers with flexible sensibilities know MUJI. They appreciate MUJI and are happy to work with MUJI. MUJI has always operated on the basis of anonymity, but in order to personify the MUJI concept a little more intentionally, it may be necessary to have talent from around the world participate in product definition. It's time that we stopped thinking of MUJI within the narrow confines of Japan. We have reached the point of actively incorporating talent and ideas from around the world. Imagine what kind of products and shops would have come into existence if the MUJI concept had originatedin Germany or Italy? Or in today's China, where consciousness about daily modern life continues to mature?