How and what kind of product groups would come about? This kind of imagination is important today. MUJI's big vision may be the concept of collecting the universality found in locales around the globe and the acceptance (the “this will do") born from the world's myriad cultures, and then creating from them, and with the most rational processes and most penetrating design, products that we can offer to the entire world. Embracing this image, I hope to move MUJI forward. I would like to help realize this vision. ## Emptiness The MUJI vision: On the one hand, it considers product development. On the other, it must at the same time continue to communicate this vision to society. This is my specialty. So, first I'd like to present MUJI's thinking on advertising communication. In a word, the concept I propose for MUJI's advertising is emptiness. That is, advertising does not present a lucid message, but in effect, offers an empty vessel to the audience. Communication is not dispatching information from one entity or person to another, but facilitating the mutual exchange of information. Advertising communication is generally thought to be the process of clarifying the point that you want your audience to comprehend, turning it into an easily understood message, choosing the appropriate media, and circulating the message. But not all advertising has to follow this method. In some cases, communication happens when the recipient, offered not a message but an empty vessel, supplies the meaning himself. Let's take the example of Japan's national flag. The red circle in the center carries no meaning. It's just a geometric figure. People supply the meaning. Because the flag was once used as a symbol of militaristic Japan, there are many who still abhor it. On the other hand, there are also those who insist that the flag has now become the symbol of a peaceful nation. As I myself grew up in the peaceful days following World War II, the flag looks rather pacific to me. But when I made this remark at a university in China, the audience stirred. Although most of them were young students, they seemed not to share my view of the meaning of the Japanese flag. And then there are those who say the red circle symbolizes the sun, which is a shintai, orShinto object of worship. Others say it represents red blood, or spirit. Others laugh, saying