MUJI has many admirers, but their reasons vary. Some think of MUJI products as ecologically sound. Others like MUJI's urban aesthetic, and some respond to MUJI products because they're inexpensive. Yet others take pleasure in MUJI's simple design. Then there are those who neither like nor dislike the products but use them habitually because they do the job. Our advertising message should not represent any single one of these reasons; our ideal is to create a capacious vessel that will accommodate them all And so MUJI's ads have no copy. In a sense, the MUJI logo is the best copy and brand mark we could possibly have. By virtue of the passage of time and the accumulation of significance, the fourChinese characters of the MUJI logo reflect meaning to just the right extent. In keeping with this concept, our product advertising has a definite, simple style in which the featured product is placed in the center of an image in which the MUJI logo also appears somewhere. ## Placing the Logo on the Horizon Our ad campaigns basically follow the same concept. The 2003 campaign uses photographs of the horizon as an empty vessel of epic proportions. The image of the horizon represents nothing in particular; on the contrary, it can accommodate everything. This is because it gives us an unobstructed view of everything in heaven and earth at once. It is the ultimate image, capturing man and the earth. Can't this be seen asillustrating the "global rational value" I described earlier, the sense of value that all inhabitants of the earth should share? No, more than an illustration, it's a symbolic image that allows for and nurtures that ideal. That's how I thought of it. It was the photographer Tamotsu Fujii who suggested the horizon when we were discussing what kind of image could accommodate peoples