Location—In Search of the Horizon In the quest for a perfect horizon, we visited the Bolivian town of Uyuni. The town stands at 3,700 meters, at the foot of the Andes. The mountain ranges, their peaks at 5,000 and 6,000 meters, stretch out around the area. Leaving Tokyo, we flew first to Buenos Aires in Argentina, Bolivia's neighbor, and then to Jujuy, near the Bolivian border. If we'd gone any further by plane, we would have succumbed to altitude sickness. So we drove to the Andes in a parade of four-wheel drive vehicles. We approached Uyuni over a couple of days, lodging in small towns along the way and gradually adapting to the altitude. Even so, we all experienced the slight headaches symptomatic of altitude sickness. Our destination was certainly physically far away, but the amount of effort needed to reach it further intensified the sense of complete isolation. Why would we shoot the perfect horizon in Uyuni? Because of its proximity to the largest salt lake in the world. The term salt lake is a little misleading; properly speaking, it's a dried-up salt field, a vast, blank plane, perfectly flat and sparkling white. The 360-degree view reveals only the white earth and the sky; the horizon fills the eye. The salty earth was unyielding. Our vehicles hardly made a rut. A streaky pattern, like the coat of a muskmelon, overlaid the whole area. This gigantic white melon-like epidermis, partitioned by polygons the size of handkerchiefs, went on forever. Not the entire lake is completely dry, though. Because a river flows through it, in certain seasons you need boots to walk on it. And even though it is indeed water, it's thick, sticky salt water that never streams and looks as if it's stuck fast to the earth. It might be due to its high specific gravity that the water doesn't ruffle like the surface of a lake or the sea and reflects the sky as in a flawless mirror. In this place, the sky is divided in two; the horizon is the boundary line. A vast expanse of the sky extends as far as the eye can see. No, it's really closer to clouds than sky. We stood there, on a sea of floating