clouds that formed a symmetrical line, bordered by the horizon. There were two suns. There were two moons. Because the moon happened to be full when we shot, at dusk the doubled moon and sun lined up, facing one another from east and west. It was more than unusual scenery; I slipped into the illusion that we had traveled to another planet entirely. Why on earth did I need such immense horizons? Because I wanted to use them for a certain project, which would help people speculate on the universality of nature's providence, the prerequisite for the wellbeing of the earth and mankind. I planned to shoot pictures in which the solitary figure of a person stood like a dot on the horizon. It's simple, but it's also the ultimate composition of earth and human being. There was nothing, yet everything. That was the kind of photo I thought we could take. A young woman from The photographer Tamotsu Fujii wanted to shoot the scene from the height of about four meters. I was skeptical about the difference that four meters' elevation would make on the scale of the landscape, but the staff worked through the night welding iron pipes they'd gotten somewhere and erected a scaffold. We carried it to the lake, climbed up, and immédiately understood; an enlarged view of the earth's surface came into sight. The elevà- tion had amplified the depth in perspective between where-we stood and the horizon, clarifying the grand scale of the landscape. The shoot lasted five days. The mirroring of the sky in the water was impressive, but it was so impossibly beautiful, dreamlike, that it lacked the earth's reality. And so we chose instead to take pictures of the cloudless blue sky and the white earth. We left Uyuni satisfied. To travel from the center of the lake to its edge took an hour by car. From there, it was another half hour to the town. There was a restaurant in town called Cactus, where every night we ate llama steak, not knowing what to do with the afterimage of the colors of that horizon, engraved on our mind's eye.