## Art and Design All the objects that shape our living environment, house floor, bathtub, toothbrush, are comprised of basic elements like color, form and texture. The foundation of modernism is the concept that their shaping should be entrusted to the rational, lucid consciousness, whose aim is to organize those elements. And thus design thinking is, in a broad sense, construed to be the pursuit of universal balance and harmony of the human mind through rational, integrative manufacture; design refers to the will to interpret the meaning of human life and existence through the process of making things. Art, on the other hand, is the act of discovering a fresh human spirit. Both design and art employ molding or representation, which is the manipulation, one way or another, of objects perceptible by our sensory organs. This is why I am often asked about the difference between art anddesign. As I'm not particular about the significance of combining art and design, nor segregating art from design, I won't define them here. However, in order to help my readers understand the concept of design as well as rationally grasp the periphery of the RE-DESIGN project, I will say a little about their differences. Art is an expression of an individual's will to society at large, one whose origin is very much ofa personal nature. So only the artist knows the source of his own work. This loftiness is what makes art so cool. Of course, there are plenty of ways to interpret the expressions that artists give birth to. Non-artists commune with art by coming up with interesting interpretations of art, appreciating it, commenting on it, re-editing art as in an exhibition, or using art as an intellectual resource. Design, on the other hand, is basically not self-expression. Instead, it originates in society. The essence of design lies in the process of discovering a problem shared by many people and trying to solve it. Because the root of the problem is within the society, everyone can understand plans for solutions and processes for solving the problem, in addition to being able to see the problem from the designer's perspective. Design is appealing because the process creates inspiration that is engendered by this empathy among human beings in our common values and spirituality. The term “re-design" includes this theme of society's commonly shared and recognized objects or issues. Establishing daily products as the