## The Future of Design I sometimes say to myself, "Look at the big picture and work on the task at hand." We want to look at things from the vantage point that allows us to see not the near future, a half-step ahead of where we are today, but the whole of time, reaching from the past to the present and then on a bit, to the midfuture. The future lies ahead and at the same time we have an immense accumulation of culture reservedin the past, which is another unknown resource. Even if I can manage that vantage point, what I actually need to do right now might be making tomorrow's presentation successful, or organizing a planning paper for the presentation, or arranging my desk so I feel better doing it, or, the most important of all, washing out the coffee cup on my desk. In fact, what we do is just an aggregate of practical, trivial things. But to get to that place where we are satisfied, while we're occupied taking care of all the little things, we need to maintain in our consciousness some sort of guidance device to help us navigate there. So here I'd like to move on to the big picture: where should design go next? Naturally, MUJI contends with the world economy. Design, too, is definitely linked to the world economy. Design is a driving force of the economy as well as a vital resource of corporate management. The cool, accurate application of design dramatically improves the competitive power of products and the effectiveness of a corporation's communication. Once we understand that design has this kind of power, we compete for the most sophisticated methods and thus the most effective design. But what are we really after? I'd like to ask what the end result of our work is, without focusing on how the products do in the marketplace or the power of the messages. “A person is looking at the horizon” is rhetoric. A refreshing im-