project's theme is not some novel idea but is the most natural, appropriate method for reexamining the concept of design, because design deals with our common, shared values. ## RE-DESIGN Exhibition In April 2000 I produced an exhibition project with a title that was a tad long: “RE-DESIGN: Daily Products of the 21st Century." For the project I wanted 32 leading creators in Japan to design anew some very ordinary commodities, including toilet paper and matches. The participants are active in a variety of fields, including architecture, graphic design, product design, advertising, lighting, fashion, photography and literature, and all have a candid perspective on, and insight into, their profession. Each participant took charge of one of the “re-design” subjects. We produced a prototype of each proposal. The results were exhibited next to an example of the conventionally designed object to allow the audience to enjoy the contrast. I was the one who basically decided onthe pairings of objectand creator. This kind of project is often likely to be misunderstood as a sort of gag. Of course, I had no intention of excluding amusement, but I didn't aim for it; the project is essentially serious. If it were a game of tennis, it would be as if I were intentionally serving balls to a succession of top players, each in a spot deemed tricky to return. And they were returned: shots far more exquisite and sharp than anything I had served. The serve was a design question, but the volleys, compensating for the nascent nature of my question, came one after the other, so creative that they included yet other, new questions. To avoid misunderstanding, I would like to add that the RE-DE-SIGN Exhibition never aimed to actually improve daily commodities by enlisting the help of top-caliber designers. Daily products exist within a stable of fully mature design that's been cultivated through history, difficult for even famous creators to surmount in a short period of time. However, each of these creators' design proposals had a clear idea and exhibited a striking difference in the thought behind them and that behind the conventional products. With this project I hoped to decipher the essence of design found within this gap. I learned a lot from the series of procedures. Now I would like to track and introduce some of the subjects.