eliminate the gap. That's because the problem doesn't come from the chef, but the customers. If you compare the number of people in Tokyo and Hong Kong who know and demand good Chinese food, there's no contest. But more and more Tokyoites have developed discerning palates for Chinese food. This isn't due to some shortsighted marketing, some survey of Japanese taste, to which Chinese chefs have catered. What's happened is that the excellence of a cuisine that has long been cultivated on the Chinese mainland has workedits enlightening power and developed the appetite for Chinese food among the Japanese. The same can be said of French or Italian food, and sushi as well as kaiseki tea ceremony dishes. Any cuisine, matured in its parental cultural sphere, can educate the appetite of consumers from other markets. Now we find that all national cuisines, if served in a world metropolis, reach a very high level. With the homeland culture as its prop root, every food reciprocally educates those in other markets, enlivening dietary scenes across the world. It's a rich competition. ## Fertilizing the Soil One thing that can be said for the economy in the days ahead is that competition on a cultural level will join the competition in production technology and production cost on a cultural level. No, I think I should call it a competitive performance instead. The competitive performance of cultures supported by locality makes the world richer. It is a competition to create products or ideas that are based in one's own culture or market but can inspire other markets. In this way, the education of desire will compete for global influence. Predicting such a thing, I'm putting my mind to the possibilities of design that can inspire consumers through products. Once someone gets hold of a product