try to figure everything out based on their own sense of value, but try instead to understand other countries' cultures by reflecting on them within their own contexts. I think the reason for their diligence is due in great part to the bitter circumstances of the modernization of Japan as a country. Within the past 60 some years, Japan has experienced defeat in war and, of all things, the suffering of nuclear bombardment twice. In due course, it also learned the meaning both of rapid economic growth and the money that makes the world go round; and from rapid industrial progress, Japan has caused environmental pollution. Then, by overcoming that, became convinced of the importance ofnature and our environment. What's more, the collapse of the “bubble economy" enlightened us about the frailty of an economy that rises and falls at the mercy of speculation. If we shift our attention to the nottoo-distant past, about a hundred years before I was born, we come to the Edo period (1603-1867). This was a period in which polish was applied to the originality ofa culture accumulated over a period of more than 1000years, and then isolated for another 300. Today, we have absolutely no means available that would allow us to realistically imagine the extent of the brutality of the cultural revolution called the Meiji Restoration (1867), which managed to transform completely the purely Japanese “Edo Culture" into a Westernized one. However, people in those days probably expended a stupendous amount of energy on information gathering and study about theWest. And no doubt they were also pained by the discrepancies between their traditional culture and Western culture. To look back on Japan's modern history as a designer is to imagine the disruption of both a culture and a sensitivity. If I'd been a designer working for the Edo Shogunate, confronted by the Meiji Restoration, I might have committed seppuku (ritual suicide). Of course, given our post-defeat fusion with American culture, today more than ever, with the circulation of people and things, the accelerating economy, and our close contact with the diversity of the world, there are bound to be various cultural conflicts. Viewed from a cultural perspective, Japan's modern history is nothing but scars and bruises.