And yet, we've been able to attain a certain awareness precisely because we've suffered such culture-splitting predicaments and pain. The Japanese people see themselves as eternally unrefined country bumpkins, always situated at the edge of the world. But I think we needn't devalue this nature of ours. Isn't it O. K. to think of oneself as seated in a modest position, without considering oneself the center of the universe? In fact, the global perspective only becomes possible when one orients oneself on the edge, not, like the United States, at the center of the universe. With an attitude that observes the world based on a full knowledge of all the facts, not just some of them, we will think globally based on a lucid awareness of both our bad and good points. In the coming world, that kind of attitude willsurely be necessary. When you think about it, Japan is in a special place even in terms of geographical position: on the eastern tip of Asia. The journalist Hajime Takano introduces an interesting point of view concerning Japan's position in his book “How to Read the World Atlas" (Nippon Jitsugyo Publishing Co., Ltd., 1982). Ifyou take Eurasia and tilt it 90 degrees until it is on top, like the cabinet of a “pachinko" game (Japanese upright pinball), the Japanese archipelago is on the bottom, right where the ball catch would be. In pachinko, when you shoot a small steel pinball (about ten millimeters in diameter) toward the top of the machine, it descends in a complicated path down the back wall, negotiating a far greater number of obstacles than are in a Western pinballmachine. Ifthe ball findsits way to oneof the holes in the wall before it falls into the catch at the bottom, you win. Let's suppose that the top of our Eurasian pachinko game is Rome in the days of the Romans. Japan is situated precisely in the ball catch, where all the balls that missed the holes accumulate. Looking at the map this way, the paths of the transmission of culture and influence are liberated from uniform thought. The Silk Road, starting in Rome and extending through Persia to Dun Huang, traversing China and the Korean Peninsula as well, is thought of as the course culture took. And it may have been the primary course. But when the map is viewed from our new angle, imagination takes flight; there must have been an innumerable