number of paths for the falling balls to take; there must have been maritime and drifting routes from Oceania or Polynesia, and of course the oceanic silk road flowed from the coasts of India via Southeast Asia. Even balls traveling through Sakhalin Island via the cultural area of Tunguska and Siberia in the Russian North must have fallen into the catch. Some must have fallen straight in through the Mongolian Prairie. Nothing exists below Japan; it is situated on the abyss that is the Pacific Ocean, where it catches all the arriving cultures and institutions. Japan has long existed here. Call it a frontier; surely it is, but aren't there very few places that maintain such a self-possessed posture towards the world? This unique geographical point of view opened my eyes. Even in Asia, the intentional simplicity of the Japanese culture and the tension generated by an object placed all alone in an empty space are unique. Any example of ornamentation or decoration from another Asian region will reveal dense, elaborate details. On the opposite end of the scale is the Japanese concept of contentment with simplicity and emptiness. Whence comes our sensibility for such things as suki (aesthetic appeal), sabi (elegant simplicity) and ma (negative space)? Where is their origin? For a long time, I couldn't find an answer that satisfied me. But I feel the issue is dispelled by a look at this tilted map. Japan, catching such a great variety of diverse cultures via multiple routes, was probably a very tangled cultural locus. Accepting all and continually shouldering the chaos, quite the reverse of what we might expect, created an extreme hybrid that amalgamated them all in one breath. That is to say, perhaps our ancestors came up with the idea of stopping them allin their tracks, negating them with the utmost simplicity: zero. They must have arrived at the sensibility of balancing everything with nothingness. Looking at the map of the Eurasian continent, on which Japan occupies the lowermost spot, this explanation satisfies me. The aesthetic of Japan is something that was nurtured as a kind of wisdom to balance the world from our place on the frontier. The Japan of today exists thanks to the combination of three components, namely, a position on the edge ofAsia, the special cultural sensitivity nurtured there, and a