stance capable of calmly facing the world, encouraged by our grave experiences with the process of modernization. Fortunate to have been born in such a place, I think I'll live here and bend my ear to the rest of the world. Putting down here the roots of my sensibilities, I would like to see their infinitesimal threads growdensely into this soil. ## Tradition and Universality Recently, two of my friends recommended I reread the book "In Praise of Shadows," by Junichiro Tanizaki. One of them was the writer Munenori Harada, and the other the product designerNaoto Fukasawa. Fukasawa commented on the book for a design magazine and Harada was kind enough to present me with a pocket edition. Junichiro Tanizaki was active more than a half century ago as a novelist well versed inJapanese aesthetics. What impressed both of my friends enough to tell me about this book were the lines depicting yokan (a reddish-brown sweet bean paste formed into rectangular blocks). In this section, Tanizaki describes yokan as a sweet meant to be eaten in the dark. He claims that yokan is black because it is eaten in a traditional Japanese house, whose rooms are always rather dim inside. It tastes as sweet as anything when you have in your mouth a small lump of this stuff, whose very shape dims, dissolved into the interior darkness. Tanizaki says this sensation is the essence of yokan. It seems that both of my friends were struck with this point of his observation. Since I had read Tanizaki's book as a student, at first I only vaguely recalled that he had written about yokan. But in rereading, I realized something. While this is a superb insight into the Japanese sensibility, to me, a designer living and working in the present, it seems to be a concept book of Japanese design, which reached the light of day only through the struggles of Westernization. Here's my idea: if Japan had not modernized towards Westernization, but had been able to impregnate its own traditional culture with modern science and developed naturally, surely it would have produced a unique design culture that could have competed with the west. This design