culture would have been completely different from that developed by the Japan that endured the Meiji Restoration. “In Praise of Shadows"attempts to disclose to the world of the possibility of Japanese-oriented design that would have evolved, not under the far-too-intense lighting of Western modernity, but within our own dark and shadows. The book was written 70 years ago but good ideas don't age. I believe Tanizaki's hypothesis is valid even today. If we read this as a design book, we should be able to bring into bloom, in a place still far beyond traditional Japanese culture, a modernity that is neither known nor has ever been experienced before. I am not writing from a standpoint of anti-globalism. It's been a long, long time since the onset of active international exchange; it would be nonsense today to insist on the idiosyncrasies of individual cultures. I simply believe it must be meaningful to be conscious of the part of Japan that's capable of contributing to universal values. As a designer who was born in Japan, I would like to concentrate on quietly delving the ground beneath my feet. It may be that I want to know my roots a little better. Every time I step out into the world, I find my affection for Japan grows, and yet I also feel frustrated with the fact that I am not more acutely embodying that culture. I don't know if this feeling has reached some other realm, but lately I've had more and more opportunities to encounter locales and cultural aspects that convey Japan's individuality to the present, and to meet fascinating individuals who carry this legacy. In this chapter, I would like to introduce some things that I've come upon in my focused attempt to reviewJapan. Afterward, I would like to briefly mention a few examples of my work that also convey Japan's individuality to this present time. ## Recreating a Mature Culture From now on, and for some time, Japan will be standing right beside, and observing, a bustling China in the verge of an economic boom. It's like looking upon a gigantic shopping center newly built in the neighboring town.