The hustle and bustle of the market is annoying, but it's also the economic world'sgrave new standard. For present-day Japan, which is stagnating, carrying its once-upon-a-time prosperity in the form ofits citizens'miniscule savings, this stimulus is too powerful. However, this is no reason for Japan to lose confidence. Here in our unflappable position on the eastern edge of Asia, in full knowledge of our confidence, we must make a reasonable appearance. And that quietly and introspectively. And under no circumstances should we act hastily to bring unto our own nation the kind of prosperity currently enjoyed by China. We mustn't try to keep step with a country with four thousand years' worth of cultural resources, where one billion, three hundred six million people have begun to undertake a forceful acceleration of their national economy. High economic growth is like adolescence, when fatigue is unknown. Japan has been there already and is in a place to develop into both economic and cultural maturity. Living here, we should be completely aware that human happiness lies not only in the hustle and bustle of a soaring economy. We must evaluate the factors that have fueled the worlds of economy, technology and foreign cultures, as well as the virtues and idiosyncrasies of our own culture. And we must clearly recognize the significance of producing the elegance associated with a mature culture. Otherwise, Japan may be obliterated from the memory of the rest of the world's people, forgotten as a shallow place, a nation that, without recognizing their proper use, abandoned not only its own economy but also its cultural resources: a place not worth even visiting. How can we recreate the identity of a mature culture? Probably what this country needs is to start afresh with a vision. From this perspective, I sought and found several topics that seem like they would point us in the right direction. I would like to deal with neither abstract stories nor massive