development projects, but to introduce small-scale practical examples that are on the road to being realized through the power of individuals. Waitingfor What Nature Brings: Gajyoen and Tenku-no-Mori First is “Tenku-no-Mori"(Forest in the Sky), conceived by Takeo Tajima, manager of the hotel“Gajyoen Hotel," which is at the southwest tip of the island of Kyushu and accessible from Kagoshima Airport. Gajyoen is quite different from the conventional hot-spring hotels around the rest of the country, which are well built, sterile and generally without character. Here, where thatched roofs line the sky and chickens dartabout, you can sense a tension in the air, the force of a subtle grip on the very essence of things, far from narrow constraints. On the brushwood fence in front of one of the cottages, pieces of konnyaku potato are drying in the sun. Elsewhere, a tiered stone tank fills silently with water, cooling submerged freshly picked vegetables. On the way to one of the open-air hot springs, an arbor partially obscures a sunken hearth, where, at the proper hour, bamboo cups are filled with the Japanese spirit called shochu, which is mixed with warm water; the guests help themselves. At the table guests use chopsticks made of bamboo that was cut that day. Here they don't use extravagant, high-priced ingredients; every dish nearly bursts with the vigor of nature. To put it simply, there is no artifice here. To associate with nature is to wait, and waiting, before we know it we are swathed in the abundance of nature. Tajima knows how to pour the gift of nature into his space. This is the overwhelming inimitability that distinguishes Gajyoen and the reason for its unflagging popularity. And yet, popular though it may be, Gajyoen is not bustling with guests. The spirit of visitors who love its elegance quietly pervades the whole space, lending anatmosphere of quality. Mr. Tajima bought a mountain. At first glance, it seemed impossible that this mountain of 79 acres of bamboo thickets could be made use of. But the location was good. The peak overlooks a wonderful panorama facing the