Kirishima Range and is secluded and secure from prying eyes. With his own hands and the aid of a few staff members, Tajima tackled the nearly hopeless task of clearing the thick bamboo growth. In seven years, the mountain was transformed from a bamboo grove to a breezy hardwood paradise. Now it is a first-class resort destination in every way. However, Tajima has no intention of building any large-scale accommodations. Apparently he plans to have only five rooms built, scattered here and there around the place. Five rooms on 79 acres! This far exceeds the average sense ofscale, but if the goal is to create a utopia where human beings can experience happiness in the bosom of nature, this is what you'd come up with, I think. This is not hotel management. It's forest management. This man wants to manage a place where time passes at nature's rhythm, isolated from the artificial, not exerting effort and care to make something, but waiting for what nature brings. One day we'll have places where people can feel like Adam and Eve, and these forest spaces will gently destroy the whole“resort" concept we've entertained thus far. Right now, near the mountaintop, is a spacious wooden terrace facing the distant Kirishima Range and a trial open-air hot springwith afantastic view. ## Reclaiming Japan's Quality in theWorld's Eyes: Obuse-do Corporation Next is Obuse-do, a business situated in Nagano Prefecture in central Japan and run by one of the descendants of a wealthy merchant who acted as a patron of Hokusai Katsushika, the painter known for his landscape pictures in the Edo period. The central townscape is dotted with Obuse-do's concerns: the company's principal businesses are traditional shops selling chestnut sweets and the factories making them; additionally, Obuse-do runs a sake brewery, Japanese- and Western-style restaurants and bars and the Hokusai-kan art gallery, and maintains a Japanese garden. The C.E.O. Tsugio Ichimura is the central figure in gathering people with an eye for good culture. Among them is a U.S. citizen, Sara Marie Cummings, whose 1993 trip to Japan to help pre-