pare for the 98 Winter Olympics in Nagano led to a visit to the city of Obuse. Today she holds the unique role of "producer" for the company. Cummings proposed renovating the storehouse of the sake brewery Masuichi Ichimura as a sake shop and Japanese-style restaurant. She was aided by architect John Morford, whose interior design for the Park Hyatt Tokyo suggested an ability to design Japanese-style spaces. Once under the guidance of Frank Lloyd Wright (1867-1959), Morford opened an office in bustling Hong Kong because he was attracted to Asian culture. It suggests something that these two people involved in redeveloping the Obuse brewery are both from the United States. Fairly evaluating Japanese culture in a global context may not be something we Japanese can accomplish. Morford designed the restaurant as an open kitchen, but in a corner of this liberated kitchen squats a huge traditional kamado, a ceramic stove with two holes meant to accommodate large iron pots. Thus is the Japanese atmosphere accomplished. No detail is left unexamined or unattended. The male cooks and servers are attired in happi (livery jackets) designed exclusively for the brewery. They receive Cummings’ strict instructions on all things. For example, they are to carry the restaurant's lacquerware and ceramics, whose finer-than-average arabesque karakusa pattern was specified by Cummings, not using two hands for one dish but rather with one dish in each hand, and these dishes must be large, communal plates. Above and beyond managing the restaurant, Cummings became a sake sommelier and revived one of the brewery's varieties called “Hakkin." The Masuichi brewers accept Cummings'vision. With the clear insight that no vision but hers can motivate the peculiarity of Japan, blonde-haired Sarah influences not only the brewers but the city's government officials as well. This serial movement has created a large cultural impetus in the area. A seminar she hosts on the day of each month corresponding to the number of the month (1/1, 2/2, etc.) to which Cummings invites guest speakers from around the country, is one aspect that has attracted particular public attention.