Unearthing the Meaning of Nothingness: Mukayu Let me relate one more hot-spring hotel story. In the photo is pictured a hotel located in Kaga, Ishikawa Prefecture, on the Sea of Japan. Originally named Beniya, the hotel gained an annex, Mukayu, and is now called Beniya-Mukayu. Its architect, Sey Takeyama, named the annex. As coined by the Chinese philosopher Chuang-tzu, mukayu means nothingness or idleness. But therein lies a complete upending of common values; it comprises a vision in which that which seems useless at first glance is all the more abundant. A vessel that's empty has the possibility, precisely because it is empty, to hold things inside. In the same way, abundance lies in possibility—the possibility that exists before anything occurs. This philosophy, in which the potential of possibility is seen as power, has been common to China and Japan since ancient times. Takeyama designed this annex with the concept of evoking the power of the potentiality of "nothingness"and so named it. Mukayu will certainly vitalize both the concept and the space, as the hoteliers Kazunari and Sachiko Nakamichi have been working hard to lend a face to both the concept and the space of Mukayu and have fortunately been very successful bringing in more people. One of the hotel's distinctive features is its garden, located in the center of the site, which looks like a large thicket of assorted hardwoods. It bears no resemblance to any of the elaborate, artistic gardens found in the temples of Kyoto. Here, maples, pines, camellias, Chinese quinces and other trees grow freely and thrive. Flourishing natural formations sometimes permeate nature that's been left relatively untouched. In the fresh green season, new maple leaves inundate the garden. The windows of every guest room are opened wide onto the garden. And so the flood of young leaves, transformed into currents of dappled light, spills into each room. The rooms as Takeyama has planned them are in the Japanese style, but this is as spaces that, like an empty vessel, accept the garden scenes that pour in. He has provided guests with an empty vessel, a receptacle both for the garden spectacle and for the