## Identity Breeds Attraction None of these supremely enchanting examples can help but inspire people. The concept of Tenku-no-Mori is intent on maintaining not popularity, but tranquility. This secluded forest, isolated and serene, commanding its superb view, is dotted with shelters spaced at generous distances. This is the most sumptuous situation. There must be people everywhere who are searching for this sort of majesty; if by chance they happen to be deep in the mountains of Kagoshima, they'll certainly discover this sumptuousness. This is something that answers a demand that exists around the world, so perhaps a tranquil culture could become a kind of model for the rest of the world. As for Obuse-do, its directors grasped the primary advantageous aspects ofJapan within the context of the world's cultures and then focused on boldly modernizing and utilizing those characteristics. What's more, the owner had the insight and resolution to entrust the historically important area of Obuse to an outsider with a vision. Certainly, the greater China's clamor becomes, the more radiant Obuse will appear. As for Mukayu, here the people are well aware of the power of an empty vessel and make good use of that. They recognize the value, and the challenge, of fully activating this power. Undertaking steady, consecutive remodeling, this inn is drawing nearer to the ideal of “nothingness," but in fact, this honest and unflagging attitude may well be what's stimulating the power inherent in emptiness. Pretty soon, I think those involved in matters concerning any vision of the future should just drop the idea of planning for popularity. At one time, the term machiokoshi, literally, “town-waking," was heard a lot, referring to a national trend of concerted economic development of small towns, usually based on some amalgamation of their characteristics. But towns that were thus“awakened"are now lifeless, defunct. A town isn't something you wake up; its only appeal is in its identity. You don't wake it up. In fact, you can tackle its maturity and tranquility head on, and even after these have fermented to perfection, you don't have to advertise it to the public, just