leave it in its isolation, in the depths of the forest, beyond the wisps of rising mist. Anything that is superb will be discovered, without fail. Identity is that sort of power, and should certainly become a great source of communication. As a designer, I provided a little help on Obuse-do and Mukayu. I was introduced by acquaintances to people at both establishments. Moved by their determination and work ethic, I lent a hand, really in hopes of gaining a share in these sensibilities. For Obuse, I designed several things, including the brewery's sign; the shop's noren (traditional divided curtain in the entryway, which serves as the door during operating hours); and the bottle and labeling for their newly revived brand of sake, Hakkin. The bottle, made of stainless steel, is like a mirror. For Mukayu, I designed the logotype and asked the photographer Tamotsu Fujii to capture the atmosphere of the inn. These were not explanatory photos, but a series of pictures through which people who have stayed here can ruminate on the trailing memory of that time. I designed the hotel brochure using these pictures. Now Tamotsu Fujii has become a true admirer of the place; apparently he visits now and then, to enjoy a hot bath and take pictures. These are by-products of the inn's charm, and it's my covert role to use the photos that have accumulated as a result in things like Mukayu's postcards and coffee packaging. As for Tenku-no-Mori and Gajyoen, I just visit. I’ve never done anything for them as a designer. There is neither room nor reason for it. Once, in the small bar in Gajyoen I happened to see a bottle—for a brandy called Alambic—that I'd designed long ago. I was with the architect Kengo Kuma at the time, and I showed it off to him. I felt quite happy to know that a bottle I'd designed with my own hand was displayed in a place like that.