# The Expo That Might Have Been The Original Idea and “Nature's Wisdom" As art director, I was in charge of the early promotion stages of Expo 2005. First came the Japanese presentations to the Bureau of International Expositions (BIE), from 1996 to 1997. The opening plan was described in a thick sheaf of materials, but we formed a team to present it with complete clarity. This Theme Conception Committee comprised the religious scholar Shinichi Nakazawa, who expressed the idea in writing; the architects Norihiko Dan, Kengo Kuma and Sey Takeyama, who conceptualized the site plan; and myself. I took charge of visualization. The official presentation was held in Monaco in June of 1997. The BIE member countries voted, and Japan's Aichi Prefecture, which had vied with Canada's Calgary, won the right to host the World Exposition. The contents ofthe presentation and the subsequent projects we had planned are still clearly engraved in my mind. But the Aichi Exposition as it was translated into reality was utterly different from the initial plan presented at the BIE venue. How did this happen? There's no need to debate here the propriety of this outcome, but I would like people to understand what kind of initial conception we had for the Aichi Expo, because I think it would provide a hint for thinking about several things: the view of nature within individual cultures, the situation of ecology today, and the meaning and possibilities of the international event called an Exposition. The theme for this Expo was"Nature's Wisdom." What I'm going to relate here is my understanding of the contents and the intent of the theme in general, based on communication with those involved in planning it. Since ancient times, the Japanese have believed that wisdom resides in nature and human beings live by basking in the wisdom of nature. This dif-