fers from the Western conceptual climate, which posits wisdom on the part of human beings and states that nature, an undomesticatedwilderness, should be controlled byhuman intellect. This Western idea, which puts humans at the center, functions to express the will and responsibility of this living nucleus, the human being. This concept has been very persuasive for a long time. Certainly, it can be said that modern civilization has been built on the human-centeredview. But dowe call this controlling or managing nature, what today's civilization does? No, we've done nothing but destroy it, wounding both nature and our own living environment. On the other hand, the more science (a symbol of human intellect) progresses in various fields, the more it is exposed to the wondrous subtleties inherent in nature and life, and the more it is enchanted by this truth. These incessant encounters with a wisdom that transcends human wisdom naturally lead us to the modest conceptthat humans are also a part of nature. What's happened is that the sensibility at the very forefront of science has drawn near to the view of nature that sees wisdom as residing in nature. The words of the Exposition theme, “Nature's Wisdom," are meant to illustrate this thesis. In order to convey its idea more precisely, I would like to offer a composition entitled “Beyond Development: RediscoveringNature's Wisdom," by Shinichi Nakazawa. As the piece is not too long, I include it in its entirety. "Nature has given its bounty freely. Nature, the source of all life, has willingly bestowed wisdom and enabled humankind to develop the technologies needed to utilize all manner of energy and other resources. Yet humanity has not repaid or even duly acknowledged this vast debt, and now nature is beginning to lose patience. The overriding imperative for humanity in the 21st century is thus that of rediscovering nature's wisdom to once more resonate in harmony with the rest of life and nature. Technology was not given so humankind could ride roughshod over nature and wreak irreparable changes. Rather, technology is to draw out the hidden essence of all nature so that it