can sparkle with new purpose. Technology is not to enslave and command life but to draw forth the infinite possibilities locked within all life and to open new realms of significance. Thus it is that we need to heed the message of life andnature and to create new interfaces infused with nature's wisdom. Thus it is that we need to breathe the forgotten wisdom into our technology-dominated civilization, to allow modesty and humility back into our hearts, and to restore the precarious relationships between humanity and the rest of nature and among people themselves. This is the great experiment being begun in Japan's semi-domesticated woodlands. These woodlands lack imposing wilds but have everything that humankind needs for the 21st century. The essential experiment underway here is a bold attempt to confront the many issues facing humankind head on and to deal wisely with them. Integrating the best of human technology, art, and culture, this experiment pushes the very limits of nature's wisdom to bring forth a new dimension of human development for the new century. This is the focus we propose for EXPO 2005." ## The Practical Power of Ecology Today, one cannot lightly make one's theme the earth and the natural environment; our whole assertion will collapse unless we are ready to sort out as well as solve, through practical measures, issues like the effective use of energy and resources and creating the technology necessary for a society based on recycling. And yet Expo Aichi was ready to boldly accept this challenging theme. Backing it were not only philosophical, but also technological justifications. In its rush towards industrialization, Japan committed the grave error of spoiling the environment. And yet, countering this painful experience of ecocide, Japan has developed technology to restore nature. That is, as far as environmental technology goes, we have gathered the power to contribute specifically to the urgent environmental issues facing the world. When we were working on visualizing the presentation materials for the BIE, the official from the Ministry of International Trade and Industry in charge at