the time would regularly drop by our offices on nights when we were still beavering away, and eagerly explain details of various situations and measures available for meeting all the energy and environmental issues. Thanks to his visits, I gradually became well versed in this kind of knowledge. By taking measures to counter environmental pollution, Japan is developing a variety of technologies that reduce the environmental load. In 1997, when we were in the midst of planning, a high-efficiency turbine that generates power by burning waste safely had been developed, revealing a practical path toward waste-to-power energy generation. In Japan, the efforts industry has made to deal with emission controls or vehicular energy consumption (like hybrid cars from Toyota and Honda) are a step ahead of the rest of the world. The plan for the eco-community of the near future that we envisioned in the Expo forest included equipping the forest with technologies like photovoltaic generation, fuel-cell technology, methane fermentation to produce bio-gas, electric power storage and high-performance heat pumps, as well as an efficient control system for all of the above. As a result, by reducing energy consumption to 50 percent of that in an average urban area, and consumption of fossil fuels by 50 percent, we expected to be able to reduce carbon dioxide emission by 25 percent. We proposed that a significantly practical plan be carried out that addressed ecology. We thought of the expo as a model of recycling-based energy and resources, covering not only power generation, but also local composting and gray-water recycling using an intermediate water supply. This was a proposal to test the kind of technology you would need to create the clean infrastructure that would be necessary in an urban area expected to make noteworthy progress on the environmental front. In a world in which we even find it difficult to abide by the Kyoto Protocol, which was enacted as an agreement on the lowest carbon dioxide emission numbers needed to just barely keep global warming from advancing any further, this proposal was brimming with opportunities to make it into a completely rationalplan.