## Our Forest Vision The most important point of this plan was that the Exposition be held in the forest. The supporting idea for the theme, “Nature's Wisdom," was that the more technology evolves, the closer it comes to nature; we were advocating not the confrontation of technology and nature, but the assimilation of technology into nature. To carry this out in the forest would be to symbolically put the theme into practice. Would technology be able to unite with nature in reality, not just end up as pie in the sky? We were going to get an answer from the forest. The proposed site was in a forest intricately linked with the history of the porcelain of Seto, a city with a thriving ceramics industry. To understand this forest, you must know that 90 percent of Japan is covered with mountains, so the boundary zone between nature and human habitation, called a satoyama, (literally “village mountain"), referring to the base of a mountain near a town, village or city, is a vital area with uses specific to the occupations of the people who live nearby. This particular satoyama has long been where clay for porcelain is extracted and firewood gathered, what's sometimes called a "firewood forest"; therefore it's been repeatedly denuded, and every time, reforested. In other words, it is like so many other satoyama in our country, which combine man-made and natural woodlands and are therefore rich in biota. The concept of nature preservation often deifies “untouched"wilderness. But human beings are an intrinsic part ofnature and forests that develop in association with humans are richer natural areas for it. In fact, it has been reported that as the use of “firewood forests" has declined, forests whose floors are no longer managed or tended in this way will be devastated. Forest floor management means tending the forests' healthy growth by scything and thinning the lower growth. A richer diversity of flora and fauna is observed in these satoyama, where the artificial and the natural interact to just the right extent, than in complete wilderness. The recycle-based urban site model envi-