sioned for the Exposition was based on the concept of the satoyama. Our goal was to realize, in this model city, an ecologically friendly community born of the interaction between nature and the man-made. Our original proposal even included an intention to revolutionize the rules of the Exposition itself; we planned to change the rule that calls for the host country to clear a large expanse of flat land for the site, partition it, and erect an array of pavilions there. The Great Exhibition held in London in 1851 was very meaningfulin that it allowed for the real (and rare) "exhibition” of a collection of cultural and industrial objects from around the world And thus the enormous iron-and-glass “Crystal Palace" was significant —in terms of providing the space. Since the Great Exhibition in London, there have been so very many spectacular World Expositions in so many locations. However, with the increase of human exchange and commodity circulation, the original significance and role of a World Exposition has become obscure. Even so, the Expositions up until about Montreal ('67) and Osaka ('70) did good work; they played the role of spreading maturing technologies to a mass audience. But when transportation and media have developed as far as they have today, the very meaning of the exhibition and display that are the root of the Exposition is fading. Today, if you want to see something, you can look it up on the Internet. If you want to touch it, you can go to the trouble of visiting in person. It's just a twelve-hour flight from Japan to Europe. In addition, these days, when architecture itself has begun to involve impermanence, and examples of experimental architecture are constructed one right after another, the architectural appeal of Expo pavilions is pretty feeble. What's more, it's clearly a waste of resources and money; it lasts for so short a time. If the Exposition has any current significance, it is as a way to point out the salient themes of the near future, to nurture the seeds of the next generation of technology and thought, and to share them with the world. One more rationale is the creation of information that cannot be experienced any other way than by physically visiting the Exposition site.