The vision for an eco-community was a new experiment in technology, but this was not an experiment involving the destruction of nature through large-scale land creation, but rather an experiment in assimilating technology with nature gently and subtly. Because the proposed site was in the woods, we were going to concentrate the high-density urban functions in one location, and planned to construct the facilities very simply, following the terrain and leaving a light footprint. The vision for the “Exposition of the Forest" included a mechanism to make sure we didn't end up with a forest ofpavilions. As for the experiences people would like to have by going to the trouble of visiting the Expo, several epoch-making ideas were under consideration. One was the idea of regarding the forest itself as a “living exhibition resource." If there were an anthill in the woods, cutting-edge camera and projection technology would allow visitors to experience the confined interior environment with magnificent reality.You could idle about the nest convinced of the reality that you yourself were an ant. You might even be able to enter a plant cell from the hair-like roots of a clump of woodland grass. The mantra among the planning staff was, "Experience the forest with the eyes of a bird or an insect," but ifyou were to bringin the latest technology, you could also explore the intricacy of the forest on the level of micro-organisms and even of genes. In short, we would turn nature as it's found on the Exposition site into endless exhibition resources, without trucking in great numbers and massive volumes of exhibits from the world outside the forest. Wisdom resides in nature. The basis of this proposalwas to try to access the workings of nature's core. There's no need for the relics of the last century, the pavilions and the mega-scale projected images. Simply by putting on our “high-tech glasses," the forest could have become a Crystal Palace in its own way. And technology, far from being a concept opposed to nature, should have been repositioned as a continuation of nature's elegance.