## Technology: Closer to Nature with Each Evolution In 1998, we gradually set the ball rolling on promoting the Expo vision through slow media like pamphlets, calendars and posters. We still had seven years to go until the Expo opened and we wanted the essence of the event to permeate society little by little. An Exposition speaks to the future, but the future conjured for this one was not something that sparkles like a CD, a glow with rainbow color. The image we were after was that ofchic high technology so deeply fused with nature that, as it evolves, becomes indistinguishable from nature. The motifs I used to represent this image were from an Edo-period series of illustrated books of natural history called the Honzo Zusetsu (series). What is the Honzo Zusetsu? According to experts, honzo was the pharmacology transmitted from China toJapan long ago, which consequently developed into the study of all fields of natural-science, including zoology and botany about 300 years ago. Due to the encouragement of the Edo Shogunate and a long period of peace, there occurred a kind of natural science boom. Many encyclopedia-type books featuring detailed illustrations of animals, plants, aquatic life and minerals were compiled. Among them was the Honzo Zusetsu, authored byShunzan Takagi (?-1852) and consisting of 195 Japanese-bound volumes. As all the pictures were hand-painted, the edition consists of only the original 195 books. The strokes of Takagi's brush vividly convey the exertion of a man engrossed in portraying, with due reverence, the physical forms of nature. These days, we can just take a picture, but in his time there was only painting. Takagi worked hard to scrupulously copy nature by assiduously training his eyes and hands. His work has a look of sincerity that reveres the creativity of nature. The look I'm talking about here conveys not the human-centered science pursued by Western modernity, but a sense of nature that venerates all animals, plants and humans as object creatures in which the deity resides; they are all considered to stand aligned on level ground. These are the eyes of pre-Meiji Era Japanese, before the forward progress of civilization began.