a message to narrate the future. With it, we couldwell express a panoramic perspective penetrating the future from the distant past. I designed several communication tools using his illustrations. This is a collaboration with a painter who worked well about two centuries years ago. ## Familiar Nature and Life Forms, as Characters Here's one more story—about the epoch-making idea of Takuya Onuki for promoting the Exposition. Onuki, a member of the design committee, won the nomination for the Expo symbol and as such was expected to play an active role in the series of design projects for the event. The symbol he designed is a heavy green dotted line in the form of a circle, whose shape seems common at first glance, but is superbly designed. It's a shape that says “attention,"or rather, "caution." Broadly put, it is a symbol calling the attention of mankind. Dotted over a picture of the forest, they would generate an image promoting awareness of—or pleading caution about—the myriad lives and happenings of the forest. Encircling the Earth, as it floats in the space of our universe, the symbol would visually issue an alert on the global environment. It would work pretty well as a cursor on computer screens, too. Around the time I was planning promotion for the initial stage, Onuki was planning the Expo's promotion ad campaign. Whenever we happened to run into one other, we would talk about our respective campaigns. Once the symbol had been determined and the first posters presented, the design committee started working on the mascot character. Both Onuki and I started to think that it would be best if this weren't the kind of mascot that would become a plush toy. A mascot character not only functions as a communication resource, but also as a profit-maker when developed into consumer goods. Naturally, the host committee wants a tool like this. However, if we could infuse this kind of tool with an epoch-making idea, this too would function as a message of the new-format Exposition.