Onuki's vision follows. It was the idea of making into Expo characters all of the life forms and plants familiar to us all and found in every satoyama: the stag beetle and grasshopper, dragonfly nymph, ant lion, the buttercup and the delicate flower of the birdseye speedwell, among others. Children, even children today, love flora and fauna, and insects top the list. That's because they're truly interesting. In the curiosity based in children's instinctive love for nature, Onuki recognized the groundwork for attracting them (and adults) to the theme of the Expo: the wisdom of nature. This idea accords with the concept of searching for the wisdom of nature in the forest. Of the overseas programs on the Discovery Channel, there are some that rivet our attention and, before we know it, completely engross us. When the workings of nature are ingeniously represented using high technology, the results are sometimes superb. The more familiar to them is the flora, fauna or other life form, the more the accessible it seems, and the more empathy should be engendered. Computer graphics can create truly realistic images of the ecology of insects, so kids are sure to become engrossed in the life cycle of a stag beetle as illustrated through computer graphics. Onuki must have imagined the effect as such: living creatures become the star characters in kids' lives, and information about them flies through the streets like Pokemon cards. He planned to launch an ad campaign that would build on this childlike interest in and appreciation of living things, and spontaneously direct that interest towards “Nature's Wisdom." A fancy plush toy character would be useless in this case. When the subsequent “nature observation" boom took hold, more television shows would be related to the wisdom of nature and would lead to a rising interest in the Expo. In bookstores, illustrated books of fauna and flora or Expo-recommended books wrapped in partial dust jackets of green would be part of some of the most popular displays. This attentiongetting symbol would certainly have had a lively time of the whole situation.