## The Self-propagating/Multiplying/BreedingMedia The last project I worked on for the Exposition was a series of illustrated gummed tape created as “communication goods." For a promotion campaign, so-called novelty goods are expedient, but I would be ashamed if, in promoting an event endorsing the future and the global environment, we were to carry out a massive distribution of ballpoint pens and Expo coffee cups. I suggested that, as long as we were going to do something, we should create an entire category (communication goods) particular to the event and put together an annual design plan that would make a clear statement. At the time, I was working on the RE-DESIGNproject, for which the architect Shigeru Ban had devised a square toilet paper roll. (The project and Ban's solution are presented in Chapter Two.) This led me to the idea of delivering the Expo's message in the guise of daily commodities, which would be used up, and fade away to nothing in the end. The gummed tape was the first of the communication goods. Used as motifs on the color-printed tape were flora and fauna familiar to us in Japan: Reeve's turtle, the goldfish, and our common grasses. In order to avoid a misunderstanding I would like to explain that the tape was not some fashionable design trinket, but meant to function based on the idea of gummed tape as a medium. Ordinary communication tools function only upon their distribution, and then as mementos, while the tape spreads the Expo message continually and more effectively the more widely it is used. When cardboard boxes are taped, they themselves metamorphose into the Expo message. In the circulation process, a variety of people would glance at the tape's message. We're in the Internet era. The more e-commerce thrives, the more physical objects are delivered. Right now, physical distribution is growing with great strides; creating this series of gummed tape is based on the idea of making use of those delivered packages as messages. One roll of gummed tape can seal two hundred manila envelopes. That is, a single tool achieves its goal two hundred times. And once they're used up,