they are reduced to atoms. And so, to the very end, each is converted into our message. We planned to recruit talent from across the country to make one example after another of this kind of communication goods. If it had gone well, a retail shop just for these might have existed by the time the Expo opened. ## The Never-ending Project To our disappointment, the Exposition was not to be held in the forest. Because public opinion already firmly equated an Exposition with the destruction of nature, an outcry against allowing the event to occur in the forest took shape and flourished. Furthermore, the woods planned for the event site were publicized as a sort of mysterious, undeveloped forest, with a wellknown anchor on one news program phrasing a question this way: “Because theKaisho-no-Mori (forest) is situated here, the area is wonderful. Do you agree that the areashould be used for theExposition?" Then, because the existence of a goshawk nest in the forest was confirmed, the movement to make it impossible to use the woods intensified; goshawks, at the top of the food chain, symbolize the rare ecological system there, it was said. This movement, focusing on a rule that is beyond argument, was to leap to a conclusion allowing for no dialogue. In any case the discussion points brought up by the mass media were consistent with those of the movement. The problem was never discussed from a levelheaded perspective graced by essentials; no, such a possibility was mocked by the argument that, leaving the old polar opposites of nature and human as is, holding an Expo in a forest was disgraceful. Without discussing the essence of the matter, the public apparently changed its vision, based on its emotions. This, too, exemplifies Japan. As a result, the Exposition was held in a location at some distance from the forest. Transferred to a site that made ample allowance for large-