scale development, it was then rewritten as a plan fully loaded with a forest of pavilions, gigantic-scale image projection, a mega-scale Ferris wheel, and shows galore. Most of the brains as well as the talent that had been involved from the beginning didn't participate in the project in its final form. These are not problems that can be easily solved here. Behind the cancellation of the initial project also stands firm a mode of thinking that views an Exposition as a public works project and makes the economic effect primary. The event we envisioned, with its lesser impact on the surroundings, might not have answered the expectations of the local economic world, which anticipated public works or grand-scale civil engineering and construction. In our publicity planning, we might have underestimated the influence of a public whose image of an Expo is limited to pavilions. Furthermore, we had not yet accurately infused society with our initial vision for the event. As the director ofpromotion, I hold this as a regrettable point. However, even after experiencing such a setback, I have come to think anew that as a designer, I would like to take part in conscious projects with clear intentions, even if they involve aspects that don't go so well. I am not interested in creating messages that stand against something, like messages against nuclear development, or anti-war messages; design functions as part of a planning process. Be it the problem of the environment or of globalism, how can we move towards improvement? What can I do to budge it even one step in the right direction? I want to make design function persistently in this positive, practical dimension. In this sense, my Exposition has not come to an end.