# The Beijing Summer Olympic Games Symbol Design Competition The Pulse of Asia The Beijing Olympics is going to be held in 2008. Taking this event as an opportunity, China is expected to undergo drastic change. In 2003, nominated by the Beijing Olympics Organizing Committee, I entered the symbol design competition. The design introduced here received an honorable mention but was not selected as the final symbol. I am happy with how I made it and how I understood its function, and I would like readers to appreciate it as a way of thinking about Asia's design. Design in China, diametrically opposed to that in Japan, appeals through details. I thought it would be fascinating if the symbol were to impart a complex, serene aura that would shake up the conventional modern symbol, which is oriented toward simplicity. Every portion of this symbol is comprised of pictograms (ancient writing symbols) representing a variety of sports. As you may know, written Chinese with its units called “characters," uses ancient writing symbols. I produced pictograms that employ this Chinese tradition. The aggregate of symbols indicating the various athletics motifs forms a complex, centripetal symbol. A modernist tendency is design through systematic and geometric organization. Japanese designers who studied design in Europe created these kinds of pictograms for the Tokyo Summer Olympics in 1964. For the Munich Summer Olympics in 1972, Otl Aicher (1922-1991) designed pictograms in which all the forms were situated at respectively unified angles, like 90° or 45°. It seemed to me that with this work of Aicher's, systematic graphic design had nearly reachedits conclusion.