This symbol does not have the severe structure of systematic design, but exhibits a more generous hieroglyphic nature. All of these pictograms are designed based on curved lines drawn freehand. The athletes move dynamically around the central “日” that is the symbol of the sun. Thus I expressed an image like the pulsing earth, as a whole. On the one hand, the individual pictograms function as a motion graphic. Because the structure is designed as a simple wire frame, they can execute charming movement with extremely minimal data. I'd like you to imagine them dancing in the corner of your TV screen. As the symbol is made up of pictograms, there is a smooth continuity between it and the signage. It's fun to imagine the individual pictograms, isolated from the symbol, moving as motion graphics. This symbol also functions as a Chinese seal. There are two styles, “white," or white on red, and "red," or red on white: a sort of Ying and Yang. Making these two types seemed to allow for convenient classification. And because the seals may be used at smaller sizes, three densities are available, insuring a stable impression at various sizes. If the symbol were actually carved into stone as a seal, it would probably be an interesting tool. Someday I would really like to have it carved by a Chinese craftsman. It will be my private memento of the Beijing Olympics. The photos feature simulated images of the admission ticket to the opening, the athletic games, and the shopping bag. Design in Asia is about to bloom. There will come a day when the East will maintain a position relative to the West, and the two will associate with one another in a true sense, and togetherinfluence world culture. Asia is blessed with the resources of dazzling histories and cultures. Yet it gives the impression of having been buried by modernization or Westernization. But no, Asia's histories and cultures may be embedded, but not in the ground. They are buried in the depths of our sensory perceptions or in the abyss of our memories. By unearthing them little by little, we will see the subsequent birth of completely new design. From the tip of Asia, I hope to continue to communicate their vital pulse.