do a better job. We are surrounded by too many overdone designs, he thought, and the existing ones show just enough ingenuity. Sato thought it would be a shame to overdo it and strike a wrong note; the more realistic approach, he concluded, would be not to stick his finger in the pie at all. He may be right. The prudence and sincerity that allows him to be unafraid of making a minor change even after coming to his conclusion is part of the same sense of precision that allows him to make use of and put into practice the rules of communication in the first place. ## Kengo Kuma and the Roach Trap Kengo Kuma is an architect of intelligence. But he is distinctly different from the usual brainy architects who use all their intellectd to interpret their own architecture. Kuma feels ashamed to present to the world, under the term “architecture,"any object that is too splendid, and uses his mind deliberately and carefully to bring quality sophistication to his professional commitments. Kuma believes that to evaluate the quality of today's architecture in particular, the point is in figuring out how to curb two things: the destiny of monumental architecture that asserts authority, and the individual's desire to create idiosyncratic, aesthetic depictions via architecture. In this respect, Kuma has been working to create a highly cultivated sophistication. His manners of restraint are never the same. In one project he created a strange object that was paradoxically designed to disprove his refinement. In another he saturated the architecture with light to lessen the sense ofits existence. In yet another he designed a building so it would be invisible from the outside. The Kiro-san Observatory is a representative example of the invisible architecture of Kengo Kuma. While the observatory allows for a panoramic view of the Seto Inland Sea from the top of a mountain, the building itself remains invisible unless you fly over in a helicopter to see it from the sky. Even looking up to the mountaintop from the base, you can see only the mountain itself. Kuma was asked to design an observatory on land that was originally reclaimed from the mountain. After construction was completed, the observatory was buried and trees were planted on the site, which functions successfully as a spot from which to command a view, but the tangible building sinks out of sight if viewed from otherlocations.