answers. Creativity is to discover a question that has never been asked. If one brings up an idiosyncratic question, the answer he gives will necessarily be unique as well.In this sense, I will be happy if this project helps my readers question anew the meaning of knowing as well as understanding, and the essential identity ofcommunication. ## Putting a Full Stop to Thinking Modern people frequently remark, "I know, I know." I don't know why, but it's always said twice. When the topic is the architect Le Corbusier (1887- 1965), they'll say, "I know, I know," When the white tiger at the Delhi Zoo comes up in conversation, they'll say, "I know, I know." Whether the subject is the design of the restroom at the new bar at Piccadilly Circus, the spa service at the new hotel in Chiang Mai, or the glistening hologram sticker on Japan's recently issued currency, I'm haunted by this feeling that as soon as I even start to mention it, I'm going to be answered, "I know, I know." Are people today blessed with some great store of knowledge? Well, we do spend every day in contact with loads of information. With the development of the media and its vigorous news coverage, it's like the surface of every occurrence and phenomenon in the world is mowed into tiny particles of information, which fly about piecemeal, like cut grass, in media space. Willingly or not, our brains are obliged to keep in constant touch with these pieces of information. As a result, innumerable portions of segmented knowledge have stuck to our brains. This accretion would be all right if it incited further interest, as a kind of intelligence index, but objective observation shows that we only talk about the fact that we've brushed against the information; we seldom get any more involved in the topic. The remark “I know, I know" puts an end to our conversation, like ringing down the final curtain on thought.