## Acquiring Knowledge Is not the Goal “I’ve heard the new China Central Television building in Beijing will be designed by the Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas." “I know, I know. Jacques Herzog is working on the construction project of the Olympic stadium, isn't he?" “He's from the architects' group Herzog & de Meuron, isn't he? They built the Prada building in Tokyo." "I know, I know." “The Prada shop in SoHo was designed by Rem Koolhaas." “I know, I know." “As I recall, next month a gallery in Ginza is going to hold an exhibition featuring the works of Antony Gormley." “He's a sculptor who uses the human body as the basis for metal casts, isn't he?"“Olafur Eliasson's work, which I saw at the Hara Museum of Contemporary Art, was just wonderful, too." “Ah, I've seen his rainbowlike installation."“That's an early work, entitled Beauty'."“Its motifs are natural phenomena like light and wind."“Fantastic. I'm impressed by your knowledge. You are well informed about sweets, too."“Oh, you're talking about the Geppei moon cake fromShanghai, right? That was delicious, wasn't it?" "I know. I know it was from Shanghai. There was an article about it in a magazine and I bragged to my friend that I had eaten the sweet featured there." As a conversation, it seems to be proceeding quite pleasantly. The topics are varied and rich in knowledge. However, because the “I know" remark is expressed with a tinge of accomplishment, it functions as a prompt for the conversation partner to move on, or a way to introduce knowledge on another topic, or the end of one topic and an invitation to switch to another. The person providing the topics only introduces facts. So in the conversation, in which each side transmits “I know" information in turn, the conversationalists never actually intersect. The example I used is a bit extreme, but we're all plenty familiar with this kind of dialogue. Basically, knowledge is no more than an entrance to thought. To converse is to exercise one another's thoughts by beginning with a trifling piece of knowledge and speaking about it together. By ingeniously mingling fragments of knowledge with dialogue and speculation, we are able to come