up with heretofore-unknown images and ideas. To know something is not a goal, but a starting point for our imagination. Even so, as is symbolized by the habitual "I know" conversation, somewhere along the line we've run off the rails that lead knowledge to imagination, and have completely halted the train of thought. The information-dispatch side is engrossed only with throwing broken pieces of information at the recipient, and the recipient has begun to consider catching information as the goal.Evading the troublesome work of inquiring into it, we have become devoted to a game of"information catch." I wonder if this is where the problem of stagnating creativity in communication lurks. ## Making an Entrance for Curiosity Here's another thing. Let's try imaginingnot a conversation, but something in our immediate surroundings: information design. Take the example of a guidebook, something from which we gain necessary information for travel. Let's call it “The Smart Guide to ExploringNewYork." The tag line is, "With this, you'll be a New Yorker by tomorrow." In this guidebook targeting experienced travelers who plan to travel to New York alone, a mass of information is rationally edited and combined for handy reference. The first pages describe the options for air service to New York from your nearest international airport. These are followed by the introduction of two airports, La Guardia Airport and John F. Kennedy International Airport, as well as access to midtown, etc. Details are provided on the use of and fares for transportation—taxis, buses and subways. After the currency exchange rate comes information on accommodations, and a graph of average temperatures and basic tipping conventions. Accommodations are classified by the number of stars, ranging from ultraluxury hotels to budget lodging. A number of pages are assigned to dining information, delineating even the interiors, as well as detailed price lists, extending from famous restaurants where they serve seafood or steak, to recommended shops and restaurants