in Chinatown and Little Italy, and includes restaurants featuring the cuisine of Scandinavia, Japan, India, Mexico and France, as well as fast-food joints, popular delis and bagel shops, and restaurant store-fronts, where you can even order take-out soup. You can find information on shopping by area and street. Of course, the map section is succinctly compiled and designed for quick comprehension. Furthermore, information on cultural facilities like art galleries and museums has all the bases covered, including musicals and concerts currently in performance, nightspots and even recommended spas. There is also a report on recent SoHo news or the activities at new Midtown galleries, in response to readers' expectations for the latest information. In addition, the appendix includes reader-recommended routes for strolling and suggested jogging courses in Central Park. It was the information architect Richard Saul Wurman who said, "The goal of information design is to empower the user." I basically agree with his view and am sure that an efficiently compiledguidebook must serve as a precious navigation tool for sightseers in New York. They would visit alternative spaces in Midtown with this guidebook in hand. They would get to know New York by eating a bucket of mussels at the South Street Seaport, picking up a few things at some museum shop, roaming around SoHo. Home again, before long they would bounce through a conversation centered on questions about their experiences in New York. “Did you buy spices at Dean and Deluca?"“Did you see the amazingly gorgeous kitchens and baths at the Boffi showroom? Did you try a hot stone massage?"“Did you see Karim Rashid's furniture in that Midtown interiors shop?" “Did yougo to the new MoMA?" Probably you too can imagine how happily their conversation swings along through its unlimited supply of I knows. They toss questions to one another, each to be answered by "I know, I know." Behind their conversation is a perceptible satisfaction in the understanding that they have successfully replaced the pre-travel guidebook lessons with actual experience. It goes without saying that this kind of conversation has to be enjoyable in a way.