To these people, traveling is “sightseeing,"period. Their desire is to see expected scenes. We cannot say that a serious documentary approach is of higher quality than the approach of these people in just looking for what they expect. However, would it be possible, by bluntly disregarding the cycle of exchanging already knowninformation, the “I know"cycle, to create a guidebook that would act as an “entrance for curiosity," one that would help readers sense a fresher, unknown New York? I suppose it would be something that in the end does not make New York known, but rather awakens us quietly, yet thoroughly, to the truth of howlittle we know about the metropolis ofNew York. ## The Process of Making Things Unknown Is it possible to communicate not by “making known," but by “making understood how little we know"? Ifwe can recognize that we know so little, a method for finding out how little we know will become clear as well. As the Greek philosopher Socrates remarked, “The only true wisdom is in knowing you know nothing." There are an infinite number of methods to attain knowledge; finding the right method is up to the individual. This single idea throws conventional communication methods into reverse. I call this method “exformation," as a counterpart concept to “information."“In"is to“ex" as “inform" is to “exform." In other words, I want to speculate on the form as well as the function of information, not for making things known, but for making things unknown. The “in" of “information" is an affix. Attached to the beginning of a word, sometimesit adds a negative implication. But in most cases, it intensifies the root meaning, or adds meanings like “directed within, on and toward." This is the case with “inform." The word “form” means to shape, organize, or arrange in order, but implies the movement vector involved in taking a definite shape. Accordingly,"inform,"with the background meaning, “giving a certain form," carries meanings like, "to make known,""to tell,"