If you look at a map in which only the rivers are drawn in detail, the land of Japan looms so clearly that the rivers appear to cover the country like capillaries. Protecting these rivers from environmental pollution has been an issue for a long time. Under these circumstances, the Shimanto River has attracted nationwide attention as an uncontaminated and precious limpid waterway. The river is special for the number of fish found there, and many people in the surrounding areas depend on fishing for a living. In Japan today, our consciousness about environmental preservation is heightened, so this location has garnered sincere attention. It's situated on the frontier, on the island of Shikoku, so not that many people take the trouble to visit, but a popular TV documentary, “Japan's Last Clear River," helped impress the audience with the area's untouched wilderness. So we could easily imagine that when people hear “Shimanto River," a vague image engendering a vague comment of preconception, "Ah, I know what kind of place it must be," springs to mind. I had been to the Amazon, the Sahara, and even to the Iguazu Falls on the Argentina-Brazil border, but had never visited our own Shimanto River. Nor had any of my students been there, although they could all conjure up a preconceived image of it; so we had our theme. Probably every country has a river or two that meet the same criteria. If you were to imagine a familiar clear river in your country, you wouldn't find much of a difference between it and the one we were going to visit. But, being only 200 km long, it's not as large in scale as the Amazon, the Mekong or the Rhein. ## Field Research Our project may be supported by abstract thought, but realization demanded awfully practical processes. To conduct field research in the Shimanto River basin, we gathered in a small village in the western region of Kochi Prefecture at the end of August. We were careful to avoid the holiday festivities, waiting till our target quieted down a bit. We rented an old house to stay in and one of our local collaborators also provided his workshop for us to lodge in.