We divided into several teams and began our research, but the weather forced us to return toTokyo for a time. This year Japan was hit by twice as many typhoons as usual. Most of them made land in Kochi Prefecture, which functions like a kind of welcoming gateway for typhoons headed to Japan. Particularly at the end of August, Kochi is like a typhoon intersection; as soon as one passes, another one hits. Over the Shimanto River, there are 21 "sinkingbridges" (chinka-bashi), so named because when the river rises during various disasters, including typhoons, these bridges are completely submerged. The edges of the bridges are rounded, like the wings of airplanes, and they are designed to stand up to the water's flow, interrupting the velocity of the current below the surface. They are equipped with neither handrails nor parapets. The people of this region might well have built taller bridges that would never be submerged, but that would hardly be attuned with the scenery, and would appear rather dreary. So even though it means putting up with some inconvenience, they have chosen to maintain the sinking bridges, which beautifully partition the entire basin, from the upper reaches to the lower. We placed some of our research bases on the bridges, so when the river rose and the bridges sank below the surface, we were forced to abandon our research for a time. We came to the project with some understanding that these sinking bridges apparently are submerged now and then, but we didn't foresee how frequently they would sink. They certainly went under easily! It was in the beginning of October that we returned to the river after having experienced several typhoons since our first visit. My students had polished their plans for this second visit and so did a fine job carrying out the fieldwork on their own.