# Exformation—2 RESORT After Clothing, Food and Shelter After a discussion with the new students, we came up with “resort"as the theme for the second year of exformation. In contrast to the very practical theme of the Shimanto River, this one is a bit abstract. Today people are assiduous in their work, but they seem to put equal passion into their time off. We say that the basic needs for living are food, clothing and shelter, but “repose" may be next on the list. Looking around, we see the burgeoning “resortification" of places that provide the perfect climate, cultural conditions, and easy-access environment for relaxation. All over the world, facilities that seem capable of mesmerizing flesh and soul alike are being built one after another. What do people do when they visit theseplaces? They draw a deep breath and relax,"Phew!"Sunbathe to their hearts' content. Bask in the silence of the forest. Eat fine food and drink good sake and wine. Enjoyleisurely conversation with family or friends. Read any book, at any pace. Have a massage or a healing treatment. Sleep as much as they like. Relax poolside. Do sports all day long. Forget social restraints. Appreciate an exotic foreign culture. Spend elegant hours surrounded by sophisticated interiors, and so on. I've heard that “resort" means a place of frequent, habitual visiting. I guess that basically any place we tend to visit with the aim of doing the thingslisted above would be aresort. Resorts are nothing new, but I feel that people are paying more attention to them now than they did before, which may be a reaction to the slightly more hectic world we live in today, made busier by technological progress and the resulting increase in the intensity of economic competition. Marshall McLuhan (1943-1962) said, "The message is the massage,"but the massage we need isn't one from the media; it's a physical massage. I might have