written something like this somewhere in this book, but the truth is, walking in any city in the world, we see many, many signs for aromatherapy, reflexology, Thai massage and shiatsu (acupressure). It seems that our desire for relaxation increases in proportion to the increase in the world's speed. But what is relaxation, or “resort"? We seem to have a clear understanding of it, but seldom speculate on its essence. “Resort" might not be an ideal theme for analysis and earnest, humorless research, but this is why it impressed me as an interesting topic for exformation. However, while proceeding with our discussion, I began to notice that there was a subtle gap between my views of “resort" and those of my students. As a middle-aged guy who has had the resort experience just out of the necessity of taking breaks from his work, I imagined “resort" along those lines. I need only spread out a map of the Atlantic Ocean and see the islands dotted over the vast waters and in my mind I can't help but feel the pleasant breeze blowing and imagine a peaceful breakfast surrounded by the scent of lovely flowers. Below I've reproduced the keywords I still have from our class. The positive images for "resort": a Heaven-like serenity/doing nothing in particular/going with the flow/pleasant, comfortable/soaking away tension/secluded and extraordinary accommodations/tasting exoticism/returning to Mother Nature/schedule-free/staying the way you are/loose fit/a sense of belonging in harmony/in touch with great nature/limpid and transparent/ neat and clean/bright and lively/in touch with divine, venerable perception. The negative images: extravagant and blasphemous/affected and offensive/lazy and distracted/unethical and immoral/decaying and decadent. The images for scenes and situations: rich natural environments like seas and mountains/benign climates/tranquility/luxuriant flora/sunshine filtering through foliage and rustling trees/a thick growth of palm trees/ strange topography and foreign countries/animals, birds and fish/sophisticated spaces/marble and fieldstone/natural wood and botanical material/ expert service/delicious, plentiful food/fully-matured local cultures/perfect