hot springs, spas and pools/water spectacles/plant spectacles/massages and other treatments/shade/wind/water/plants/stones/sights/gardens/strolling paths/benches. The sensory impressions: the soles of the feet/the tips of the fingers/ the touch to the fingers/the touch to the palate/textures/a senseof fitting/a sense of relaxation/moist to the touch/velvety to the touch/slick to the touch/dry and smooth to the touch/sweet scents/wafting scents/faint scents/tranquility/ the sounds of the natural environment/music/cool/lukewarm/warm/hot. ## Relaxation Time that Makes Sense to Everyone As it turned out, my students' response to these keywords was less than enthusiastic. It seemed that they didn't sense much realism from the image of the picture-postcard resort. That is, there was a difference between the images of a conventional resort and what the students had in mind. What really set us on a beautifully straight course were the words of the students. One, exploring her own consciousness for an accurate sense of resort, came up with this: “To me, resort is peeling a mandarin orange so that all the inner membranes come off nicely and then finding no seeds at all... When I finally take off my shoes at home after having walked in pumps all day... When I finally take off my shoes at home after having walked in pumps all day...When my end of the seesaw is going up!" What these words capture are not the dramatic resorts where we stretch out our arms and draw a long, long exaggerated breath, but rather those small instances when we release a small sigh of relief in our souls. People do have those moments of repose that occur without flying all the way to some tropical seaside thick with palm trees, or finding a comfortable lounge on which to stretch out poolside. Those moments could be called the “seeds" of resort. And they seem to include more of its essence as well. One student looked at the example of the hot spring resort town of Atami in Shizuoka Prefecture in central Japan, a place that became quite pop-