ular and prosperous during Japan's economic growth, but is now in decline. He pointed out that perhaps the essence of resort might be found there, in the unaffected, rather relaxed air around this particular resort town. He focused on the possibility of finding resort in the intention of skillfully evading sophistication, something like the scent of dissolution that clings to blues music. Even the essence of pleasure manifests itself not in the roaring fire but in the remaining embers. And from the cluttered table following a banquet, we can observe both the bright and dark sides of human behavior. These meanings too were included in this student's suggestion. The discussion with the students awakened me to the fact that before I realized what was happening, my own sense of resort had been hijacked by the stereotyped pursuit-of-pleasure image that mirrors the sense of “resort" or relaxation that has been developed by Western society within the cultures of its colonies. At that moment I was sure that resort was a very viable theme for exformation. We also began to realize that when we make something, we bring to that process far more rationality and order than necessary. In the practice of making things, modernism tends to compel us towards refinement and inflexibility. Bauhaus-style purity, or achieving perfection through the refinement of some object, does have a certain valuable benefit, but we would feel claustrophobic if the entire world were enveloped in this kind of rationality and sophistication. The world maintains itself with just the right balance between creation and depletion. Design is the intelligence that is conscious not only of the generative direction, but at the same time, of the degenerative direction. The world is like the water's edge, where creation and depletion intersect. Human existence is the process not only of creating something but also of simultaneously causing the depletion of something. Depletion exists within creation and creation within depletion. “Resort"may be the ideal theme through which to comprehend this. In a gentle image of decline there is something that cheers people up. This project awakened the consciousness of wanting to capture the bud of a certain sympathy, a sympathy that would make anyone nod in agreement,