Resort Switch Produced byMakoto Tomita Starting with the idea of adding a “resort"mode to the switches of an instrument, Tomita went on to examine the relationship between human beings and machines. In other words, from imagining the reactions of various devices when their “resort" switch is activated, Tomita tried to discover clues to the interactionof humans andinstruments. Tomita's idea originated in the “yuragi (fluctuating breeze)" mode of an electric fan. The yuragi switch makes the regular motions and speed of the fan irregular and unpredictable. This changeable breeze makes us feel comfortable, as if we were in nature's breeze. In the fan's case, the yuragi function came first; the technology led to the development and existence of the instrument. The theme of the "resort switch" came from Tomita's question: Is “resort”the affirmative acceptance of irregularity? The yuragi button is a resort switch. When it's flipped, the stiff relationship between human and machine becomes supple. Unlike in the case of the fan, in which the yuragi function came first, the device second, Tomita's instruments are first given only an imaginary “resort"switch, superimposed photos, and then Tomita infers its function. For instance, pressing the resort switch on the TV begins a process in which the images are gently snuffed out and the screen emits a plain white light. In time, the screen slowly turns dark, and eventually turns off. What Tomita has done is imagine the idea of directing a wavering moment of gentle, sleep-inducing light, lessening the lonely silence that falls so suddenly when a television is turned off in the conventional way. The resort switch on the telephone provides harmonious background music for your conversation. If the person on the other end of the line is someone with whom you can speak candidly, the music makes for a nice mood. This is pure speculation, but if an interface could be devised, product development could follow.