# WHAT IS DESIGN? Hearing the Outcry What is "design"? This is the fundamental questionfor my profession, and I spend my days as a designer trying to find the answer somehow. We've entered the 21st century, the entire world is engulfed in a vortex of great transformation, accelerated by technological progress, and our sense of values concerning both the making of things and communication is in flux. When technology changes the structure of our world, the aesthetic values that have accumulated in our environment are often victimized. The world, armed with economy and technology, pushes ahead, but the long-nurtured aesthetic of our daily life, overpowered by the intensity of the transformation, lets out a continual scream. In a situation like this, might it be more important to listen to the cries and face the delicate values that are about to be dissipated in the whirling change, than to look for the next big thing on the horizon? Lately I can't help feeling this way, and the thought grows stronger daily. Constantly pushing the era forward isn't always progress. We stand between the future and the past. I wonder if we could discover a key to our creativity not in that far-off target at which all of society stares so intently, but rather in the extension of a vision that looks right through society from the past. The future lies ahead of us, but behind us there is also a great accumulation of history—a resource for imagination and creativity. I think we call “creative" that dynamism of intellectual conception that flows back and forth between the future and the past.