Now design is not based solely on Western thought. Because the Industrial Revolution occurred in England, people of non-Western societies have long thought they had to learn the standards of modern civilization from theWest. But both the effete civilizations of the day and struggles among civilizations were caused by the global spread of the values of Western modernity. Both human wisdom and design are found in the bosom of individual cultures around the world. We have to become aware of the wisdom and insight that is being threatened with extinction,soon to be swallowed up by the torrent of globalism. We have learned myriad things from modern thought in the West. We give this truth its due respect and each unique culture digests the fruit of Western modern thought, but still, the world has begun to move towards new design wisdom. Design is the energetic acknowledgement ofour own living world through the making of things and through communication. Outstanding perceptions and discoveries should make us happy and proud as living human beings. New things are not born of nothingness, and they are not taken from without, but from our attempts to boldly awaken our everyday existences, which seem ordinary and mundane. Design is the provocation of the senses and a way of making us discern the world afresh. Some of the design projects I’ve introduced in this book are my attempts to access this sort of speculation in my own way. If I talk about my own experiences, it's not going to turn into any beautiful story of design theory. Still, verbalizing design is one thing a designer does. So far, I've told you several design stories, but I'd like to take a brief moment to review the period from the origin of the concept of design through today, in terms of various epochs. This is because I want to confirm one more perspective within the tide of history, one that looks out on both design and my own life. Of course, I don't intend to trace history precisely, but to summon my courage to create a rough portrait, like a croquis.