there in this vanishing point of these two images, where they nearly converge in our distant past? I can't clearly express it in words. However, if we place the wellspring of design there, on this vanishing point, our imagination concerning design will become dramatically more flexible. In particular, I believe that by concentrating on the original form of a vessel, which functions precisely because it holds “emptiness" or nothingness within, we may be able to come up witha new critical discernment towards civilizations that have stressed the club and processed the environment to excess. The club amplifies physical strength and has evolved into a tool that can process and change the world. A sharpened stone axe developed into tools or weapons for hunting animals: the sword, the spear, the bow and arrow. At the same time, it evolved into the plow and the hoe to cultivate the land; an oar to propel boats; a propeller to paddle the air and processing tools such as the saw, the hammer and the knife. In the dazzling, brilliant history of human beings, the axe has evolved slowly and steadily. After the invention of motive energy, it developed into an enormous power. Power shovels, cranes, tanks and missiles that actualized an even more mammoth increase in power have swollen to such a scale as to metamorphose the nurturing environment of our very existence. And it is not onlylarge-scale things, but also infinitesimal things and microengineering aimed at nanotechnology that are extensions of the club as a means of extending our physical functions. Of course the vessel developed into various kinds of containers, but it also evolved into all kinds of tools, like clothing and shelter, that hold emptiness within and also hold or preserve things. Likewise, languages, which act as a tool for emotions and speculation; letters and characters, which preserve languages; or books, which house letters and characters. All these are vessels too. Extending from the vessel are also receptacles of intellect, such as the hard drive, which archives all data, including sound and image. Mankind has constructed civilization by considering the operations of acceptance and preservation as antithetical to those of manufacture and change. Within their evolution, club-descended tools and vessel-descended