tools have sometimes united, giving birth to innovative tools like the spaceship and computer, which are neither sticks nor vessels, but comprise both; they are both stick-like vessels and vessel-like sticks. With these innovative tools, what kind of wisdom will mankind cultivate now? The present is the first step in this new situation. ## Decoration and Power Is design decoration? The concept of modernism is to speculate on the shapes and colors of objects with a rational mind, eliminating all patterned decoration, or "frills." But in terms of human history, mankind's grasp of the concept of simplicity is comparatively recent. In fact, with no fear of misunderstanding, I can say that throughout most of mankind's long history, design has been a metaphor for affluence and the decoration that celebrates the traces of the man-made. For instance,what was the purpose of designing the volute patterns that are densely overlaid on the bronzeware created in China's Bronze Age? Why aren't the patterns plain and simple? When you think about it, the sensibility that can see value in simplicity depends on a special aesthetic. Human beings are naturally awed by things that are intricate and complex. Our attention is more aroused by bronzeware whose entire surface is covered with intricate patterns than by a plain one with no decoration. This is because within the intricately patterned object is concentrated the mastery of difficult skills and the accumulation of artifice spanning a vast period of time. So we feel a special aura is expressed in the complexity of patterns. Bronzeware was the high technology of the time and was closely related to the authority that then ruled. That is, elaborate decorations were employed, as were breadth of scale and symbolism, to exert centripetal force to maintain unity among countries or clans. The more the number of human beings on the planet increased, the more dynamically active were the various countries and clans, and the more