mutual contact and interference ensued. Refined patterns functioned in the surroundings of all greatpowers with especially stalwart armed forces and intimidating auras. The volute pattern led to the creation of the dragon pattern. In the neighboring Islamic world, the authority of the religion and of the nations was expressed with intricate geometric patterns as well. The same is true of Europe. The authoritative power of the kings and their countries was closely connected with delicate, elaborate patterns. The congeries of magnificent, complicated skills found in the churches has the same meaning in terms of the demonstration of authority and power. The same root applies to the reasons for the creation of numerous astounding decorations: the walls of the Taj Mahal in India, with their amazing arabesque designs using a variety of colorful stones from all corners of the globe; the dragon patterns carved everywhere in the Forbidden City in Beijing; the arabesque designs covering entire walls of mosques; the intricate, Gothicstyle cathedrals and elaborate stained glass of their magnificent interiors; the complex, embellished rococo decoration of the Mirror Room in Versailles. These kinds of mind-boggling accomplishments, which can be achieved only with immense amounts of time devoted by highly trained human hands, breed power. Until the arrival of the modern age, the world needed great powers. But the modern age is a world in which individuals, emancipated from such overwhelming power, can freely realize their own ways of life. The beginning of modern society and the collapse of central governments marked by popular revolutions and the rise of democracy were movements to free design from decoration that was used to produce a coercive force, and the impetus for discovering the value of rationality and simplicity. Indeed, in the days of the inception of modern design, design still rested in the hands of craftspeople; and these hands, which underwent training for the likes of the aristocrats, which knew well both the severity and the pleasure of making things, maintained the quality of the furnishings of traditional life. By and by, thanks to the craftspeople, the general public was almost at the point of being able to enjoy a variety of devices and goods that