had been cultivated over the course of history. But a new paradigm for making things, called “machine production," trampled the potential for such an environment. Using this as an opportunity, human beings recognized a manner of forming their environment that was rational and independent-minded; they became conscious of design. ## The Origin of Design According to the book “Pioneers of Modern Design" by the art historian Sir Nikolaus Pevsner (1902-1983), the concept of design arose from the thinking of two figures: John Ruskin (1819-1900), an advocate of social thought, and William Morris (1834-1896), a theorist and the founder of the Arts and Crafts Movement. This was only about 150 years ago, so it's not an old story. Thanks to the machine production system, which sprang from the Industrial Revolution, England flourished in the mid-19th century. However, the early machine-made products weren't much to look at; they were mere imitations produced by the awkward hand of machinery, aiming to reproduce furniture and other kinds of objects that maintained a vestige of aristocratic decoration. Glancing through reference material from the London's Great Exhibition of 1851, we can imagine what they looked like. The cultivated forms that were refined over time by manual skills were superficially interpreted, distorted andmass-produced at extraordinary speed. Under circumstances like these, it seems that anyone with any affection for his own lifestyle and culture must have felt the sense of crisis over the loss of something, and must have been concerned about the deterioration of aesthetics. Those crude machine-made goods would never be embraced by the sophisticated traditional culture of Europe without a fight. In fact, the appearance of these substandard objects resulted in the unearthing of both the culture that had been nurtured by manual work and the sensibilitieshidden beneath that culture. Ruskin and Morris represented the collective snort of the people: “We absolutely cannot bear it!"This was their protest against