machine production, which threatened to roll right over the intricate, delicate sensibilities awakened in us by objects. Their activities were a warning and a great booing against the aggressive, impatient reform of the era. Clearly, the concept of design, or the beginning of its way of thinking, was the backlash of aesthetic sensibility against the dullness and immaturity lurkingin the industrial mechanism that was so violently changing man's living environment. However, there was no turning back for machine production as long as it continued to fuel the trends of mass production and mass consumption. Even though the common intellect and aesthetic sensibilities leveled some criticism against it, nothing was going to slow the momentum of the production and consumption explosion ignited by the Industrial Revolution. Because Ruskin's writings and lectures and Morris's Art and Crafts Movement were so strongly anti-modern, with both men championing the revival of the manual skills of craftspeople and harshly criticizing the negative effects of machine production, their arguments were not accepted into the mainstream of the time and failed to gather enough force to stop or slow society's transformation. Still, their insights and perceptions about the source of pleasure in the relationship between making things and daily life were upheld by the design movement activists of the next generation as the very wellspring of the concept of design, so we can say that in the end they had a significant effect on society. It goes without saying that we cannot directly experience the era of Ruskin and Morris, but we can catch a glimpse from preserved materials. There is an abundance of these, vividly conveying the messages they introduced, including Morris's works of the Arts and Crafts Movement, such as his book designs for the Kelmscott Press and his wallpaper designs. Whenever I look at their work, I am in awe, as if I were actually meeting these stalwart men of the 19th century. Their spirited drive in demonstrating—not through theory but through real objects—an antithesis to the doltish objects manufactured by the clumsy machine is still intense and ardent enough to unsettle the sensibilities of today's designers; we still succumb to its beauty. Somehow their