work makes me feel like I'm being scolded. Clearly their passionate enthusiasm inspired the concept of design. On the other hand, although the idea of design emerged from a negative social situation arising from deteriorating product quality, we can't definitively state that it was solely the brainchild of Ruskin and Morris. No doubt during the middle of the 19th century, as civil society matured, there thrived in a subterranean channel a sensibility different from art, some sense of gaiety in creating appropriate objects or environments, and a joy in bringing these to daily life. With the appearance of crude, machine-made daily commodities as an impetus, this sensibility flooded all society. The movements led by Ruskin and Morris symbolized this deluge. In any event, the raging torrent of machine production pained the delicate aesthetic sense of daily life. This then triggered the emergence of design as a way of thinking and perceiving in society. Today, as our living environment is being newly transformed by the development and spread of information technology, we need to once again focus on the circumstances and movements surrounding the origin of design. I think it's time we took a new look at the roots of design thought and sensibility and at the pain that's arisen in this new era, just as if we were backtracking to the era of Ruskin and Morris. ## Integration of Design There's one more development that occupies a significant position in the minds of us designers as a special epoch enshrined right next to the concept of design. That's the Bauhaus movement. Bauhaus refers to both a school of design and a movement begun in Weimar, Germany, in 1919. In 1933, the Nazis forced the Bauhaus to close, so the activities of the Bauhaus proper only lasted fourteen years. Even in its heyday, the Bauhaus was small, with a little more than a dozen teachers and less than two hundred students. But this is where the concept of “design" got its direction. Here, the machine production system was accepted as a positive aspect. At the same time, a variety of concepts for