the plastic arts, excavated via the art movements of the beginning of the 20th century, were reorganized here. During the period spanning the epoch of Ruskin and Morris through that of the Bauhaus, a storm of new and dazzling art movements swept across the entire world: Cubism, Art Nouveau, the Vienna Secession, Futurism, Dadaism, De Stijl, Constructivism, Absolutism, Modernism and so on. The names and representational style varied depending on the country, region, and ideology, but if one thing can be said, it's that in every area of Europe and in every field of art, in order to break from the forms of the past, practitioners used a passionate, radical trial-and-error approach to completely dismantle those forms. Targets were all the vocabularies of the plastic arts that had accumulated duringthe history of the decorative arts: ornamental idioms, artisanal skills, and snobbish, monomaniacal aristocratic pursuits. It may very well be that as a result, various disciplines of the fine arts and the plastic arts momentarily turned into a kind of nutrient-packed mountain of debris. It was the Bauhaus that with, penetrating ideas and energy, both verifiedand dissolved this mountain, then crushed it into powder in the mortar of powerful thought, and finally, in screening this detritus, arranged and ordered the elements. At this stage, all kinds of elements linked to the plastic arts were examined from the point of view of speculation as well as the senses and then were reduced to the zero point. The elements that could not be simplified any further were identified as color, form, texture, material, rhythm, space, movement, dots, lines, planes and so forth. It was the Bauhaus that, by neatly laying out these elements as if on an operating table, proudly declared, “All right then, let's begin a new era of plastic arts." And it did. Of course I am fully aware that this is a rough summary made with a simple metaphor. The Bauhaus was a whole bundle of activities undertaken by a great number of people and can't be bound into any single thought. Walter Gropius (1883-1969) put his heart and soul into integrating a wide range of arts and outlined the Bauhaus plan. Johannes Itten (1888-1967) em-