braced mysticism. With his precise theory of the plastic arts, Hannes Meyer (1889-1954) brought an accurate indicator to the activities of the Bauhaus. Laszlo Moholy-Nagy (1895-1946) explored a new approach to the plastic arts for the new era based on elements derived from the dismantlement of past forms. Both Paul Klee (1879-1940) and Wassily Kandinsky (1866-1944) pursued the original forms of the dynamics through which living beings create order (form) by equating the process of molding with the issue of life. Focusing on the Bauhaus theater workshop, Oskar Schlemmer (1888-1943) developed a modernism that transcends conventional world-perceptions. The more carefully we look, the more individuality we find. The Bauhaus is simply the result of the convergence of activities carried out by individuals of many talents. We could draw unlimited speculation from a detailed, microscopic examination of this group and its activities. But if we observe their combined activities from some distance, through the telescope of the 21st century, the collection of glittering stars would certainly appear as swirling galactic clouds. Unless we look at it with our eyes half closed, we often lose sight of the essence of history, but here, viewing the Bauhaus just as we would a galaxy from afar, I'd like to roughly summarize its entity and continue my story. Briefly put, the concept of design realized an extremely pure form in the framework of modernism, thanks to the opportunity provided by the Bauhaus. ## Design in the Afternoon of the 20th Century John Ruskin and William Morris nurtured the seeds; the art movements of the early 20th century cultivated the soil; consequently it was on the soil of Germany that design put forth small buds in the form of the Bauhaus. The way of thinking that design has presented embraces a world endowed with real spontaneity and liberty, and has developed into abundant foliage in many different cultural aspects insofar as human beings acknowledge the quality of their lives in terms of products and communication.