Now, in the second half of the 20th century, when design was supposed to flower, the power of the economy, instead, began to drive the world. Design ended up being pulled along by the new engine of the economy. All design thought, whether of Ruskin and Morris or of the Bauhaus, has had a socialistic tint. Both Ruskin and Morris abhorred being controlled by an economy in which making things was synonymous with machine production, and because the birth of the Bauhaus was enabled by the social-democratic government in Weimar, it can be said that the social-democratic trend fostered the Bauhaus way of thinking. Basically, the concept of design was conceived and developed in no small measure on the premise of idealistic social ethics. Now, within the intense magnetic field of economic principle, the purer the concept, the less able it is to live up toits ideal. The birth of economic principle is clear-cut. Modern society was realized and personal freedom was born. This heightened the urge to possess objects, consume goods and services, and accumulate wealth. Thus were generated an unlimited number of authorities created to satisfy these desires more advantageously, and as these congregated and separated, a new great power that would move the world came into existence. This was the economy. The economy, in an aim to encourage consumer spending in modern society, works to ensure the successive production of new objects. And in order to circulate these new products as the objects of consumer desires, the media have developed into a variety of formats, and communication methods have seen persistent evolution. Astoundingly, design has become part of the current ofeconomic development. The world experienced two great wars in the 20th century. If we look at this from a broad perspective, we see demonstrated the process by which the world shifts to a new motive principle. People around the world, billions of them in myriad nations, cultures and religions, all live by their own sense of value. The more intense the dynamism of interrelation, which is allowed by the progress of movement and correspondence in the form of trade and philosophical exchange, the more frequently egos