and forces collide. Without a framework for international intervention undertaken with the rationality of a bird's-eye view, these collisions spiral into wretched catastrophe, namely, war. After having experienced two great wars, the world seems to be maintaining just enough rationality to restrict the appeal of arms, which would cause more misery. Instead, economy, as the new unarmed method of competition, has begun to run the world as if it were the driving source of human activity. This is the shift of the motive principle of the world—to economy. Terms like economic war were born from this newly emerging context. Design has been embroiled in this situation. ## Standardization and Mass Production To imagine the situation with more clarity, let's go overit in some detail. After World War II, in the defeated nation of Japan on the tip of East Asia, product design became part of industrial production. Modern design thought, beginning with the Bauhaus, brought forth a unique modernism in Japan, too, but its evolution would be engulfed in the industrial momentum toward the commitment to standardization and mass production. Immediately upon his return from a tour of inspection in the United States and Europe, Konosuke Matsushita, one of the representative entrepreneurs of Japan's postwar manufacturing industry, reportedly said, "The next era belongs to design." Of course he wasn't talking about something to be incorporated into the Bauhaus-like, idealistic wellspring of design. But these were honest words regarding the useful nature of design as it appeared to Matsushita, a businessman shouldering the industrial restoration of the country as it crawled back from the ashes of defeat. Right there, we had industries preparing for complete recovery and growth, and the diligent workers to shoulder that growth. The conditions were all in place; with rapid economic growth, design would fuse into industry as one of the gears driving standardization and mass production.