On the other hand, Japan had long been searching for an independent design concept outside of mass production. The history of modern design in Japan has been haunted by the question, "What is originality?" repeated like a hiccup every time modernism from the U.S. or Europe is dropped into the gut of our culture. This particular inclination to contrast the originality of one's own nation with Western identity or thought is a cultural trauma commonly foundin Asian countries that have experienced the civilizing of their cultures in reference to Western modernity. Within this context, the mingei (folk art) movement, which found the ideal of product design in the traditional crafts nurtured by the everyday life of the citizenry, held conciseness as one of its concepts, and had a unique aesthetic that could stand shoulder-to-shoulder with Western modernism. The idea was that the form of an object is created and refined not by an incidental plan devised by industry, but by that accumulation of time called life. The viewpoint that design ought to be derived from tradition sounds reasonable compared to the assertions of Ruskin and Morris, but the movement had little significant influence on a socialsituation in which industry was making remarkable progress and the influx of postwar U.S. and European cultures was creatingconfusion. It's obvious, when we look at it from a distance, with eyes half closed, that Japan's industrial design was directed not toward the culture of daily life but toward the economy. Rising from the devastating damage of war, Japan was fully engaged in increasing national power, and its goal was economic prosperity, not a mature consciousness of everyday life. For Japan at that time, the priority was not the quality of the food, but filling the stomach; not culture, but industry. The value system of that time exerted a latent power over the entire second half of the 20th century, one that even now reverberates deeply through the substratum of our society like a basso continuo. Looking over today's product design, we see that except for a few examples, almost every design is based on the perspective of a large-scale manufacturer, premised on the principles of standardization and mass production.