In industrial design, the individuality of designers is suppressed, while the will and strategy of the corporations that plan, produce and sell goods or services is reflected accurately. If this system works well, we get rational design that skillfully gathers materials and technology in response to the demands of the contemporary lifestyle. If it does not, we get shameless design that has ingratiated itself to the market. The industrial products of Japan, represented by SONY, have shown the world high-standard design based on employment of in-house designers, close ties between engineering and design, and scrupulous management of standardization and mass production. ## Style Change and Identity What if we look at the United States? European pioneers of modern design who emigrated to escape the war brought with them a portion of that concept. Walter Gropius went to Harvard University, Mies van der Rohe (1886-1969) went to the Illinois Institute of Technology, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy led the New Bauhaus in Chicago. Each communicated hisidiosyncratic thinking about design in his new home. These influxes of European or Bauhaus-style thinking can be detected behind the United States' breakthrough in the fields of architecture and product design. However, unlike the social-democratic-tinged thought of the Bauhaus, design in the United States has continued to emit vivid colors as part of the marketing that supports its economic development. In the U.S., design has evolved in an extremely pragmatic manner, closely linked to marketing analysis and management strategy. The prevalence of streamlining in the 1930s in the U.S. was where the practice of using design to change the form of a product originated. Ever since, there's been no slowdown in the development of a coupling that affects the entire world: the differentiation of surface design paired with the evolution of industrial technology. In an environment in which the United States leads the world economy, this kind of pragmatic view of design influences Europe and Japan as well. In short, the U.S. views design as a management