resource. Entrepreneurs, who discovered that innovation is what whets people's appetite for consumption, promoted design to the role of “style changer." The appearance of a new style forced the aging of the existing product and turned it into an antique. Series of plans were drawn up based on the strategy of "making things that are fresh today seem old tomorrow,"just to motivate consumer spending, and design responded to that role with continual changes to product appearance. Then, in every corner of the world, all kinds of products, from cars to AV equipment, lighting appliances, furniture, sundries and packaging, came into existence through style change and stirred up consumer appetites. On another front, when Europeans recognized the operating concept of brand (the preservation of value in the marketplace) they also assigned to design a portion of the work of handling this device, namely, branding. In the past, “management resources"meant human resources,equipment and financial resources. Recently these have been joined by information, which includes both corporate image and brand, two concepts that have filtered down to the general public. It is also the United States that has skillfully developed methods like corporate identification and brand management, strategically interpreting the role of design to aid corporate management. ## Thought and Brand What about European design? In Europe, two other defeated countries, Germany and Italy, pulled design along as they developed. After the closing of the Bauhaus school, most of the professors left for the United States, but those who had shared school experiences helped the Bauhaus idea progress in their newhomes. In Germany the Ulm School of Design played a part. Its first director, Max Bill (1908-1994), advocated a concept he called Umweltgestaltung (Environmental Design), with which the perspective of design began to include the idea of contending with its environment. The principle of the school