is clearly readable in its curriculum, which includes the fields of architecture, environment, product form, visual communication andinformation, but it seems they're listed here not as specialized fields, but to position design as a discipline that integrates all the fields. Included in this curriculum are not simply knowledge and training in color and form, but also philosophy, information aesthetics, ergonomics, mathematics, cybernetics and the fundamentals of the sciences. The contents of this curriculum were no longer to be regarded as an educational structure for a genre of handicrafts or art, but had to be understood as a sort of integrated anthropology or integrated formative sciences, premised on a crossover to science. This curriculum is evidence of deep consideration of what kind of ideas and knowledge system are needed to support designers, whose work bears upon the entire environment. It speaks of the deepening profundity of the concept of design from the Bauhaus to Ulm, a profundity that lay behind German precision products (as symbolized at one time by those of the Braun brand) and was the result of a very high level of research intohuman behavior. What about the other defeatednation, Italy? Italian design, whose Latin radiance helped develop modern design, is quite a contrast to meditative German design. As illustrated by the words of the industrial designer Enzo Mari, who “grew up feeling close to Michelangelo and Leonard da Vinci," the world of Italian design freely reaches for an exuberant originality. Its freewheeling dynamism gives design yet one more appealing aspect. And because of the high quality of its ideas and its plastic arts, not in mass production, but in relatively small-scale industrial production that integrates the handwork of craftsman into the production process, Italian design has achieved originality, excellence andincreasingfame. Examining European design in minute detail, we sense the independent spirit of its designers as well as a lingering craftsmanship. This is probably because the lineage of craftsman-like handiwork is inherited as part of the vocational consciousness of European designers. In the Bauhaus, a professor and a master craftsman partnered to teach lessons, and the foundation