of European manufacturing includes the handiwork of trained craftspeople. When this system works well, it produces design of stunning individuality, originality and freedom. When it does not, it renders design in which we sense asomewhatarrogant individuality. In the market, those fine products marked both by the talent of individual designers and the quality of the craftsmanship gain a reputation for superiority, which is then preserved as a special value. That is, the force we call "brand"obtains social recognition. This brand, guaranteeing the quality and origin of a product, imperceptibly gathered strength in the world market and continued to develop when refined as a methodology. The industrial products of Olivetti and Alessi exemplify the notion of brand. With branding, we glimpse again the underlying strength of design. As I said, in the United States, this concept of brand was thereafter researched with great passion as an element of marketing and demonstrated its power as product design, corporate image management and ad strategy design. I can't fully cover European design here. There are endless stories about the superb design of Scandinavia, France, England, the Netherlands and so on, but let's leave that for another time and continue on with the topic at hand. Japan, the United States, Europe: the shape and form design takes differs in each society depending on the circumstances of its birth, its lineage, and what influenced it during the coming-of-age of the national economy. Still, in the latter half of the 20th century, when economic power strengthened its control, economy was the main source of power behind the development of design. Expected to do more and more, as a service providing quality, innovation and identity, design began working to respond to these requirements. In these kinds of societies, ordinary people so enjoyed associating with the novelty of information and products that they became afraid of fallingbehind the times.