## The Prank of Postmodernism On the brink of the explosive spread of personal computers, we were bound to head into the infancy of yet another new economic culture, but on the eve of that birth, for just a bit, design strayed into a bizarre labyrinth. In the '80s, the term “postmodern" was introduced in the world of design, developing into a trendy phenomenon that spread across the fields ofarchitecture, interior design and product design. Originating in Italy, it spread like wildfire to the rest of the developed world. As the term indicates, postmodernism was conceived as the ideological conflict between modernism and the new era, but if we review it with a little broader perspective today, in the 21st century, we recognize that postmodernism cannot be seen as a turning point in design history. It was just a fleeting commotion that occurred during the hand-off of the concept of modernism from one generation to the next. If we look carefully, we can even see postmodernism as an event symbolizing the aging of the generation of designers that sustained modernism. From the trends in the plastic arts, it is clear that postmodernism was a small, manipulated system of icons and something of a fad. Photos of people in old-fashioned clothes of any past era make us laugh because of the strangeness of an entire society's participation in this empty agreement called fashion. Viewed from the 21st century, postmodernism makes us laugh for the same reason. It seems like a revival of the StreamlineStyle. However, it's worth noting that those who initiated the movement included designers like Ettore Sottsass, whose brilliant accomplishments include products andcorporate identity for Olivetti created within the tide of modernism. What distinguishes this movement from the streamline boom is the fact that the designers were not overwhelmed by the plastic, representational nature of postmodernism, but those who perceived the limitations and possibilities of modernism through their own experience played with design, creating an empty iconic system with full knowledge of what they were doing. At the same time we can't forget the germination, among ordinary people, the recipients of design,