of a kind of maturity and worldliness that recognized and accepted the fictitious nature of this kind of design. However, I question reading postmodernism as the aging of a certain generation, because this is a world of pranks, directed by designers weary of spending time with modernism and ordinary people who have attained some sophistication regarding information. In the generation tired of pouring its pure passion into modernism, I sense a phase of mature insight. The forms attending the playfulness of postmodernism are like the sophisticated jokes cracked by the designers of our grandparents' generation, an epoch of design's dissolution that we should cherish. The world should have let postmodernism pass with a smile, but the economy alone was serious, trying to use it to revitalize the market, and spreading it into the world much more than was necessary. For a bit, young designers were tossed about in the melee too. Even critics acclaimed postmodernism as a duel between modernism and a new era. Here lies the cause of postmodernism's wandering, its bewilderment and its bitterness. From these events we should recognize that modernism isn't over yet. Even if the power of the impact it had at its inception has been lost, modernism is not the kind of thing that can turn into a trend or a fashion. Modernism has temporarily suffered from the experience of being ironically shrugged off as a parody by designers of a certain generation who were tired of pursuing it. If the intellect that understands the quality of life through the practice of making things is an essential energy that can inspire modernism to evolve and grow, designers born afresh among the younger generation who are exposed to the idea of modernism will direct a new modernism that transcends the work of the senior generation that grew so tired of the mainstream. ## Computer Technology and Design Where does design stand today? The remarkable progress of information technology has thrown our society into great turmoil. The computer promises, we