When technology moves society, we call the society “technology driven," but there is one country whose design conforms to this situation more than that of any other country. It's the Netherlands. The cradle of Europe's most recent design epoch isn't always Italy or Germany. In 2000, the World Exposition was held in Hanover, Germany. Ecology was the theme, with presentations of programs about issues like natural resources and environmental preservation. Only the Netherlands' message differed from the rest. I remember it went something like this: “Our country's land, the forests, the varieties of flowers, energy, even beer: we've made it all, on our own." The Dutch pavilion, nicknamed "Big Mac" and designed by the architect group MVRDV, comprised six layers.The rooftop held a plateau-like area with a small lake and several windmills that generated the building's power. The lower level was a forest of natural trees. Natural wood pillars supported the floors and ceilings. A tremendous number of fluorescent lights were installed at random all over the ceilings, and it looked as if they had helped the trees to perform photosynthesis. On the sub-level was a flower garden. I seem to remember hearing the sound of honeybees from small monitors scattered in the carpet of flowers. Fundamentally, visitors to the pavilion were richly rewarded with a direct experience ofthe Dutch way of communing with Nature. Now that I think about it, I recall that the Netherlands reclaimed its land by drainage and a quarter of its land lies below sea level. This is the origin of the saying “God created the world. Netherlanders created the Netherlands." Saying that they made the land means they made the forests, the fields and the canals. The Dutch canals are very geometric, as if they were drawn with a ruler, and the houses stand neatly along their banks. Once tremendously enthusiastic about improving tulip varieties, the Netherlands is now the hub of the flower seedling industry. Its technique for generating energy through windmills is superb; it's possible to conclude that the nation has some pride in having intert vened in nature and createdits own environment through man's artifice.