Simply put, the tradition of Dutch modern design is radicalism, probably partly reflecting this cultural disposition. The artists who took an active part in the De Stijl movement in the first half of the previous century included the graphic designer Piet Zwart, who taught at the Bauhaus, the architect Gerrit T. Rietveld, noted for designing the Red and Blue Chair as well as the Schroder House, and the painter Piet Mondrian. The distinguishing feature of the De Stijl artists can be interpreted as frank and fundamentalist. The De Stijl gave origin to the tradition of Dutch modernism exemplified by fastidiousness as well as wholeheartedness, and marked by the sort of attitude that, once one decides to do something, he'd better commit to it until the end. Rem Koolhaas, who shines with particular brilliance in the world of architecture, is the emblematic figure of this Dutch radicalism; afloor turns directly into walls and the walls immediately into ceilings. Pillars do not necessarily stand upright. The color selection for the seats in an auditorium is random. Ceiling lamps are spaced randomly as well. To pursue a rational space apportionment, he comes up with the solution of a building designed as if it were raised from a ground plan made of a pie graph. His design approach, presenting modern brilliant touches against his dry, candid solutions, which at first glance look aggressive, seems to be a product of the technology-driven context. The Dutch product design collective, Droog Design, also entails a nihilistic criticism of modernism. Though their pranks differ a bit from postmodernism's, the radical sensibility at their core has the same root as Koolhaas's. The aesthetics cultivated in this land of no mountains and much human ingenuity, fighting a bit with the jarring rhythm of an immature technology, has had no small effect on today's design around the world. It blows a breeze of originality into the blocked mind. Before complaining about the rapid progress of technology, it might be a good idea to learn something from the straightforward, positive dash the Dutch have been on. There must be something for us to learn from it, even if the greater part of this book's message is an antithesis to this kind of context.