## Beyond Modernism So far, this tale of design has covered design absorbed in style-changing techniques and design that clings closely to new technologies, but design is not going to end up as a servant to the economy or technology. While leaning towards that tendency on the one hand, design has done a consistently good job as a rational indicator for giving form to objects. Within its innermost parts, design carries an extra gene of idealistic thought: the pursuit of shape and function, and even while operating on economic energy, it maintains some semblance of a cool, pious way-seeker.That is, within industrial society, design has steadily acted as the rational and efficient indicator, planning for optimal objects and environments. Every time technological progress reveals a new possibility for creating new products or communication infrastructures, design plays a role in persistently and consistently pursuing the best possible solution. I am writing this on a plane bound to Buenos Aires from New York; not only the improvement of aircraft safety, but also the comfort of the seats and other interior furnishings can be recognized as the results of design's assiduous efforts. And from the simplified, ergonomic form of my computer's keyboard, I also see clearly design's role in manufacturing. In other words, one of the achievements of modernism is design's firmly rooted place in our daily lives. Today's designers are beginning to realize that endless possibilities for design lie dormant not just in the new situations brought on by technology, but also in the common circumstances of our daily lives. Creation of novel things is not the only creativity. The sensibility that allows one to rediscover the unknown in the familiar is equally creative. We hold a great accumulation of culture in our own hands, yet we remain unaware of its value. The ability to make use of these cultural assets as a virgin resource is no less creative than the ability to produce something out of nothing. Beneath our feet lies a gigantic, untouched vein of ore. Just as simply donning sunglasses makes the world look fresher to us, there is an unlimited number of ways of looking at things, and most of them haven't been discovered yet. To awaken and activate