those new ways of perceiving things is to enrich our cognitive faculty, and this relates to the enrichment of the relationship between objects and human beings. Design is not the act of amazing an audience with the novelty of forms or materials; it is the originality that repeatedly extracts astounding ideas from the crevices of the very commonness of everyday life. Designers who have inherited the legacy of modernism and shoulder the new century have gradually begun to explore their consciousness of that fact. The same is true of communication. To create an indicator that can be trusted in chaotic circumstances is to amass sensible, practical observations on the real state of affairs. Today we have come to understand the real state of affairs as follows. The conventional is not replaced by new technologies. The old accepts the new, resulting in more options. What we need for that to happen is not to cling to the new, but to rationally analyze the options we've got. For example, in the e-commerce market, newly established companies have not been as successful as existing companies that entered the same field after painstaking analysis. Internet news services haven't eliminated newspapers. The development of e-mail service and cell phones hasn't reduced the number of postal objects. Clearly, an increase in the number and complexity ofmedia leads to multipolarization of our communication channels. Communication design is the sensibility that efficiently organizes these media. The sensitivity cultivated by conventional media is not going to be made redundant by the emergence of new media. One medium may be the one that cultivates our communication sense, but others will make use of it as well. Design is the vocation of taking both old and new media, favoring neither, putting them into a cross-disciplinary perspective, and making full use of all. Design is not subordinate to media; design explores the essence of media. In fact, within the labyrinthine complexity of today's media, we can expect people to more clearly understand the genuine value of design. Digging a little deeper into the relationship between technology and communication, some designers have begun to rethink the possibilities of the quality of information; putting aside the rough information that swirls