Mende came up with the following solution for matches. First, they are natural twigs whose tips are coated with a combustible substance. Specifically, his concept is to entrust these dried twigs with a final role (matches), prior to their return to the soil. The design asks us to consider the relationship between humans and fire, which spans tens of thousands of years, letting our imagination run through time, over our ancestors' life as it was intertwined with fire, and then place fire in the palm of our hand. Now as we take a closer look, the shapes of sticks are quite aesthetically pleasing. Our busy life usually exiles such aesthetic objects from our mind. Nature, fire and humans: Mende's solution impressively evokes their individual existences. These are called Anniversary Matches. It would be quite effective to use these matches to light the candles on birthday or anniversary cakes. After all, burning fire is a powerful symbol. Perhaps this is because flame enshrines the possibility of both a ferocious, destructive power that can grow immensely, and the essence of creation. This giant imagination is infused into a match-sized design solution. ## Kosuke Tsumura and Diapers The subject here is the disposable diaper, but not for babies: diapers for adults, particularly the aged. Disposable diapers were first put on the market in 1963. Since high polymer absorbent material was applied in 1983, they have become better fitting and easier to wear, as well as remarkably compact. Functionally, disposable diapers have reached a high standard, but I still felt that the conventional product was missing something. If I became incontinent tomorrow I'd have to use what's on the market today. Imagining the scene, I start feeling a bit miserable. You'd agree if you were to stand in front of a mirror wearing such a thing. The sight reflected there hardly maintains human dignity, because the pattern is basically the same as that for babies. I'd hate to wear such a thing, and I'd be very sad to have to ask my parents to. I entrusted this subject to the fashion designer Kosuke Tsumura. His brand, called Final Home, is based on a completely different concept than that underlying conventional brands, which are concerned only with fashion and trends. The Final Home concept came about from an experimental attempt to find a new kind of relationship between clothes and human beings.