# About Kenya Hara Naoto FUKASAWA Product designer “When a creative individual from a certain group finds some kind of symbol, that symbol will help energize anew the members of the group." This is an excerpt from “The Mechanism of Unconsciousness" by Hayao Kawai (published by Chuokoron-shinsha). The Christian cross is a symbol, as is the hinomaru, or red circle on the Japanese flag. Kenya Hara wants to create asymbol like this, one that will generate a wealth of psychic energy inspiring the masses. His aspiration seems to be too audacious, but his intention includes no political or religious aspects. It is indeed true that most people tend to reject being controlled under the auspices of particular symbols. What Kenya Hara aspires to is not even establishing a symbol representing some sort of movement. The symbol he seeks entails no tangible body. His true interest is to visualize the feelings common to all human beings, i.e., those at work in the subconscious. He excels in symbolizing in an easily understandable format the particles of creation flying all about us. He is extremely skilled at editing and integrating numerous creations—each of which glitters individually—into a single glowing mass of light. His power is enough to metamorphose so many diverse things— design, art, architecture and the great variety ofsocial phenomena—into a particular symbol and an innovative message. Just as we may look at each and every star in the sky, but never see the constellations of which they are part, Kenya Hara is the only one who sees the silhouette. Its entity manifests itself through his artifice—candidly, delicately and aesthetically. I guess that Hara is convinced that he is a designer endowed with the ability of interpreting things logically and analytically. He is not wrong in this view. But I prefer to think of him as a designer capable of perceiving events and phenomena intuitively to the utmost. Take an example of how he lays a stone on a piece of white paper. It is marvelous that he never fails to identify the