one and only position of harmony for the stone to rest within its space. Even if there were one hundred stones, the composition of the stones he produces on the paper would be accurate and strike a chord. I believe that this intuitive power, through which he is capable of holistically apprehending events and phenomena, perceiving an exact point of layout through the repetition of concentrations and distractions in a blink of an eye, is a boon for his ingenuity. It is not that the stones and the paper are prepared, already having some aesthetic value. Our wonder is that he is able to turn those objects into an aesthetic entity through a perfectly targeted layout. He is that rare being who can translate into reality the exquisiteness that creates value not through content but composition. It goes without saying that Japanese-like aesthetics or the culminated aesthetics of simplicity underlies his thought. The exquisiteness he creates is likened to the hinomaru as a symbol or graphic design. I am not talking about social thought of some kind, or history, but the meaning such a symbol implies. The hinomaru is a mere crimson disk on a white square background, which serves nonetheless as a capacious vessel that can be translated into all kinds of meanings by all sorts of viewers. I am sure that Hara wants to demonstrate an empty, liberal framework that allows a certain target interpretation or understanding to arise in the mind of a viewer without intentionally prescribing the meaning. Kenya Hara is a designer who stands in sublime isolation. He seems to remain at a certain distance from other people and things in order to apprehend all the creations encompassing the fields of design, art and architecture as design in the aggregate. Without getting too close, and based outside the ridgeline where subjectivity becomes objectivity, he is trying to catch the outline of the nested boxes that accommodate all creations.