# Afterword, or Perhaps, a New Serve Kenya HARA Design is like the ball that's put in play in games. A ball has to be round. If it's not round, there's no game and no progress. Modern science supposedly evolved alongside ball games. A round ball is a medium that reveales nature and the principle of the cosmos; ball play allows human beings to experience these things through physical movement. The important point is that a round ball cultivates proficiency. A ball with irregular mass would react unsteadily, hardly allowing the players to gain any skill. A ball that's fairly spherical, on the other hand, always reacts regularly, helping us gradually improve our handling of it. If the ball is round, in tennis, for example, we can make a quick, decisive serve into a corner. We can even ride on a large ball. This is not a matter of personal ability. It's about communicating with the world and the principles of the cosmos. Design is the round ball. People, by continually relating to design, can experience nature and the principle of the cosmos, and so benefit a great deal from this indicator that points to the creation of environments and communication. The projects I've been involved in are like ball games of all sorts. If I liken them to tennis, it's as if a succession of top players were making strong returns of every subtle serve I had made on the corner. I return the ball too, and it takes yet another subtle course. This is how HAPTIC, RE-DESIGN and other such projects have come to be. As I worked on these projects, I felt like serving another ball to the world; this book is that next serve. I expect the ball is round, so everyone will be able to play. And now I'd like to express my respect to the many creators who, with profound understanding of the intention of each project, fully participated in them, so that we could share a fascinating intellectual resource through