these individual exhibitions. And then, because the solutions were so high in quality, upon review, we were able to learn from yet other, newly discovered issues that had gone unnoticed during the run ofthe projects themselves. I would first of all like to extend my gratitude to Lars Müller for making this book a reality. He said to me in the beginning, “Monographs belong to the last decade. You must not be a subject, but an author." Accepting his opinion, I was able to bring this book into the world. The product designer Jasper Morrison encouraged me to publish the book through Lars Müller Publishers. Due to his very appropriate advice, this book gained both will and an independent existence. I also want to express my deepest appreciation to those who, despite their incredibly busy schedules flying here and there around the world, responded so quickly to my request for manuscripts. There is no greater honor than to receive this kind of encouragement from respectedcolleagues. I would also like to express my thanks to Etsuko Watari at the Watari Museum of Contemporary Art, who introduced me to Lars Müller. Thanks to her, I have made a new friend in whom I have complete faith. I would also like to thank Li Edelkoort for contributing to this book. Her sensory brilliance, by which a trend becomes a rich story, inspired me continually. By virtue of her writing, the first part of the book is adorned with many inspirational words, which I am convinced will act as powerful mediators for this work as it goes out into the world. John Maeda, who also contributed, is like a master to me in terms of that newly emerged senseware called the computer. Despite his broad ability to run ahead of the times, he doesn't just run forward, and I deeply respect his circumspect, liberal intelligence. It is a great pleasure to be granted his words in this book. Thank you, John.