I offer my thanks also to Naoto Fukasawa, who has written the words that appear at the end of the book. He is one of the designers with whom I meet most frequently and, at the same time, one of my colleagues at Musashino Art University. His unique perspective in observing the world and his devotional appetite for design constantly envelop me in design, too. I always feel gratitude for this quasi-older brother. I would also like to thank Maggie Kinser Hohle and Yukiko Naito, who together translated this text into English. Maggie has shown much interest in my work over the years, supporting it in various ways: translating, interpreting, and introducingit through articles in a number of magazines. Thanks to this pair's deep understanding of my particular design language, this book is able to reach an English-reading audience. Furthermore, I would like to thank the Takeo Company for sponsoring the HAPTIC and RE-DESIGN Exhibitions, and showing such great understanding of the projects created for them, and also for providing the paper used for this book. I would also like to thank our printer, SunM Color. I extend my sincere gratitude to the staff of the Hara Design Institute in the Nippon Design Center, Inc. who participated in the production of this edition; I am particularly thankful to Yukie Inoue, who has supported my work for many years, and to Kaoru Matsuno, for her editorial design of this book. Last but not least, I thank my wife Yumiko. I am pleased to tell you that the book is finally finished.