ality, standing wouldn't occur if there were no gravity and no decently solid surface on which to do it. Under a weightless condition, we would float. Even in a deep swimming pool full of water, standing does not come into existence as an action. In the case of standing, both gravity and a solid surface are said to “afford”the action. The following story cites Fukasawa's explanation. Suppose you're on a drive with your girlfriend and you feel like having some coffee. You stop at a vending machine. You insert a coin and press a button. The first paper cup of coffee is served from the machine. Holding this cup, you can't get another coin out of your pocket to put in the machine. You need to find somewhere to set the cup. Your girlfriend is still in the car. There is no suitable place to put it. But you realize that the roof of the car is at just the right height. It seems a bit bad mannered, but, with no alternative, you place the cup on the roof of the car and insert another coin for the second cup of coffee. In this case, although the car roof is clearly not designed to serve as a table, its ideal height and its level nature “affords" the action of putting down the cup of coffee. This results in the generation of an action: placing the cup on the roof. This attitude of both comprehensively and objectively observing the variety of environments and situations that are tied to various actionsis called affordance. Fukasawa doesn't deduce a solution with the strict guidance of the theory of affordance. However, his focal points are close to the concept. Consider the CD player Fukasawa designed. It looks almost exactly like a wall-mounted fan. The CD is inserted in the center. If you pull the cord that on a fan would be the on-off cord, the disc begins to spin, just like a fan. We know it's a CD player, but our previous experiences and memories of fans, entrenched in our minds, cause us to prepare ourselves for that object. Particularly the skin on our cheeks, with its extraordinary sensitivity, begins to activate the “sensor" of the sense of touch, standing ready for the wind we expect to blow. What comes wafting over us is not wind, though, but music. Thanks to the use of the fan-shaped design, this product, although its performance as audio equipment alone may be a little lower than average, may in fact provide relatively better performance by inducing the users' sensors to stand ready for the flowing music. Fukasawa's methods attempt to establish this kind of magical relationship between the object and its design. Whatever the case may be, the MUJI CD player, which boasts a concept that differs