intrigued with this question for a while, and developed my interest through the Architects'Macaroni Exhibition. The idea for this exhibition came to me when the Japan Institute of Architects asked me to represent the creativity of its members in some way that would make it more understandable to the general public. It's surprising that most people don't correctly understand either the occupation or the individual character of the architect. Probably because each project of a great architect is in itself so luminous, so overwhelming, it's hard for the public to understand his or her individual talents. So my thought was that if I asked architects to move to the periphery of the kitchen and compete with one another on a theme that even ordinary people could appreciate, the creativity of the architectural profession, the differences among the concepts of individual architects as well as their originality, would be revealed to all. Macaroni was the theme of this competition. Creating a blueprint for macaroni seemed simple, but in fact, it was quite difficult. Why is macaroni shaped the way it is, as a short hollow tube? Naturally, there are specific reasons. First, there is heat conduction. Macaroni is boiled. If it were solid rather than hollow, the core would never cook thoroughly enough. So macaroni has a uniform thickness and no core. Second, there is the area to be covered with sauce. As macaroni is nearly flavorless, it needs plenty of sauce, and ample surface area for that. The hollow tube design creates inner surface area as well. Some macaroni has grooves on the surface. This tactic may also be understood as a means to increase the surface area and make it easier to fully apply the sauce. Third, there's ease of production. This is an industrial commodity; it is crucial that it have a shape that is easy to manufacture. Conventional hollow macaroni is made by squeezing the pasta material out of a hole that looks like a circle written with a fat marker. Of course it's important that it look delicious and boast a certain simplicity that allows for our long relationship with the product without our growing weary of it. Hollow macaroni fulfills all of these requirements.