Incidentally, the Asian counterparts to macaroni in Japan are string-shaped masterpieces of udon (wheat noodles) and soba (buckwheat noodles). In Italy they have spaghetti, but the simplicity of udon and soba is more Oriental. The square cross-section, created by slicing the noodle dough with a kitchen knife, is a perfect fit for chopsticks. The way we pull the noodles from their immersion in the broth, and slurp them up is based on the idea of balancing the amount of noodles and broth while eating. If you eat too slowly, the broth is left behind. The diner needs to have some skill as well. The correct way is to take in the noodles with some air, quietly slurping, with a refined “sluh"sound. Given this perspective, it's clearthat macaroni, though simple in shape, also has complex criteria. We might call it "edible architecture." In fact, in Italy many distinguished designers have taken up the subject of macaroni. Giorgetto Giugiaro and Philippe Starck have created interesting macaroni designs. However, instead of elbowing out conventional macaroni, these maestros' designs occupy only a minor position in commercial production. Most macaroni shapes are all too typical: hollow, twisted, shell, ribbon, alphabet... Explaining this background to 20 Japanese architects and designers, I asked them to come up with their own macaroni designs. Each design was then displayed with a model 20 times the original size, as well as a suitable recipe devised by the food critic and illustrator Hideko Kogure. Now I would like to present some of the solutions. The architects who tackled the subject so earnestly proposed the following macaroni designs.