No sketching was allowed. Instead, they started designing something that would tickle the human senses. We invited participants from multidisciplinary fields, including architecture, product design, fashion, graphics, interior design and textiles. Also invited were a traditional Japanese plasterer, an electrical appliance manufacturer and a science-and-technology expert. Once they had assimilated the aim and intention of the exhibition, all were perfectly ready for the task. Observe the environment, or ecology, of the senses. We deliberately take the results obtained through our senses and turn them to the processes of making things and communicating. This attitude reveals a new field that unites design, science and the senses. This exhibition does not stand for nostalgia. It's creation headed straight for the future. Thanks to our distinguished participants, the haptic concept has gained complete clarity in a single burst in this exhibition. I'll now introduce several of their pieces. I hope you enjoy these haptic presentations with every infinitesimal hair of your senses erect. ## The HAPTIC Exhibition The photograph on page 68 shows a close-up of the “H"of the exhibition logo. I drew the letters by planting porcine bristles on a silicone surface. I designed this spiny logo to introduce the concept to potential participants. Does it give you a little chill?When we think about design, it's harder than we might expect to start designing without thinking first about color andshape. Take a coffee cup for instance. Any designer would be itching to do a sketch as the first phase of the process. Not for this exhibition. I asked all the participants tostart from the point of thinking on how that coffee cup couldstimulate and awaken the senses, before ever coming up with an image for its form or anything else.