# List of Contributors Jeremy Aynsley studied History of Art at Sussex University and became interested in the interaction between painting, graphic design and photography, especially of the Weimar period. He now teaches Art and Design History at Brighton Polytechnic and is researching German Graphic Design of the interwar period. Hazel Conway came to design history from a background in science and technology and was a founder member of the Design History Research Group, the group which led to the setting up of the Design History Society. Her research and teaching experience of design history ranges from industrial, furniture and interior design to landscape and environmental design. Among her publications is a monograph on the furniture designer Ernest Race who was active in the 1940s and 1950s, and she was awarded her PhD for her study of the design and development of the municipal park in the nineteenth century. She is at present Principal Lecturer in History of Architecture and Design at Leicester Polytechnic. John Heskett has specialized in design history since 1967, after working in town planning, publishing and secondary-school teaching. At present Head of Historical and Theoretical Studies at Ravensbourne College of Design and Communication at Chislehurst in South London, he has also lectured widely and acted as consultant for companies and governmental organizations at home and abroad. He is the author of Industrial Design (1980) in the World of Art Series and Design in Germany 1870–1918 (1986) which is intended as the first of three volumes on the history of German design in the last century. Pat Kirkham read History at Leeds University where she specialized in social and economic history as well as the history of architecture and design. Her PhD (London University) was written on furniture making in London c 1700–1870. Author of William and John Linnell, 2 vols, 1980 (with Helena Hayward), Harry Peach: Dryad and the DIA (1980), and numerous articles in learned and more popular journals, she has lectured widely in America and this country. At present she is working on a book on women and design and collaborating with the Geffrye Museum and London History Workshop on a study of furniture making in the East End of London. She teaches architecture and design at Leicester Polytechnic Josephine Miller studied Embroidery and Textiles at Goldsmiths' College School of Art and subsequently was awarded an MA in the History of European Art with a special emphasis on Dress History from the Courtauld Institute of Art, London University. She is currently employed as Senior Lecturer in the History of Design at the City of Birmingham Polytechnic. She has wide-ranging experience in teaching and has worked on a series of ten programmes on Dress for Educational TV and carried out freelance picture research. Rowan Roenisch was born in Welwyn Garden City and brought up amongst the natural beauty of Mount Park Estate (1876) and South Hill Avenue garden estate' Harrow on the Hill. She originally trained in Fine Art. After historical studies at the Courtauld Institute she went on to teach architectural and design history and is now Senior Lecturer at Leicester Polytechnic. More recently she has successfully completed a Postgraduate Diploma in Architectural and Building Conservation and undertaken a joint report for the Victorian Society on Church Redundancy and Re-use in Leicester. Her research interests include housing in the Soviet Union, Britain and Zimbabwe, and vernacular architecture. Jonathan Woodham studied for the MA degree in Fine Art, mounted jointly by the University of Edinburgh and Edinburgh College of Art, which involved both practical and historical work. After studying for an MA in the History of British Romantic Art at the Courtauld Institute of Art in London, he was appointed to the staff of the North Staffordshire Polytechnic in the Potteries where he became increasingly aware of the significance of design. Since then he has researched extensively into the history of the subject, with a particular focus on British industrial design since the First World War and has written a book, The Industrial Designer and the Public, published by Pembridge, 1983. He is now Principal Lecturer in Design History at Brighton Polytechnic. ## Introduction This is a book about how to study design history – where to start, what sort of questions to ask and how to answer them. In recent years the possibilities of studying design history have grown enormously. It is now possible to study it at school, in colleges, polytechnics and universities and at levels which range from A level to undergraduate and postgraduate. Design history can be the main subject of a degree course, or it can be part of practical design or humanities courses, yet until now there has been no book which offers guidance to students on how to study it or how to approach the subject. The aim of this book is to provide an introduction to the study of design history which can be used by students in colleges, polytechnics and universities. No matter whether your main subject is a two- or three-dimensional design course, or whether you are studying design history as a main subject, this book will provide a clear introduction to it, and teachers of design history at A level will find that it provides a wealth of information on the topic. Studying is traditionally associated with educational establishments, but being a student is not only a matter of attending courses, it is much more concerned with attitude of mind and a spirit of inquiry. So this book also aims to help to make the study of design history more accessible to those with an interest in the subject, whether or not they are involved in formal education. Design history is a large subject and the chapter headings of the book indicate broad areas of it. However such sub-divisions are in many ways artificial as I suggest in the first chapter, Design History Basics’. 'Design History Basics' introduces the basic tools necessary to any historical study and discusses some of the general problems and issues that may be encountered. Each of the following chapters on dress and textiles, ceramics, furniture, interiors, industrial design and graphics indicates the scope of the subject in terms of its breadth, chronology and the links between the various subject areas. Case studies illustrate some of the possible approaches to each area and the types of problem and pitfalls to look out for. In addition some indication is given on how historians have approached particular areas in the past. As the subject of environmental design and the literature on it is so large, a rather different approach has been adopted in this chapter. The emphasis ## Design History there is primarily concerned with the question of project work on various aspects of twentieth-century issues, and indications are given of a variety of potential topics. At the end of each chapter there are notes to the references and quotations that appear and a Further Reading list for each chapter is given at the end of the book. These are an important supplement to each chapter since they enable readers to build on the introductory material in the chapters, and so pursue particular interests in more detail. Although some readers may be interested primarily in one or two of these areas, many points of interest may well appear in other chapters. The index which lists all the main topics provides access to relevant material in other chapters. Also at the end of the book is a glossary which can be referred to whenever (q.v.) or (qq.v) follows a name or term in the text. This is followed by a list of useful addresses or organizations which relate in a variety of ways to the study of design history.