# Industrial Design # JOHN HESKETT Industrial design is concerned with the vast array of goods manufactured by serial- or mass-production methods. The profession of industrial designer emerged in the twentieth century and can be seen as a featuré of the division of labour and specialization characteristic of large-scale modern industry. Before this specialism developed the function of design in industry was less well-defined and was performed by a variety of people, from major artists to anonymous workers. These more obscure and distant circumstances present particular problems and challenges. Modern practice for industrial designers generally falls into two broad categories, when s/he is either a direct employee of an organization and designing exclusively for it, or an independent consultant commissioned to design for a variety of clients. Examples of the first category are the design groups employed by all major motor-vehicle manufacturers, or by the giants of electrical goods manufacturers, such as the Dutch company Philips or Matsushita Electric of Japan. Such teams are responsible for translating the possibilities of scientific and technological invention into products that are áppropriate and appealing to the buying public. Their success or failure can profoundly influence the performance of a company. Consultants perform a similar function but for a variety of clients and product types. Kenneth Grange of the consultancy Pentagram has been responsible for a range of work of as diverse a nature and scale as the front-end and cab of British Rail's High-Speed 125 train, kitchen appliances for Kenwood and disposable razors for Wilkinson's Sword.¹ Whatever the mode of employment, or type of product under consideration, the task of modern industrial designers is to produce a plan and specification of a form or mechanism for large-scale production. An essential feature of their work is the separation of concept from manufacture or realization. ## The Significance of Industrial Design in Modern Society A key characteristic of industrial design is therefore the manufacturing context for which designs are created. Unlike design for ceramics, glass or textiles, it is not confined to one material, nor, as in furniture or interior design, to a particular category of artefact or environment. It can frequently overlap with other areas of design, indeed, practitioners have claimed its range of concerns extends from ‘a lipstick to a steamship' or from a match to a city'. Such breadth can be problematic. The sheer extent and diversity of the innumerable products of industry is itself confusing. To illustrate this, consider some details of your own daily life. To simplify the illustration, concentrate on one area: the kitchen as working space and the preparation of food as a main activity. Basic fittings will include storage spaces and containers for food and equipment, with a table or cupboard-top surface at which to work. To prepare food, there will be hand-implements such as knives, spoons, ladles, vegetable-peelers and spatulas, for use with basins, jugs and cutting boards, and mechanical appliances such as a hand-whisk or powered mixer/beater. Vessels for cooking will include saucepans, frying-pans, baking-tins and casserole dishes, of varying shapes, materials and sizes. For cooking there will be a stove, using gas, electricity or solid fuel, possibly supplemented by appliances such as a toaster or electric kettle. An examination of any other area of domestic life will reveal a similar diversity. Neither is such a consideration limited to the home environment. To go anywhere beyond immediate walking distance of where you live will require access to a form of transport, of a personal kind, perhaps; bicycle, moped, motor-cycle or car; or maybe public forms: bus, tram, underground or train. Whilst out you may wait at a bus-shelter, stop at a traffic light, or make a call from a telephone box. Whatever your destination, school, work, public buildings or sites for sport and recreation, there will again be a remarkable variety of objects to facilitate particular activities. All will have been conceived to serve a certain purpose and embody a particular set of values. It would be possible to continuein similar vein and compile a lengthy catalogue. The examples given above are just the tip of a very large iceberg, but they do illustrate the degree to which our environment, in all its details, is composed of industrial products. They are so numerous and ubiquitous as to be frequently taken for granted. Yet they form the material framework of our existence, enabling it to function, not only in practical or utilitarian terms, but also in ways that give pleasure, meaning and significance to our lives. The public outcry in Britain in 1984, when British Telecom announced the replacement of the traditional red telephone booth by a bland modern design, ignored the undoubted efficiency of the latter and was essentially a lament for the loss of a familiar image, that communicated a strong sense of identity. Industrial products are therefore elements of our material culture, tangible expressions of individual and social values. This means objects cannot be studied simply in terms of visual characteristics and qualities, or as ends in themselves. Instead, visual analysis needs to be supplemented by questions exploring wider reaches of meaning. ## What Does the Study of Industrial Design Involve? Basically, questions on the nature and role of industrial design point in two directions. The first concerns how artefacts come into existence: who designed what, when, how, where and why? This is obviously vital in establishing a basis of fact and understanding about the activity of design, though it is susceptible to differing interpretations and emphases, stemming from the variable meaning of the word ‘design' itself. This can be illustrated by a seemingly nonsensical sentence: 'Design means designers design designs by means of designs.' The noundesigners' refers to individuals or groups engaged in the activity, whose background, talent and achievement needs to be described and understood. The verb ‘to design' describes an action or process, implying a development or sequence of thought and practice through which industrial designers create and evolve a concept for later production. The sentence also contains three usages of design' as a noun. The first word describes the total activity in an all-embracing and undifferentiated sense, as in: ‘Design is an essential ingredient in successful industrial performance.' The final word refers to a concept or plan, the end result of the design process, e.g. ‘The completed design was ready for production.' As used following the verb, however, ‘design' describes the realized object after the process of production, e.g. Like all great designs, the Mini became the symbol of an entire generation.' The second major direction of questioning explores the application of an object: who is it intended to be used for, who uses it, for what purposes, with what effect and what meaning. Widely differing conclusions can be drawn from these two channels of inquiry, since the meaning intended for an object by its designer may not be the same as the meaning of an object in use. The context may alter, and with it the manner in which an object is utilized or perceived. An example indicating how these different approaches can combine in the history of industrial design is the German car, the Volkswagen, popularly known as the Beetle', which became the best-selling vehicle of all time, with over 20 million being produced. The character and career of its designer, the Austrian engineer Ferdinand Porsche, are obviously important and, in particular, the ideas and influences leading him to the conception of a small car with a rear-mounted air-cooled engine which he developed by the early 1930s. Attempts to have such a car manufactured commercially failed, but in 1936 he was commissioned by Adolf Hitler to produce an inexpensive ‘People's Car' by mass-production methods similar to those earlier used by Henry Ford in the USA. This shift from the possibility of commercial to statesupported production in itself altered the significance of the concept. The intention was to manufacture a vehicle available to broad sections of the population previously unable to afford a car, as a means of securing support for the regime and diverting attention from its less savoury aspects. The detailed design process of how Porsche fulfilled a very tight brief on cost and performance to create the most enduring example of 1930s streamlined style is itself fascinating, and after models and plans had been approved by Hitler the first prototypes were demonstrated in 1938. The various stages of design as process, concept and object can all be identified in its development to this date. The significance of the Volkswagen, however, does not end there. The car was promoted as an achievement of the Nazi regime but remained an unfulfilled promise. Few were produced before the outbreak of war, when the concept was adapted for a military vehicle. As such it was given an incredibly rigorous testing, from the snows of Russia to the sands of North Africa. After Germany's defeat, a new company was formed to commence commercial production of the original ‘Beetle'. It became an astonishing success, a sound, reliable and inexpensive vehicle, capable of coping with rugged conditions. Even more remarkable was the way it became a cult object, particularly in the USA, where it became the star feature of the Herbie' series of films produced by the Walt Disney organization. It was, in so many ways, an astonishing process: from being the symbol of the Third Reich, known pompously as the Strength-through-Joy' car, to the fun object of the 1950s. Its form and construction, though modified and improved in detail, remained unaltered, and its functional qualities, though refined, were also unchanged. Yet its meaning and significance had totally changed. Of course, not all objects have such extensive a public impact or as dramatic a history as the Volkswagen. Many have more private and intimate significance, the importance of which was apparent to the American novelist Henry James. In his novels he used a technique of precisely detailed descriptions of the objects and interiors surrounding his main characters, which expressed their nature, as a means of increasing readers' awareness of their personalities. The importance of this ambience was summed up by him in the evocative phrase, ‘the empire of “things"’,2 a term entirely appropriate to the role of industrial products in modern life. ## The Scope of Industrial Design History The scope of the history of industrial design, is obviously closely linked to the development of industrialization, and much depends on how that term is interpreted. It is most commonly associated with the introduction of mechanization, mainly steam-power, and large-scale manufacturing and commercial organization, which gathered momentum from the late eighteenth century, the period of the Industrial Revolution. Indeed, research on industrial design has overwhelmingly concentrated on Western Europe and North America since that revolution. Industrialization has transformed virtually every aspect of material existence. Machines have been devised not only to produce age-old categories of artefacts, such as ceramics and furniture, but also to create new objects and other machines for use in daily life, from aircraft and cars, to refrigerators and vacuum cleaners. With mechanization values changed from an emphasis on tradition, the conservation of tested models which ensured survival, to an emphasis on innovation, of new ideas in a condition of superfluity. The new scale of production hinged on duplicating predetermined forms and, in the division of labour which developed, the role of industrial designer emerged as the creator and specifier of that form. The transition from predominantly agricultural/craft cultures to ones based on industrialization, with all the consequences for technique, form, organization and social significance, will therefore continue to be the main focus of attention in any history of industrial design. There is, however, a strong case for extending the range of research further back in time and over a greater geographical area than is generally the case at present. This requires a distinction to be drawn between industrialization and steam- or electrically-powered mechanization. The two are often regarded as synonymous, but are not necessarily so. If industrialization is defined in terms of organizational structure instead of sources of power, a different perspective becomes possible. Productive capacity on a scale beyond individual capacities, and based on specialization of tasks and division of labour, need not involve large-scale mechanization, but can be based on hand techniques. There is evidence, for example, of forty-five distinct pottery forms in Egypt in the Archaic Period, c. 3000 BC, being found in such profusion in excavations that an archeologist, W. B. Emery, writes of their massproduction'.³ Archaeological research provides a wealth of information on the classification of forms and their identification in relation to place and time. There is a potential role for design historians not only to draw on such research, but also to contribute to it with studies of forms related to materials and processes, and analyses of the functions they performed. The pottery and stoneware vessels of civilizations such as those of Archaic Egypt were precise solutions to particular functional and cultural requirements which emerged from centuries of craft adaptation. In this shadowy process of evolution it is generally impossible to identify individual figures or groups to whom specific forms can be attributed. This has given rise to a concept that has come to play an important role in histories of industrial design. Anonymous forms of this type are generally considered to be part of a vernacular or folk tradition. By this is meant those implements and artefacts which, over an extended period of time, have established basic forms appropriate to their function and cannot be fundamentally improved: for example, the shapes of tools such as spades, hoes, axes and saws, and domestic items such as jugs and ladles. Some may be specific to particular cultures, others may be more widespread. An example universally used as a cutting instrument, is scissors. Exactly when, where or how this solution to the problem of cleanly cutting material evolved is unknown, though it is believed to have been in the Bronze Age. Certainly, they were widespread over 2000 years ago as far afield as Ancient Rome and China. But whatever detailed variations have subsequently appeared, and they are innumerable, the fundamental configuration remains unaltered. The vernacular tradition is thus an important source of design concepts and forms, often known as type-forms, which have become firmly established due to their appropriateness and widely adapted to industrial mass-production. In principle, there is little difference of form in relation to function of modern scissors to those evolved long ago, despite the very different production techniques used. The concept of the vernacular tradition can be romanticized in mystical terms as an expression of the soul of an age or people. Such treatments gloss over the fact that we simply do not know, and often have no conceivable way of knowing, what particular individuals, events or processes contributed to the evolution of a form. Neither is this kind of approach restricted to studies of the distant past; for example, writing of American design in the early nineteenth century, Arthur Pulos asserts: In the young and virile democracy it was thought that everyone was, or may have been, a contributor to the evolution of a product . . . It would seem that anonymity was then, and continues to be, part of the burden that designers must bear for their role in democratic utilitarian design.'4 Anonymity is equated with democracy, but what this really means is that not enough research has been done or inadequate material is available for us to know what really took place. Whatever the limitations and misuse of the concept of the vernacular tradition, it does have a positive side. It provides a useful corrective, in its acknowledgment of collective effort, to a one-sided emphasis on individualism and an important means of demonstrating the essential continuity of many design forms through time. The idea of continuity, however, needs complementing by an awareness of the forces producing change within a culture, of the contrasts existing between different cultural traditions and the extent of exchange between them. Considered in terms of cultural awareness, the history of industrial design is afflicted with the academic equivalent of tunnel vision, an inability to focus other than in a very restricted range. The prevailing emphasis on recent events in an exceedingly limited number of countries has neglected trends that, even in the twentieth century, have had a profound impact in global terms. An example is the rise to economic power and the influence of designs from the countries of the Western Pacific arc, Japan in particular. Equally neglected are those countries under communist systems of government, or Third World countries, where differing economic and social structures have led to differences in design theory and practice. If this limited outlook is true of the present, it is even more marked in studies of the past. Once again, however, a corpus of work from various disciplines exists which can give important leads to a wider understanding, such as Romila Thapar's history of her native India. She describes how, in the period c. AD 200-300, political and economic events combined to produce an expansion of trade: With the increasing demand for particular commodities and the consequent necessity to raise their output, some guilds began to employ hired labour and slaves ... Leading guilds were those of the potters, metalworkers, and carpenters. Their size can be gauged from the fact that even at an earlier period one wealthy potter named Saddalaputta had owned five hundred potter's workshops. In addition, he had organized his own distribution and owned a large number of boats which took the pottery from the workshops to the various ports on the Ganges.5 That raises many intriguing questions. Some relate to the effect increased trade and larger scale organization had on methods of production and the forms manufactured for expanded markets. Such research could be a valuable contribution to knowledge of the role of design for handicraft industry in one of the world's most diverse cultures, where continuities from the past provide distinctive challenges and problems for modern Indian industrial designers. It could also enable valuable comparisons with developments in other countries to be made. Perhaps even more significant, however, is the point Romila Thapar makes about the role of Indian traders as middlemen between East and West, based on a long association with Graeco-Roman civilization and their trading ventures into South-East Asia, which she succinctly sums up in the statement: Exchange of merchandise led inevitably to an exchange of ideas.'6 It is a statement valid for all periods of history and has considerable, if yet inadequately explored, relevance to the development of industry and the design of its products.