# Design History ## From Craft Industry to Mechanized Industry Under the more stable social and economic conditions of earlier ages, with slower processes of change and growth, craftsmen were not basically concerned with innovation, in terms of entirely new artefacts, but with handing on and adapting the skills and forms developed by previous generations. However, in Europe, under the more dynamic economic conditions of the fifteenth century onwards with the growth of competition, innovation became a vital ingredient of success and gradually the craft tradition of maintaining established standards came under increasing threat. In the early stages of this process, innovation might not necessarily mean the development of new forms, but rather some eye-catching or fashionable feature of decoration or treatment of material, but nevertheless it was recognized as a valuable instrument in attracting the attention of potential customers. Yet again, the influence of this important transitional phase and the role of design for larger scale production has been comparatively neglected. The long-term effect of increased trade and competition was fundamental, however, largely due to the interest in technological invention which drew upon new scientific knowledge and offered means of producing goods faster, in greater quantities, and at lower prices. By the mid-eighteenth century this process reached a cumulative take-off point into the Industrial Revolution. When industrialization gathered momentum the consciousness of those societies experiencing it changed profoundly. By the mid-nineteenth century, Britain was a predominantly urban country, the human environment increasingly man-made, its systems increasingly detached from nature, and innovation seemingly an indissoluble element of progress and economic success. The nineteenth century was a complex age and there are problems in presenting particular aspects of it as ‘typical'. Nevertheless, there are some that are of particular relevance to the Victorians' view of what was significant for design. Firstly, their attitude to history. As an academic subject, history was not a nineteenth-century invention, but few ages have shown such intense interest in it. Perhaps the scale and pace of change being experienced made them conscious of the process of change through time. Whatever the reason, historical research rapidly grew to give a much more detailed view of the past and provided an expanded repertoire of stylistic sources. Secondly, there was an attitude towards the design of objects that evaluated their quality in terms of decorative rather than structural features. Thirdly, the importance of religion cannot be underestimated. It provided a unifying world-view which helped to temper and absorb the impact of change and made it possible to imbue any aspect of life with moral significance. The element of decoration requires closer examination because it clearly lay at the heart of what was then considered important in questions of design. The reasons were varied. The emphasis in many industries of the period was in producing goods of an essentially traditional nature, in quantities and at prices accessible to a larger market. Their criteria and standards were derived from an age when elaborate form, costly materials and intricate decoration were symbols of wealth, for only the richest members of society could afford the products of highly skilled craftsmen. The new mechanical processes, however, were capable of replicating not only the fine decorative patterns of traditional forms and techniques, but also of simulating the qualities of rare materials. For many manufacturers, decoration could make an object look more expensive than it really was. From the consumer's point of view, ostentatious display could symbolize wealth, or at least its appearance, an important consideration in an age when the financial system depended upon creditworthiness, the ability to borrow money. It was thus important to keep up appearances, and this frequently became synonymous with ostentatious display. An interesting feature of the discussion of decoration in the nineteenth century is that few voices were raised against it. On the contrary, it was generally accepted as necessary or desirable and the main thrust of argument centred on the appropriateness of the style of decoration to an object and its function. Consequently, if one wishes to understand the objects of that period, they must be understood in the light of contemporary preoccupations with what was appropriate decorative style, and indeed some historical accounts reveal a similar preoccupation. For example, Simon Jervis, High Victorian Design (1974), a volume based on an exhibition of the same title, is divided into chapters which discuss the nature and characteristics of various styles of that time. Whilst decorative motifs derived from historical research, and travellers' collections were frequently used by entrepreneurs interested only in fashionable novelty, some scholars and practitioners sought a unified style as an expression of national identity in the contemporary world. Henry Cole (q.v.), a leading figure in organizing the 1851 Great Exhibition, argued for the establishment of principles governing ornamentation that could be reconciled to machine production, looking to nature for inspiration. In 1849 he founded The Journal of Design, a periodical to publicize these ideas, which gives a valuable insight into Victorian design for industry.7 However, Cole has been generally overshadowed by John Ruskin and William Morris (qq.v.), who shared his love of nature and also advocated it as the source of ornament, but as part of a powerful moral indictment of conditions to which life and labour were subjected in the new industrial cities. They regarded industrial workers as depersonalized adjuncts to machines, deprived of skill and creativity in their work, and robbed of an essential element of their humanity. As a remedy they put forward a philosophy proposing a recreation of the values of the Middle Ages, of a harmonious society, close to nature, the works of man being dignified by the skills and creativity of craftsmanship. It was a nostalgic and idealized vision of the past, in which joy in work was manifested in the virtuosity of skilled, artistic ornament. The views of Ruskin and Morris have received most prominence in historical accounts of nineteenthcentury design, with their anti-industrial bias generally unquestioned. Whatever the power or validity of their analysis, one needs to know the extent of their influence, to whom their ideals appealed and why, and also why there were no effective counter-arguments. Or if the latter did exist, why they have been neglected in design histories of the period. ## Some Problems of Interpretation Nineteenth century industrialization generated new methods of production and new materials which created new'skills or enabled old ones to be adapted. For example, the new machines of industry and transport created the many skills of mechanical engineering, whilst the older skills of coachbuilding were adapted to the production of railway carriages, and later of motor vehicles. In all the new large-scale industries, the task of designing models for production was developed in a variety of ways. Sometimes well-known artists were commissioned to provide designs, in a manner foreshadowing today's consultancies, such as John Flaxman's work for Wedgwood (q.v.), or Christopher Dresser's (q.v.) designs for various metalworking companies. Sometimes those responsible for designs were engineers, as in the manufacture of locomotives and industrial machinery, or modellers and pattern-makers, for example in textiles and furniture production, in a manner anticipating modern in-house designers. Decoration and the revitalization of craft-work were thus vital focal points of critical attitudes in the nineteenth century, not only towards design, but also for an extensive range of reaction against industry and contemporary society. There were, however, other developments of at least equal importance for the subsequent evolution of industrial design which require recognition. The bias of interpretation resulting from an emphasis on one aspect or another of the past can shape, and even distort, our understanding of the present. For example, in 1979 Fiona McCarthy organized an exhibition in Sheffield under the title 'Home Spun to High-Speed', which depicted the development of modern British industrial design as stemming from the Arts and Crafts tradition.8 In part this is true, but by omitting the contribution of, for example, the very strong tradition of locomotive engineering and design to the evolution of the high-speed train, it shapes an understanding of present-day practice, emphasizing the crafts, that may not be appropriate for current needs. In terms of history, such approaches lead to an emphasis on William Morris, one of the most important progenitors of the Arts and Crafts Movement, whilst ignoring William Morris, later Lord Nuffield, whose small cars of the 1920s and 1930s were important for British design, and of profound social significance. The problem of interpretation of the past is further complicated by a powerful strand of theory and practice in design stemming from Europe in the early twentieth century, in which groups of avant-garde architects and artists sought to come to terms with the nature of industrial society. In movements such as de Stijl in Holland, Constructivism in the Soviet Union, the New Objectivity in Germany, and Purism (qq.v.) in France, talented individuals and groups developed ideas and forms that had in common an attempt to unite aesthetic concerns with the concepts and processes of technology, and so create a framework of values for a new society. Common to all these groups was a complete rejection of decoration as an emblem of past decadence. In its place structure and function were stressed as a symbol of moral and social renewal. Contemporary historians and critics who shared this viewpoint interpreted the past in a way that was essentially an attempt to find justification for it. Typical was the work of Herbert Read, whose book Art and Industry (1934) did much to propagate the ideas of the Modern Movement (qq.v.), as it became collectively known in Britain. Its opening lines declare: The aim of this book may be stated quite briefly. For more than a hundred years an attempt has been made to impose on the products of machinery aesthetic values which are not only irrelevant, but generally costly and harmful to efficiency.'9 In such a manner was the central preoccupation of the previous century dismissed. What Read did was to emphasize those aspects of past design which were utilitarian and functional as precursors of what he advocated for his own time. According to his thesis, the role of a designer was to adapt ‘the laws of symmetry and proportion to the functional form of the object that is being made'.10 Depending on the extent to which this is successfully achieved, a designer is an abstract artist. Machine art is thus equated with the abstract formal concepts of the Modern Movement. In so far as Read deals with history, it is completely subordinate to the polemics of his book. A considerable body of work on the history of industrial design advocates similar ideals, focusing on the institutions that formulated them, most notably the Bauhaus (q.v.), the famous German school established in 1919. Nicholas Pevsner, Pioneers of Modern Design, first published in 1936 but subsequently revised, was probably the most widely influential book on design history ever published. It postulates the Bauhau as the apogee of a line of development leading from nineteenth-century Britain to Germany in the 1920s. The book goes no further than the Bauhaus, indeed it can hardly do so since it is both a historical justification and assertion of the primacy of the ideas of the Modern Movement. The ideas, practices and work emanating from this tradition have been profoundly influential, shaping the patterns of design education in many countries, and visible in the work of many modern designers, such as Hans Gugelot and Dieter Rams for Braun, the German electrical products company.11 The emphasis onsimple, geometric form as epitomizing contemporary industrial culture has, however, been frequently elevated to an article of faith, and the histories based on its advocacy have a common flaw. This is that they ignore, dismiss or even deride a range of other tendencies, values and approaches which coexisted with the ideals they advocated. Even Pevsner, one of the most scholarly writers in this tradition who did so much to emphasize the importance of industrial design in modern life, commented in 1937: ‘When I say that 90 per cent of British industrial art is devoid of any aesthetic merit, I am not exaggerating.'12 The basis of that sweeping judgement was fundamentally a question of whether designs conformed to the aesthetic canons of the Modern Movement (q.v.) and the appearance of so-called Functionalism (q.v.). Concurrently with the development of that movement, however, were other tendencies that had considerable influence on designs for industry and on public taste. The fashion for stepped and saw-toothed geometrical forms and colourful, jewel-like decoration of the interwar years, subsequently given the collective label of Art Deco (q. v.), was a powerful influence in much commercial production. From a very different source, scientific research into the problems of movement through the elements of air and water and techniques of wind-tunnel testing led to the emergence of streamlined style, drawing on the forms of airships and submarines for a variety of utilitarian and decorative forms. In addition to concepts of style considered appropriate to industrial products, there were also many other developments which profoundly affected the structure of industry, its methods and form of production, and thus the practice of industrial design. The methods of massproduction introduced by Henry Ford for the manufacture of his Model T’ car in the USA involved new concepts of the standardization and integration of the production line that were adopted across the world. New materials such as plastics and light metals, new power sources such as the small electric motor, and new processes of stamping, moulding and welding enabled the design and mass-production of a spectrum of products in the interwar years, such as cars, radios and domestic appliances, that fundamentally altered the material basis of everyday life. As the size of businesses and the scale of their markets increased, with competition becoming more intense, so the visual form of products became an important element of advertising and market strategy. Artists, architects, engineers and model-makers continued to undertake the function of design in many companies, but in the late 1920s in the USA a body of specialists emerged who established industrial design as a discrete profession, bringing its activity a new status and recognition. Governments too began in this period to show a greater awareness of the economic role and propaganda possibilities of industrial design, often forming bodies to encourage its development, with, for example in Britain, the Council of Art and Industry being established in 1932, followed by the Council for Industrial Design in 1944. Even when the above factors and developments are taken into consideration, there still remains a sector of industrial production which does not conform to any canons of style, taste, good design' or technical quality and to which the standards of professional industrial design are alien. They may frequently be dominant in particular market categories. Such forms may be in a variety of revivalist styles that have little to do with utility, such as Tudor- or Georgian-style electric fires with imitation coal-effect. They may express a taste for materials and forms that become fashionable, such as farmhouse-style' pine kitchen furniture, or exploit commercial imagery, such as Mickey Mouse telephones. Little attention has been given to such products, and their sources are frequently obscure, often overseas, and difficult to trace. They represent an area of choice and often aspiration in terms of popular culture which often sharply contrasts with the more clearly defined standards and norms of high culture as it has been adapted to industrial design. At any point in history, therefore, one is faced with a plurality of tendencies and ideas affecting the nature and role of design for industrial production, in its widest sense, and its social impact. The task of a historian of industrial design, I believe, is to investigate and communicate an understanding of that diversity. Opinions, arguments and interpretations on what is significant will inevitably vary and, indeed, are necessary to give vitality to debate, but this need not mean using history as justification for a partial viewpoint, as has often been the case, reducing it to·the level of propaganda for a particular tendency. ## Sources for the History of Industrial Design If the scope of the history of industrial design is exceedingly broad, so too is the range of materials and sources relevant to its study, though at present the potential of these has yet to be fully tapped. Only one thing can be stated in this respect with any certainty: as with all other aspects of design, the central focus of any study must be the designed object. There can therefore be no substitute for seeing and actually experiencing the artefacts or mechanisms that are the subjects of any investigation, or the sketches, drawings, models and documentation tracing the evolution of a design. Although this experience is crucial, however, it is not enough in itself, for there are limitations to what can be learnt from an artefact or its preliminary documentation. To concentrate on that alone would be to indulge in a form of connoisseurship. Rather, the artefact should be a point of departure into, and a point of return from, a wider range of investigation. This may involve business structures, professional and industrial organization, economic and political policy, social influence and impact, which should enlarge and enhance understanding of the design process and designed artefacts. To emphasize the latter as an autonomous activity is to ignore the element of social formation and effect in industrial design. Conversely, however, to reduce human creativity simply to an expression of social or material factors is to diminish this essential feature of our humanity. If industrial design is a crucial element in material culture, our concern must therefore be with its place in everyday life, with the interactions of creativity in society. The problems of study in this area are compounded by the fact that there is no single institution where a general overview of industrial design history is available, so it is necessary to draw on a variety of sources. Industrial museums, such as Ironbridge and Beamish, give good insights into manufacturing processes with examples of products, as do museums of technology such as those at Manchester and Birmingham. In addition, local museums frequently have extensive collections of local products, such as cutlery in Sheffield or glassware at St Helens or Stourbridge. There are also specialist collections, such as the Bakelite Museum at Blackheath and a fine cross-section of electrical appliances at the Milne Museum in Tonbridge. One initiative by a local museum of great interest is a collection of mass-produced appliances and artefacts, such as radios, vacuum cleaners and kitchen equipment dating from the early part of the century, at Calderdale in Yorkshire. Advertisements were placed in the local press appealing for contributions and a valuable collection has been assembled, some of which is occasionally shown in exhibitions at the Piece Hall Museum, Halifax. Transport is a field which is well covered and accessible. The National Railway Museum at York is amongst the finest of its kind, whilst the National Motor Museum at Beaulieu has built up a magnificent collection sited in delightful surroundings. London Transport has its own historical collection at Covent Garden in London and British Leyland have a fine museum of their products at Castle Donington. The list could be endless and there are specialist publications that give detailed accounts of transport collections across the country, such as Historical Transport, published annually by the Transport Trust. Two of the greatest national collections in Britain lie across the road from one another in London: the Science Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum. The division between them in terms of their exhibits is perhaps symbolic of the gulf that exists still between technological and aesthetic values in Britain. There is sometimes an overlap between the objects exhibited by each museum, though each will have its own emphasis. Wedgwood pottery may be shown at the Science Museum, but in the context of an exhibition on the scientific research of Josiah Wedgwood. Radios have been exhibited at the V and A, but with technical developments being subordinate to aesthetic considerations. All the above are collections of objects without any discussion of the wider aspects of design. Indeed, there is a real problem in the traditional approach to exhibiting objects in isolation with little more than identifying captions that requires reassessment if industrial design is ever to be depicted adequately in exhibitions. Whilst artefacts are, I believe, the focus of studies in industrial design, there are distinct limitations to the information they can in themselves provide. A detailed analysis of forms, in an attempt to understand why a particular shape has evolved, or how it fulfils its function, or how materials and techniques have contributed to the end result, will all provoke more questions than an object can provide answers. It is at this point that investigation of design as object leads into an investigation of design as process and concept. A documented example is the catalogue of the Boilerhouse exhibition, The Car Programme, which focused on the planning and design of the Ford Sierra.13 On a limited level, the study of process can be confined to individual designers and the characteristics of their designs, an approach that can easily romanticize designers as ‘star' figures. This can be assiduously cultivated by designers themselves. The French designer Raymond Loewy who carved a very successful career in America in the 1930s showed himself a master in the cult of personality, projecting his name and image at every opportunity. At one point, however, he had offices in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, London and Sao Paulo in Brazil with a staff of hundreds. It is unlikely that more than a small proportion of the designs submitted under his name were actually created by him. The design process, especially in a modern context, generally involves a considerable number of people and specialisms other than design. Although no one pattern of organization can be described as typical, many industrial designers will have colleagues or access to specialist advice in such areas as graphics and packaging, ergonomics, market research and analysis, various branches of engineering and materials science. Support staff may include research assistants, secretarial and administrative staff, visualizers and technical illustrators, modellers in clay and other materials and, increasingly, operators of computer-aided design equipment and programmes. The interaction between all·these skills obviously varies with the nature of the organization and project as. similarly, does the manner in which a project is developed. It will probably go through the stages of initial contact and briefing, investigation and definition of the problem, preparation of preliminary solutions, leading to decisions on and specification of a final solution. Research into the detailed structure and dynamics of design teams and how they have functioned in various situations is relatively sparse. One programme has recently been based at the Institute of Advanced Studies at Manchester Polytechnic, where research has been carried out into case studies of design projects from initiation to completion, with the on-going results intended to be used as the basis of an archive.14 Business archives of particular companies may also yield important information on the role of design, with design management research contributing to knowledge of recent structures and projects. Even on that scale of investigation, only a restricted understanding of the design process in a modern industrial setting is possible, for it must be remembered that individual designers or design teams have to reconcile many, and often competing, factors which may constrain their freedom of choice or action. This should not imply a limitation on their creativity, however, since it is when working within conflicting demands that creativity is really challenged. The kind of consideration designers need to take into account include the state of materials science and production technology; the size, capacity and policies of the organization for which they are working; the role assigned to design within the organization and its relationships with other sectors such as production and marketing. On a wider plane, there can be policies and influences affecting design work directly or indirectly, such as the specific nature of a particular country or market; the role of bodies promoting design, such as the Design Council with its centres in London, Cardiff and Glasgow and advísory services to industry; or the policies of governments. These latter can be specific, as with the 1836 Royal Commission on Art and Manufacture, or the more recent Design for Profit' campaign introduced in 1983, or they may be indirect, in terms of the basic economic and political decisions which set the framework for industrial and commercial activity. Many of these areas will necessitate coming to terms with material and problems in related subjects, such as the histories of technology, economics, politics and society -- indeed the historian of industrial design requires an interdisciplinary competence. In this sense it parallels a widely quoted definition of a designer: A jack of all trades and master of one. Whilst it is easy to advocate what should be done, the dearth of primary documentation on the areas discussed above creates major problems for research into industrial design history, though also providing a considerable challenge. In the USA, the Singer company recently donated archival material to the Smithsonian Institute in Washington DC, which documents a century of evolution of sewingmachines. In Britain it is difficult to cite any comparable industrial documentation. However, the Art and Design Archive of the National Art Library is building a collection of individual, group and company papers and documents relating to major exhibitions. The publications and documentation of bodies such as the Design and Industries Association and the Design Council are accessible but also need cataloguing. There is no equivalent in Britain of the Werkbund Archiv and Bauhaus Archiv, both in Berlin, dedicated to scholarship in relation to particular institutions. Sources such as the Public Record Office, for government documentation, and the Patents Office, for details of legally registered designs, offer huge potential as yet barely touched. A further primary source is the memory of living designers, using the techniques of oral history. Though reminiscences may not always be factually accurate, they are capable of giving a living insight in vivid detail of the human relationships and reactions in a given situation. The situation therefore is that whilst design as objéct is relatively easy to research, design as process or concept and the broader aspects of the subject are less well-served, though there is undoubtedly a wealth of material to be explored and a growing number of facilities. A recent initiative of enormous potential for the study of industrial design is the Boilerhouse Project, funded by the Conran Foundation. Since 1982 it has organized a series of exhibitions, partly historical, partly thematic, sometimes with associated seminars and conferences. It is moving to a new purpose-built site at Butler's Wharf, near Tower Bridge, and the plan is for a permanent collection of artefacts, with space for temporary exhibitions, and a library and archive with study facilities. Whilst the Boilerhouse Project has not entirely succeeded in overcoming the limitations of prevailing concepts of exhibitions, the new premises could provide the kind of flexible and wide-ranging facilities to stimulate a wholly new approach to the study of industrial design, particularly if its collection of archival material is given priority and substantially developed. In the provision of secondary works, the pattern of coverage remains uneven, not only in terms of subject but also of treatment and approach. The diversity of approaches possible in industrial design history, and some of the achievements and pitfalis associated with them, are evident in the readily available books on the subject. In the category of books that give a general introduction to the subject are Ann Ferebee, A History of Design from the Victorian Era to the Present (1970). a lightweight account which gives a pictorial overview of the last century and contains some examples of industrial developments, and my own Industrial Design (1980), which attempts a general historical overview of the history of this area of practice. Edward Lucie-Smith, A History of Industrial Design (1983), is beautifully illustrated, but the text shows little understanding of the subject beyond aesthetic concerns. Stephen Bayley, In Good Shape (1979), is a useful compendium of twentieth-century documents on industrial design with a selection of case studies of particular works. Reference was made earlier to the strand of published work based on the tenets of the Modern Movement and, in particular, Pevsner, Pioneers of Modern Design (1960). Another work informed by the same spirit and similarly of seminal importance in establishing the study of industrial design as a serious branch of scholarship was Siegfried Giedion, Mechanization takes Command (1948). This examines the evolution of concepts of mechanization and their realization in industrial products and although eccentric in some respects is packed with fascinating examples. These two works and the standpoint they represent have inspired many others in similar vein, such as Herwin Schaeffer, The Roots of Modern Design (1970), and Kurt Rowland, A History of the Modern Movement (1973), both of which advocate so-called functional design, although from a standpoint which does not argue a case, but rather assumes its unquestioning acceptance. Of ali aspects of the Modern Movement and, indeed, of design history as a whole, the Bauhaus has been covered most prolifically. This is a testament to the power of its ideas, though its influence on industrial design is often exaggerated to the level of an exclusive claim. H. M. Wingler, The Bauhaus (1969), is a massive, profusely-illustrated collection of documents that provokes as many questions as it answers. Although individual documents can be considered primary sources, their selection and presentation emphasize the international role of the institution and neglect the context in which it existed. Frank Whitford, Bauhaus (1984), is a general survey emphasizing artistic aspects, but for a more thorough treatment of design, Gillian Naylor, The Bauhaus Reassessed (1985), is to be preferred. Whilst the Modern Movement was important in the context of relating concepts of avant-garde art to industry, the wider context of design in Germany has been comparatively neglected. My own Design in Germany 1870–1918 (1986), gives a general account of the period before the First World War. Two scholarly works that go some way to redressing the balance are Joan Campbell, The German Werkbund (1978), which is concerned more with the theory of design for industry than its practice, and Industriekultur: Peter Behrens and the AEG (1984) by Tilman Buddensieg and Henning Rogge, a most thorough account of one of the forerunners of German industrial design. On developments in the USA, a number of publications have appeared providing a much broader understanding of developments there. Arthur Pulos, The American Design Ethic (1983), is a large, profusely-illustrated volume of sometimes dubious methodology in its bias to the myths of American history, though many interesting features of design ·do survive this treatment. Donald Bush's wellillustrated The Streamlined Decade (1975) is a readable if generalized account of the 1930s, but the most scholarly contribution on American design yet to appear is Jeffrey Meikle, Twentieth Century Limited (1979), a detailed account of the development of design and streamlining in the interwar years. Many consultant practitioners prominent in America have written autobiographies, though some smack of selfadvertisement, especially Raymond Loewy's. One of the best is Designing for People (1955), by Henry Dreyfuss, which gives fascinating and often wryly humorous insights into his work for many leading American corporations. In-house design in the USA has been less extensively covered, though Stephen Bayley, Harley Earl and the Dream Machine (1983), is an excellent account of the career of General Motors'design chief, drawing extensively on company archives. On developments in Britain there are few works that give an adequate overview. Fiona McCarthy, A History of British Design (1979), is a concise, readable book, but of limited scope, focusing essentially on tendencies leading to, and associated with, the Design Council. A similar point of view characterizes Michael Farr, Design in British Industry – a Mid-Century Survey (1955), which is an extensive review of what constituted ‘good design' according to the Design Council. Noel Carrington, Industrial Design in Britain (1976), is a misleading title, being more of a personal account of the Design and Industries Association between the wars. The influence of technology and materials on design is as yet inadequately researched, but Sylvia Katz, Plastics Design and Materials (1978), is a well-illustrated introduction. Tubular Steel Furniture (1979), edited by Tim Benton and Barbie Campbell-Cole, is a collection of articles on the title subject. Several of the texts for the course on 'History of Architecture and Design' formerly presented by the Open University are useful in this context, such as A. Forty and G. Newman, British Design (1975), which includes a good account of electrification in the home between the wars. Many works exist on the development of specific products, though they are often for enthusiasts and lack detailed information on design. Brian Haresnape, Railway Design Since 1830 (1968), is a useful survey, as is Jonathan Hill, The Cat's Whisker: 50 Years of Wireless Design (1978). Despite limitations of approach, it is often possible to glean much information from the host of books on such subjects as cars, household gadgets and tools. There is a growing body of work on individual designers and consultant groups. In the former category is a Design Council series, of which three studies have so far been published, including Penny Sparke, Ettore Sottsass Jnr (1982), on the remarkable if eccentric Italian designer. Two works from the Pentagram Design Partnership, Pentagram (1972), and P. Gorb (ed.) Living by Design (1978), and John and Avril Blake's book on the Design Research Unit, The Practical Idealists (1969), give an insight into the work of particular consultancies, whilst Penny Sparke, Consultant Design (1983), is a review of this particular form of design organization. Little work exists on the role of government or the responses of the public. Whilst the title of Jonathan Woodham, The Industrial Designer and the Public (1983), might refer explicitly to the latter, it is in fact better on the former. Two recent works reveal the poles of treatment apparent in books on this subject. Deyan Sudjic, Cult Objects (1985), is a review of 'classic' designs which have achieved unique recognition, though mainly in design circles. In stark contrast, Adrian Forty, Objects of Desire (1985), argues that designs manifest social concepts and values, and cannot be considered solely as expressions of personality. Penny Sparke, An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century (1986), concentrates on the design of consumer products and also argues that design must be placed in its economic, social and technological context. Two observations are necessary to conclude this brief review of published books. First, the coverage of industrial design is characterized by large gaps, though these can be filled to some extent by a wide range of catalogues, pamphlets and journal articles on a variety of subjects. Second, there is a considerable amount of work on industrial design in the process of publication, which makes any general survey in constant need of updating. It seems highly likely that the current interest in the evolution of industrial design will extend the range of readily available information and current interpretation far beyond its present limitations. ## Notes 1 See the exhibition catalogue (1983), Kenneth Grange at the Boilerhouse, The Boilerhouse Project. 2 From James'novel The Ambassador, quoted in Douglas, M. and Baron Isherwood (1980), The World of Goods (Harmondsworth: Penguin), p. 6. 3 See Chapter 9, 'Industry', for the section on pottery in Emery, W. B. (1961), Archaic Egypt (Harmondsworth: Penguin), pp. 206–14. 4 Pulos, A. J. (1983), American Design Ethic: A History of Industrial Design, (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), p. 100. 5 Thapar, Romila (1966), A History of India, Vol. 1 (Harmondsworth: Penguin), pp. 109–10. 6 Thapar, op. cit., p. 118. 7 The Journal of Design, of which six volumes were published 1849–51. 8 Sheffield City Art Galleries, exhibition catalogue (1979), From Home Spun to High Speed: A Century of British Design 1880–1980. 9 Read, Herbert (1934), Art and Industry (London: Faber), p. 6. 10 Read, op. cit., p. 49. 11 On the work of these two designers see Die Neue Sammlung, Munich, Exhibition Catalogue, ‘System – Design Bahnbrecher: Hans Gugelot 1920–1965, 1984; and Burkhardt,F. and Franksen,J. (eds) (1980), Design: Dieter Rams (Berlin: Gerhardt Verlag). 12 Pevsner, N. (1937), Industrial Art in England (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), p. 12. ## Industrial Design 13 The Boilerhouse Project (1983), The Car Programme: 52 months to Job One or How they Designed the Ford Sierra. 14 For an account of some of the work and methods adopted as part of this project see Alexander, Mary, Creative marketing and innovative consumer product design – some case studies', Design Studies, vol. 1, January 1985.