# Further Reading ## Chapter 1 Brink, A. (ed.) (1981), The Libraries, Museums and Art Galleries Yearbook 1978–1979 (Cambridge: James Clark) Carr, E. H. (1961), What is History? (London: Macmillan) Coulson, A. J. (1979), A Bibliography of Design in Britain, 1851–1970 (London: Design Council) Honour, H. and Fleming, J. (1977), The Penguin Dictionary of Decorative Arts (Harmondsworth: Penguin) Horne, Donald (1984), The Great Museum: The Re-presentation of History (London: Pluto) Jervis, S. (1984), The Penguin Dictionary of Design and Designers (Harmondsworth: Penguin) Kamen, R. H. (1981), British and Irish Architectural History: a Bibliography and Guide to Sources of Information (London: Architectural Press) Morgan, A. L. (1984), Contemporary Designers (London: Macmillan) Museums Association, Museums Yearbook (London: Museums Association) Wright, P. (1985), Ón Living in an Old Country: The National Past in Contemporary Britain (London: Verso) ## Chapter 2 Ashelford, J. (1983), A Visual History of Costume: The Sixteenth Century (London: Batsford). Byrde, P. (1985), A Visual History of Costume: The Twentieth Century (London: Batsford). Cumming, V. (1983), A Visual History of Costume: The Seventeenth Century (London: Batsford). Cunnington, C. W. and P. and Beard, C. (1976), A Dictionary of English Costume (London: A. & C. Black). Foster, V. (1984), A Visual History of Costume: The Nineteenth Century (London: Batsford). Lurie, A. (1981) The Language of Clothes (London: Heinemann). Parry L. (1983), William Morris Textiles (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson). Parker, R. (1984), The Subversive Stitch – Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine (London: Women's Press). Ribeiro, A. (1984), Dress in Eighteenth Century Europe, 1715–1789, (London: Batsford). Scott, M. (1980), Late Gothic Europe, 1400–1500 (London: Mills & Boon, History of Dress Series). Scott, M. (1986), A Visual History of Costume: The Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries (London: Batsford). Wilson, E. (1985), Adorned in Dreams, Fashion and Modernity (London: Virago). ## Chapter 3 Aslin, E. (1969), The Aesthetic Movement (London: Elek). Atterbury, P. and Irvine, L. (1979), The Doulton Story (Stoke on Trent: Royal Doulton Tableware). Beard, G. (1969), Modern Ceramics (London: Studio Vista). Bernard, J. (1972), Victorian Ceramic Tiles (London: Studio Vista). Birks, T. (1976), The Art of the Modern Potter (London: Country Life). Bristow, W. S. (1964), Victorian China Fairings (London: A. & C. Black). Buchanan, R. A. (1972), Industrial Archaeology in Britain (Harmondsworth: Allan Lane). Burchill, F. and Ross, R. (1977), A History of the Potters' Union (Stoke-on-Trent: Ceramic and Allied Trades Union). Burton, A. (1975), Remains of a Revolution (London: Deutsch). Charleston, R. (1968), World Ceramics (Feltham: Hamlyn). Cook, R. M. (1966), Greek Painted Pottery (London: Methuen). Cushion, J. P. and Honey, W. B. (1965), Handbook of Pottery Marks (London: Faber). Donhauser, R. S. (1978), History of American Ceramics: the Studio Potter (Dubugue, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt). Drey, R. E. A. (1978), Apothecary Jars: Pharmaceutical Pottery and Porcelain in Europe and the East 1150–1850 (London: Faber). Edwards, R. and Ramsey, L. (1958), The Early Victorian Period (London: Connoisseur Period Guide). Gaunt, W. and Clayton-Stamm, M. (1971), William de Morgan (London: Studio Vista). Giedion, S. (1969), Mechanization Takes Command (New York: Norton). Girouard, M. (1978), Victorian Pubs (London: Studio Vista). Godden, G. A. (1968), Encyclopaedia of British Pottery and Porcelain Marks (London: Barrie & Jenkins). Godden, G. A. (1970), British Pottery (London: Barrie & Jenkins). Godden, G. A. (1970), Coalport and Coalbrookdale Porcelain (London: Barrie & Jenkins). Gray, B. (1953), Early Chinese Pottery and Porcelain (London: Faber). Haggar, R. G. (1960), Concise Encyclopaedia of Continental Pottery and Porcelain (London: Deutsch). Hamilton, D. (1978), Architectural Ceramics (London: Thames & Hudson). Hogben, C. (1978), The Art of Bernard Leach (London: Faber). Hannah, F. (1986), Ceramics (London: Bell & Hyman). Haslam, M. (1975), English Art Pottery 1865–1915 (Woodbridge: Antique Collectors' Club). Haslam, M. (1978), The Martin Brothers, Potters (London: Richard Dennis). Hillier, B. (1968), Pottery and Porcelain 1700–1914 (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson). Honey, W. B. (1945), The Ceramic Art of China and Other Countries of the Far East (London: Faber). Honour, H. (1977), Neo-Classicism (Harmondsworth: Penguin). Hudson, K. (1963), Industrial Archaeology (London: John Baker). Jenyns, S. (1951), Later Chinese Porcelain (London: Faber). Jenyns, S. (1971), Japanese Pottery (London: Faber). Jenyns, S. (1973), Japanese Porcelain (London: Faber). Kelly, A. (1965), Decorative Wedgwood in Architecture and Furniture (London: Country Life). Kira, A. (1979), The Bathroom Book (Harmondsworth: Penguin). Lane, A. (1947), Early Islamic Pottery: Mesopotamia, Egypt and Persia •(London: Faber). Lane, A. (1949), French Faience (London: Faber). Lane, A. (1954), Italian Porcelain (London: Faber). Lane, A. (1971), Later Islamic Pottery (London: Faber). Lane, P. (1983), Studio Ceramics (London: Collins). Leach, B. (1976), A Potter's Book, revised edition (London: Faber). Lindkvist, L. (1977), Design in Sweden (Stockholm: The Swedish Institute). Lucie-Smith, E. (1981), The Story of Craft: the Craftsman’s Role in Society (London: Phaidon). Mankowitz, W. and Haggar, R. G. (1957), The Concise Encyclopaedia of English Pottery and Porcelain (London: Deutsch). Morley-Fletcher, H. (1971), Meissen (London: Barrie & Jenkins). Naylor, G. (197í), The Arts and Crafts Movement (London: Studio Vista). Pugh, P. D. G. (1970), Staffordshire Portrait Figures and Allied Objects of the Victorian Era (London: Barrie & Jenkins). Rackham, B. (1963), Italian Majolica (London: Faber). Rackham, B. (1972), Medieval English Pottery (London: Faber). Rosenthal, E. (1949), Pottery and Ceramics: From Common Brick to Fine China (Harmondsworth: Penguin). Sandon, H. (1975), Royal Worcester Porcelain from 1862 to the Present Day (London: Barrie & Jenkins). Savage, G. and Newman, H. (1974), Illustrated Dictionary of Ceramics (London: Thames & Hudson). Singer, C., Holmyard, E. J. and Hall, A. R. (eds) (1954–1958), A History of Technology, Vols 1–5 (Oxford: Clarendon). Victoria and Albert Museum (1984), Rococo Art and Design in Hogarth's England (London: Trefoil). Watney, B. (1973), English Blue and White Porcelain of the 18th Century (London: Faber). Whiter, L. (1970), Spode: A History of the Family Factory and Wares (London: Barrie & Jenkins). Williams, T. (1978), A History of Technology, Vol. 6 (Oxford: Clarendon). Wright, L. (1960), Clean and Decent (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul). ## Chapter 4 Agius, P. (1978), British Furniture 1850–1915 (Woodbridge: Antique Collectors' Club). Andrews, E. D. and Faith (1966), Religion in Wood (Bloomfield, Ind.: Indiana University Press). Anscombe, I. (1984), A Woman's Touch. Women in Design from 1860 to the Present Day (London: Virago). Aslin, E. (1962), Nineteenth Century English Furniture (London: Faber). Baker, H. (1966), Furniture in the Ancient World, Origins and Evolution 3100–475 BC (London: The Connoisseur). Baroni, D. and Thomas, G. (1978), Rietveld Furniture (London: Academy Editions). Beard, G. and Gilbert, C. (eds) (1986), Dictionary of English Furniture Makers (Leeds: Furniture History Society). Bellaigue G. de, (1974), The James A. De Rothschild Collection at Waddesdon Manor, 2 vols (Fribourg: Office du Livre). Billcliffe, R. (1986), Charles Rennie Mackintosh – The Complete Furniture Drawings and Interior Design, (London: Murray). Billcliffe, R. (1984), Mackintosh Furniture (Cambridge: Lutterworth). Blaser, W. (1982), Mies van der Rohe Furniture and Interiors (London: Academy Editions). Buttrey, D. N. (ed.) (1964), Plastics in the Furniture Industry (London: Macdonald). Callen, A. (1979), Angel in the Studio: Women in the Arts and Crafts Movement (London: Astragal). Ceșinsky, H. (1969), The Gentle Art of Faking Furniture (London: Chapman & Hall). Chippenale, T. (1966 reprint), The Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director (New York: Dover). Clarke, R. (1983), Japanese Antique Furniture (New York: Weatherhill). Comino, M. (1980), Gimson and the Barnsleys (London: Evans). Cox, J. C. and Harvey, A. (1973 reprint), English Church Furniture (Wakefield: E. P. Publishing). Dalisi, R. (1976), Gaudi Furniture (Milan and New York: Academy Editions). Ditzel, N. and J. (1954), Danish Chairs (Copenhagen: Høst & Søns). Drexler, A. (1973), Charles Eames Furniture From the Designer Collection, The Museum of Modern Art, New York (New York: MOMA). Duncan, A. (1982), Art Nouveau Furniture (London: Thames & Hudson). Eames, P. (1977), Medieval Furniture (London: Furniture History Society). Ecke, G. (1970 reprint), Chinese Domestic Furniture (Rutland, Vermont and Tokyo: Tuttle). Edwards, R. and Macquoid, P. (1954), The Dictionary of English Furniture Makers, 3 vols (London: Country Life). Edwards, R. (1974), The Shorter Dictionary of English Furniture (London: Country Life). Ellsworth, R. H. (1971), Chinese Furniture (New York: Collins). Emery, M. (1983), Furniture by Architects (New York: Abrams). Fairbanks, J. L. and Bates, E. B (1981), American Furniture, 1620 to the Present, (London: Orbis). Fastnedge, R. (1962), Sheraton Furniture, (London: Faber). Filbee, Marjorie, (1977), Dictionary of Country Furniture (London: The Connoisseur). Fusco, Renato de, (1981), Le Corbusier, Designer: Furniture, 1929 (London: Architectural Press). Garner, P. (1980), Twentieth Century Furniture (London: Phaidon). Garner, P. (1980), The Contemporary Decorative Arts (London: Phaidon). Gilbert, C. (1978), Furniture at Temple Newsam House and Lotherton Hall (Bradford and London: National Art Collections Fund and Leeds Art Collections Fund). Gilbert, C. (1978), The Life and Work of Thomas Chippendale, 2 vols (London: Studio Vista). Gloag. J. (1964), The Englishman's Chair (London: Allen & Unwin). Gloag. J. (1969), A Short Dictionary of Furniture (London: Allen & Unwin). Goodison, N. (1974), Ormolu: the Work of Matthew Boulton (London: Phaidon). Goodison, N. (1968), English Barometers 1680–1860 (Woodbridge: Antique Collectors' Club). Goodman, W. L. (1964), The History of Woodworking Tools (London: Bell). Grandjean, S. (1966), Émpire Furniture 1800–1813 (London: Faber). Hanks, D. (1979), The Decorative Designs of Frank Lloyd Wright (London: Studio Vista). Harris, E. (1963), The Furniture of Robert Adam (London: Tiranti). Harris, J. (1961), Regency Furniture Designs from Contemporary Source Books 1803–1826 (London: Tiranti). Hayward, H. (ed.) (1965), World Furniture (London: Hamlyn). Hayward, H. (1964), Thomas Johnson and the English Rococo (London: Tiranti). Hayward, H. and Kirkham, P. (1980), William and John Linnell, Eighteenth Century London Furniture Makers, 2 vols (London: Studio Vista). Heal, Sir A. (1953), The London Furniture Makers From the Restoration to the Victorian Era 1660–1840 (London: Batsford). Hinckley, F. L. (1960), Directory of the Historic Cabinet Woods (New York: Crown). Hummel, C. F. (1968), With Hammer in Hand. The Dominy Craftsmen of East Hambton, New York (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia). npton, Huth, H. (1974), Roentgen Furniture (London: Sotheby Parke Bernet). Jervis, S. (1974), Printed Furniture Designs Before 1650 (Leeds: Maney for The Furniture History Society). Jervis, S. (1962), Victorian Furniture (London: Ward Lock). Jov, E. T. (1967), Chairs (London: Country Life). '  T (1967) The Country Life Book of Clocks (London: Country Life). Joy, E. T. (1977), Pictorial Dictionary of British 19th Century Furniture Design (Woodbridge: Antique Collectors' Club). Joy, E. T. (1977), English Furniture 1800–1851 (London: Sotheby Parke Bernet). Kane, P. (1976), 300 Years of American Seating (Boston: New York Graphical Society). Kates, G. N. (1962), Chinese Household F urniture (New York: Dover). Leeds City Art Galleries (1972 catalogue), Town and Country Furniture (Leeds: City Art Galleries). Leeds City Art Galleries (1977 catalogue), Back-Stairs Furniture (Leeds: Leeds City Art Galleries). Lever, J. (1982), Architects' Designs for Furniture (London: Trefoil). Liversidge, J. (1955), Furniture in Roman Britain (London: Tiranti). Makinson, R. L. (1979), Greene & Greene. Furniture and Related Designs (Salt Lake City, Utah: Peregrine Smith). Mercer, E. (1969), Furniture 700–1700 (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson). Montgomery, C. (1967), American Furniture. The Federal Period (London: Thames & Hudson). Musgrave, C. (1970), Regency Furniture (London: Faber). Parker, R. (1984), The Subversive Stitch – Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine (London: Women's Press). Parker, R. and Pollock, G. (1981), Old Mistresses, Women, Art and Ideology (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul). Pugin, A. W. N. (1972reprint), GothicFurniture (London: Gregg International). Quimby, I. (ed.) (1979), American Furniture and Its Makers (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). Radice, B. (1985), Memphis (London: Thames & Hudson). Randall, G. (1980), Church Furnishing and Decoration in England and Wales (London: Batsford). Russell, F., Garner, P. and Read, J. (1980), A Century of Chair Design (London: Academy). Salaman, R. A. (1975), Dictionary of Tools Used in the Woodworking and Allied Trades c.1700–1970 (London: Allen & Unwin). Sheraton, T. (1980 reprint) The Cabinet-Maker and Upholsterer's Drawing Book (New York: Praeger). Sheraton, T. (1980 reprint), The Cabinet Dictionary (New York: Praeger). Sparke, P. (1981), Ettore Sottsass Jnr (London: Design Council). Sparkes, I. (1975), The Windsor Chair (Bourne End: Spur). Symonds, R. W. and Whineray, B. (1962), Victorian Furniture (London: Country Life). Thornton, P. (1978), Seventeenth-Century Interior Decoration in England, France and Holland (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press). Toller, J. (1973), Country Furniture (Newton Abbott: David & Charles). Verlet, P. (1963), French Royal Furniture (London: Barrie & Rockliff). Walton, K. (1973), The Golden Age of English Furniture Upholstery, 1660– 1840 (Leeds: Leeds City Art Galleries). Ward-Jackson, P. (1959), English Furniture Designs of the Eighteenth Century (London: HMSÒ). Watson, F. J. B. (1960), Louis XVI Furniture (London: Tiranti). Watson, F. J. B. (ed.) (1976), The History of Furniture (London: Orbis). Wilk, C. (1981), Marcel Breuer, Furniture and Interiors (London: Architectural Press). Eastlake, C. L. (1868, reprinted 1969), Hints on Household Taste in Furniture, Upholstery and Other Details (London: Constable). Wright, E. and Pai, M. (1985), Korean Furniture: Elegance and Tradition (New York: Kodansha). Young, D. (1952), Sitting in Comfort (London: British Rubber Development Board). Young, D. (1957), Upholstery With Latex Foam (London: British Rubber Development Board). ## Chapter 5 Adburgham, A. (1975), Liberty's: A Biography of a Shop (London: Allen & Unwin). Banham, R. (1969), The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment (London: Architectural Press). Barley, M. W. (1971), The House and the Home (London: Studio Vista). Barman, C. (1979) The Man Who Built London Transport (Newton Abbot: David & Charles). Beecher, C. E. and Beecher Stowe, H. (1869), The American Woman's Home (New York: Thames & Hudson). Brunskill, R. W. (1981), The Tradit:onal Buildings of Britain (London: Gollancz). Cantacuzino, S. (1975), New Uses for Old Buildings (London: Architectural Press). Collins, P. (1959), Concrete: The Vision of a New Architecture (London: Faber). Encyclopedia of World Art (1951–68) (London and New York: McGraw-Hill). Fawcett. J. (ed.) (1976), The Future of the Past: Attitudes to Conservation 1147–1974 (London: Thames & Hudson). Fischer Fine Art (1982), The Wiener Werkstätte and their Associates 1902–1932 (London: Fischer Fine Art). Girouard, M. (1975), Victorian Pubs (London: Studio Vista). Glasstone, V. (1975), Victorian and Edwardian Theatres (London: Thames & Hudson). Greenhill. B. and Giffard, A. (1972), Travelling by Sea in the Nineteenth Century: Interior Design in Victorian Passenger Ships (London: A. & C. Black). Hayden, D. (1981), The Grand Domestic Revolution: A History of Feminist Designs for American Homes, Neighbourhoods and Cities (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press). Hayward Gallery (1969), Frescoes from Florence (London: Arts Council). Hope, T. (1807, reprinted 1971), Household Furniture and Interior Decoration (London: Constable). Le Corbusier, (1923) Vers Une Architecture (Paris: G. Cres); translated 1927 by Etchells, F. (1974 edn) Towards a New Architecture (London: Architectural Press). Mackintosh, I. and Sell, M. (eds) (1982), Curtains!!! or New Life for Old Theatres (Eastbourne: Offord). Matrix (1984), Making Space: Women and the Man-made Environment (London: Pluto). Pevsner, N. (1951–), Buildings of England (Harmondsworth: Penguin). Pevsner, N. (1976), A History of Building Types (London: Thames & Hudson). Pick, F. ‘The meaning and purpose of design', The Listener, April, 1933, pp. 640–54. Reprinted in Documents, Open University Course Ünit A305, 1975 (Milton Keynes: Open University) Praz, M. (1964), An Illustrated History of Interior Decoration: from Pompeii to Art Nouveau (London: Thames & Hudson). Richards, J. M. (1958), The Functional Tradition in Early Industrial Buildings (London: Architectural Press). Rudofsky, B. (1977), The Prodigious Builders (London: Secker & Warburg). Savage, G. (1966), A Concise History of Interior Decoration (London: Thames & Hudson). Service, A. (1982), Edwardian Interiors: Inside the Homes of the Poor, the Average and the Wealthy (London: Barrie & Jenkins). Sharp, D. (1969), The Picture Palace and Öther Buildings for the Movies (London: Hugh Evelyn). Singer, C., Holmyard, E. J., Hall, A. R. and T. I. Williams (eds) (1954–8), A History of Technology, 5 vols (Oxford: Clarendon). Skilleter, P. (1981), Morris Minor: The World's Supreme Small Car, (London: Osprey). Smith, D. L. (1967), How to Find Out in Architecture and Building (Oxford: Pergamon). Tann, J. (1970), The Development of the Factory (London: Cornmarket Press). Thompson, P. (1971), William Butterfield (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press). Thornton, P. (1978), Seventeenth Century Interior Decoration in England, France and Holland (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press) Thornton, P. K. and Tomlin, M. F. (1980), The Furnishing and Decoration of Ham House (London: Furniture History Society). Victoria and Albert Museum (1971), Victorian Church Art (London: HMSO). Victoria and Albert Museum (1979), Vienna in the Age of Schubert: The Biedermeier Interior, 1815–1848 (London: Elron Press). Ward-Jackson, C. H. and Harvey, D. E. (1972), The English Gypsy Caravan (Newton Abbot: David & Charles). Whiton, S. (1974), Interior Design and Decoration (Philadelphia; Lippincott). Williams, T. I. (ed.) (1978), A History of Technology, vol. 6(Oxford: Clarendon). Wilson, R. F. (1960), Colour in Industry Today (London: Allen & Unwin). ## Chapter 6 Bayley, S. (1979), In Good Shape: Style in Industrial Products 1900–1960 (London: Design Council). Bayley, S. (1983), Harley Earl and the Dream Machine (London: Knopf). Benton, T. and Campbell-Cole, B. (1979), Tubular Steel Furniture (London: Art Book Co.). Blake, J. and A. (1969), The Practical Idealists (London: Lund Humphries). Buddensieg, T. and Rogge, H. (1984), Industriekultur: Peter Behrens and the AEG 1907–1914, translated by I. B. Whyte (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press). Bush, D. J. (1975), The Streamlined Decade (New York: Braziller). Campbell, J. (1978), The German Werkbund (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). Carrington, N. (1976), Industrial Design in Britain (London: Allen & Unwin). Dreyfuss, H. (1955), Designing for People (New York: Simon & Schuster). Farr, M. (1955), Design in British Industry – a Mid-Century Survey (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). Ferebee, A. (1970), A History of Design from the Victorian Era to the Present (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold). Forty, A. (1985), Objects of Desire (London: Thames & Hudson). Forty, A. and Newman, G. (1975), British Design (Milton Keynes: Open University). Giedion, S. (1948), Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History (New York: Norton). Gorb. P. (ed.) (1978), Living By Design (London: Lund Humphries). Haresnape, B. (1968), Railway Design Since 1830 (London: Ållen & Unwin). Heskett, J. (1986), Design in Germany 1870–1918 (London: Trefoil). Heskett' I. (1980), Industrial Design (London: Thames & Hudson). Hill, J. (1978), The Cat's Whisker: 50 Years of Wireless Design (London: Oresko). Iervis. S. (1974), High Victorian Design (Ottawa: National Gallery of Canada). Katz S (ì978). Plastics Design and Materials (London: Studio Vista). Loewy, R. (1951), Never Leave Well Enough Alone (New York: Simon & Schuster). Lucie-Smith, E. (1983), A History of Industrial Design (Oxford: Phaidon). McCarthy, É. (1979), À History of British Design (London: Allen & Unwin). Meikle, J. (1979), Twentieth Čentury Limited: Industrial Design in America 1925–1939 (Philadelphia: Temple University Press). Naylor, G. (1985), The Bauhaus Reassessed: Sources and Design Theory (London: Herbert). Pentagram Design Partnership (1972), Pentagram (London: Lund Humphries). Pevsner, N. (1960), Pioneers of Modern Design (Harmondsworth: Penguin) First published as Pioneers of the Modern Movement in 1936. Pulos, A. (1983), The American Design Ethic (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press) Read H\_(1934). Art and Industry (London: Faber & Faber). Read, Rowland, K. (1973), A History of the Modern Movement (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold). anu Nenior Schaeffer, H. (1970), The Roo of Modern Design (London: Studio Vista). Sparke, P. (1983), Consultant Design: The History of the Designer in Industry (London: Pembridge). Sparke, P. (1982), Ettore Sotsass Jnr (London: Design Council). Sparke, P. (1986), An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century (London: Allen & Unwin). Sudjic, D. (1985), Cult Objects (London: Paladin). Whitford, È. (1984), Bauhaus (London: Thames & Hudson). Wingler, H. M. (1969), The Bauhaus – Weimar, Dessau, Berlin, Chicago (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press). Woodham, J. (1983), The Industrial Designer and the Public (London: Pembridge). ## Chapter 7 Ban, S. (ed.) (1974), The Tradition of Constructivism (London: Thames & Hudson). Barthes, R. (1977), Image Music Text, ed. Heath, S. (London: Fontana). Barthes, R. (1973), Mythologies (London: Paladin). Benton, C. and T., and Sharpe, D. (1975), Form and Function. A Sourcebook for the History of Architecture and Design 1890–1930 (London: Crosby Lockwood Staples). Booker, C. (1969), The Neophiliacs: A Study of the Revolution in English Life in the Fifties and Sixties (London: Fontana). Dobrow, L. (1984), When Advertising Tried Harder (New York: Friendly Press). Frostick, M. (1970), Advertising and the Motor Car (London: Lund Humphries). Goffmann, E. (1979), Gender Advertisements (London: Macmillan). Hall S. (1972), The Social Eye of Picture Post, Working Papers in Cultural Studies, no. 2 (Birmingham: University of Birmingham), pp. 71–120. Hawkes, T. (1979), Structuralism and Semiotics (London: Methuen). Hoggart, R. (1957), The Uses of Literacy (London: Chatto & Windus). Ivins, W. Jr (1969), Prints and Visual Communication (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press). Klingender, F. (1972), Art and the Industrial Revolution (London: Paladin). Lewis, J. (revised edn 1984), The Twentieth Century Book (London: Herbert Press). Lissitzky-Kuppers, S. (revised edn 1980), El Lissitzky – Life, Letters, Texts (London: Thames & Hudson). Lodder, C. (1983), Russian Constructivism (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press). McLuhan, M. (1962), The Gutenberg Galaxy (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul). Meggs, P. (1983), A History of Graphic Design (Harmondsworth: Allen Lane). Müller-Brockmann, J. (1971), A History of Visual Communications (London: Tiranti). Myers, K. (1986), Understains: The Sense and Seduction of Advertising (London: Comedia). Ogilvy, D. (1983), Ogilvy on Advertising (London: Pan). Packard, V. (1957), The Hidden Persuaders (London: Longmans Green). Rand, P. (1986), A Designer's Art (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press). Said, E. (1978), Orientalism: Western Conceptions of the Orient (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul). Saussure, F. de (1974), A Course in General Linguistics (London: Fontana). Sibley, B. (1985), The Book of Guinness Advertising (London: Guinness Books). Spencer, H. (revised edn 1984), Pioneers of Modern Typography (London: Lund Humphries). Steinberg, S. H. (reprinted 1979), Five Hundred Years of Printing (Harmondsworth: Penguin). Turner, E. S. (1965), The Shocking History of Advertising (Harmondsworth: Penguin). White, J. (1982), Magazine Design (Epping: Bowker). Williams, R. (1962), Communications (Harmondsworth: Penguin). Williams, R. (1976), Keywords (London: Fontana). Williamson, J. (1978), Decoding Advertisements (London: Marion Boyars). Williamson, J. (1985), Consuming Passions: The Dynamics of Popular Culture (London: Marion Boyars). ## Chapter 8 Burke, G. (1976), Townscapes (Harmondsworth: Penguin). Civic Trust (1981), Environmental Directory: National and Regional Organisations of Interest to those concerned with Amenity and the Environment (London: The Trust). Clifton-Taylor, A. (1972), The Pattern of English Building (London: Faber). Coleman, Alice (1985), Utopia on Trial: Vision and Reality in Planned Housing (London: Hilary Shipman). Conrads, U. (1970), Programmes and Manifestoes in Twentieth Century Architecture (London: Lund Humphries). Cullen, G. (1961), Townscape (London: Architectural Press). Curtis. W. (1982), Modern Architecture since 1900 (Oxford: Phaidon). Department of Èducation and Science (1981), Environmental Education (London: HMSO). Fairbrother, N. (1972), NewLives, New Landscapes (Harmondsworth: Penguin). Glen. M. H. (ed.) (1976), Town Trails and Urban Walks, 2nd edn (London: British Tourist Authority). Goodey, B. (ed.) (1981), Èast Anglia's Built Environment as an Educational Resource (London: RIBA). Halliday, J. (ed.) (1973), City Centre Redevelopment: A Study of British City Centre Planning and Case Studies of Five English City Centres (London: Charles Knight). Hoskins, W. G. (1977 edn), The Making of the English Landscape (London: Hodder & Stoughton). Howard. E. (1963 edn), Garden Cities of Tomorrow (London: Faber). Hussey, C. (1967 edn), The Picturesqué: Studies in a Point of View (London: Cass). Jackson, Alan (1973), Semi-detached London: Suburban Life and Transport 1900–1939 (London: Allen & Unwin). Jacobs, Jane (1965 edn), The Death and Life of Great American Cities (London: Penguin). Jencks, C. (1985 edn), Modern Movements in Architecture (London: Penguin). Jencks, C. and Chaitkin, W. (1982), Current Architecture (London: Academy Editions). Krier, R. (1979), Urban Space (London: Academy Editions). Le Corbusier, (1947 edn), The City of Tomorrow and its Planning (London: Architectural Press). Le Corbusier (1964), The Radiant City (London: Faber), first published in 1933, as La Ville Radieuse. Lowenthal, D. (1985), The Past is a Foreign Country (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). Matrix (1984), Making Space, Women and the Man-made Environment (London: Pluto). Newman, Oscar (1973), Defensible Space, People and Design in the Violent City (London: Architectural Press). Oliver, P., Davis, I. and Bentley, I. (1981), Dunroamin. The Suburban Semi and its Enemies (London: Barrie & Jenkins). Open University (1973), Planning and the City, DT 201 Block 7: Unit 27, The Optimum Size; Unit 28, Urban Renewal; Unit 29, Planning Residential Areas (Milton Keynes: Open University). Ravetz, Alison (1980), Remaking Cities: Contradictions of the Recent Urban Environment (London: Croom Helm). Smales, L. M. and Goodey, B. (1985), The Essex Design Guide for Residential Areas, Bibliography A1426 (Monticello, Ill.: Vance). Swenarton, Mark (1981), Homes for Heroes: The Politics and Architecture of Early State Housing in Britain (London: Heinemann). Watkin, D. (1982), The English Vision, The Picturesque in Architecture, Landscape and Garden Design (London: Murray). Wright, P. (1985), On Living in an Old Country: The National Past in Contemporary Britain (London: Verso).