# Useful Names and Addresses ## Britain Advertising Association, 15 Wilton Road, London SW1V 1NJ. Library and information centre. Arkwright Society, c/o Tawney House, Matlock, Derbyshire. Presentation of Arkwright's buildings in Cromford and the preservation of buildings and machinery of industrial archeological and historic interest. Arts Council of Great Britain, 105 Piccadilly, London W1V 0AU. Scottish Arts Council, 19 Charlotte Square, Edinburgh EH2 4DF. Welsh Arts Council, 9 Museum Place, Cardiff CF1 3NX. Will supply information about forthcoming exhibitions. Association of Art Historians, 18 Fitzwarren Gardens, London N1G 3TP Publishes a bulletin and quarterly journal and organizes an annual conference, held outside London in alternate years. Association of Industrial Archaeology, Ironbridge Gorge Museum, Telford, Salop TF8 7AW. To promote the study of industrial archaeology and improve and encourage standards of recording, research and conservation. Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland, 20 Falkland Avenue, Newton Mears, Renfrewshire G77 5DR. Similar aims to those of The Council for the Protection of Rural England. Monthly meetings held at which papers are presented on new discoveries and the results of recent research. Covers British coinage and that of territories formerly subject to the British Crown. British Theatre Association, 9 Fitzroy Square, London WIP 6AE. Mainiy concerned to develop the art of theatre, but the library also has documentation on theatre buildings and interiors. Brunel Society, Mrs M. Williams, Hon. Secretary, Brunel Technical College, Ashley Down, Bristol BS7 9BU. Formed to promote research into and study the lives of I. K. and Sir M. I. Brunel. Lecture programmes, visits, newsletter published occasionally. Business Archives Council, 185 Tower Bridge Road, Lonaon SE1 2U Encourages the preservation and efficient organization of business records. Maintains a library of business histories and has regional branches. Business Archives is published annually. Charles Rennie Mackintosh Šociety, Patricia Douglas, Director, Queens Cross. 870 Garscube Road, Glasgow G20 7EL. Conserves Mackintosh's buildings and artefacts and promotes interest in him via visits, lectures and study tours. Chartered Society of Designers, 29 Bedford Square, London WC1 3EG Formerly, Society of Industrial Artists and Designers. Professional organization for practising designers in all areas of design. Cinema Theatre Association, 123b Central Road, Worcester Park, Surrey KT4 8DA. Voluntary association to promote studies in history, architecture and equipment associated with film. Publishes a bulletin six times a year and maintains an archive. Organizes visits and occasional lectures. Civic Trust, 17 Carlton House Terrace, London SW1 5AW. Encourages the protection and improvement of the environment by means of films, conferences, reports and projects. Provides information on local amenity societies nationally. Civic Trust for the North West, 65 Oxford Street, Manchester M27 2UX. Civic Trust for the North East, 34–5 Saddler Street, Durham DH1 3HL. Scottish Civic Trust, 24 George Square, Glasgow, G2 1EF Civic Trust Wales, Welcome House, Llandaff, Cardiff CF5 2YZ. Commemorative Collectors Society, 25 Farndale Close, off Wilsthorpe Road, Long Eaton, Notts NG10 3PA. Represents the interests of commemorative collectors internationally, arranges meetings and exhibitions and publishes a quarterly journal. Costume Society, 63 Salisbury Road, Liverpool. Promotes interest and research in costume. Crafts Council, 8 Waterloo Place, London SW1Y 4AT. Set up to promote the work of craftspersons in Britain. Maintains an index of individuals active in a variety of crafts. Has a large slide collection and organizes exhibitions. Decorative Arts Society, c/o The Keeper of Decorative Arts, The Royal Pavilion Art Gallery and Museums, Brighton BN1 1UE Promotes research and general interest in the ecorative arts of the period 1850 to the present, by means of lectures, visits and its annual journal. The quarterly newsletter also lists forthcoming sales of decorative arts at the major auction houses. Design Council, 28 Haymarket, London SW1Y 4SU. Promotes the improvement of British design via awards, publications and exhibitions. Slide library makes slides available for loan and there is a range of slide packs for sale. Design History Society, 22 Hickman Close, Fulmer Road, London E16 3TA. Formed to promote research and provide a forum for the interchange of ideas on design history. Conferences, study days and visits are organized regularly and details are carried in the quarterly newsletter. Annual Conference papers have been published by the Design Council. Design and Industries Association, c/o 17 Lawn Crescent, Kew Gardens, Surrey TW9 3NR. Voluntary independent pressure group with a number of regional groups set up to improve design standards. Publishes a yearbook and newsletters; study tours, conferences. Design Research Society, 24 Kensington Gore, London, SW7 2EX. Promotes contact between people concerned with research into design, its nature, products and role in society. Organizes meetings, international conferences and publishes a quarterly journal Design Studies Designers and Art Directors Association, 12 Carlton House Terrace, London SW1Y 5AH. Annual exhibition and publications. Ephemera Society, 12 Fitzroy Square, London W1P 5HQ. Provides a forum for interchange of ideas. Focuses on studies in that collection, but also concerned with the broader implications of the subject. Furniture History Society, c/o Department of Furniture and Interior Design, Victoria and Albert Museum, London SW7 2RL. Founded to increase the knowledge of furniture and to promote its preservation and its records. Furniture History is published annually and the society arranges visits, courses and an annual conference. Garden History Society, 12 Charlbury Road, Oxford OX2 6UT. Garden History Society, 1z Cnaribury Roau, Uxioru To bring together those who are interested in all aspects of the subject: horticulture, forestry, landscape design. Georgian Group, 2 Chester Street, London SW1X 7BB. Mainly concerned with the preservation and conservation of eighteenthcentury and early-nineteenth-century buildings. Visits organized in the summer. Glass Association, Broadfield House Glass Museum, Barrett Lane, Kingswinford. West Midlands DY6 9QA. Promotes understanding of historical and contemporary glass and glassmaking methods. The Glass Cone is published quarterly and a scholarly journal every two years. Historic Churches Preservation Trust, Fulham Palace Road, London SW6 Information and register of churches of historic interest. Historic House Association, 38 Ebury Street, London SW1W 0LU. Information on houses in private ownership which are open to the public. History of Advertising Trust, Unit 2.02, Butlers Wharf Business Centre, 45 Curlew Street. London SE1 2UD. Holds archives of the Advertising Association, the Advertising Standards Authority and a number of companies. Charges for access to archives. National Art Library, Victoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington, SW7 2RL. Large collection of design source books. National Association of Decorative and Fine Arts Societies, 38 Ebury Street, London SW1W 0LU. Promotes interest in the decorative arts nationally through lectures and visits. National Association for Design Education, Kirby Hill', Plawsworth, Chesterle-Street, Co. Durham DH2 3LD. An interdisciplinary group with members from across the whole breadth of design activities found in the school curriculum. National Monuments Record, Fortress House, 25 Saville Row, London W1X 1AB. National Society for Education in Art and Design, 7a High Street, Corsham, Wilts, SN13 0ES. Concerned with art and design within the school curriculum. National Trust, 42 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AS. National Trust for Scotland, 5 Charlotte Square, Edinburgh EH2 4DU. Details obtainable at all National Trust properties. Newcomen Society, Executive Secretary, Science Museum, London SW7 2DD. To promote study of the history of engineering and technology. Piers Information Bureau, 38 Holte Road, Atherstone, Warwicks CV9 1HN. To promote contact among those active in this field. Concentrates on the nineteenth century. Bulletin published quarterly. Planning History Group, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Salford, Salford M5 4WT. Main emphasis on late-nineteenth- and twentieth-century planning internationally. Planning History Bulletin published three times a year; conferences and seminars. Publishes Planning Perspectives. Plastics Historical Society, 11 Hobart Place, London SW1W 0HL. To promote the study of all aspects of plastics history. Bulletin published two or three times a year gives details of meetings. Open free to individuals and groups. Railway and Canal Historical Society, 20 Neston Drive, Chester CH2 2HR. To investigate and record details. Local groups organize lectures, visits and tours. Railway Heritage Trust, Melley House, 65 Clarendon Road, Watford WD1 1DP. Assists in negotiations over British Rail property, and administers grants for buildings in the listed category. Independent of British Rail and the Government. Royal Academy of Arts, Piccadilly, London W1V 0DS. To help practising artists and art historians with their inquiries. Royal Society of Arts, 8 John Adam Street, London WC2N 6EZ. To promote the advancement of science in connection with the arts and to act as a liaison between the practical arts and the sciences. Royal Institute for Brtish Architects, 66 Portland Place, London W1N 4AD. The Institute includes a library with an excellent catalogue of books and articles on architecture and design. The RIBA drawings collection is housed at Portman Square. Save Britain's Heritage, 3 Park Square West, London NW1 4LJ. Conservation pressure group to awaken concern about the destruction of historic buildings. Victorian Society. 1 Priory Gardens, Bedford Park, London W4 1TT. Scottish Tramway Museum Society, PO Box 78, Glasgow G3 6ER. Formed to preserve selected trancars and publish historical information on tramway fleets. Details of monthly meetings, slide and film nights, and visits are published in the Newsletter and Scottish Transport, which is produced regularly, is free to members. Society of Architectural Historians of Great Britain, Room 208, Chesham House, 30 Warwick Street, London W1R 6AB. Maintains a register of research, organizes an annual conference, study tours and an annual public lecture. Architectural History is published annually. Society of Designer Craftmen, 24 Rivington Street, London EC2A 3DU. Formerly the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, it represents the interests of people working in the crafts in Britain. Details of conferences, exhibitions and lectures published in the quarterly newsletter. Society of Industrial Artists and Designers See Chartered Society of Designers. Society of Typographic Designers, Dunstable College, Kingsway, Dunstable, Beds LU6 4HG. Professional organization to safeguard and help those working in this field. Terracotta Association, Drayton House, 30 Gordon Square, London WC1H 0AU. Information and advice on restoring terracotta- and faience-clad buildings. Textile Society, David Graysmith, Related Studies Department, Wolverhampton Polytechnic, Wolverhampton WV1 1DT. Promotes research in the history and conservation of textiles. Thirties Society, 3 Park Square West, London NW1 4LJ Founded as a pressure group to draw attention to the qualities of 1920s and 1930s buildings and interiors and to preserve and conserve them. Tools and Trades History Society, Winston Grange, Stowmarket, Suffolk. To increase interest in pre-industrial tools and technology and to foster pride in craftmanship. Meetings, exhibitions, newsletter and journal. Twentieth Century Ceramics Society, 100d Clapham Common Northside, London SW4 9SQ. Formed to bring together historians, collectors, potters, dealers and auctioneers. Organizes meetings, visits and private views and publishes a newsletter. Concerned with the preservation and conservation of nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century buildings, and the effects of planning legislation and proposed planning on towns and cities. Groups in many parts of the country which organize visits and lectures on all aspects of Victorian architecture, art and design. Vernacular Architecture Group, 18 Portland Place, Leamington Spa, Warwicks CV32 5EU. To promote study of lesser traditional buildings. Wallpaper History Society, Victoria and Albert Museum, London SW7 ZRL. To encourage research, provide information on wallpaper production, consumption and design and foster awareness of the importance of preserving period decorations. Newsletter, visits, tours of design studios and manufacturers archives. World Ship Society, 35 Wickham Way, Haywards Heath, Sussex RH16 1UJ. Encourages research and organizes nautical activities in most of the major cities. Details are published in Marine News published monthly. ## AUSTRALIA Industrial Design Council of Australia, 114 William Street, Melbourne, Victoria 3000. New South Wales Design Centre, 50 Margaret Street, Sydney 2000. Queensland Design Centre, Central Railway Plaza, 315 Edward Street, Brisbane 4000. Victoria Design Centre, 37 Little Collins Street, Melbourne 3000. ## AUSTRIA Bund Österreichischer Gebrauchsgraphiker, Hollgasse 6, 1050 Wien. Proessional association for graphic designers. Bund Österreichischer Innenarchitekten, Penzingerstrasse 23, A 1140 Wien 14. Professional organization for interior designers. Osterreichisches Institut für Formgebung, Salesianergasse 1, A 1030 Wien. Association for companies involved in industrial design. ## BELGIUM Design Centre, 51 Galerie Ravenstein, 1000 Brussels. Project Industrieel Erfgoed, c/o Begijnhof 39, B 3800, Sint Truiden. Centre for the study and conservation of the industrial heritage. Union des Designers de Belgique, Hall du Palais des Beaux Arts, 61 Ravenstein, 1000 Brussels. Professional organization for graphic and interior designers. Union Professionnelle des Industrial Designers de Belgique, 2 rue de la Régence, 1000 Brussels. Vlaamse Vereniging voor Industriële Archeologie, PO Box 30, Maria Hendrikaplein, B 9000 Ghent 12. Flemish association for industrial archeology. ## BULGARIA Central Institute of Industrial Design, 34 Totleben, Sofia. ## CANADA Association of Canadian Industrial Designers, c/o School of Industrial Design, Carleton University, Ottawa K1S 5B6. National Design Council, Department of Industry, Trade and Commerce, 300 Sparks Street, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A OH5. ## CZECHOSLOVAKIA Biennale Brno, Moravaska Galerie, Husova 14 CS6626, Brno 2. Poster archive of Brno Biennale competitions. ## DENMARK Dansk Designrad, Nyhavn 39, DK 1051, Copenhagen. Danish Design Council. Dansk Kunsthåndvaerker Råd, Ameliegade 15, DK 1256, Copenhagen. Council for Arts and Crafts. ## FINLAND Oy Finnish Design Centre AB, Kasarmikatu 19, SF 00130 Helsinki 13. Suomen Taideteollisuusyhdistys, Unioninkatu 30, SF 00100 Helsinki 10. Finnish society of crafts and design. ## FRANCE Bibliothèque Forney, Hôtel des Achevêques de Sens, 1 Rue du Figuier, Paris 04. Design, visual communication. Books, periodicals, photographs and slides. Bibliothèque du Musée des Arts Decoratifs, 107 Rue de Rivoli, Paris 75001. Graphic arts and product design. Centre de Création Industrielle, Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris 75191. Documentation and resources covering design, architecture and town planning; exhibitions, conferences. Centre de Récherche sur la Culture Technique, 69 bis rue Charles Laffitte, 92200 Neuilly. Conferences, exhibitions. Publishes Technique et Culture. ## GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC Amt für Industriel Formgestaltung, Breitestrasse 11, 102 Berlin. Promotional organization. Publishes Form und Zweck. ## GERMAN FEDERAL REPUBLIC Bauhaus Archiv, Museum für Gestaltung, Klingelhöferstrasse 13–14, D 1000 Berlin 30. Books and documents on the Bauhaus and on art, architecture and design since 1850. Deutscher Werkbund, Alexandra Weg 26, Ernst Ludwig Haus, 61 Darmstadt. Publishes Werk und Zeit. Die Neue Sammlung Staatliches Museum für Angewandte Kunst, Prinzregentstrasse-3, 8 Munich 22. Collection of posters. Internationales Design Zentrum, Ansbacherstrasse 8–14, D 1000, Berlin 30. Visual communication and product design. Rat fuř Formgebung, Eugen-Bracht Weg 6, 61 Darmstadt. Gives quality awards for design; publishes Design Report. Werkbund-Archiv, Schlossstrasse 1, I Berlin 19. Documentation of the Werkbund and on the history of design and mass culture. ## HONG KONG Industrial Design Council, Eldex Industry Building 12/F, 21A Ma Tau Wei Road, Hung Hom, Hong Kong. ## HUNGARY Hungarian Council of Industrial Design, Martinelli Ter 8, 1052 Budapest. ## INDIA Industrial Design Centre, Indian Institute of Technology, Powai, Bombay 400 076. National Institute of Design, Paldi, Ahmedabad 380 007. ## IRELAND Crafts Council of Ireland Ltd, Thomas Prior House, Merrion Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin 4. Kilkenny Design Workshops Ltd, Kilkenny. Government agency for promoting design. ## ISRAEL Israel Design Centre, 51 Petach-Tikvah Road, Tel-Aviv. ## ITALY Archeologia Industriale, Via Rossellini 8, 20100 Milan. Association for industrial archeology. Associazione per il Disegno Industriale, Via Montenapoleone 18, 20121 Milan. Professional organization for industrial designers. ## JAPAN The CoCoMAS Committee, 5–5–6 Bancho, Chiyoda-Ku, Tokyo 102. Visual communication and corporate identity. Japan Craft Design Association, 21–13 Sendagaya 1-Chome, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 151. Japan Industrial Designers Association, PO Box 198, Trade Centre 105. Osaka Design Centre, Senba Centre Building, 2–2 Senba-Chuo, Higashi-Ku, Osaka. ## MEXICO Design Centre, Rio Churubusco 353, Mexico 13. ## NETHERLANDS Beroepsvereniging van Nederlandse Interierarchitekten, Keizergracht 321, Postbus 19610, 1000 G P Amsterdam. Interior designers' organization. Gafisch Vormgevers Nederland, Nieuwe Keizergracht 58, 1018 DT Amsterdam. Graphic designers' organization. Kring Industrielle Ontwerpers, Keizergracht 321, Amsterdam. Industrial designers' organization. ## NEW ZEALAND New Zealand Industrial Design Council, 70 Ghuznee Street, Wellington. ## NORWAY Norsk Design Centrum, Drammensveien 40, Oslo 2. Norwegian Council of Industrial Design, Uranienborg un 2, Oslo 2. ## PAKISTAN Pakistan Council of Industrial Design, 52 G 2 Pechs, Karachi 29. ## POLAND Central Office of Design for Light Industries, ul Swietojerska 5/7, 00 236 Warsaw. ## RUMANIA Centrul Romän de Design, 169 Calea Floreasca, S 2 Bucharest 7000. Rumanian Design Centre. ## SPAIN Asociación de Diseñadores Profesionales, Apartado de Correo 12174, Barcelona. Professional association for designers. Instituto Promoción Industrial, Poeta Queral 15, Valencia 2. Covers design, architecture and town planning. Publishes Diseño Comunicación. ## SWEDEN Ekoteket, 'Tjärhovsgatan 44, S 11629 Stockholm. Centre of environmental movement in Sweden. Föreningen Svensk Form, PO Box 7404, S 103 91 Stockholm. Swedish society of industrial design; publishes Form monthly. ## SWITZERLAND Arbeitsgemeinschaft Schweizer Grafiker, Chorgasse 18, 8001 Zürich. Verband Schweizer İndustrial Designers, Weinbergstrasse 11, 8001 Zürich. Association of industrial designers. ## UNITED STATES American Institute of Graphic Arts, 1059 3rd Ave, New York, NY 10021. American Society of Interior Designers, 730 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10019. Boston Museum of Fine Arts, 479 Huntington Avenue, Boston, Mass. 02115. Original art and correspondence on or about Hermann Zapf, Jan Tschichold and others. Busch-Reisinger Museum, 29 Kirkland Street, Cambridge, Mass. 02138. Bauhaus archive. Center for Design, 227 Forest Avenue, Palo Alto, Calif. 94301. Aims to promote public awareness of design and supports design projects such as design for the disabled. Chicago Historical Society, Clark Street at North Avenue, Chicago, Ill. 60614. Exhibits and archives related to design and architecture in Chicago. Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91 Street, New York, NY 100Z8. The design branch of the Smithsonian Institute. Donald Deskey Archives, Henry Dreyfus Archives, Ladislav Sutnar Archives. Cooper Union Art School, Cooper Square, New York, NY 10003. Research Institute of industrial design with affliated branches in other cities. Dizajn Centar, Zmaj Jovina 13, Belgrade. Yugoslav Design Centre. Slide archives of posters by members of the Alliance Graphique Internationale. Cranbrook Academy of Design, Box 801, Bloomfield Hills, Md 48013. Design History Forum, c/o Professor Herbert Gottfried, College of Design, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011. An association of people, mostly academics, interested in design history. Design Management Institute, 621 Huntington Avenue, Boston, Mass. 02115. Institute for Environmental Action, 81 Leonard Street, New York, NY 10013. ITC Center, 2 Hammarskjøld Plaza, Third Floor, New York, NY 10017. Graphic design exhibitions. Rosenbach Museum and Library, 2010 Delancey Place, Philadelphia, Pa 19103. Maurice Sendak drawings and related ephemera. The library has a collection of drawings by eighteenth- and nineteenth-century illustrators. Society of Typographic Arts, 233 East Ontario Street, Suite 201, Chicago, Il 60611. University ofIllinois at Chicago, Manuscript Collection, Box 4348, Chicago,I. 60680. Archive on the Institute of Design and Moholy-Nagy. University of Texas, Humanities Research Center, PÖ Box 7219, Austin, Tex. 78712. The Harry Ransom Center, Archives of Norman Bel Geddes. Upper and Lower case International Typeface Corp., 2 Hammarskjøld Plaza, New York, NY 10017. An archive of correspondence and interviews with graphic designers including Saul Bass, Bil Goldin, Herb Lubalin and Paul Rand. ## USSR Vsesojuzny Naučno Isledovatelski Institut Techničeskoj Estetiki, VNIITE, Moscow 129223. ## YUGOSLAVIA ## Glossary AALTO, Alvar (1898–1976) Finnish architect and designer. In design Aalto made major contributions to the development of plywood furniture. ADAM, Robert (1728–92) Architect, interior and furniture designer. Among his most famous interiors are Syon House, 1760–9, and Osterley Park, 1761–80, both near London. Aesthetic Movement A movement focused mainly on London and Oxford c.1860–80, which offered an alternative lifestyle summed up in the phrase Art for Art's sake’. Aesthetic forms were drawn from the medieval and from Japan. Apse A semicircular or polygonal projection found in basilican buildings and in the east ends of churches. Art Deco A term coined from the Paris Exposition des Arts Décoratifs held in 1925, it embraced architecture and design. The stylistic influences on Art Deco ranged from Expressionism to Egyptian and the Modern Movement. Art Nouveau Decorative style often associated with whiplash curves and plant forms, popular throughout Europe between c.1890 and 1910. Known as Jugendstil (literally youth style’) in Germany, and in Italy as Stile Liberty after the Regent Street store in London. Arts and Crafts Movement Largely influenced by the ideas and ideals of Ruskin and Morris the movement sought to revitalize the arts of architecture and design. It was influential not only in Britain, but also in the USA and in Europe. BAILLIE SCOTT, M. H. (1865–1945) Architect and designer closely associated with the Arts and Crafts Movement, who worked in England, Russia, the USA and Europe. Baroque Originated in Italy and spread in seventeenth century to Europe generally. It embraced architecture and design. BARNSLEY, Edward (1865–1926) see GIMSON, Ernest. BARNSLEY, Sidney (1863–1926), see GIMSON, Ernest. Basilica A Roman public building with double colonnades inside and an apse at one end. aulláus School of art, architecture and design set up in Weimar by Walter Gropius. Later moved to Dessau, then Berlin where it was closed down by the Nazis. Of enormous importance to the development of avant-garde movements not only because of the work undertaken by Bauhaus members, but also because of the way its ideas and activities were publicized. BAYER, Herbert (1900–) Born in Austria, Bayer developed his typography at the Bauhaus and emigrated to the USA in 1938. His work covers architecture, interior, product and graphic design. Black Basaltes Fine hard-grained black stoneware perfected by Wedgwood and used for vases, busts and other wares. BOFILL, Ricardo (1939–) Spanish architect, founded Taller de Arquitectura in Barcelona, in 1960. Completed buildings include Le Téâtre and Palace of Abraxes, Marne-la-Vallée, and Les Arcades du Lac, Saint Quentin-en-Yvelines, near Paris. These exploit the language of classical architecture very freely. BREUER, Marcel (1902–81) Student and teacher at the Bauhaus where he designed a series of chairs reflecting the various phases of development at the school. These included chairs of tubular steel. Practised as an architect and designer in England and the USA. BROWN, Lancelot (1716–83) Nicknamed Capability'. Architect and landscape gardener who worked with the natural materials of trees, water and grass, rather than with architectural elements, to produce his landscapes. BRUNEL, Isambard Kingdom (1806–59) Trained as an engineer and designed bridges, iron ships and the Great Western Railway from Paddington Station, in London, to Bristol. BUTTERFIELD, William (1814–1900) Architect of great importance to the Gothic Revival. Mainly involved with ecclesiastical buildings, schools and colleges. CIAM Congrès Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne set up in 1928 aimed at a revolution in housing and town planning. Drew up its findings in the Athens Charter (1933). These were published by Le Corbusier in The Radiant City (1933). CHIPPENDALE, Thomas (1718–79) One of the best-known English furniture names and author of The Gentleman and Cabinet Maker's Director, first published in 1754. Classicism The principles of Greek and Roman architecture and design. COLE, Henry (1808-82) Founder of Summerly's Art Manufacturers in 1847, and of the Journal of Design. Closely involved in the 1851 Great Exhibition and an influential critic of design through his work and writings. COLOMBO, Joe (1930–71) Italian architect, designer and artist, his innovative furniture and interiors of the 1960s received wide acclaim. CONRAN, Sir Terence (1931–) Designer and entrepreneur who has aimed to improve design in Britain ## Glossary through retailing in the Habitat shops and by sponsoring, through the Conran Foundation, the Boilerhouse Project. Constructivism A movement embracing architecture and all the arts in the Soviet Union in the period following the 1917 revolution. It sought to redefine the relationship between society, architecture, art and design. Crystal Palace, See Paxton, Joseph. DAY, Lewis F. (1845–1910) English designer involved in a wide range of design for industry and also associated with the Arts and Crafts Movement. DAY, Robin (1915–) Furniture and interior designer one of whose best-known contributions was the development of the polypropylene chair, available in a wide variety of forms for indoor and outdoor use. Decorative Arts An umbrella term which can include design in ceramic, silver, glass as well as furniture or jewellery. Generally associated with small scale objects. Title of a magazine and a movement initiated by Theo van Doesburg in Holland in 1917. The red/blue chair (1917) and the Schröder House (1924) designed by Gerrit Reitveld are among the best-known examples of de Stijl principles translated into three dimensions. Design and Industries Association Organization set up in 1915 to promote awareness of design among British manufacturers. Inspired by the work of the Deutsche Werkbund. DIOR, Christian (1905–57) French fashion designer who introduced the New Look in 1947. DRESSER, Christopher (1834–1904) Writer and designer of glass, ceramics, wallpaper, textiles, furniture and metal work. His metalwork designs for Hukon and Heath, Elkington and others in the 1870s and 1880s were based on clear geometric forms. EAMES, Charles and Ray American architects, designers and experimental film-makers whose plywood furniture and designs of the 1950s and 1960s were accorded international acclaim. Ray and Charles married in 1941 and work attributed solely to Charles was often the result of their partnership. Etruscan Ware Etruscan pottery dates from c.700 BC to c.100 BC. Eighteenth-century Etruscan ware featured classical motifs and colour schemes mainly of black, terracotta and white which were derived from Greek pottery vases, assumed at that date to be Etruscan. Expressionism A movement involving literature and many of the arts. In architecture and design expressionism occurred predominantly in Germany and Holland c. 1911–23. It had spiritual, Utopian, aesthetic and socialist implications. FARRELL, Terry (1938 Early work 1965–80 in partnership with Nicholas T. Grimshaw. Since 1980 Farrell has contributed to Post-Modernism in Britain with such buildings as the Clifton Nurseries, Covent Garden, and TV AM Building at Camden Lock with its finials of eggs in eggcups. Functionalism A philosophy of design with roots in Greek philosophy [see E. R. de Zurco (1957), Örigins of Functionalist Theory (New York: Columbia U.P.)]. Often associated today with the Modern Movement and the Machine Aesthetic. GALLÉ, Emile (1846–1904) French glassmaker, founder of the Nancy School and a leading exponent of Art Nouveau. Garden City See HOWARD, Ebenezer GIMSON, Ernest (1864–1919) Trained as an architect but became best known for his furniture design. In 1895 he set up a workshop in the Cotswolds with Edward and Sidney Barnsley. GLASER, Milton, (1929–) American graphic designer, founder of Push Pin Studios (1954), much influenced by Picasso in the development of graphic images. GRAY, Eileen (1878–1976) Irish architect and furniture designer who worked in Paris. Her furniture ranged from lacquered pieces to the use of tubular metal and steel rod. HILLE, Ray Born in Russia, came to Britain and worked in the First World War as a VAD she joined her father's company S. Hille & Co. as a furniture designer subsequently becoming Managing Director and Chair. HOLDEN, Charles (1875–1960) Architect who designed more than thirty stations for the London Passenger Transport Board and introduced certain aspects of the Modern Movement in them. HOPE, Thomas (1769–1831) Merchant, patron and author of Household Furniture and Interior Decoration (1807), a catalogue and guidebook to his London mansion, with its Egyptian, Roman and Greek room settings HOWARD, Ebenezer (1850–1928) 'Inventor' of the Garden City. The first garden city to be built was Letchworth, started in 1903 and designed by B. Parker and R. Unwin. Jacobean Jasper Ware À slightly translucent stoneware perfected by Wedgwood in 1775. Fine grained and hard, it could be stained, the most famous colour being Wedgwood blue. JONES, Inigo (1573–1652) Architect and stage designer who introduced the classical style to England from Italy. Among his important buildings are the Queen's House, Greenwich, the Banqueting House, Whitehall and the first London square at Covent Garden. KENT, William (1645–1748) Architect, painter, furniture designer and landscape gardener. Contributed to the development of informality in garden design at Chiswick House, London and elsewhere. KRiER, Robert ( An important theorist of Post-Modernism and the urban environment, he has produced urban schemes for Vienna, Stuttgart, and Berlin. The Ritterstrasse Housing Scheme in West Berlin (1978-80) illustrates his theories of social housing. He is Professor of Architecture at Vienna Technical University with a practice in Vienna. LE CORBUSIER, Charles Edouard (Jeanneret) (1887–1966) One of the most influential of twentieth-century architects, designers and town planners, by virtue not only of his work, but also his writings. LEACH, Bernard (1887–1979) English studio potter who founded the Leach pottery at St Ives, Cornwall, and developed pottery forms based on both Eastern and Western traditions. LOEWY, Raymond (1893–1986) Flamboyant industrial designer whose office has been much involved in transport design. These include the Greyhound bus and Skylab. MACDONALD, Margaret (1865–1933) Trained at the Glasgow School of Art, worked as a designer, embroideress and metalworker and married C. R. Mackintosh in 1900. The attribution of her work thereafter is illustrative of the difficulties posed by husband-andwife teams. Machine Aesthetic Advocated by many exponents of the Modern Movement, the machine aesthetic embraced references to transport and machinery and associated simple geometric forms with ease of mass production. MACKINTOSH, Charles Rennie (1868–1928) Architect and designer mainly associated with Glasgow. Designed many buildings including the Glasgow School of Art (1896) and with his wife Margaret Macdonald was involved in graphic, interior and furniture design. McKNIGHT KAUFER, Edward (1890-1954) American stage, graphic/textile designer who worked in England 1914–40 where he made his name as a poster designer. MACMURDO, A. H. (1851–1942) Architect and designer and founder, in 1882, of the Century Guild which was inspired by Ruskin and Morris. MAGISTRETTI, Vico (1920–) Italian architect and designer who has continually experimented with new forms and materials in seating and lighting. MAJORELLE, Louis (1859–1926) French cabinet maker and leading exponent of Art Nouveau furniture which was made in Nancy. MAKEPEACE, John (1939–) Furniture craftsman. Set up the Parnham School in Dorset, England, to promote and encourage craftsmanship in wood. MEMPHIS, See Sotsass Jr, Ettore. MIES VAN DER ROHE, Ludwig (1886–1969) Active as an architect in Germany until 1938, when he moved to the USA. Less is more', one of his many aphorisms, sums up his quest to simplify his architectural language. Modern Movement An umbrella term for a number of avant-garde movements in architecture, art and design which occurred in Europe and the USSR in the early twentieth century. Colloquially, and incorrectly, the term is often limited to avantgarde architecture built in Germany and by Le Corbusier in the 1920s. Modernism See Modern Movement MOHOLY-NAGY, Laszlo (1895–1946) Joined the Bauhaus in 1922 and in the 1930s moved to London and then to USA where he established the New Bauhaus. This subsequently became the Chicago Institute of Design. His work included graphics, photography, painting, film and metalwork. MORRIS, William (1834–96) Of major influence on all areas of architecture and design from his writings and lectures, as well as his own work, and that of his firm, Morris, Marshall & Co. (later Morris & Co.). Neo-Classicism New Classicism, the revival of the principles of Greek and Roman architecture and design. New Objectivity A term associated with early-twentieth-century avant-garde movements in Europe and the USSR that were searching for a new language in architecture and design that had no historic precedent. Pantheon Major Roman religious building c.AD100–25 whose dome was an engineering feat of the time. PAXTON, Joseph (1801–65) Gardener, architect and designer of the iron and glass Crystal Palace (1851) for the first international exhibition ever to be held. PERRET, Auguste (1874–1954) French architect associated with bold experiments in the use of concrete. An open space, usually surrounded by buildings. PICK, Frank (1878–1941) Commercial manager of the London Passenger Transport Board, responsible for reorganizing its corporate identity through new station and interior design, and graphics. Picturesque A landscape or building which looked as if it has come out of a painting, particularly paintings in the style of Claude or Poussin. C. 1790 it was defined as an aesthetic quality, between the sublime and the beautiful. In both landscape gardening and architecture picturesque qualities implied variety and diversity in forms and materials. Pilotis Pillars, or stanchions. French term for the vertical supporting member of a building. Point Block A high-rise, commercial, industrial or residential building almost square, cruciform, or circular in cross-section, as compared with slab-blocks (rectangular in cross-section) or ribbon blocks (continuous blocks). Post-Modernism An umbrella term for architecture and design which show characteristics not espoused by the Modern Movement. Can include any kind of ornament and revived styles such as classicism, or neo-vernacular. PUGIN, A.W.N. (1812–52) Architect, designer and writer of enormous influence to the Gothic Revival, and to the development of an ethical approach to architecture and design. Purism A form of abstraction invented by Le Corbusier and A. Ozenfant and influential in the development of Le Corbusier's architectural language in the 1920s. REPTON, Humphry (1752–1818) Writer, theorist and practitioner of landscape gardening of the generation after Brown. Through his writings his ideas continued to be influential until well after the mid-nineteenth century. Rococo The last phase of the Baroque, the Rococo was a new form of decoration initiated in France, which was light, asymmetrical and abstract. RUSKIN, John (1819–1900) Writer, theorist and critic of enormous influence on nineteenth-century art, architecture and design. SCOTT, Fred (1942–) Trained as a cabinet maker and visited Scandinavia on a travelling scholarship. He joined Hille International as a freelance designer in 1969. Shakers A Christian sect founded in the late-eighteenth century in England and USA. American Shaker furniture reflected the sect's ideals in its simple forms and good craftsmanship. SMITHSON. Alison (1928–) and Peter (1923–) The partnership of Alison and Peter Smithson has been active in the field of architecture, design and writing since the 1950s when their school at Hunstanton, Norfolk (1954) caused considerable controversy. SOTSASS, Ettore Jnr (1917–) Architect, designer, writer, worked as an industrial designer for Olivetti since late 1950s. In 1981 Memphis, founded by Sotsass and others sought to challenge ideas and criteria relating to design. TALBERT, B. J. (1838–81) Scottish architect and designer influential for his wallpaper, furniture and metalwork designs. Transept The arms on either side of the crossing in a cruciform church. TSCHICHOLD, Jan (1902–74) Swiss typographer, lettering and book designer whose new typography developed in the 1920s and 1930s, was very influential VITRUVIUS POLLIO, Marcus (active 46–39 BC) Roman architect and writer of a ten-volume treatise on architecture, De Architectura. As the only complete Roman treatise to survive, this was very influential from the early Renaissance onwards. VOYSEY, C. F. A. (1857-1941) Architect and designer influenced generally by William Morris and Arthur Macmurdo. Voysey designed the furniture, metalwork and details of his country houses. He also designed wallpapers and textiles. WEDGWOOD, Josiah (1730–95) One of the most successful English potters and entrepreneurs whose influence was international. WRIGHT, Frank Lloyd (1860–1959) Internationally acclaimed American architect whose work spanned sixty years and ranged from the prairie houses in Chicago to the Imperial Hotel, Tokyo (1924), successfully designed to withstand earthquakes, and the Guggenheim Museum, New York (completed 1960), with its spiral ramp. WYATT, Matthew Digby (1820–77) Architect and architectural journalist involved in the circle of Henry Cole and in work on the 1851 Great Exhibition. 300 Years of American Seating (Kane) 83 Aalto, Alvar 9, 203 Adam, Robert 9, 69, 92, 5.2, 5.3, 203 advertisements/advertising 3–5, 15, 42, 3.3, 47, 100, 123, 134–41, 7.1, 143, 153–8, 7.5 Advertising: An Annotated Bibliography (Thompson) 158 'Advertising, the magic system' (Williams) 154 Advertising and the Motorcar (Frostick) 153 Advertising in Britain: A History (Nevett) 158 Aesthetic Movement 28, 55, 203 Aesthetic Movement, The (Aslin) 55 Agius, Pauline British Furniture 1850–1915 (1978) 80 Aglaia 28–9 American Design Ethic, The (Pulos) 130 American Furniture, 1620 to the Present (Fairbanks & Bates) 80 American Furniture: The Federal Period (Montgomery) 80 American Furniture and Its Makers (ed. Quimby) 80 American Museum, Bath 75 Andrews, E. D. and Faith Religion in Wood (1966) 83 Apothecary Jars: Pharmaceutical Pottery and Porcelain in Europe and the East 1150–1850 (Drey) 53 archaeology 41, 48–50, 60, 79, 163 Architects' Designs for Furniture (Lever) 68–9 Architectural Ceramics (Hamilton) 55 Architectural Review 98 architecture/architects 5, 55, 59, 68–9, 76, 87–90, 100, 144, 162, 167,173, 178–80 Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment, The (Banham) 102 archives 47–9, 127–9, 148, 176 areas of outstanding natural beauty 165 Art and Industry (Read) 121–2 Art and the Industrial Revolution (Klingender) 136 Art Deco 41, 56, 79, 83, 123, 203 Art Direction 159 Art Nouveau 41, 54, 83, 101, 104, 141, 203 Art Nouveau Furniture (Duncan) 80 Art of Bernard Leach, The (Hogben) 55 Art of the Modern Potter, The (Birks) 55 Arts and Crafts Movement 55, 69-70, 75, 79,83, 95, 121, 203 Arts and Crafts Movement, The (Naylor) 55 Aslin, Elizabeth Nineteenth Century English Furniture (1962) 80 The Aesthetic Movement (1969) 55 Asymmetric Typography (Tschichold) 160 Atterbury, P. & L. Irvine The Doulton Story (1979) 54–5 attribution, furniture 65–7, 4.2 ‘Badminton' bed 4.1, 62 Baillie Scott, M. H. 36, 95, 203 Bakelite Museum, Blackheath 125 Baker, Hollis S. Furniture in The Ancient World, Origins and Evolution 3100–475BC (1966) 79 Banham, Rayner The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment (1969) 102 Bann, S. The Tradition of Constructivism (1974) 143 Barbican Arts Centre 74 Barley, W. M. The House and the Home (1963) 89 Barnsley, Edward 69–70 Barnsley, Sidney 69 barometers 73–4 Baroque movement 65, 79, 203 Barthes, Roland 155, 157 Image Music Text (1977) 155 Mythologies (1973) 155 Baseline-International Typographics Magazine 158 Bases of Design, The (Crane) 159 Bathroom Book, The (Kira) 52 bathrooms 50–2 Bauhaus 77, 122, 129–30, 203–4 Bauhaus (Whitford) 130 Bauhaus, The (Wingler) 130 Bauhaus Archiv 128 Bauhaus Reassessed, The (Naylor) 130 Bayer, Herbert 146 Bayley, Stephen Harley Earl and the Dream Machine (1983) 130 In Good Shape (1979), 129 Beamish North of England Open Air Museum, Co. Durham 75, 125 Beard, G. Modern Ceramics (1969) 55 Bellaigue, Geoffrey de The James A. De Rothschild Collection at Waddesdon Manor (1974) 84 Benjamin, Walter 141 Benton, C. & D. Sharp Form and Function. A Sourcebook for the History of Architecture and Design 1890–1930 (1975) 138 Benton, Tim & Barbie Campbell-Cole Tubular Steel Furniture (1979) 131 Berger, John Ways of Seeing (1971) 152 Bernard, J. Victorian Ceramic Tiles (1972) 55 Bethnal Green Museum 75 Spitalfields silk collection 34 bibliographies 11–12, 78, 142, 158 Bibliography of Book Illustration, A (Bland) 158 Bing, Samuel 101 Birks, T. The Art of the Modern Potter (1976) 55 Black Basalt 42, 204 Blake, John and Avril The Practical Idealists (1969) 131 Bland, D. A Bibliography of Book Illustration (1955) 158 Blists Hill Open Air Museum, Coalbrookdale 108 Blue Boy (Gainsborough) 2.1, 22 Blueprint 98 Bofill, Ricardo 179, 204 Boilerhouse Project 126, 128–9, 205 Bonnard, Camille Costume Historique (1829–30) 28 book design 5, 136, 7.4, 148–51 Book of Guinness Advertising, The (Sibley) 153 Book of the Modern Home, The (Bradell) 51-2 Booker, Christopher The Neophiliacs: A Study of the Revolution in English Life in the Fifties and Sixties (1969) 151 Bookseller, The 150 Boynton, Lindsay 60 Bradell, Dorothy The Book of the Modern Home (1939) 51-2 Brentham Estate, Ealing 169, 176 Breuer, Marcel 204 'Wassily' chair 83 Bristowe, W. S. Victorian China Fairings (1964) 54 British and Irish Architectural History: a Bibliography and Guide to Sourčes of Information (Kamen) 12 British Can Make It exhibition 56 British Design (Forty & Newman) 131 British Furniture 1850–1915 (Agius) 80 British Industries Fair 56 British Leyland 125 British Museum 57, 4.4, 109 British Pottery (Godden) 54 British Telecom 112 Brown, Lancelot (Capability) 164, 204 Brunel, I. K. 88, 204 Brunskill, R. The Traditional Buildings of Britain (1981) 91 Buchanan, R. A. Industrial Archaeology in Britain (1972) 49 Buck, Ann Dress in Eighteenth Century England (1979) 31 Buddensieg, Tilman & Henning Rogge Industrekultur: Peter Behrens and the AEG (1984) 130 Buildings of England (Pevsner) 102 Burchill, F. & R. Ross A History of the Potters' Union (1977) 45 Büro Bedauf Pelikan Prospectus (1924) 144–8, 7.3 Burton, A. Remains of a Revolution (1975) 49 Bush, Donald The Streamlined Decade (1975) 130 Butterfield, William 88, 204 Buttrey, D. N. Plastics in the Furniture Industry (1964) 84 Byker Wall 179 Campaign 158 Campbell, Joan The German Werkbund (1978) 130 Cantacuzino, S. New Uses for Old Buildings (1975) 90 Car Programme, The 126 Capitoline Museum 42 Carr, E. H. What is History? (1961) 6 Carrington, Noel Industrial Design in Britain (1976) 131 catalogues exhibition 41–2, 56, 84, 108 trade 26, 47, 49, 80 Cat's Whisker, The: 50 Years of Wireless Design (Hill) 131 Caughley porcelain works 49 Century of Chair Design, A (Russell, Garner & Read) 83 Ceramic Art of China and Other Countries of the Far East, The (Honey) 53 ceramics 4–5, 10, 12, 38–57, 111, 114, 135 Cescinsky, Herbert The Gentle Art of Faking Furniture (rev. edn 1969) 67 chairs 3–4, 42, 69, 4.1–4.3, 4.5 & 4.6 76,83–4 Chairs (Joy) 83–4 Charles Rennie Mackintosh collection, Glasgow 13 Charleston, R. World Ceramics (1968) 52–3 Chinese Domestic Furniture (Ecke) 79 Chinese Furniture (Ellsworth) 79 Chinese Household Furniture (Kates) 79 Chippendale, Thomas 4.1, 65, 81, 204 Church Furnishing and Decoration in England and Wales (Randall) 82–3 CIAM 172, 204 City Museum and Art Gallery, Stoke on Trent 45–6, 57 Civic Amenities Act (1967) 170 Civic Trust 13, 166, 194 Clarke, R. Japanese Antique Furniture (1983) 79-80 Clean and Decent (Wright) 52 clean-sweep planning 174, 176 Clifton Nurseries 178–9 clocks 74 Coalport and Coalbrookdale Porcelain (Godden) 54 Cole, Henry, 8, 119–20, 204 The Journal of Design 120, 204 Coleman, Alice Utopia on Trial (1985) 177 Collection of the Dresses of Different Nations, both Ancient and Modern, A (Jefferys) 27 collections 8–14, 30–4, 44, 56–7, 74–5, 77 Collins, Peter Concrete, The Vision of a New Architecture (1959) 88 Colombo, Joe 81, 204 Colour in Industry Today (Wilson) 102 Communication Arts 159 Communications (Williams) 151 community architecture 179 Complete View of the Dress and Habits of the People of England, A (Strutt) 28 Concise Encyclopaedia of Continental Pottery and Porcelain (Haggar) 53 Concise Encyclopaedia of English Pottery and Porcelain, The (Markowitz & Haggar) 53, 57 Concise History of Interior Decoration, A (Savage) 91 Concrete, The Vision of a New Architecture (Collins) 88 Congrès Internationaux d'Architecture Modern 172, 204 Conran, Sir Terence 77, 81, 204–5 Conran Foundation 128, 205 conservation areas 170 conspicuous consumption 17 Constructivism 121, 7.1, 141–3, 146, 148, 205 Consultant Design (Sparke) 131 Contemporary Decorative Arts, The (Garner) 80 Contemporary Designers (Morgan) 12 Cook, R. M. Greek Painted Pottery (1966) 53 Cookson, D. 3.2 Cooper, A. Making a Poster (1938) 159 Costume Historique (Bonnard) 28 Coulson, A. J. A Bibliography of Design in Britain, 1851–1970 (1979) 11–12, 78 Council for Industrial Design 123 Council for the Protection of Rural England 166, 194 Council of Art and Industry 123 Country Life Book of Clocks, The Joy) 74 Course in General Linguistics, A (de Saussure) 154–5 Cox & Harvey English Chu Crane, W. The Bases of Design (1898) 159 Crawfords 138 Creative Review 158 Cubism 7.1 Cullen, Gordon Townscape (1961) 167 Cult Objects (Sudjic) 131–2 Cunnington, Phyllis 29 Current Architecture (Jencks & Chaitkin) 179 Curwen, H. Processes of Graphic Reproduction in Printing (1947 edn) 159 Cushion, J. P. & W. B. Honey Daily Mail Ideal Home Exhibition 108 Danish Chairs (Ditzel) 83 Davis, Joseph Gordon 104 Day, Lewis F. 36, 205 Day, Robin 69, 81, 205 Poly’ chair 69, 4.3, 205 De Architectura (Vitruvius) 91–2 de Saussure, Ferdinand A Course in General Linguistics (1974) 154–5 de Stijl 5, 121, 146, 205 Death and Life of Great American Cities, The (Jacobs) 174 Decoding Advertisements (Williamson) 157 decoration 7, 41, 44, 48, 53, 57, 76, 119–21 Decorative Designs of Frank Lloyd Wright, The (Hanks) 69 Decorative Wedgwood in Architecture and Furniture (Kelly) 43 Defensible Space, People and Design in the Violent City (Newman) 177 Department of the Environment's Housing Development Diréctorate 177–8 department stores 101, 144 Design 158 Design and Art Direction 158 Design and Industries' Association 77, 128, 131,205 Design Council 127–8, 131 'Design for Profit' campaign 127–8 Design in Sweden (ed. Lindkvist) 56 Design International (Mees, Forbes & Lloyd) 12 Design in British Industry – a Mid-Century Survey (Farr) 131 Design in Germany 1870–1918 (Heskett) 130 Designer 158 Designing for People (Dreyfuss) 130 Development of the Factory, The (Tann) 101 diaries 8, 10, 23, 25–6, 33, 66 dictionaries 11–12, 78 Dictionary of English Furniture Makers 1660–1840, The 78, 80 Dictionary of Tools Used in the Woodworking and Allied Trades c. 1700–1970 (Salaman) 84 Dimonstein, Morton 7.4, 149 Dior, Christian 9, 205 directories 11–12, 14 Directory of the Historic Cabinet Woods (Hinckley) 84 dispersal planning 169 Ditzel, Nanna & Jørgen Danish Chairs (1954) 83 Dobrow, L. When Advertising Tried Harder (1984) 153 Dolphin water closet 50, 3.5 domestic interiors 90–8, 5.2, 5.3 Donhauser, R. S. History of American Ceramics: the Studio Potter (1978) 56 Doulton and Watts 50 Doulton Story, The (Atterbury and Irvine) 54–5 Downland Open Air Museum, Coalbrookdale 108 Doyle, Dane, Bernbach 153 drawings 10, 12–13 dress design 4–5, 15–37 Dress in Eighteenth Century England (Buck) 31 Dresser, Christopher 48, 120, 205 Drey, R. E. A. Apothecary Jars: Pharmaceutical Pottery and Porcelain in Europe and the East 1150–1850 (1978) 53 Dreyfuss, Henry Designing for People (1955) 130 Dryad, Leicester 4.5 DTV 150 Duncan, Alistair Art Nouveau Furniture (1982) 80 Dunroamin. The Suburban Semi and its Enemies (Oliver, Davis & Bentley) 176 Eames, Charles 68–9, 4.3, 205 Eames, Penelope Medieval Furniture (1979) 79 Eames, Ray 63, 69, 205 Early Chinese Pottery and Porcelain (Gray) 53 Early Islamic Pottery: Mesopotamia, Egypt and Persia (Lane) 53 Early Victorian Period 1830–1860, The (Edwards and Ramsey) 54 Eastlake, Charles L. Hints on Household Taste in Furniture, Upholstery and other details (1868) 92 Ecke, Gustav Chinese Domestic Furniture 79 economic history 33, 36, 41, 46–8, 60, 100, 138, 162, 176 Edwardian Interiors (Service) 91 Edwards & Roberts 67 Edwards, R. and L. Ramsey The Early Victorian Period 1830–1860 (1958) 54 Ekholm, Kurt 56 El Lissitzky – Life, Letters, Text (Lissitzky-Kuppers) 146 Ellsworth, R. H. Chinese Furniture (1971) 79 Emery, Marc Furniture By Architects (1983) 69 Emery, W. B. 115 Empire Marketing Board 138 Enclosure Acts 163, 165 Encyclopaedia of British Pottery and Porcelain Marks (Godden) 44 Encyclopaedia of World Art(McGraw-Hill) 91 English Art Pottery (Haslam) 55 English Barometers 1680–1860 (Goodison) 73 English Blue and White Porcelain in the 18th Century (Watney) 53 English Church Furniture (Cox & Harvey) 82 English Furniture 1800–1851 (Joy) 80 English Furniture Designs of the Eighteenth Century (Ward-Jackson) 81 English Gypsy Caravan, The (Ward-Jackson & Harvey) 100 English Vision, The: The Picturesque in Architecture, Landscape and Garden Design (Watkin) 164 Englishman's Chair, The (Gloag) 84 engraving 25, 42, 91 environmental design 3–5, 10–12, 162–80 Environmental Directory, The: National and Regional Organisations of Interest to those Concerned with Amenity and the Environment (1981) 166 Erskine, Ralph 179 Etruscan ware 43, 205 Ettore Sottsas Jnr (Sparke) 80–1, 131 exhibitions 9, 11, 54, 56, 77, 107–9, 121, 128–9 Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes, Paris (1925) 108 Exposition Universelle, Paris (1900) 108 Exposizione Internationale d’Arte Decorativa Moderna, Turin (1902) 108 Expressionism 149, 205 Face, The 98 Facetti, Germano 150 factory organization 45–7, 49, 101–2 Fairbanks, J. L. & E. B. Bates American Furniture, 1620 to the Present (1981) 80 Fairbrother, Nan New Lives New Landscapes (1970) 165 Fairholt, F. W. 28 fakes 44, 54, 67 Farm Security Administration 163 Farr, Michael Design in British Industry – a mid-Century Survey (1955) 131 Farrell, Terry 178–9, 205–6 Fawcett, J. The Future of the Past: Attitudes to Conservation 1147–1974 (1976) 105 Ferebee, Ann A History of Design from the Victorian Era to the Present (1970) 129 Festival of Britain exhibition 56 Fine Art Society 108 Fischer Fine Art Gallery 108 Five Hundred Years of Printing (Steinberg) 149 Flaxman, John 43, 120 Flugel, J. C. The Psychology of Clothes 29 Ford, Henry 113, 123 form 3–4, 6–7, 1.1, 122, 126 Form and Function. A Sourcebook for the History of Architecture and Design 1890–1930 (Benton & Sharp) 138 Forty, Adrian British Design (with G. Newman, 1975) 131 Objects of Desire (1985) 132 Foster, Norman 101 France/French 17–19, 42, 49, 52–3, 67, 75, 80, 121, 143, 150, 153, 198–9 French Faience (Lane) 53 French Royal Furniture (Verlet) 80 Frescoes from Florence' (Hayward Gallery) 108 Frostick, M. Advertising and the Motorcar (1970) 153 Functional Tradition in Early Industrial Buildíngs, The (Richards) 91 Functionalism 96, 123, 206 Furnishing and Decoration of Ham House, The (Thornton & Tomlin) 105 Furniture 700–1700 (Mercer) 59, 79 Furniture at Temple Newsam House and Lotherton Hall (Gilbert) 84 Furniture By Architects (Emery) 69 furniture design 3–5, 8, 10, 58–85, 108, 111, 114, 121 furniture history 78 Furniture History Society 59, 77 The Dictionary of English Furniture Makers 1660–1840 (1986) 78, 80 Furniture in Roman Britain (Liversidge) 79 Furniture in the Ancient World, Origins and Evolution 3100–475 BC (Baker) 79 Future of the Past, The: Attitudes to Conservation 1147–1974 (Fawcett) 105 Mary, Countess Howe 22–3, 2.4 Gallimard 150 Games, A. Over My Shoulder (1960) 159 Garden City Movement 168–9, 206 Garner, Philippe The Contemporary Decorative Arts (1980) 80 Twentieth Century Furniture (1980 Garthwaite, Anna Maria 33–4 Garvan Collection, Yale 76 Gatwick Airport 74 Gauguin 41, 143 Gaunt, W. & M. Clayton-Stamm William de Morgan (1971) 55 Geffrye Museum, London 75 Gender Advertisements (Goffman) 157 Gentle Art of Faking Furniture, The (Cescinsky) 67 Georgian Group 170 German Werkbund, The (Campbell) 130 Giedion, S. Mechanisation Takes Command (rev. edn 1969) 52, 129 Gilbert, Christopher Furniture at Temple Newsam House and Lotherton Hall 84 The Life and Work of Thomas Chippendale (1978) 65, 81 Grimson. Ernest 68–9, 74, 83, 206 Girouard, M. Life in the English Country House (1978) 165 Victorian Pubs (1978) 55 Gladstone Pottery Museum 49, 57 Glaser, Milton 136, 206 Glasgow Media Group 152 Gloag, John A Short Dictionary of Furniture (1969) 78 The Englishman's Chair (1964) 84 Godden, G. A. British Pottery (1970) 54 Coalport and Coalbrookdale Porcelain (1970) 54 Encyclopaedia of British Pottery and Porcelain Marks (1979) 44 Goffmann, Erwing Gender Advertisements (1979) 157 Golden Age of English Furniture Upholstery, The (Walton) 72 Goodison, Nicholas English Barometers 1680-–1860 (1968) 73 Ormolu: the Work of Matthew Boulton (1974) 73 Goodman, W. L. The History of Woodmaking Tools (1962) 84 Gorb, P. Living By Design: Pentagram (1978) 131, 159 Gordon Russell Ltd 74 Gothic Furniture (Pugin) 82 GPO Film Unit 138 Grand Domestic Revolution, The: A History of Feminist Designs for American Homes. Neighbourhods and Cities (Hayden) 95 Grange, Kenneth 110 Grapes of Wrath, The (Steinbeck) 163 graphic design 4–5, 134–61 Graphics 149 Graphis 159 Gray, B. Early Chinese Pottery and Porcelain (1953) 53 Gray, Eileen 63, 206 Gray's Pottery 45–6, 3.4 Great Museum, The (Horne) 9 Greek Painted Pottery (Cook) 53 Greenhill, B. & A. Giffard Travelling by Sea in the Nineteenth Century: Interior Design in Victorian Passenger Ships (1972) 100 Gugelot, Hans 122 Gustavsberg China Factory 56 Gutenberg Galaxy, The (McLuhan) 137 Haggar, R. G. Concise Encyclopaedia of Continental Pottery and Porcelain (1960) 53 Concise Encyclopaedia of English Pottery and Porcelain, The (1968, with Mankowitz) 53 Hall, Stuart The Social Eye of Picture Post (1972) 152–3 Ham House 4.2, 68, 105 Hamilton, D. Árchitectural Ceramics (1978) 55 Handbook of American Popular Culture (Inge) 158 Handbook of Pottery Marks (Cushion & Honey) 44 Handbook of Type and Illustration, A (Lewis) 160 Hanks, D. A. The Decorative Designs of Frank Lloyd Wright (1979) 69 Haresnape, Brian Railway Design Since 1930 (1968) 131 Harley Earl and the Dream Machine (Bayley) 130 Harris, John Regency Furniture Designs from Coniemporary Source Books 1803–1826 (1961) 81 Haslam, M. English Art Pottery 1865–1915 (1975) 55 The Martin Brothers, Potters (1978) 55 Haweis, Mrs 28 Hawkes, T. Structuralism and Semiotics (1979) 155 Hayden, D. The Grand Domestic Revolution: A History of Feminist Designs for American Homes, Neighbourhoods and Cities (1981) 95 Hayward, Helen The History of Furniture (1976) 78-9 Hayward, Helen cont Thomas Johnson and the English Rococo (1964) 80 World Furniture (1965) 78–9 Heal, Sir Ambrose The London Furniture Makers From The Restoration to The Victorian Era 1660–1840 (1953) 78, 80 Hélène Fourment (Rubens) 22, 2.3 Henry Du Pont Museum 75 Hepplewhite 81–2 Heskett, John Design in Germany 1870–1918 (1986) 130 Industrial Design (1980) 129 Hidden Persuaders, The (Packard) 154 High Victorian Design (Jervis) 119 Highams 138 Hill, Jonathan The Cat's Whisker: 50 Years of Wireless Design (1978) 131 Hille, Ray 63, 206 Hillier, B. Pottery and Porcelain 1700–1914 (1968) 54 Hinckley, F. Lewis Directory of the Historic Cabinet Woods (1960) 84 Hints on Household Taste in Furniture, Upholstery and Other Details (Eastlake) 92 Historical Transport 126 History of American Ceramics: the Studio Potter (Donhauser) 56 History of British Design, A (McCarthy) 130-1 History of Building Types, A (Pevsner) 91 History of Design from the Victorian Era to the Present, A (Ferebee) 129 History of Furniture, The (ed. Hayward) 78–9 History of Graphic Design, A (Megs) 137 History of Industrial Design, A (Lucie-Smith) 129 History of Technology, A (ed. Singer et al) 53,102 History of the Modern Movement, A (Rowland) 129 History of the Potters’ Union, A (Burchill & Ross) 45 History of Visual Communications, A (Müller-Brockmann) 137 History of Woodworking Tools, The (Goodman) 84 Hitler, Adolf 113 Hogben, C. The Art of Bernard Leach (1975) 55 Hoggart, Richard The Uses of Literacy (1957) 150–1 Holden, Charles 100, 206 ‘Home Spun to High-Speed' (1979) 121 Homes for Heroes (Swenarton) 176 Honey, W. B. The Ceramic Art of China and Other Countries of the Far East (1945) 53 Honnecourt, Villard de 92 Honour, H. Neo-Classicism (1977) 43 The Penguin Dictionary of Decorative Arts (1977, with J. Fleming) 12 Hope, Thomas 206 Household Furniture and Interior Decoration (1807) 92, 206 Horne, Donald The Great Museum (1984) 9 Hoskins, W. G. The Making of the English Landscape (1970) 163–4 House and the Home, The (Barley) 89 Household Furniture and Interior Decoration (Hope) 92, 206 housing 162, 166, 168–9, 172, 175–8 Housing Act (1924) 51 How to Find Out in Architecture and Building (Smith) 90 Howard, Ebenezer 168–9, 172, 206 Hudson, K. Industrial Archaeology (1963) 49 Humberstone Garden Suburb, Leicester 169 Hurlburt, A. Layout: The Design of the Printed Page (1977) 159–60 Hummel, Charles F. With Hammer in Hand. The Dominy Craftsmen of East Hampton, New York (1968) 84 Hussey, Christopher The Picturesque (1927) 164 Huxley, Aldous 134 Illustrated Dictionary of Ceramics (Savage & Newman) 53 Illustrated History of Interior Decoration, An (Praz) 91 illustration 135–6, 141, 151–2 Illustrators 158 Image Music Text (Barthes) 155 In Good Shape (Bayley) 129 India/Indians 18, 35, 117, 199 Industrekultur: Peter Behrens and the AEG (Buddensieg & Rogge) 130 Industrial Archaeological Society 13 Industrial Archaeology (Hudson) 49 Industrial Archaeology in Britain (Buchanan) 49 industrial design 4–5, 12, 56, 69–70, 4.3, 110-33 Industrial Design (Heskett) 129 Industrial Design in Britain (Carrington) 131 Industrial Designer and the Public, The (Woodham) 131 Industrial Revolution 46–9, 56, 59, 114, 118 Inge, M. T. Handbook of American Popular Culture (1980) 158 Inmos factory 101–2 Institute of Advanced Studies, Manchester Polytechnic 127 interior design 3–5, 55, 67–8, 70, 4.4, 72, 80, 86–109, 111 Interior Design and Decoration (Whiton) 91 Interior Design International (The International Contract Furnishing and Interior Design Exhibition) 108 Introduction to Deisgn and Culture in the Twentieth Century, An (Sparke) 132 Introduction to Typography (Simon) 160 Ironbridge Gorge Museum Trust 49, 125 Italian Majolica (Rackham) 53 Italian Porcelain (Lane) 53 Italy 32, 41, 53, 200 Ivins Jr., William M. Prints and Visual Communication (1969) 136 J. Paul Getty Museum, Calif. 75–6 Jackson, Alan Semi-detached London (1973) 176 Jacobs, Jane The Death and Life of Great American Cities (1965) 174 James, Henry 114 James A. De Rothschild Collection at Waddesdon Manor, The (de Bellaigue) 84 Japan/Japanese 11, 18, 35, 53, 79–80, 117, 143–4, 200 Japanese Antique Furniture (Clarke) 79-80 Japanese Porcelain (Jenyns) 53 Japanese Pottery (Jenyns) 53 Jasper ware 42, 206 Jefferys, Thomas A Collection of the Dresses of Different Nations both Ancient and Modern 27 Jencks, Charles 178 Current Architecture (1982, with Chaitkin) 179 Modern Movements in Architecture (1985) 179 Jenyns, S. Japanese Porcelain (1973) 53 Japanese Potter (1971) 53 Later Chinese Porcelain (1951) 53 Jervis, Simon High Victorian Design (1974) 119 The Penguin Dictionary of Design and Designers (1985) 12 Printed Furniture Designs Before 1650 (1974) 81 Victorian Furniture (1968) 80 Jones, Inigo 178, 206 Journal of Design, The 120 Joy, Edward Chairs (1967) 83–4 The Country Life Book of Clocks (1967) 74 English Furniture 1800–1851 (1977) 80 Pictorial Dictionary of British 19th Century Furniture Design (1977) 81-2 Kage, Wilhelm 56 Kamen, Ruth H. British and Irish Architectural History: a Bibliography and Guide to Sources of Information (1981) 12 Kane, Patricia 300 Years of American Seating (1976) 83 Kates, G. N. Chinese Household Furniture (1962) 79 Katz, Sylvia Plastics Design and Materials (1978) 131 Kauffer, E. McKnight 7.1 Kedleston Hall 75 Kelly, A. Decorative Wedgwood in Architecture and Furniture (1965) 43 Kent, William 5, 207 Keywords (Williams) 135 Kira, A. The Bathroom Book (1979) 52 Kitchen design 97–8 Klingender, F. Art and the Industrial Revolution (1972) 136 Knole, Kent 75 Korean Furniture: Elegance and Tradition (Wright) 80 Krier, Robert 167–8, 207 Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight 75 Land Use Research Unit, London 177 landscape design 5, 162–6 Lane, P. Studio Ceramics 55–7 Later Chinese Porcelain (Jenyns) 53 Later Islamic Pottery (Lane) 53 Laughter in the Dark (Nabokov) 7.4, 148–51 Laver, James 29 Layout: The Design of the Printed Page (Hurlburt) 159–60 LCC cottage estates 169 Leach, Bernard 44, 55, 207 A Potter's Book (rev.edn. 1976) 55 Leavis, F. R. 134 Letchworth 169 Letters 8, 10, 23, 25–6 Lever, Jill Architects' Designs for Furniture (1982) 68–9 Lewis, John A Handbook of Type and Illustration (1956) 160 The Twentieth Century Book (1984 edn) 149 Liberty 101 libraries 13, 49, 69, 140 Libraries, Museums and Art Galleries Yearbook 1978–9, The (1981) 14 Life and Work of Thomas Chippendale, The (Gilbert) 65, 81 Life in the English Country House (Girouard) 165 Limner, Luke 28 Lindkvist, L. Design in Sweden (1977) 56 Linley Sambourne Museum 104 Linnell, John 4.1, 62 Lissitzky, El 144–8, 7.3 Lissitsky-Kuppers, Sophie El Lissitsky – Life, Letters, Texts (1980 edn) 146 Living By Design: Pentagram (Gorb) 131,159 Livres de Poche 150 Lodder, C. Russian Constructivism (1983) 142 Loewy, Raymond 126, 130, 207 London Furniture Makers From The Restoration To The Victorian Era 1660–1840, The (Heal) 78, 80 London Passenger Transport Board 100, 125, 138, 7.1 Lotherton Hall 75 Louis XVI Furniture (Watson) 80 Lucie-Smith, E. A History of Industrial Design (1983) 129 The Story of Craft: the Craftsman's Role in Šociety (1981) 55 McCarthy, Fiona 121 A History of British Design (1979) 130-1 McCullin, Don 152 Macdonald, Margaret 105–6, 5.5, 207–8 Mackintosh, C. R. 68–9, 105–6, 5.5, 207 Mackmurdo, A. H. 36, 207 McLennan, J. H. 3.1 McLuhan, Marshall The Gutenberg Galaxy (1962) 137 Magazine Design (White) 151 magazines articles on design 9, 11, 25–6, 28, 42, 56, 102, 108, 132, 148 Sunday Times colour supplement 151-3 Magistretti, Vico 81, 207 Makepeace, John 70, 207 Making a Poster (Cooper) 159 Making of the English Landscape, The (Hoskins) 163–4 Making Space, Women and the Man-Made Environment (Matrix) 95,178 Manchester Exchange Theatre 5.1, 90 Manet 143 Mankowitz, W. & R. G. Haggar The Concise Encyclopaedia of English Pottery and Porcelain (1968) 53, 57 Mann, J. L. 33 Mansion House Square 171 marketing 4, 15, 46–7, 54, 123, 150 marks, pottery 44 Martin Brothers Potters, The (Haslam) 55 Mary, Countess Howe (Gainsborough) 22–3, 2.4 materials 4, 7, 35, 41, 44, 53, 60, 71–4, 76, 78, 80, 84, 111, 119–20, 123, 126, 131, 135, 170 Matrix Making Space, Women and the Man-Made Environment (1984) 95, 178 Mechanisation Takes Command (Giedion) 52, 129 Medieval English Pottery (Rackham) 53 Medieval Furniture (Eames) 79 Megs, Philip A History of Graphic Design (1983) 137 Meikle, Jeffrey Twentieth Ċentury Limited (1979) 130 Meissen 38, 42, 44–5 Meissen (Morley-Fletcher) 53 Memphis (Radice) 81 Memphis Group 80, 209 Mercer, Eric Furniture 700–1700 59, 79 Mies van der Roche, Ludwig 171, 207 Miller, Hermann 4.3 Milne Museum, Tonbridge 125 Minton 48 Modern Ceramics (Beard) 55 Modern Chairs (1918–1970) 83 Modern Movements in Architecture (Jencks) 179 Modernism 8, 65, 72, 4.5, 83, 96–7, 121–3, 129–30, 138, 7.1, 142, 162, 171–2, 175, 178–9, 207–8 Moholy-Nagy, L. 208 Painting Photography Film (1969) 160 Monotype Corporation 149 Montgomery, Charles American Furniture: The Federal Period (1967) 80 Morgan, Ann Lee Contemporary Designers (1984) 12 Morley-Fletcher, H. Meissen (1971) 53 Morris, William 5, 8, 30, 35, 55, 104, 120–1,208 Morris, William (later Lord Nuffield) 121 Morris & Co. 75 Morris Minor: The World's Supreme Small Car (Skilleter) 100 Morrison, Stanley 149 Müller-Brockmann, J. A History of Visual Communications (1971) 137 Munch 143 Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris 108 Museum of Design, London 77 Museum of Modern Art, New York 74 museums 4, 9, 11, 13, 16, 19, 30–2, 38, 49. 53, 56–7, 59, 64, 67, 71, 74–7, 107, 125–6 Museums Yearbook 14 Mythologies (Barthes) 155 Nabokov, Vladimir Laughter in the Dark (1963) 7.4, 148–51 National Art Library, Art and Design Archive 128 National Gallery 171 National Motor Museum, Beaulieu 125 National Railway Museum, York 125 National Trust 68, 105, 165–6 Naylor, G. The Arts and Crafts Movement (1971) 55 The Bauhaus Reassessed (1985) 130 Neo-Classicism 5, 41–3, 65, 79, 93, 208 Neo-Classicism (Honour) 43 Neophiliacs, The: A Study of the Revolution in English Life in the Fifties and Sixties (Booker) 151 Nevett, T. Advertising in Britain: A History (1982) 158 New Lives New Landscapes (Fairbrother) 165 New Objectivity 121, 208 New Towns 169 New Uses for Old Buildings (Cantacuzino) 90 Newman, Oscar Defensible Space, People and Design in the Violent City (1972) 177 newspapers 23, 60, 134, 136–7, 144, 153,176 Newton, Stella Mary 29 Nineteenth Century English Furniture (Aslin) 80 Objects of Desire (Forty) 132 offices 100-1 Ogilvy on Advertising (Turner) 153 Oliver, P., I. Davis & I. Bentley Dunroamin. The Suburban Semi and its Enemies (1981) 176 On Living in an Old Country; The National Past in Contemporary Britain (Wright) 9 open piazza 171, 208 oral history 10, 62–3, 128, 176 oriental ceramics 44–5, 49, 53, 57 Orientalism: Western Conceptions of the Orient (Said) 143 Ormolu: the Work of Matthew Boulton (Goodison) 73 Osterley Park House 68, 75, 105 Over My Shoulder (Games) 159 Packard, Vance The Hidden Persuaders (1957) 154 painting 5, 8, 12, 20–5, 2.1–2.4, 28, 33, 57,91, 146 Painting Photography Film (Moholy-Nagy) 160 Palumbo, Peter 171 Parker, Roszika The Subversive Stitch (1984) 29 pattern books 33, 57, 65, 80–1, 91–2 Paxton, Joseph 88, 208 Pelikan prospectus (1924) 144–8, 7.3 Penguin books 7.4, 148–51 Penguin Dictionary of Decorative Arts, The (Honour and Fleming) 12 Penguin Dictionary of Design and Designers, The (Jervis) 12 Pentagram (1972) 131 Pentagram Design Partnership 110, 131, 159 Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art 57 Perret, Auguste 88, 208 Pevsner, Nicholas Buildings of England (1951–) 102 A History of Building Types (1976) 91 Pioneers of Modern Design 122, 129 photography 8, 12, 25, 60, 135, 7.2, 141, 144, 152 Pick, Frank 100, 208 Pictorial Dictionary of British 19th Century Furniture Design (Joy) 81-2 Picture Post 152–3 Picturesque, The (Hussey) 164 picturesque taste 89–90, 164, 208 Pioneers of Modern Deisgn (Pevsner) 122, 129 Pioneers of Modern Typography (Spencer) 146 Planché, J. R. 28 Plastics Design and Materials (Katz) 131 Plastics in the Furniture Industry (ed. Buttrey) 84 point block 171, 209 polypropylene furniture 69, 4.3, 76 Ponting, K. 33 Porsche, Ferdinand 113 posters 136–8, 7.1, 141–3, 146–8 Post-Modernism 148, 158, 162, 168, 171, 178–80, 209 Potter's Book, A (Leach) 55 Pottery and Ceramics: From Common Brick to Fine China (Rosenthal) 44 Pottery and Porcelain 1700–1914 (Hillier) 54 Practical Idealists, The (Blake) 131 Praz, Mario An Illustrated History of Interior Decoration (1964) 91 Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood 28 Print 159 Printed Furniture Designs Before 1650 (Jervis) 81 Prints and Visual Communication (Ivins) 136 Processes of Graphic Reproduction in Printing (Curwen) 159 Prodigious Builders, The (Rudofsky) 91 production processes 4, 7, 27, 35–6, 44, 47–50, 55, 60, 62, 114–16, 118–20 Psychology of Clothes, The (Flugel) 29 Public Record Offices 13, 128, 176 Publisher's Weekly 150 Pugh, P. D. G. Staffordshire Portrait Figures and Ällied Objects of the Victorian Era (1970) 54 Pugin, A. W.N. 8, 48, 209 Gothic Furniture (1835) 82 Pulos, Arthur 116 The American Design Ethic (1983) 130 Purism 121 Queensberry, Duchess of 25 Quimby, Ian M. American Furniture and Its Makers (1979) 80 Rackham, B. Italian Majolica (1963) 53 Medieval English Pottery (1972) 53 Radiant City 172–3, 8.1 Radice, B. Memphis (1985) 81 Railway Design since 1830 (Haresnape) 131 Rams, Dieter 122 Rand, P. Thought on Design (1967) 160 Randall, Gerald Church Furnishing and Decoration in England and Wales (1980) 82–3 Rational Dress Society 28 Aglaia 28–9 Ravetz, Alison Remaking Cities (1980) 175 Read, Herbert Art and Industry (1934) 121–2 recreation, interiors for 98 Regency Furniture Designs from Contemporary Source Books 1803–1826 (Harris) 81 Regional Furniture History Society 59 Regional Furniture Study Group 64 Religion in Wood (Andrews) 83 Remains of a Revolution (Burton) 49 Remaking Cities (Ravetz) 175 reproductions 44, 54, 67 Repton, Humphry 164, 209 Reynolds, Joshua 25 Discourses 25 Rhodes, Zandra 18 Richards, J. M. The Functional Tradition in Early Industrial Buildings (1958) 91 Rococo 41, 54, 79, 209 Rococo Art and Design in Hogarth's England (V & A) 41–2 Roentgen Furniture (Huth) 80 Roots of Modern Design, The (Schaeffer) 129 Rosenthal, E. Pottery and Ceramics: From Common Brick to Fine China (1949) 44 Roţhstein, Nathalie 34 Rowland, Kurt A History of the Modern Movement (1973) 129 Royal Commission on Art and Manufacture (1836) 127 Royal Doulton Tableware Ltd 38, 48, 54 Royal Institute of British Architects 68–9 Royal Worcester 38, 47 Royal Worcester Porcelain from 1862 to the Present Day (Sandon) 54 Rubens, Peter Paul 22 Hélène Fourment 22, 2.3 Rudofsky, Bernard The Prodigious Builders (1977) 91 Ruskin, John 8, 55, 88, 120, 209 Russell, Bertrand 134 Russell, Frank et al A Century of Chair Design (1980) 83 Russian Constractivism (Lodder) 142 St Fagan's Museum, Cardiff 75, 108 Said, Edward Orientalism: Western Conceptions of the Orient (1978) 143 Salaman, R. A. Dictionary of Tools Used in the Woodworking and Allied Trades c. 1700–1970 (1975) 84 Samson of Paris 44 Sandon, H. Royal Worcester Porcelain from 1862 to the Present Day (1975) 54 sanitary ware 41, 50–2, 3.5, 54, 56–7 Savage, George A Concise History of Interior Decoration (1966) 91 Illustrated Dictionary of Ceramics (1974, with H. Newman) 53 Schaeffer, Herwin The Roots of Modern Design (1970) 129 Schwitters, Kurt 146 Science Museum 126 Scott, Fred 69, 209 Scottish Furniture History Group 59 Semi-detached London (Jackson) 176 semiology 154–8, 7.5 sense of place 169–72, 178 Service, Alastair Edwardian Interiors (1982) 91 Seventeenth-Century Interior Decoration in England, France and Holland (Thornton) 68, 91 Sèvres 38, 44 Shakers 83, 209 Shell Mex and BP 138 Sheraton 81–2 Shocking History of Advertising, The (Turner) 153 Shoji, Hamada 55 Short Dictionary of Furniture, A (Gloag) 78 Sibley, B. The Book of Guinness Advertising (1985) 153 Simon, O. Introduction to Typography (1963 edn) 160 sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) 162 Sitting in Comfort (Young) 84 Skilleter, Paul Morris Minor: The World's Supreme Small Car (1981) 100 Smith, Adam The Wealth of Nations (1776) 47 Smith, D. L. How To Find Out in Architecture and Building (1967) 90 Smithson, Alison 63, 209 Smithsonian Institute, Washington DC 128 Social Eye of Picture Post, The (Hall) 152-3 social history 33–6, 41, 45–6, 3.4, 47, 54, 60, 100–1, 138, 162, 176 Sottsass, Ettore 80, 209 Sparke, P. Consultant Design (1983) 131 Ettore Sottsass Jnr (1981) 80–1, 131 An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century (1986) 132 Sparkes, Ivan The Windsor Chair, An Illustrated History of a Classic English Chair (1975) 83 Spencer, Herbert Pioneers of Modern Typography (1984 edn) 146 Spode: A History of the Family Factory and Wares (Whiter) 54 Squire, Geoffrey 29 Staffordshire Portrait Figures and Allied Objects of the Victorian Era (Pugh) 54 Stein, Gertrude 169–70 Steinbeck, J. The Grapes of Wrath (1939) 163 Steinberg, S. H. Five Hundred Years of Printing (1979 edn) 149 Story of Craft, The: the Craftsman's Role in Society (Lucie-Smith) 55 Streamlined Decade, The (Bush) 130 Structuralism 157 Structuralism and Semiotics (Hawkes) 155 Strutt, Joseph A Complete View of the Dress and Habits of the People of England (1796–7) 28 Studio Ceramics (Lane) 55–7 Subversive Stitch, The (Parker) 29 Sudjic, Deyan Ċult Objects (1985) 131–2 Sührkamp 150 Sunday Times colour supplement 151–3 Susannah Hope (Wright) 2.2, 22-3 Swenarton, Mark Homes for Heroes (1981) 176 Symonds, R. W. & B. Whineray Victorian Furniture (1962) 80 Syon House 75, 92–3, 5.2, 5.3 Talbert, B. J. 36, 209 Talle d’Arquitectura's Les Arcades du Lac 179 Tann, Jennifer The Development of the Factory (1970) 101 technological history/development 33, 41, 48, 53, 60, 97–8, 100–2, 118, 131, 137, 149 Temple Newsam House 75 textiles 4–5, 26, 32–7, 70–2, 4.4, 111, 121, 135 Thapor, Romila 117 Thirties Society 13 Thomas Johnson and the English Rococo (Hayward) 80 Thompson, J. W. Ltd Advertising: An Annotated Bibliography (1972) 158 Thompson, Paul William Butterfield (1971) 88 Thornton, Peter The Furnishing and Decoration of Ham House (1980, with M. F. Tomlin) 105 Seventeenth-Century Interior Decoration in England, France and Holland (1978) 68, 91 Thought on Design (Rand) 160 tiles 38, 3.1, 41 Toulouse-Lautrec, Henri de 143 town planning 5, 162, 167–80, 8.1 Townscape (Cullen) 167 Townscapes (Burke) 118 Tradition of Constructivism, The (ed. Bann) 143 Traditional Buildings of Britain, The (Brunskill) 91 transport 99–100, 5.4, 125–6 Travelling by Sea in the Nineteenth Century: Interior Design in Victorian Passenger Ships (Greenhill & Giffard) 100 Tschichold, Jan 146, 209–10 Asymmetric Typography (1967) 160 Tubular Steel Furniture (ed. Benton & Campbell-Cole) 131 Twentieth Century Book, The (Lewis) 149 Twentieth Century Furniture (Garner) 80 Twentieth Century Limited (Meikle) 130 Type Sign Symbol (Frutiger) 159 Typographica 149, 158 Typographische Monatsblätter 159 typography 135–6, 141, 144–9, 7.3 United Kingdom 32, 52–5, 59, 67, 73, 80, 123, 128, 130–1, 138, 141, 143, 150,154 Upholstery With Latex Foam (Young) 84 Upper and Lower Case 159 urban environment 162–3, 165–80 USA 11, 50, 52–6, 58–9, 75, 79, 113–14, 116, 123, 128, 130, 138, 141–3, 153–4, 159, 163, 201–2 Uses of Literacy, The (Hoggart) 150–1 USSR 11, 79, 121, 142–4, 153, 202 Utopia on Trial (Coleman) 177 Van Dyck 22 Van Gogh, V. 143 Veblen, Thorsten 17 Verlet, Pierre French Royal Furniture (1963) 80 Vers Une Architecture (Le Corbusier) 96 Victoria and Albert Museum 19, 33, 41–2, 54, 57, 4.1, 68, 74, 77, 91, 105, 108, 126, 135 Victorian Ceramic Tiles (Bernard) 55 Victorian China Fairings (Bristowe) 54 'Victorian Church Art' (V & A 1971) 108 Victorian Furniture (Jervis) 80 Victorian Furniture (Symonds & Whineray) 80 Victorian Pubs (Girouard) 55 Victorian Society 13, 170 'Vienna in the Age of Schubert: The Biedermeier Interior 1815–1848' (V & A 1979) 108 visual communication 136 Vitruvius Pollio, Marcus 210 De Architectura 91–2, 210 Vogue 7.2, 140, 152, 7.5 Volkswagen 113–4 Voysey, C. F. A. 35–6, 210 Vuillad, 143 Wadsworth, A. P. 33 Wallace Collection, London 75 Walton, Karin The Golden Age of English Furniture Upholstery 1660–1840 (1973) 72 Ward-Jackson, C. H. & D. E. Harvey The English Gypsy Caravan (1972) 100 Ward-Jackson, Peter English Furniture Designs of the Eighteenth Century (1959) 81 Watkin, David The English Vision, The Picturesque in Architecture, Landscape and Garden Design (1982) 164 Watney, B. English Blue and White Porcelain in the 18th Century (1973) 53 Watson, F. J. B. Louis XVI Furniture (1960) 80 Waugh, Norah 29 Ways of Seeing (Berger) 152 Wealth of Nations, The (Smith) 47 Wedgwood 38, 42–3, 3.3, 47, 57, 120, 126 Wedgwood, Josiah 9, 43, 46–7, 126, 210 Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine 57 Werkbund Archiv 128 What is History? (Carr) 6 When Advertising Tried Harder (Dobrow) 153 Whiter, L. Spode: A History of the Family Factory and Wares (1970) 54 Whitford, Frank Bauhaus (1984) 130 Whiton, Sherill Interior Design and Decoration (1974) 91 Who's Who in Graphic Art (Herdeg) 158 'Wiener Werkstätte and their Associates 1902–32, The' (Fischer Fine Art 1982) 108 Wightwick Manor 75 Willet Collection, Brighton Museum 57 William Butterfield (Thompson) 88 William de Morgan (Gaunt & Clayton-Stamm) 55 Williams, Raymond Advertising, the magic system'154 Communications (1962) 151 Keywords (1976) 135 Williamson, Judith Decoding Advertisements (1978) 157 Wilson, Robert F. Colour in Industry Today (1960) 102 Windsor Chair, The: An Illustrated History of a Classic English Chair (Sparkes) 83 Wingler, H. M. The Bauhaus (1969) 130 With Hammer in Hand. The Dominy Craftsmen of East Hampton, New York (Hummel) 84 women's history 10, 15–16, 29, 45–6, 3.4, 63–4, 95, 101, 141, 178 Woodham, Jonathan The Industrial Designer and the Public (1983) 131 World Ceramics (ed. Charleston) 52–3 World Furniture (ed. Hayward) 78–9 Worth, Charles Frederick 19 Wright, E. & M. Pai Korean Furniture: Elegance and Tradition (1985) 80 Wright, Frank Lloyd 69, 210 Wright, L. Clean and Decent (1960) 52 Wright, Patrick On Living in an Old Country, The National Past in Contemporary Britain (1985) 9 Wright of Derby, Joseph Susannah Hope 2.2, 22–3 Whyatt, Matthew Digby 88, 210 Young, Dennis Sitting in Comfort (1952) 84 Upholstery With Latex Foam (1957) 84 How can we study design history? This book introduces the student new to the subject to different areas of design history and shows some of the ways in which it can be studied and some of its delights and difficulties. No background knowledge of design history, art or architecture is assumed. The book guides the reader through various approaches to an understanding of design history in all its aspects. The first chapter introduces the reader to the main tools and general problems which may be encountered when studying the history of design. The follówing chapters discuss the scope and chronology of dress and textiles, ceramics, furniture, interiors, industrial design, graphics and environmental design. Each is written by an expert in the field and provides case studies to illustrate possible approaches, problems and pitfalls. Every chapter has a guide to further reading and there is a glossary of terms used and a list of useful addresses. Black and white photographs illustrate some of the artefacts discussed in the text. This book provides the essential first steps to the study of design history for students at school, college, polytechnic or university. It will also interest all those who want to explore further the way in which design has shaped the world in which we live. Hazel Conway is Principal Lecturer in History of Architecture and Design at Leicester Polytechnic and has a wide range of teaching and research experience. She is an active member of the Design History Society, the Victorian Society and many other groups associated with design history. Cover illustration: 'Just what is it that makes today's homes so different, so appealing?' by Richard Hamilton, collage, 1956 (Richard Hamilton/Waddington Galleries Ltd).