# TH      ED AND O O   D (  )  ONT. IST     I P    IO M WH        ES.

But what separates digital art from its analog counterparts aesthetically? Mostly it is our perception. There is nothing intrinsically “computer-like” about digitally generated images. Low-end devices such as the Macintosh do not yield a stronger inherent style than do the high-end Scitex systems, which are often perceived as functioning invisibly and seamlessly. This merely shows what computer virgins we are. High-end computers have been painstakingly programmed to mimic traditional techniques such as airbrushing or calligraphy, whereas the low-end machines force us to deal with more original, sometimes alien, manifestations. Coarse bitmaps are no more visibly obtrusive than the texture of oil paint on a canvas, but our unfamiliarity with bitmaps causes us to confuse the medium with the message. Creating a graphic language with today’s tools will mean forgetting the styles of archaic technologies and remembering the very basics of design principles.

This is perhaps the most exciting of times for designers. Digital technology is a great big unknown, and after all, a mystery is the most stimulating force in unleashing the imagination.

COMPUTER SCIENTIST ALAN KAY UNDERSTOOD THE COMPUTER AS A RADICALLY NEW MEDIUM THAT COULD FUNDAMENTALLY CHANGE OUR PATTERNS OF THINKING. Influenced by Marshall McLuhan, he insisted back in the 1960s that to seize upon this power, users—all users, not only computer scientists—must be computer literate. They must be able to not only read but actually write in the medium in order to use computers to create materials and tools for others. At a 1968 graduate student conference in Illinois, with this goal in mind, Kay sketched the Dynabook, a small mobile computer with a language so simple that a child could program it. His fellow students found this idea absurd.<sup>1</sup> Kay, however, continued to work on making computation accessible to nonspecialists. In the early 1970s, as one of the founders of the influential Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), he pioneered a GUI that utilized overlapping windows, icons, and menus.<sup>2</sup> In 1979 this new symbolic interface system, along with Kay’s conceptual models of the Dynabook, enamored a young Steve Jobs and inspired a bevy of mass-marketed Apple products: the Lisa, the Macintosh, and, much later, the iPad. Such products fit Kay’s vision of personal computing but not his ultimate belief in empowering the public to program. Graphic designers still struggle with this possibility. Is it enough for us to use the computer as simply a tool for making? Or should we engage more deeply with the process of computation? Kay’s famous statement, “The best way to predict the future is to invent it,” could be a clarion call to designers everywhere to seize the power of computer literacy and, in doing so, affect the medium that increasingly dictates our livelihoods.

## USER INTERFACE: A PERSONAL VIEW ALAN KAY | 1989

Therefore, let me argue that the actual dawn of user interface design first happened when computer designers finally noticed, not just that end users had functioning minds, but that a better understanding of how those minds worked would completely shift the paradigm of interaction.

This enormous change in point of view happened to many computerists in the late sixties, especially in the ARPA research community. Everyone had their own catalyst. For me it was the FLEX machine, an early desktop personal computer of the late sixties designed by Ed Cheadle and myself.

Based on much previous work by others, it had a tablet as a pointing device, a high-resolution display for text and animated graphics, and multiple windows, and it directly executed a high-level, object-oriented, end-user simulation language. And of course it had a “user interface,” but one that repelled end users instead of drawing them closer to the hearth. I recently revisited the FLEX machine design and was surprised to find how modern its components were—even a use of iconlike structures to access previous work.

But the combination of ingredients didn’t gel. It was like trying to bake a pie from random ingredients in a kitchen: baloney instead of apples, ground-up Cheerios instead of flour, etc.

Then, starting in the summer of 1968, I got hit on the head randomly but repeatedly by some really nifty work. The first was just a little piece of glass at the University of Illinois. But the glass had tiny glowing dots that showed text characters. It was the first flat-screen display. I and several other grad students wondered when the surface could become large and inexpensive enough to be a useful display. We also wondered when the FLEX machine silicon could become small enough to fit on the back of the display. The answer to both seemed to be the late seventies or early eighties. Then we could all have an inexpensive powerful notebook computer—I called it a “personal computer” then, but I was thinking intimacy.

I read [Marshall] McLuhan’s Understanding Media (1964) and understood that the most important thing about any communications medium is that message receipt is really message recovery; anyone who wishes to receive a message embedded in a medium must first have internalized the medium so it can be “subtracted” out to leave the message behind. When he said, “The medium is the message” he meant that you have to become the medium if you use it.

That’s pretty scary. It means that even though humans are the animals that shape tools, it is in the nature of tools and man that learning to use tools reshapes us. So the “message” of the printed book is, first, its availability to individuals, hence, its potential detachment from extant social processes; second, the uniformity, even coldness, of noniconic type, which detaches readers from the vividness of the now and the slavery of commonsense thought to propel them into a far more abstract realm in which ideas that don’t have easy visualizations can be treated.

McLuhan’s claim that the printing press was the dominant force that transformed the hermeneutic Middle Ages into our scientific society should not be taken too lightly—especially because the main point is that the press didn’t do it just by making books more available; it did it by changing the thought patterns of those who learned to read.

Though much of what McLuhan wrote was obscure and arguable, the sum total to me was a shock that reverberates even now. The computer is a medium! I had always thought of it as a tool, perhaps a vehicle—a much weaker conception. What McLuhan was saying is that if the personal computer is a truly new medium, then the very use of it would actually change the thought patterns of an entire civilization. He had certainly been right about the effects of the electronic stained-glass window that was television—a remedievalizing tribal influence at best. The intensely interactive and involving nature of the personal computer seemed an antiparticle that could annihilate the passive boredom invoked by television. But it also promised to surpass the book to bring about a new kind of renaissance by going beyond static representations to dynamic simulation. What kind of a thinker would you become if you grew up with an active simulator connected, not just to one point of view, but to all the points of view of the ages represented so they could be dynamically tried out and compared? I named the notebook-sized computer idea the Dynabook to capture McLuhan’s metaphor in the silicon to come.

Shortly after reading McLuhan, I visited Wally Feurzeig, Seymour Papert, and Cynthia Solomon at one of the earliest Logo tests within a school. I was amazed to see children writing programs (often recursive) that generated poetry, created arithmetic environments, and translated English into Pig Latin.<sup>3</sup> And they were just starting to work with the new wastepaper basket–size turtle that roamed over sheets of butcher paper, making drawings with its pen.

I was possessed by the analogy between print literacy and Logo. While designing the FLEX machine, I had believed that end users needed to be able to program before the computer could become truly theirs—but here was a real demonstration and with children! The ability to “read” a medium means you can access materials and tools created by others. The ability to “write” in a medium means you can generate materials and tools for others. You must have both to be literate. In print writing, the tools you generate are rhetorical; they demonstrate and convince. In computer writing, the tools you generate are processes; they simulate and decide.

If the computer is only a vehicle, perhaps you can wait until high school to give driver’s ed on it —but if it’s a medium, then it must be extended all the way into the world of the child. How to do it? Of course it has to be done on the intimate notebook-size Dynabook! But how would anyone “read” the Dynabook, let alone “write” on it?

Logo showed that a special language designed with the end user’s characteristics in mind could be more successful than a random hack. How had Papert learned about the nature of children’s thought? From Jean Piaget, the doyen of European cognitive psychologists. One of his most important contributions is the idea that children go through several distinctive intellectual stages as they develop from birth to maturity. Much can be accomplished if the nature of the stages is heeded, and much grief to the child can be caused if the stages are ignored. Piaget noticed a kinesthetic stage, a visual stage, and a symbolic stage. An example is that children in the visual stage, when shown a squat glass of water poured into a tall thin one, will say there is more water in the tall thin one even though the pouring was done in front of their eyes.…

The work of Papert convinced me that whatever user interface design might be, it was solidly intertwined with learning. [Jerome] Bruner convinced me that learning takes place best environmentally and roughly in stage order—it is best to learn something kinesthetically, then iconically, and finally the intuitive knowledge will be in place that will allow the more powerful but less vivid symbolic processes to work at their strongest. This led me over the years to the pioneers of environmental learning: Montessori Method, Suzuki Violin, and Tim Gallwey’s The Inner Game of Tennis, to name just a few.

My point here is that as soon as I was ready to look deeply at the human element, and especially after being convinced that the heart of the matter lay with Bruner’s multiple-mentality model, I found the knowledge landscape positively festooned with already accomplished useful work. It was like the man in Molière’s Bourgeois gentilhomme who discovered that all his life he had been speaking prose! I suddenly remembered McLuhan: “I don’t know who discovered water, but it wasn’t a fish.” Because it is in part the duty of consciousness to represent ourselves to ourselves as simply as possible, we should sorely distrust our commonsense self-view. It is likely that this mirrors-within-mirrors problem in which we run into a misleading commonsense notion about ourselves at every turn is what forced psychology to be one of the most recent sciences—if indeed it yet is.

Now, if we agree with the evidence that the human cognitive facilities are made up of a doing mentality, an image mentality, and a symbolic mentality, then any user interface we construct should at least cater to the mechanisms that seem to be there. But how? One approach is to realize that no single mentality offers a complete answer to the entire range of thinking and problem solving. User interface design should integrate them at least as well as Bruner did in his spiral curriculum ideas.…

Finally, in the sixties a number of studies showed just how modeful was a mentality that had “seized control”—particularly the analytical-problem-solving one (which identifies most strongly with the Bruner symbolic mentality). For example, after working on five analytic tasks in a row, if a problem was given that was trivial to solve figuratively, the solver could be blocked for hours trying to solve it symbolically. This makes quite a bit of sense when you consider that the main jobs of the three mentalities are:

enactive: know where you are, manipulate

iconic: recognize, compare, configure, concrete

symbolic: tie together long chains of reasoning, abstract…

Out of all this came the main slogan I coined to express this goal:

Doing with Images makes Symbols

The slogan also implies—as did Bruner—that one should start with—be grounded in—the concrete “Doing with Images,” and be carried into the more abstract “makes Symbols.”

All the ingredients were already around. We were ready to notice what the theoretical frameworks from other fields of Bruner, Gallwey, and others were trying to tell us. What is surprising to me is just how long it took to put it all together. After Xerox PARC provided the opportunity to turn these ideas into reality, it still took our group about five years and experiments with hundreds of users to come up with the first practical design that was in accord with Bruner’s model and really worked.