#

ALAN KAY “Predicting the Future” 1989

DOING mouse enactive know where you are, manipulate with IMAGES icons, windows iconic recognize, compare, configure, concrete makes SYMBOLS Smalltalk symbolic tie together long chains of reasoning, abstract

Part of the reason perhaps was that the theory was much better at confirming that an idea was good than at actually generating the ideas. In fact, in certain areas like “iconic programming,” it actually held back progress, for example, the simple use of icons as signs, because the siren’s song of trying to do symbolic thinking iconically was just too strong.

Some of the smaller areas were obvious and found their place in the framework immediately. Probably the most intuitive was the idea of multiple overlapping windows. NLS [oN-Line System] had multiple panes, FLEX had multiple windows, and the bitmap display that we thought was too small, but that was made from individual pixels, led quickly to the idea that windows could appear to overlap. The contrastive ideas of Bruner suggested that there should always be a way to compare. The flitting-about nature of the iconic mentality suggested that having as many resources showing on the screen as possible would be a good way to encourage creativity and problem solving and prevent blockage. An intuitive way to use the windows was to activate the window that the mouse was in and bring it to the “top.” This interaction was modeless in a special sense of the word. The active window constituted a mode to be sure—one window might hold a painting kit, another might hold text—but one could get to the next window to do something in without any special

termination. This is what modeless came to mean for me—the user could always get to the next thing desired without any backing out. The contrast of the nice modeless interactions of windows with the clumsy command syntax of most previous systems directly suggested that everything should be made modeless. Thus began a campaign to “get rid of modes.”

The object-oriented nature of Smalltalk was very suggestive.<sup>4</sup> For example, object-oriented means that the object knows what it can do. In the abstract symbolic arena, it means we should first write the object’s name (or whatever will fetch it) and then follow with a message it can understand that asks it to do something. In the concrete user-interface arena, it suggests that we should select the object first. It can then furnish us with a menu of what it is willing to do. In both cases we have th object first and the desire second. This unifies the concrete with the abstract in a highly satisfying way.

The most difficult area to get to be modeless was a very tiny one, that of elementary text editing. How to get rid of “insert” and “replace” modes that had plagued a decade of editors? Several people arrived at the solution simultaneously. My route came as the result of several beginningprogrammer adults who were having trouble building a paragraph editor in Smalltalk, a problem I thought should be easy. Over a weekend I built a sample paragraph editor whose main simplification was that it eliminated the distinction between insert, replace, and delete by allowing selections to extend between the characters. Thus, there could be a zero-width selection, and thus every operation could be a replace. “Insert” meant replace the zero-width selection. “Delete” meant replace the selection with a zero-width string of characters. I got the tiny one-page program running in Smalltalk and came in crowing over the victory. Larry Tesler thought it was great and showed me the idea, already working in his new Gypsy editor (which he implemented on the basis of a suggestion from Peter Deutsch). So much for creativity and invention when ideas are in the air. As Goethe noted, the most important thing is to enjoy the thrill of discovery rather than to make vain attempts to claim priority!…

The only stumbling place for this onrushing braver new world is that all of its marvels will be very difficult to communicate with, because, as always, the user interface design that could make it all simple lags far, far behind. If communication is the watchword, then what do we communicate with and how do we do it?

We communicate with:

Our selves

Our tools

Our colleagues and others

Our agents

Until now, personal computing has concentrated mostly on the first two. Let us now extend everything we do to be part of a grand collaboration—with one’s self, one’s tools, other humans, and, increasingly, with agents: computer processes that act as guide, as coach, and as amanuensis. The user interface design will be the critical factor in the success of this new way to work and play on the computer. One of the implications is that the “network” will not be seen at all, but rather “felt” as a shift in capacity and range from that experienced via one’s own hard disk.…

Well, there are so many more new issues that must be explored as well. I say thank goodness for that. How do we navigate in once-again uncharted waters? I have always believed that of all the ways to approach the future, the vehicle that gets you to the most interesting places is romance. The notion of tool has always been a romantic idea to humankind—from swords to musical

instruments to personal computers, it has been easy to say: “The best way to predict the future is to invent it!” The romantic dream of “How nice it would be if…” often has the power to bring the vision to life. Though the notion of management of complex processes has less cachet than that of the hero single-handedly wielding a sword, the real romance of management is nothing less than the creation of civilization itself. What a strange and interesting frontier to investigate. As always, the strongest weapon we have to explore this new world is the one between our ears—providing it’s loaded!

ERIK VAN BLOKLAND AND JUST VAN ROSSUM CHALLENGE DESIGNERS TO PROGRAM THEIR WAY BEYOND THE LIMITATIONS OF OUT-OF-THE-BOX SOFTWARE. As the two type designers have pointed out, if no program exists to enact what you wish to do, it might just mean that you have a new idea.<sup>1</sup> Van Blokland and van Rossum have collaborated over the years as LettError, a name they came up with while studying graphic design at the Royal Academy of Art in The Hague in the Netherlands. In 1990 Erik Spiekermann released Beowolf, the first LettError typeface, as the inaugural font in his new digital font library FontFont by FontShop. Beowolf, a so-called RandomFont, looked beyond the concept of type as identical mass-produced copies. Instead, using then-cuttingedge PostScript technology, van Blokland and van Rossum programmed the font to take a unique form with each printing, thus demonstrating the shocking dematerialization of type from physical object to a set of instructions. LettError valued this dematerialization, recognizing its potential for revolutionary typographic form, and began experimenting with integrating “programming-assisted design” into their wider methodology. In this approach the designer sets up specific parameters and then asks the computer to randomly vary those parameters, thus quickly producing lots of possible design solutions. LettError continues these explorations today: since the 1990s the firm has produced more than fifty fonts. The commercial success of van Blokland and van Rossum’s work speaks to the potential in their assertion that programming is too important to be left to programmers.<sup>2</sup>

## IS BEST REALLY BETTER

## ERIK VAN BLOKLAND AND JUST VAN ROSSUM | 1990

The developments in typeface design, typesetting, and printing have always been aimed at the improvement of “quality.” Compared to printing techniques as they existed in the early fifteenth century, we have indeed come a long way. We can digitally output the most perfectly drawn typefaces onto film in resolutions of up to five thousand lines per inch. We can print in offset, in perfect registration, on the smoothest papers, and finish it off with layers of varnish, all at a speed that our fifteenth-century forefathers would find baffling. Technically we can create the slickest printing ever, reach the highest possible quality ever. Unfortunately, the results have too often become absolutely boring. The quality of a printed product, the high resolution of its typefaces, the perfect printing are not necessarily what makes for good design or clear communication.

As a reaction to this development, we decided to create a typeface that would add liveliness to the page that has since long been lost using the modern technologies available.

Our typeface would have a high-resolution distortion of its digital outlines with lengthy rasterizing times as opposed to most developments in digital type: the unsmooth and slow versus the slick and quick.

Type has always been in flux. Gutenberg started with whole copied pages cut from a single piece of wood. All the characters were hand-cut and no two a’s were the same. And did anyone mind? Gutenberg imitated handwriting because it was the only model of letterforms available at that time. He simply developed a process that was already there, but he succeeded in doing it faster. Only later were the advantages of movable type exploited, when hot metal type casting techniques made it possible to create large quantities of type in a relatively inexpensive fashion. This was also the period when letterforms started taking advantage of this new medium. [Giambattista] Bodoni cut serifs so thin that it would have been impossible to produce them out of wood. It has always taken a while for people to realize the potential of a new technology.

Today’s fonts work the way they do because they are still created in a hot metal, movable type kind of way. Their design is based upon the process of punch cutting, which creates a matrix from which an infinite number of identical copies of each letter can be made. Digital type may even “crash” just as hot metal typesetting did. And, ironically, digital type has resulted in a revival of old style and non-lining numerals and even small caps. The usage of type is still based upon the proverbial type cases that were divided into different compartments, each for a different letter. When a certain letter is needed, it is put in line with the others to make words and sentences. Today the type case is replaced by a font and a digital printer.

Through our experience with traditional typesetting methods, we have come to expect that the individual letterforms of a particular typeface should always look the same. This notion is the result of a technical process, not the other way around. However, there is no technical reason for making a digital letter the same every time it is printed. It is possible to calculate every point and every curve differently each time the letter is generated by slightly moving the points that define a character in various “random” directions. We discovered that it was possible to create a font featuring these characteristics in PostScript; our result was Beowolf, the first RandomFont typeface of its kind. (Actually, [Donald] Knuth got there first, and he was nice about it.)

Random technology, which is what we call the programming that is involved, is about letting the rasterizer behave randomly within the boundaries of legibility. Instead of re-creating a fixed outline or bitmap, the RandomFont redefines its outlines every time they are called for. Thus, each character will be different each time it is printed. All the points that define the outline of any character will be nudged in a random direction. The distance moved depends on the parameters. For instance, Beowolf 21 has a little deviation, Beowolf 22 has a noticeable wrinkle, and Beowolf 23 is definitely mad.

What is interesting about this typeface is that the deviations in the individual letterforms create an overall unity, and the liveliness of the page that we were after is accomplished. We also discovered an interesting side effect when creating color separations for four-color printing. Since the printer (Linotronic in this case) generates different outlines each time it prints a particular letter, the color separation will result in four different nonmatching films. The resulting letterform in print will be outlined in bright colors.

While working on RandomFont, we became aware that if we treated typefaces as computer data instead of fixed letterforms, we could create some very bizarre systems. One idea was to connect a font file to a selfcopying moving mechanism to create a virus font; a self-distributing typeface: a great way for young and ambitious type designers to get their typefaces known and used. No type manufacturer would be able to compete with that kind of immediate proliferation. Or we could change typographic awareness of computer users around the world by creating a font virus that would transform every Helvetica into something much more desirable—the postmodern typographer’s revenge. Virowolves that travel around the world in a single day, with type designers getting paid by buying network shares. Or we could hand out our fonts at conferences and meetings, but after a while the files will turn sour just like milk. A perfectly good font would turn random over time. A great way to force people to eventually buy a legitimate copy. And you better hurry, or the virus font will affect your other fonts as well!

We could release a typeface that deteriorates over time, slowly turning into a Beowolf-like face, scaring the hell out of its users. We could create letters that wear out through frequent use, combined with a feature that uses up certain often-used letters. You want real letterpress quality? You can get it! How about a font that adds typos? Link a number of typos to a particular time of the day and simulate an erratic (human) typesetter or a font that does not work overtime.

If we put more data into our typefaces, we can have some very intelligent fonts. Some applications could be quite practical. For instance, the data could include the information to create automatic ink traps that would switch on or off automatically, or as specified by the user, depending on the size of the type or printing technique used. A font would modify its outline when it is to be printed in offset, or shown on TV, or screened on wood, or whatever. Or a typeface could research weather data, in particular the amount of direct sunlight on the spot where it will be printed, and modify itself to the best possible contrast.

The idea of RandomFont can be applied elsewhere too. Why should a letterhead always be the same? It can be slightly different each day. If you print your correspondence or invoices on a LaserWriter, you can have a random logo, a logo that changes itself, moves around the page, or tells something interesting about your company, the person you are writing to, or the nature of the letter. The dynamic logo can be much more informative than its fixed alternative.

For years graphic designers, especially those who subscribe to the ideas and philosophies of Swiss design or modernism, have argued that logos and typefaces should appear consistent to establish recognition. We don’t think that this is necessary. Creating a random logo for a company, with letterheads and forms on which the logo would move around and change, does not necessarily decrease recognizability. Recognition does not come from simple repetition of the same form but is something much more intelligent, something that happens in our minds. When you hear somebody’s voice on the phone and he or she has a cold, you can still recognize who is talking. We can recognize handwriting and even decipher how quickly a note was written and sometimes pick up on the state of mind the person was in when writing the note. Randomness and change can add new dimensions to print work.

Randomness within typography is not a revolutionary idea either. Typographers have always had to deal with randomness because type has always lacked standardization and consistency. One example is the measurement of type. With hot metal type everybody measured the body size of a typeface. With phototype and digital type there is no body to be measured. Some people like to measure the x-height, others the capheight. Even the computer industry has added to the confusion. Software developers in different countries have each taken their national typographic standards and type measurement units and have written programs using their respective systems. This becomes a problem when, for instance, software written by an American developer is sold in Europe and the user must switch to the American measurement system.

ERIK VAN BLOKLAND Interview in Processing 2007

There are software programs that will interpret between the various existing measurement systems, but the conversions are performed internally. So two centimeters will inevitably output as 2.0001 or 1.9999 centimeters; it never works precisely. Randomness will always exist. There is definitely not going to be a universal set of standards for type and typography. Maybe randomness is an inevitable result of human behavior. Gutenberg’s letters came out looking slightly different each time they were printed. Letters wore out, some got damaged, the impression onto the paper differed. However, overall the printed results had a vibrant and human quality. At some point during the development of type and typography, the graphic design industry decided that is was necessary to improve upon the “quality” of printing and type. In the process, due to economic and commercial considerations, much vitality was lost. We believe that the computer, although considered by many to be cold and impersonal, can bring back some of these lost qualities. RandomFont is our contribution to this idea.

IN THE MID-1980S, DESIGNER P. SCOTT MAKELA TOOK THE ADVICE OF APRIL GREIMAN AND BOUGHT A MAC. HE NEVER LOOKED BACK. His fervent, chaotic work—so unlike the then-pervasive Swiss style design—gained the respect of older design luminaries, although his style was strikingly not to their taste. Makela did not even spare the sanctity of typographic tradition. To create Dead History, a typeface for Emigre Fonts, he spliced together two existing digital typefaces, Linotype Centennial and Adobe VAG Rounded, with no care for elegance or precision. In his influential projects, such as the video for Michael Jackson’s song “Scream” and film title sequences, particularly that of Fight Club, Makela used technology to flood the senses with a shocking multimedia experience, thereby defining the postmodern aesthetic of the early 1990s. His mantra was, “It must bleed on all four sides.”<sup>1</sup> With his wife, Laurie Haycock—a design force in her own right—he codirected the influential Cranbrook Academy of Art’s graphic design program. Together this power couple taught students to look to their own private obsessions as an impetus for design practice.<sup>2</sup>

## REDEFINING DISPLAY

## P. SCOTT MAKELA | 1993

Father Richard LaCosse is the only priest in his rectory with a computer work wall in his room. There, a large, periscope-projection fabric screen flickers with video patches as the transparent digital pages of books overlap. Several colleagues call him on the videophone; their images can be adjusted in size and by proximity to each other. LaCosse’s research is interrupted by the appearance of a drawn red curtain at the left of his screen. The online confession that then begins shares the electronic screen space with his other daily work but is appropriately darkened and isolated.

This is just one fantasy for a new kind of electronic office, in which signals will be clearer, stronger, and more realistic than ever. With the application of optimal broadband fiber optics and the aggressive programming of television, personal computers, and telephones, systems like Father LaCosse’s may be available late in this decade. As the techno-hip wait for workable, day-to-day access to the three-dimensional computer simulation called virtual reality, they will continue to devise new ways of framing information on the screen. After the complete digital submergence promised by VR has been achieved, our ways of planning and executing work, communications, rituals, and leisure activities will never be the same. Until then, though, how do we choose the programming and delivery of our daily electronic stuff? Surely the current screen icons of file folders, trash cans, and windows are stiff and limiting. New paradigms for these digital presentations are needed to augment the spatial experience and optical excitement that the VR goggles, gloves, and suits have promised to deliver.

If we could dispense with the conventional office as the major metaphor for our computer visuals, we would be better able to represent our minds’ memories, dreams, and visions. We have begun by loosening the formats and softening the presentation of data, but everyone has a different idea of what such departures mean. Some people might use the screen to frame the pleasant confusion of the daily work routine; to many of us the messy desk is a useful structure. Others might arrange their media information and output on the screen with the pragmatism and care used by a biologist preparing a culture specimen. Flexibility in forming personal-data terrains and textures is sure to help make our workstations warmer and more comfortable than they are now.

Awareness of my own working methods has helped me to visualize others’ data-processing needs. Every day I make multiple phone calls while my Macintosh runs up to six software programs at once. I send faxes and email, and I am productively addicted to good electronic bulletin boards. I watch obscure satellite TV stations…, and I enjoy CDs played at high volume. Soon, when new hardware permits, I hope to add to this mix the capacity to make instant, simultaneous, high-resolution image and text transfers between terminals. I want to conduct seamless multiple-videophone conversations…and to acquire a larger on-screen working area. If only I could arrange and mold the electronic information that appears before me in the same way I unconsciously compose my desk. Depictions of the contents of my pockets…would share the screen with my software applications, vacation photos, pages from books, and stills from CNN. These images, though digital, would accurately portray the idiosyncratic elements of my daily life.

The models illustrated (realized with the help of Alex) here [see p. 94] are my subjective forecasts of how individual work walls might appear to a parish priest, an artist, a motorcycle mechanic, and a plumber, whose needs and notions of order define their digital working and communication spaces. For example, the priest conducts a primary conversation with one person whose likeness appears in full scale. Text that relates to a current conversation falls directly over an on-screen face. The artist uses online services that help him select and join various media in his work. A caller’s face is contained in a small soft circle in the upper left corner, an image inspired by signers for the hearing-impaired on Sunday morning TV religious services. The motorcycle mechanic chooses to mass her visuals, business documents, and current projects on one side of the screen, while on the other side she focuses on the precise details of a pipe cutter. The plumber prefers large background images of his upcoming fishing vacation. He files through old invoices, fittings, and valve diagrams. His grandchild links in to say hello, just as an angry client calls. Though the digital office will never completely replace the physical one, the signals we send and receive ought to better mirror the experiences and dramas of each user’s daily existence.

JOHN MAEDA UNCOILS THE POTENTIAL OF COMPUTATION AND AESTHETICS, DEMONSTRATING AGAIN AND AGAIN THAT THESE TWO DISCIPLINES CAN AND WILL FEED ONE ANOTHER IN THE DECADES TO COME. A meticulous sense of craft and labor—both of which Maeda learned growing up in his father’s tofu store— coupled with study in engineering, computer science, art, and design produced this innovative leader. In the mid-1990s, he founded the Aesthetics and Computation Group at the MIT Media Lab (ACG). There, brilliant minds experimented with raw computation as a unique expressive medium. Influential students, including Casey Reas, Ben Fry, Golan Levin, Peter Cho, and Reed Kram, helped spread the confluence of design and code through their work. In the years following Maeda’s thirteen-year stint at ACG, he served as president of the Rhode Island School of Design. He is currently a partner at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and chairs the eBay Design Advisory Council. In these roles, Maeda continues to advocate for the centrality of art and design within the technological framework of our lives.

## DESIGN BY NUMBERS

## JOHN MAEDA | 1999

Drawing by hand, using pencil on paper, is undisputedly the most natural means for visual expression. When moving on to the world of digital expression, however, the most natural means is not pencil and paper but, rather, computation. Today, many people strive to combine the traditional arts with the computer; and while they may succeed at producing a digitally empowered version of their art, they are not producing true digital art. True digital art embodies the core characteristics of the digital medium, which cannot be replicated in any other.

Computation is intrinsically different from existing media because it is the only medium where the material and the process for shaping the material coexist in the same entity: numbers. The only other medium where a similar phenomenon occurs is pure thought. It naturally follows that computational media could eventually present the rare opportunity to express a conceptual art that is not polluted by textual or other visual representation. This exciting future is still at least a decade or two away. For the moment, we are forced to settle with society’s current search for true meaning in an enhanced, interactive version of the art that we have always known.