# An Overview of Ethnography and System Design

John M. Ford

Alpine Media

Larry E. Wood

Brigham Young University

## EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The purpose of this chapter is to introduce and describe the field of ethnography to those who would like to use ethnographic methods in system design. We will begin with a brief description of ethnography and then progress to an explanation of why this approach is wellsuited to needs analysis for system design. We will then review several common methods used in requirements analysis, and how their strengths and weaknesses are related to those of ethnographic methods. Finally, we will trace the development of the use of ethnographic methods in system design and speculate on the future of this trend.

## A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF ETHNOGRAPHY

Ethnography has its roots in the descriptive research conducted by social anthropologists investigating little-known cultures, and has been shaped by the common problems faced by this type of researcher (Atkinson and Hammersly 1994; Fielding 1993; Pelto and Pelto 1973). Anthropologists are usually tasked with studying cultures that are quite different from the society in which they have lived. They not only need to note the differences between their experience and the customs of the new culture, but need to understand how the culture"works." They need to understand it from the point of view of people who live in it. Because much of what each person in the target culture does is based on unspoken or tacit knowledge (Reber 1989) about how to behave, it is not sufficient for an anthropologist to ask direct questions. In addition, he or she must observe what people do, the tools that they use, and how they talk to each other.

Anthropologists are motivated not to repeat the mistakes of a long history of misunderstanding the cultures that they are studying. Traders, explorers, missionaries, and others who have initiated "first contact" with unfamiliar cultures tended to impose incorrect European interpretations on native customs, resulting in problems ranging from simple misunderstanding to armed conflict (Vidich and Lyman, 1994). Ethnographers attempt to guard against this problem by recognizing that any or all of their initial assumptions may be incorrect. They attempt to make as many as possible of their assumptions explicit, and then systematically examine and question these assumptions during their research activities. Ethnographers believe that this is important, because they will have to discover what is most relevant to study in the target culture while they are in the field. Thus they plan only minimal structure for their research before going into the field. What is most important to know will “emerge" from extended study of the "natives" going about their business in their natural context.

As they learn the language of a new culture (sometimes an actual language, but just as often the specialized jargon of an otherwise "English-speaking" subculture (Moffet 1992)), ethnographers try to understand how the terms are used and how they relate to one another. They attempt to avoid the trap of distorting the meaning of native language by simply "translating" terms into more familiar language (Spradley 1979). Similar care is taken with the documents and physical objects that are used in the target culture. Ethnographers observe how these cultural artifacts are used to accomplish meaningful goals, rather than imposing simple classification systems based on physical properties or on apparent similarities to tools used in their home culture.

The type of research described above typically results in volumes (literally!) of written field notes, boxes of audio and videotapes, collections of "native" artifacts, and all manner of things collected during the research. Ethnographers have developed specialized approaches to documentation of this information that facilitate analysis and identification of patterns in this data (Gladwin 1989; Miles and Huberman 1994). An ethnographer uses these collections and records to guide the direction of the research, engaging in an iterative cycle of observation, recording and collecting, analysis, and renewed observation with a new set of questions. One of the challenges of ethnography is the management of the large quantity of rich, descriptive data produced by such a study (Sanjek 1990).

Ethnographers face some additional challenges in comparison to researchers who use more structured research methods. The time needed to conduct a thorough ethnographic study is greater than that needed for survey or experimental methods. This can make an ethnographic study difficult to justify to research sponsors. The extended and in-depth nature of this type of study necessarily means that fewer individuals are studied than is the case with other methods. This means that conclusions are based on data from fewer individuals and may be seen as less reliable or generalizable to larger populations. Finally, because much of the resulting data is unstructured description rather than tightly defined quantitative measurement, ethnographic research is sometimes suspect because it seems superficially less "scientific" than other approaches. For these reasons, it can be a challenge for ethnographers to defend their results to those not accustomed to this type of research.

There are a number of similarities between the research projects of the anthropologist and the requirements-definition tasks of system designers. They both need to understand an unfamiliar culture of tasks and priorities in a way that both preserves the sense of the new culture and translates it into terms that others can understand and use. Like the anthropologist, the system designer faces the need to understand and document the "language" of prospective system users as it relates to their actual work tasks (see Wood, this volume). They need to speak this language to users as they gather design information, instead of the more technical language of software engineering that many users find incomprehensible and intimidating. System designers need to use information as it is gathered, to change their design ideas and return to their investigation with new questions. Like anthropologists, they must often begin from "ground zero," with not only little knowledge of the user's environment, but with a potentially misleading set of assumptions about what users know and understand about technology.

Of course, unlike anthropologists, system designers must produce something beyond a written report. The final product of a system design effort is a software system that must be accepted by users and integrated into their work environment if it is to be successful. But the need for detailed information from the user's perspective makes ethnographic methods well-suited for system design. As we can see from the previous trend in the evolution of consumer goods, users of computer systems are becoming more demanding of user interfaces. They are less willing to adapt their work habits unnecessarily to accommodate incompatible design. Good system designers must supplement their arsenal of requirements-definition methods with approaches such as ethnography if their products are to be accepted and used by an increasingly critical audience of users.

## TRADITIONAL SYSTEM-CENTERED DESIGN

Because of the engineering/technology environment out of which computers and computer systems arose, historically software development has been done from a system-oriented perspective. Very early on, software was written by those who used it. Because of the limitations on input devices (e.g. switch panels and punched-card readers) there was little opportunity for developers or users to be concerned with a "userfriendly"system.

In the late 60s and early 70s when interactive and distributed computing first became available through the use of teletypes and combinations of keyboards and CRT displays, there began to be a greater separation between those who used software and those who developed it. However, computing resources were still very limited (by today's standards) in that CPUs were relatively slow, random access memory was limited, and permanent storage devices were expensive and slow to access (e.g., sequentially accessible magnetic tape drives). It was difficult enough to provide sufficient code to meet the functional needs of software applications. Thus, the additional code and other overhead required to develop a“usable" interface was not considered a viable option in most cases. More importantly, by then there existed a general attitude and expectation among developers and users that there was simply a heavy price to be paid in learning to use any software application.

By the late 70s and early 80s, there was certainly a large base of users of computer applications that was separate from developers, and there was a growing concern among user groups and user advocates that more attention should be devoted to making software easier to learn and use. However, it was the introduction of the personal computer and applications such as electronic spreadsheets that finally provided the momentum for a widespread change in orientation from system-centered to user-, client-, and customer-centered design. A recent article by Hutchings and Knox (Hutchings and Knox 1989) provides an interesting account of efforts (and associated resistance) to change that orientation inside a large development company.

## FROM SYSTEM-CENTERED TO CLIENT-CENTERED DESIGN

Prior to the introduction and influence of ethnographic methods, developers who were becoming sympathetic to the plight of users began to attempt to address the concerns of users in various ways. Under a system-oriented approach to development, almost all large-scale software projects include some form of beta-testing phase. Although the goals of beta testing tend to be oriented toward uncovering "bugs" in the features and functions of the software, some valuable information regarding the usability of the software is gained because it results from realistic use of the software by actual users in their natural work environment.

Unfortunately, in spite of well-designed user questionnaires and report forms distributed with beta software, attempts to debrief beta testers, and other heroic measures, the quality of beta test reports is often low. The primary reason for this is that this form of testing places too great of a burden on the beta tester, who must simultaneously play the twin roles of software user and observer of his or her own behavior. Another problem with beta testing is that this data is often obtained too late in the software-development cycle to significantly impact the design of the software system.

Because beta testing sensitized developers more to issues regarding "ease of use," developers began to perform usability tests on software prior to its release in beta versions. There now exist in many companies formal usability laboratories, where carefully controlled studies are performed with users attempting to perform realistic tasks that are measured in terms of time to completion and errors made. These measures are compared to predefined criteria to determine how well the software meets expectations (see Dumas and Redish 1993 for a description of methods of usability testing). Unfortunately, because formal usability tests are conducted so late in the development cycle, major changes must wait until later revisions before they can be implemented (see Page, this volume).

One technique sometimes used to help users report on their work activities is "think aloud"protocol analysis (Ericsson 1984; Jorgenson 1990), which has a history of use in cognitive science research. An system designer requests that a software user “think out loud" while using software or performing other work tasks. The investigator then observes (and often audio or video tapes) the user while he or she works and talks. This approach is often useful for obtaining information about why users are performing sequences of actions. A useful extension of this approach is to have the investigator and user review a session audio or videotape together to discuss the users comments. This allows the user to comment further while reviewing a rich set of memory cues and gives the investigator a chance to ask questions without actually interrupting the user at work.

One weakness of this approach is that researchers often find that talking aloud interferes with users' natural work and thought processes. This technique is also focused on the activities of single users, and misses important aspects of cooperative work. Nevertheless, this is a method that has been used in the field and is largely compatible with ethnographic approaches. Some researchers have observed that well-structured protocol analysis studies can reach a point of diminishing returns for new information after review of a small number of participants. This is an encouraging finding for system designers who are interested in field methods, but concerned with the possibly large time commitment needed.

One well-established method for obtaining information from a group of users, particularly information about how they interact, is to conduct a focus group (Morgan 1988). A group of users is gathered together and asked a series of questions by a moderator. They are encouraged to react to one another's comments and describe the way that they work together. One advantage to this approach is that the participants' comments are better memory prompts than the moderator's questions. This is a more "natural" approach, and with it that more information is obtained from each participant in the group than would be obtained if they were interviewed separately. Drawbacks to this approach include the fact that, once again, participants are typically removed from their work environment to participate in the focus group. Another typical problem with focus groups (when applied to work-description tasks such as requirements analysis) is that participants are talking about the task, not performing it. Discussion can be dominated by atypical examples rather than shaped by the usual flow of work.

Conducting focused investigations of users in usability labs is one way to relieve users of the burdens (and limitations) of reporting on their own use of a software package. These labs often present a wide range of data-gathering possibilities, including audio and videotaping equipment, user-action-logging software, and other technology-intensive approaches. A significant weakness of this kind of data gathering, however, is that the participants are removed from their work context. These studies do not allow system designers to observe participants using all of their informal job aids and other tools present in their work environment. This situation also does not recreate the interpersonal aspects of the work environment. For example, the quick phone conversations, office mail, sticky notes, etc. circulated by users of a specialized database system in a small company can be useful clues about important information tracking that the database should be revised to support.

Rapid prototyping (Beevis and St. Denis 1992; Hartson and Smith 1991) is an effort to create an actual context similar to the user's environment. Interestingly, the strengths and weaknesses of prototyping are something of a complement to those of focus groups. Prototyping focuses on creating a simplified model of a proposed system so that users can simulate how they would interact with the finished system. This is often done very early in the development process so that information gathered can be used in redesign. This approach is helpful in examining user performance in actual work tasks using the proposed system. The danger, however, is that user reactions will be influenced more by the form of the prototype (and therefore by the designers' assumptions about the work the prototype is designed to support) than by their natural work context. Prototyping focuses on work rather than on discussion of work, but the work context is based on the designer's viewpoint rather than the user's viewpoint. System designers interested in improving the prototyping process have begun to develop methods in which users have greater involvement and impact on prototype development (Bodker and Gronbaek 1991).

One of the most structured methods available to system designers is to administer some form of user survey or questionnaire. Whether administered by telephone, electronic mail, or in paper form, this is a quite efficient method when the information gatherer knows enough about the topic to ask good questions (Sudman and Bradburn 1986). The time savings from the efficiency of questionnaire administration and data analysis permits questions to be asked of a large number of users. This allows questionraire designers to be confident that the resulting information is representative of the larger audience of users. And, although users usually do not respond to questionnaires while actually performing work tasks, they often do respond from within their physical work context where they can refer to job aids, consult with colleagues, and be generally reminded of the way their work is performed.

Of course, it is often not the case that system designers initially understand what they need to know well enough to ask specific questions. While asking open-ended questions (which do not have a small set of response categories) is a partial solution to this problem, this approach also has its limitations. Like beta testing, this approach places too much responsibility on the user to observe and report his or her own behavior. When writing answers to open-ended questions, questionnaire respondents often take a minimalist approach, writing only what seems needed to provide a brief, narrow answer to the most literal interpretation of the question (Sudman and Bradburn 1974). This reduces question writing to the same problematic task of writing closed-ended questions: knowing enough about the topic in the first place to write a sufficiently focused question. Clearly there is a need for methods that can be used before this much information is available (Bauman and Adair 1992).

The last of existing "methods" we should discuss is informal investigation of user needs and work context. It may seem surprising to consider this a method in the same context as questionnaires and more formal approaches, but we believe that there is an important reason to do so. System designers need to acknowledge that the constraints of time and other resources often pressure them into using less formal methods of gathering information than they would prefer. However, they should understand the tradeoffs involved in not using more structured methods. Another reason that developers are tempted to be less rigorous than they should be is that they sometimes feel "constrained" by formal methods. We understand that there are good reasons to standardize the way questions are asked, the way prototypes or other system descriptions are presented to users, and the way samples of users are selected for interviewing. Alternatively, we also recognize that important information is learned about users and their work environments every time there is an opportunity to observe or talk with them, however informally.

## CURRENT ETHNOGRAPHIC APPROACHES TO SYSTEM DESIGN

As system developers began to appreciate the value of information gained from users through the methods described above, the climate became suitable for the introduction and adaptation of ethnographic methods, which were designed to not only learn about others'environments, but to do so from their perspectives. An approach to studying users that makes use of information obtained by observing and talking with them in their natural social and work environments is important in designing artifacts for them. Ethnographic methods are particularly useful for gathering information from users when too little information about them is known to produce a prototype or an effective questionnaire.

In addition to the close match between the basic agendas of anthropologists and system designers, there is a pattern of strengths and weaknesses in existing requirements-gathering methods that is compatible with ethnographic techniques. Some of the structured methods make assumptions about what questions are most appropriate to ask, and are thus well complemented by the open-ended approach of ethnography. Other methods tend toward the same open-ended approach as ethnography. Designers familiar with these methods will be able to make a comfortable transition to ethnographic methods. Ethnographic methods also present a disciplined alternative to informal inquiry. A number of system designers have agreed with this point and have specialized ethnographic methods for use in system design (Schuler and Namioka 1993). We will list and briefly describe a few of those that have become more widely recognized. It is not our intent to be exhaustive nor to describe methods in depth. Other chapters in this volume do this as well as demonstrate the use of these methods in a variety of situations.

## Participatory Design

Participatory Design has its origins in Scandinavian Design (Floyd et al. 1989). The basic assumption is that the task of system designers is not to replace workers by automating their tasks, but to provide tools to make workers more efficient in doing their jobs (Schuler and Namioka 1993). Designers are viewed as technology consultants who help users (the task experts) to redesign their work tasks for maximum benefit. The goal is not just to represent users' needs, but to involve users deeply in the design of the broader context of their work and to provide them an active influence in cooperative decision-making regarding the work environment. A general introduction to the use of ethnographic methods in Participatory Design can be found in Namioka (this volume) and (Blomberg et al. 1993).

## Contextual Inquiry

Contextual Inquiry is another method that draws heavily on the tenets of ethnographic methods and has grown in popularity during the last several years (Beyer and Holtzblatt 1994; Wixon and Holtzblatt 1990). As the title implies, Contextual Inquiry emphasizes interviewing and observing potential users in their natural work context and making every effort to understand their work as they do. An attempt is made to involve all members of a development team in efforts to gather firsthand "data” from potential users. Those data are then analyzed in a variety of ways to provide a shared understanding of the work to be supported by a potential application. That analysis is then turned into a design that supports and enhances the users' work.

## Joint Application Design

Joint Application Design, while not having obvious historical roots in ethnographic methods, grew out of a similar philosophical foundation of user involvement. As discussed by August (1991), Joint Application Design (JAD) was originally developed at IBM in 1977 and arose out of frustration with trying to develop requirements of distributed systems with which users would agree. It is a structured method that involves users in all aspects of the development cycle, including the development of detailed requirements and scope, designing screen and report layouts, and developing system prototypes.

The process begins with a JAD/Planning phase where a small group of individuals (usually from the higher ranks of the organization) identify high-level system requirements, define the system scope, plan the successive JAD/Design activities, and choose additional participants from other levels in the organization groups of and potential users. During JAD/Design activities, the group then carries out the activities mentioned above, being careful to document the results of each stage, so a common understanding can be agreed upon and shared among members of the group and with others outside the group. Proponents claim that the method increases productivity, enhances design quality, promotes cooperation among members of the development team, and lowers development and maintenance costs.

## PICTIVE

The PICTIVE method (Plastic Interface for Collaborative Technology Initiatives through Video Exploration) involves users in collaborative design of the system that will impact their work (Muller 1991; Muller, this volume). It assumes that information regarding the work that is to be supported has already been gathered and that an initial shared understanding of the work has been established. Deliberate use is made of low-tech materials (e.g., paper, pencil, markers, plastic "icons," and Post-it notes) that can be easily changed or discarded as necessary. This fosters unconstrained participation by all users and helps to produce an atmosphere that will encourage trial and error, without concern of serious consequences resulting from a mistake. Furthermore, PICTIVE attempts to address one of the difficulties of rapid prototyping by ensuring that all participants (particularly users) have the same access to the prototyping medium. Team members are videotaped during their attempts to collaboratively design potential system interfaces, and the information is used to inform later stages of system development.

## FUTURE TRENDS

One interesting possibility is that sophistication in ethnographic methods, like sophistication in user interface design and other aspects of system design, will migrate into the user community. A certain amount of this is inevitable, as designers explain the rationale behind the methods they are using to better understand the user's work context. But how might an increased awareness of how to study their environment affect the requests for enhancement and other communications that are generated by users themselves? Even a casual review of user newsletters, Usenet news groups, and other user-driven channels of communication shows informal use of surveys, focus groups, and other needs-analysis methods. Watch for an increase in descriptive methods in these forums as well, particularly as they increasingly become regarded as more "scientific" in other fields.

Another trend to watch for is an increase in the sophistication of system users as "informants" in the system-design process. As cooperative users become more accustomed to ethnographic methods, they will grow better able to anticipate the kind of information for which system designers are searching. Cooperative and "design-wise" users will volunteer more useful information and become skilled and noticing and recording useful aspects of their own work environment. Anthropologists have noted this trend among their own research participants (Agar 1980) and find it a useful enhancement to their research.

A final trend that will increase the usefulness of ethnographic methods in system design is the increasing availability of software tools that support the organization and analysis of ethnographic data. Of course, word-processing programs are as useful in managing the volumes of descriptive data as spreadsheets are to managing numerical data generated by surveys and rating scales; but more specialized programs are being developed that support the exploration and analysis of text and video data (Davies 1990; Fritz 1990; Weitzman and Miles 1995; Wise 1995). As ethnographic methods are increasingly employed by computer professionals, the technical sophistication and usefulness of these programs can be expected to increase. This trend promises to improve the efficiency of ethnographic methods in system design.

## REFERENCES

Agar, M.H. 1980. The Professional Stranger: An Informal Introduction to Ethnography. New York, NY: Academic Press.

Atkinson, P. and Hammersley, M. 1994 Ethnography and participant observation. Norman K. Denzin, Yvonna S. Lincoln, Eds. Handbook of Qualitative Research. pp. 248–261. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

August, J.H. 1991. Joint Application Design: The Group Session Approach to System Design. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Yourden Press.

Bauman, L.J. and Adair, E.G. 1992. "The Use of Ethnographic Interviewing to Inform Questionnaire Construction." Health Education Quarterly, 19(1), 9–23.

Beevis, D. and St. Denis, G. 1992. "Rapid prototyping and the human factors engineering process." Applied Ergonomics, 23 (3), 155–160.

Beyer, H.R., and Holtzblatt, K. 1994. "Apprenticing with the customer." Communications of the ACM 38(5), 45–52.

Blomberg, J.; Giacomi, J.; Mosher, A. and Swenton-Wall, P. 1993. "Ethnographic field methods and their relation to design." Douglas Schuler, Aki Namioka, Eds. Participatory Design: Principles and Practices. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 123-155.

Bodker, S. and Gronbaek, K. 1991."Cooperative prototyping: Users and designers in mutual activity." International Journal of Man Machine Studies. 34(3), 453–478.

Davies, J.R. 1990. "A methodology for the design of computerized qualitative research tools." Interacting with Computers. 2(1), 33–58.

Dumas, J.S. and Redish, J.C. 1993. A Practical Guide to Usability Testing. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex Publishing Corp.

Ericsson, K.A. 1984. Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports as Data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Fielding, N. 1993. "Ethnography." Nigel Gilbert, Ed. Researching social life. pp. 154–171. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Floyd, C., et al. 1989. "Out of Scandinavia: Alternative approaches to software design and system development." Human Computer Interaction , 4(4). 253–350.

Fritz, R.B. 1990. Computer Analysis of Qualitative Data. National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph Series, Mono 98, 59-79.

Gladwin, C.H. 1989. Ethnographic Decision Tree Modeling. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Hartson, H.R. and Smith, E.C. 1991. "Rapid prototyping in humancomputer interface development." Interacting with Computers, 3(1). 51–91.

Hutchings, A.F. and Knox, S.T. 1995. "Creating products customers demand." Communications of the ACM 38(5), 72–80.

Jorgensen, A.H. 1990. "Thinking-aloud in user interface design: A method promoting cognitive ergonomics." Special Issue: Marketing ergonomics: IV and V. Ergonomics, 33(4), 501–507.

Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Moffat, M. 1992. "Ethnographic writing about American culture." Annual Review of Anthropology. 21, 205–229.

Morgan, D.L. 1988. Focus Groups As Qualitative Research. Sage University Paper series on Qualitative Research Methods. Vol. 16. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Muller, M.J. 1991. "PICTIVE—An exploration in participatory design." Proceedings of the CHI '91. ACM, 225–231.

Pelto, P.J. and Pelto, G.H. 1973. "Ethnography: The fieldwork enterprise." John J. Honigman (Ed.). Handbook of Social and Cultural Anthropology. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.

Reber, A.S. 1989. "Implicit learning and tacit knowledge." Journal of Experimental Psychology: General. 118, 219–235.

Sanjek, R. 1990. Fieldnotes: The Making of Anthropology. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Schuler, D. and Namioka, A. eds 1993. Participatory Design: Principles and Practices. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Spradley, J.P. 1979. The Ethnographic Interview. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Sudman, S. and Bradburn, N.M. 1986. Asking Questions: A Practical Guide to Questionnaire Design. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.

Sudman, S. & Bradburn, N.M. 1974. Response Effects in Surveys: A Review And Synthesis. Chicago, IL: Aldine.

Vidich, A. and Lyman, S. 1994."Qualitative methods: Their history in sociology and anthropology." Norman K. Denzin, Yvonna S. Lincoln, Eds. Handbook of Qualitative Research. pp. 23-59. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Weitzman, E.A. and Miles, M.B 1995. Computer Programs for Qualitative Data Analysis: A Software Sourcebook. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Wise, J.A, et al. (In press). Visualizing the non-visual: Spatial analysis and interaction with information from text documents. IEEE Information Visualization Proceedings. 1995.

Wixon, D. and Holtzblatt, K. 1990. Contextual design: An emergent view of system design. Proceedings of CHI '90: Empowering People. Seattle, WA.: ACM, 329–336.