## About the Authors

MALENE BREUNIG is Associate Professor of Cross-Aesthetic Studies in the Department of Literature, Media and Cultural Studies at the University of Southern Denmark. She holds a PhD in cross-aesthetic studies from the University of Southern Denmark and is the author of Tolkninger af det intime (2007), on the notion of the intimate within literature and art, and the co- author of Vilkår og tolkninger: Billeder af dansk kulturhistorie 1700–2000 (2010), on the development of modern culture in Denmark interpreted through different aesthetic modes of expression. Dr Breunig has also published articles on Poul Henningsen’s lighting design and on the modernist standards of ‘good taste’ as practiced by the Louisiana Museum of Modern Art.

KJETIL FALLAN is Associate Professor of Design History in the Department of Philosophy, Classics, History of Art and Ideas at the University of Oslo. He has studied engineering design, sociology and history and holds a PhD in cultural history from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. He is the author of Design History: Understanding Theory and Method (Berg, 2010) and a number of articles on various aspects of design history published in journals like Design Issues, Journal of Design History, Enterprise and Society and History and Technology. Dr Fallan also serves on the Editorial Board of the Journal of Design History.

HANS-CHRISTIAN JENSEN is Associate Professor of Design History in the Department of Literature, Media and Cultural Studies at the University of Southern Denmark, where he also earned his PhD. He was actively involved in the research project (2006–9) investigating the cultural criticism of Poul Henningsen as co-editor (with Carl-Erik Bay) of Tradition og modernisme: Indfaldsvinkler til PH (Syddansk Universitetsforlag, 2008) and contributing author to another anthology resulting from the same project, Kulturmoderniseringens paradokser (Syddansk Universitetsforlag, 2010).

ESPEN JOHNSEN is Associate Professor of Architectural and Design History in the Department of Philosophy, Classics, History of Art and Ideas at the University of Oslo. He holds a PhD in art history from the University of Oslo and was previously Senior Curator and Research Coordinator at the Norwegian Museum of Cultural History (Norsk Folkemuseum). Dr Johnsen has written extensively on early-twentieth-century interior design, mid-twentieth-century architecture and contemporary design. Recent research projects include cocurating and editing the catalogue for the exhibition Discords: Norwegian Architecture 1945–65, shown at the National Museum of Art, Architecture and Design in 2010–11.

FINN ARNE JØRGENSEN is Associate Senior Lecturer in the History of Technology and Environment at Umeå University, Sweden. He holds a PhD in science and technology studies from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology and is the author of Making a Green Machine: The Infrastructure of Beverage Container Recycling (Rutgers University Press, 2011). His current research includes a project on Scandinavian leisure cabin culture.

PEKKA KORVENMAA is Professor of Design and Culture at and Vice Dean of the Aalto University School of Art and Design, Helsinki. He holds a PhD in art history from the University of Helsinki, specializing in the history of architecture. From 1991 he has worked at his present institution, fi rst as Research Director and from 2000 as Professor. He was also deeply involved in generating a national design policy program for Finland in the late 1990s and has since acted as a design policy consultant to foreign governments as well. Professor Korvenmaa has published extensively on Finnish architectural and design history. His latest book is Finnish Design: A Concise History (University of Art and Design Books, 2009).

SARA KRISTOFFERSSON is Guest Professor of Design History and Theory at Konstfack University College of Arts, Crafts and Design in Stockholm and a critic writing in Svenska Dagbladet, one of Sweden’s major morning newspapers. She holds a PhD in art history and visual studies from the University of Gothenburg. Dr Kristoffersson has published a number of articles on various aspects of design, fashion, art and architecture and lectures widely on these topics at museums and universities. She is currently working on a research project about IKEA.

STIG KVAAL is Associate Professor of Science and Technology Studies at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Department of Interdisciplinary Studies of Culture, Centre for Technology and Society. He holds a PhD in history from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. His main research interests are the cultural history of food and kitchen technologies, consumption and science policy. Dr Kvaal has also published widely in the fi eld of business history and the history of research and higher educational institutions.

HELENA MATTSSON is Associate Professor of History and Theory of Architecture at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm. Her doctoral thesis was published in 2004 as Arkitektur och konsumtion: Reyner Banham och utbytbarhetens estetik (‘Architecture and consumption: Reyner Banham and the aesthetic of expendability’). She has written extensively on architecture, art and culture and is the co-editor (with Sven-Olov Wallenstein) of Swedish Modernism: Architecture, Consumption and the Welfare State (London: Black Dog, 2010). Mattsson headed a research project at the Museum of Architecture in Stockholm, Architecture and Consumption in Sweden 1930–1970 (from 2005 to 2007), and is a member of the Editorial Board of the journal SITE.

ANDERS V. MUNCH is Associate Professor of Design History in the Department of Literature, Media and Cultural Studies at the University of Southern Denmark and Adjunct Professor at the Oslo School of Architecture and Design. He has studied the history of ideas and art history, and his PhD thesis from the University of Aarhus has been translated into German and published as Der stillose Stil: Adolf Loos (Fink, 2005). His writings on design history include the articles ‘Design as Gesamtkunstwerk’ and ‘Throughout Any Scale’, both published in the Scandinavian Journal of Design History (2001, 2004).

PER ØSTBY is Professor of the History of Technology at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Department of Interdisciplinary Studies of Culture, Centre for Technology and Society. He holds a PhD in history from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. His research focuses on the cultural integration of science and technology, especially within medicine, biotechnology, environmental issues but also examines the cultural implications of design and innovation, as well as the history of the environment and of mass motorization and transport. Professor Østby has participated in or directed several national and international research projects within these fi elds.

MINNA SARANTOLA-WEISS is Head of Research at Helsinki City Museum. She holds a PhD in history from the University of Helsinki, and her research interests include the history of interiors, the furniture industry and design, as well as history of the postwar consumer society. Amongst her publications are the monographs Sohvaryhmän läpimurto: Kulutuskulttuurin tulo suomalaisiin olohuoneisiin on Finnish consumer culture and domestic interiors (Finnish Literature Society, 2003) and Reilusti ruskeaa: 1970-luvun arkea (WSOY, 2008) on everyday life and consumption in the 1970s Finland.

LEENA SVINHUFVUD is Curator of Education at Design Museum Helsinki. She has curated several museum exhibitions on textiles and craft, for example the exhibition Ryijy! The Finnish Ryijy-Rug in 2009, for which she also edited the catalogue. She holds a PhD in art history from the University of Helsinki and has published widely on Finnish textile art and design. Dr Svinhufvud is currently engaged in a research project on hand weaving as a medium of woman designers.

STINA TEILMANN-LOCK is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Faculty of Law, University of Copenhagen. She has studied comparative literature, rhetoric and political science at the University of Copenhagen and holds a PhD in comparative literature from the University of Southern Denmark. She is the author of British and French Copyright: A Historical Account of Aesthetic Implications (DJØF Publishing, 2009) and co-editor of Art and Law: The Copyright Debate (DJØF Publishing, 2005) and has published numerous articles on copyright and intellectual property. She has worked as a patent administrator and has held a Carlsberg research fellowship at the Danish Design School.

JEFF WERNER is Professor of Art History at Stockholm University. Previously he has been Director of Research at Göteborg Museum of Art and Professor of Art History and Visual Culture at Gotland University. He holds a PhD in art history from the University of Gothenburg. His 2008 two-volume publication Medelvägens estetik discusses relations between the production of country images and Swedish visual culture in the USA. Together with Kristoffer Arvidsson he is the editor of the scholarly publication series Skiascope. In addition to his work on design history, Professor Werner has published a number of articles and books about museums and collections and historiography, as well as modern and contemporary art.

CHRISTINA ZETTERLUND is Senior Lecturer in the History of Craft and Design at Konstfack University College of Arts, Crafts and Design in Stockholm and a freelance curator. She holds a PhD in art history from Uppsala University and has previously worked as a curator at the Röhsska Museum in Gothenburg and as a special advisor in design matters at the Ministry of Industry. Dr Zetterlund has been involved in several research projects, including Design History in Sweden, which analysed the history writing of the Swedish applied art museums, and Forms of Sustainability, examining critical perspectives in history writing as well as in current design practice.