## DENMARK

Not much has been published internationally on the history of Danish design beyond the illustrated presentations of the most famous designers and most worshipped objects of Danish design. You can fi nd vast amounts of stories and even quite detailed historical facts on Danish designers and especially on the ‘furniture classics’ on the Internet, but such accounts tend to have too many heroes, and these protagonists are in fact often too obscure for an interesting historical narrative to emerge.

In the more scholarly literature, the international contextualization of Danish design has been a prevailing topic. For instance, the single most celebrated Danish designer in recent years, Arne Jacobsen, is predominantly acknowledged for his appropriation of American postwar impulses. Still, most discussions of the historical development are inwardly focused on the roles of the same persons, exhibitions and a few companies, and it seems that ‘usual suspects’ such as Kaare Klint and Poul Henningsen are considered diffi cult to present in an international context. The latter is of course known internationally for his lamps, but his critical writings on design and culture had a far wider importance. <sup>19</sup> The conventional understanding of the national character of Danish applied art that was established early on, especially in the wake of the World’s Fairs of 1893 and 1900, was that the Danes were not infl uenced by any international styles; their work was resistant to style as such, it was claimed.<sup>20</sup> This attitude has been rehearsed time and again at later points in the history of Danish design, for example in the case of functionalism, the Danish adaptation of which is habitually presented as the reawakening of ageold traditions in handicraft and architecture—often evidenced through historicist examples, no less. These rather restricted notions of the nation’s design history stem, of course, from the ideological and political fi ghts of the design professions and institutions, but they nevertheless have had a strong impact on the subject material even for later design historians, partly as ready templates for use in the presentation of familiar narratives, partly as mythological constructs to be challenged.

In Denmark, as in many other countries, architects played a dominant role in establishing design as a profession, discourse and institution. Critics, teachers and directors of design schools were usually the more theoretically trained architects. But on top of that Denmark has had its core of ‘furniture architects’ fi ghting over the power to control the legacy of the so-called Klint School and thereby the right to defi ne the ‘timeless’ qualities of the genuine classics of the golden age of Danish furniture design. In this outline of literature on Danish design I include key books on furniture, because this dominant topic has provoked some of the most advanced questions about the development of design in the contexts of society, economics, culture and media. There are many fi ne studies, especially from the Design Museum Denmark, of other special fi elds such as posters, textiles, silver and ceramics that are relevant to the historiography of Danish design, but they are omitted in this short presentation. As argued in the fi rst section of this chapter, international exhibitions of Scandinavian design since the mid-twentieth century have often had a Scandinavian rather than national scope. With rare exceptions like A Century of Danish Design, which toured the United Kingdom in 1968, and Dansk design 1910–1945, shown at the Danish Museum of Art and Design in 1997, the history of Danish design has seldom been the subject of designated exhibitions.

Viggo Sten Møller’s two-volume survey history Dansk kunstindustri, published in 1970, forms the entry point to this historiography, because it represents the characteristic selection of cases and persons, and Møller himself was part of the personal network and institutional initiatives he describes. <sup>21</sup> Trained as an architect, he had worked at the offi ces of fi gures such as Anton Rosen and Knud V. Engelhardt, who are presented as pioneers in his book. Later, Møller became the Editor of the leading Danish design magazine, Nyt Tidskrift for Kunstindustri, and Director of the School of Arts and Crafts (now part of the Danish Design School). In his historical presentation, he adapts the art historical scheme of styles and the traditional fi elds of decorative arts: furniture, ceramics, glass, silver, textiles and books. The second volume, covering 1900–50, presents the building, furnishing and decorating of the Copenhagen Town Hall as the calling for leading fi gures in the fi elds of arts and crafts and follows how these fi elds later develop and approach industrial production. He adds ‘intermezzi’ where he wants to highlight individuals who do not fi t the scheme but nevertheless represent moral ideals to be followed. In sum, this publication may not have any academic pretensions, but it remains an important historical source with a wide curriculum that later histories refer to. For instance, the histories of Danish design written by Møller’s own son, Henrik Sten Møller, in 1975 and by Svend Erik Møller (not related) in 1974, both published in English, follow his line. <sup>22</sup>

The art historical focus on styles is examined in Mirjam Gelfer-Jørgensen’s Dansk kunsthåndværk fra 1850 til vor tid from 1982. <sup>23</sup> She follows formal motifs as special national paths through the very complex scheme of stylistic development that international impulses introduced. The national character has been read into more individualistic styles such as national romanticism and skønvirke (as a national derivate of art nouveau) and, more paradoxically, neo-Empire or the second neoclassicism. The strict account of national stylistic variations gets close to a caricature on the threshold to the modern idiom, but this is partly the point and leads to the more critical discussion of functionalism as style. Gelfer-Jørgensen wants to go beyond ‘looking through the glasses of the functionalists on functionalism’. <sup>24</sup> This leads to a nuanced picture of the more continuous developments from Empire, historicism and neoclassicism— which is the author’s primary fi eld of expertise <sup>25</sup>—to modernism, although her understanding of national motifs resisting international tendencies, exemplifi ed by the belated appreciation of the Bauhaus in Denmark, is not far from the conventional narratives of modernism she aspires to transcend. The focus on styles seems to favour constantly reoccurring classicisms and is of little help beyond the period of functionalism. The question raised in the fi nal chapter, ‘In which style do we live?’ has not been answered in the thirty years that have passed, as recent historiography has been less preoccupied with style—although now the cult of classics and retro manoeuvres in current design practice could perhaps provide a partial answer.

In the exhibition Dansk design 1910–1945: Art déco og funktionalisme, shown at the Danish Museum of Art and Design in 1997, curator Lars Dybdahl proposed an alternative to the understanding of the healthy, Danish design as ‘style-resistant’ by using art deco in presenting the period and admitting more fashionable developments and international fl avour. <sup>26</sup> Dybdahl’s catalogue text shows a coherent picture of the broad, formal development of the functionalist idiom in Denmark, though with very few international parallels. He repeats the traditional scheme of decorative arts and leading fi gures but adds new material such as the design of posters, lamps, domestic devices, radios and trains and widens the scope with more common consumer objects. The text lacks references and mostly adds to the roster of heroic fi gures and design icons, albeit drawn from a broader industrial segment, but the essay can be seen as an appetizer to Dybdahl’s later thorough survey history, Dansk design 1945–1975, published in 2006. <sup>27</sup> Here he addresses a wide spectrum of relevant historical factors in the nascent professions of industrial and graphic designers, and the development of trades based on new materials such as aluminium and plastics, all placed in the context of international references and connections. The traditional scheme is here transformed into innumerable categories of industrial objects and becomes a valuable source of microhistorical cases, leaving virtually nothing behind. Dybdahl’s curatorial activities with collections and exhibitions form the basis for this much-needed and -appreciated expansion of Danish design history’s subject matter—the downside to which is an even longer list of objects to worship. <sup>28</sup> Dybdahl’s presentation is pleasantly independent of dominant agendas of functionalism but does return to the big questions of national identity and ideals in a brief, schematic conclusion and a manifest on humanistic design studies.

Recent years have seen a surge in the publication of monographs on individual designers, as exemplifi ed by the series on Danish designers published by Aschehoug in cooperation with the Louisiana Museum of Modern Art. <sup>29</sup> These easily accessible but disturbingly hagiographic books are accompanied by other popular historical accounts like the architect and designer Thomas Dickson’s Dansk design from 2006 (English edition published in 2008), which is basically an updated version of the format established by Viggo Sten Møller but expanded to include a very broad range of categories (much as Dybdahl did) and adhering to an expanded notion of design seen earlier—albeit using international examples—in Ida Engholm and Anders Michelsen’s Designmaskinen.<sup>30</sup> What would be next in more academic investigations of the history of Danish design are discussions on the role of professions, businesses and media as well as more critical studies of institutions like design schools and periodicals. <sup>31</sup> In the fi eld of furniture history, more detailed studies have emerged on the many different actor groups and factors producing the international success: furniture architects, cabinetmakers, industrialists, exhibitions, distributors, periodicals, critics, books on home decoration, furniture shops and many others.

Just as Viggo Sten Møller summarized the heritage of functionalism in the art industry in his two-volume publication from 1970, Arne Karlsen has done the same for Danish furniture in his Dansk møbelkunst i det 20. århundrede from 1991. <sup>32</sup> Karlsen formed part of the dominant Klint School as Professor of Furniture Design at the Aarhus School of Architecture. His account is based on the thesis of the special Danish sense of crafts and function combined with the ideal of high-quality furniture in mass production that is within everyone’s economic reach. And this becomes a very long story with circumstantial detours because neither Kaare Klint, as founding father in this tradition, nor the fi rst alliances of architects and cabinetmakers, engaged in industrial manufacture. In Karlsen’s gloss, this story is presented as a hard fi ght for artistic skills and ideals against commercialism, and only a chosen few get through the transformation from furniture architect to industrial designer with their artistic and moral integrity intact. In this way this kind of history becomes based on the character and habitus of the persons presented, and it is told in the context of education at the schools of architecture and design.

Danish design has been, and still is, a fi eld of heated discussions, where professional ethics, individual habitus, the status of furniture classics and economic interests are at stake. This has drawn scholars from other disciplines to join the discussions and investigate the context. The ethnologist Birgit Kaiser in Den ideologiske funktionalisme in 1992 partly reproduced the ideals and arguments of the furniture architects and then tried to test their impact on public taste, in political discourse and in marketing. <sup>33</sup> This, of course, shows a discrepancy between the dream of a democratic style beyond class on the one hand and the elitism associated with ‘good design’ on the other and has called for further studies of the furniture industry and marketing. The British design historian Kevin Davies has written on the marketing of Danish furniture in the United Kingdom, and the international reception is a very important aspect in understanding the success of Danish Modern. <sup>34</sup>

The most comprehensive and critical study of this kind, though, is business historian Per H. Hansen’s Da danske møbler blev moderne from 2006, in which he questions the role of the craft tradition and looks for what it takes to make an international success in industrialization, consumption and