marketing. <sup>35</sup> It becomes another history with other actors and other discourses going beyond the hagiography of the Klint School. This study is based on quite different historical theories drawn from economic history, that is path dependency, storytelling and the necessity of ‘creative destructions’ to open new opportunities. From this perspective the story of the Klint School, of the alliance of architects and cabinetmakers, is seen as an effective branding of Danish modern furniture, so that even quite undistinguished, mass-produced chairs are connected to idealistic values, artistic genius, craftsmanship, educated taste and culture. According to Hansen, this story was too good to last or fulfi lled a purpose only in the fi rst postwar decades. This phenomenon is diffi cult to control and rebrand in new commercial adventures, although it is constantly subjected to re-mediation in the marketing of furniture classics, reissued products, ‘neoclassics’ and other retro-style products such as Normann Copenhagen’s ‘New Danish Modern’ across the range of new media from lifestyle magazines to web auctions. There is plenty of room for alternative stories to be told beyond the version fi rst established by the furniture architects, and the most productive task will be to explain them internationally and contextualize the Danish success beyond the conventional hagiography.

## FINLAND

Historical scholarly inquiries into Finnish design are quite recent, despite the long-standing domestic importance and international fame of this fi eld. The following section outlines the main sources of knowledge production in this area and the varied subject matter and methodological approaches in question.

Writings on the history of Finnish crafts naturally have a long history, stemming mainly from the curatorial activities of museums and starting in the late nineteenth century. Due to the late industrialization of the country, however, we can speak of design in the present meaning of the word—that is intentionally and professionally designed, predominantly serially produced goods— only from the late 1920s onwards. With the advent of what can be called modern/modernist, design writings on the topic also began to appear, often with a historical backdrop mainly citing domestic craft traditions—a way of presenting current Finnish design that prevailed into the 1990s. <sup>36</sup> Such works may not be classifi ed as historical scholarship; instead, they used a meticulously reduced and reworked past to attach modern items to a genealogy of simple, utilitarian objects, thus creating a continuum of ‘Finnishness’ stretching from the age-old agrarian way of life to the present day. It was also already in the late 1930s that foreign writers began their still-continuing interest in Finnish design and related writing—very often seeking its background in a simple agrarian past and the supposedly intimate relationship with nature that resulted from it.

Thus, along with Finnish design’s international fame and even commercial success from the early 1950s to the 1970s, a bulk of writing was produced both domestically and internationally in which history served as a teleologically predestining gateway to the present. One of the key works of this kind—and actually the fi rst more comprehensive presentation of Finnish design—came from abroad, written by the Swedish art historian and critic Ulf Hård af Segerstad. <sup>37</sup> Rigorous scholarship, however, remained absent for a long while. One reason was that the Finnish Museum of Applied Arts (now called the Design Museum), founded in 1873, was hibernating for several decades, unstaffed and its holdings packed in a warehouse; it reopened only in 1979. Although it obtained university status in 1973, the University of Industrial Arts (now the Aalto University School of Art and Design)—the only major design school in the country—had neither the capacity nor the structure for scholarly research before the 1990s.

The fi rst comprehensive history of Finnish art, published in 1945, included a couple of pages on the ‘decorative arts since 1900’, and the next volume of similar scope slightly more. <sup>38</sup> The approach had changed dramatically when a comprehensive, multi-authored, six-volume work on the history of the arts in Finland appeared in 1990. <sup>39</sup> Here, design from the 1870s to the 1990s was given a voluminous, well-studied presentation by Leena Maunula. A change in the hierarchy of the arts was apparent: craft and design, long marginalized in art history as ‘lesser arts’, were now given serious attention as part of the widening scope of the fi eld. Doctoral candidates were now increasingly choosing design as their topic, and the fruits of this research began to appear in the mid-1990s.

Despite the dominance of art history, design history has many disciplinary bases—even in Finland. Cultural history, which began to emerge as an independent discipline in the 1970s at the University of Turku, includes a strand on the history of design. As early as 1982, a chapter on design was included in a three-volume work on the cultural history of Finland. <sup>40</sup> When a new work on the same topic appeared in 2004, design was included but only fragmentarily—probably because of the growing specialized literature on design history. <sup>41</sup>

In spite of all these new efforts and inquiries into the heritage of Finnish design, there was still no comprehensive survey history by a sole author. This situation was amended in 1989 when Erik Kruskopf, an art historian and critic, published his study on crafts and design from the 1870s to the 1970s. <sup>42</sup> The book is a balanced, well-studied work with much greater focus than in earlier accounts on issues such as education, technology, the development of professions and promotion. The book was of high value to the Finnish and Nordic context—but, like all previous studies, it was not translated into

English. The non-Nordic audience still had to rely on texts of lesser ambition and rigour.

It was obvious that by around 1990 design history had both gained visibility and become a distinct scholarly fi eld. The authors came almost solely from art history but with careers not only in academia but also as critics and museum curators. The re-establishment of the Museum of Applied Arts in 1979 soon led to a modest series of monographs accompanying exhibitions. Before long, both the scope and depth of the publications grew. These have mostly focused on designers, such as a comprehensive work on Tapio Wirkkala, or on design-intensive enterprises, such as Marimekko and Arabia. <sup>43</sup> For works such as these, the museum has always recruited external authors, thus providing others with an opportunity for scholarly publishing as well. Other museums, such as the Finnish Glass Museum, established in 1981, have also provided space for scholarly publications in their respective fi elds, as demonstrated by Kaisa Koivisto’s doctoral thesis on postwar Finnish glass design. <sup>44</sup>

By the early 1990s, a new locus for producing design historical knowledge appeared alongside museums and traditional universities: the University of Art and Design, which at this point was building its research infrastructure and system of doctoral education. From the outset, historical inquiry was here regarded as pertinent for answering questions on the origin and position of the design professions and their educational background. Doctoral theses such as Marjo Wiberg’s on the development of the textile designer profession and related educational institutions and Anna Valtonen’s on recent professional changes in industrial design proved relevant not only to the design history community but also to the professions themselves. <sup>45</sup> What made this history writing different from work at traditional universities was that these researchers had a background in design education and practice—and hence the research questions stem from that realm.

The recent consolidation of the fi eld has also implied a methodological versatility and a rich array of approaches in comparison with the previously predominant empirical and positivist narratives. Discourse analysis, poststructuralism, gender studies and Foucauldian thinking all enriched the way in which the now empirically familiar individuals, works and processes were analysed and presented. Also, following the rule of thumb that there must be one generation or forty years between the object and the researching subject, the ‘golden age of Finnish design’, the 1950s, has come under scrutiny. The seminal work in this respect was Harri Kalha’s doctoral thesis from 1997, which used discourse analysis to open up the period and its main actors. <sup>46</sup> Now, the University of Art and Design also became an object of historical investigation. For its 130th anniversary, it published a signifi cant, multi- authored volume of its history with essays that also portray the more general development of design in Finland. <sup>47</sup> At the same time, the historian Ilkka Huovio conducted a thorough institutional and pedagogical analysis of the same school. <sup>48</sup> Also, design professions and their organizations—fi rst interior architects and later industrial designers—have commissioned studies of their own historical development. <sup>49</sup>

As mentioned, there has been continuous foreign interest in writing and publishing on Finnish design. In the 1990s this turned into research-based historical inquiry. There are two categories of foreign input: work by foreign scholars and publications produced outside Finland with both foreign and Finnish authors. The fi rst category includes, for example, Kevin Davies’s work on the reception of Finnish furniture design in Great Britain, Gay McDonald’s on the American Home 1953 exhibition in Helsinki, Charlotte Ashby’s on latenineteenth-century nationalism and Asdis Olafsdottir’s on the international distribution of Aalto furniture. <sup>50</sup> Among the publications produced outside Finland with both foreign and Finnish authors, one could mention Marianne Aav and Nina Stritzler-Levine’s edited volume Finnish Modern Design.<sup>51</sup>

It is obvious that the 1990s marked a coming of age for Finnish design history. Since then, the institutional structure has remained quite stable. There are no specifi c chairs in design history, but it is practised in several institutions and within many disciplines. Design research bordering on history has even become topical in consumer studies and economic history. The continued existence of lacunae in both knowledge and methodological approaches is demonstrated by two recent doctoral theses, both expanding our understanding of the phenomena in question and the ways to penetrate it: Leena Svinhufvud’s work on textile art in the interwar period and Susanna Aaltonen’s study of the birth of the interior architect profession in Finland. <sup>52</sup> Both are by women researchers, and both combine a gender perspective with thoroughly researched empirical evidence.

Despite signifi cant expansion and deepening of the knowledge of Finnish design history since Kruskopf’s survey from 1989—or perhaps precisely because of the large body of recent research available—a new survey history has appeared only recently: Pekka Korvenmaa’s Finnish Design: A Concise History from 2009. In its bibliography, the reader can fi nd a more detailed list of resources. <sup>53</sup>

## NORWAY

Like that of many other nations, the historiography of Norwegian applied art and design remains poorly investigated. Over the years, the history of Norwegian design has been dominated by a modernistic perspective and has only to a very limited degree responded to postmodernist critique. This does not necessarily mean that what has been written is of a low scientifi c standard. In general, this type of design history is derived from the conventions of art history, with an emphasis on individual designers, issues of style and aesthetic discussions of form and material. However, most studies fall short when it comes to methodological self-refl ection. Even the use of terminology has historically been confusing. Central concepts such as kunstindustri (industrial art), brukskunst (applied art), kunsthåndverk (handicrafts), industridesign (industrial design), formgivning (design) and design have been used with varying degrees of accuracy and different interpretations.

An early awareness among Norwegian art historians of an emerging fi eld of design history can be traced to personal networks connected to certain academic communities in Britain during the 1950s. Instrumental in this were Stephan Tschudi-Madsen’s Sources of Art Nouveau, based on his doctoral thesis, which was partly conceived in London, and Alf Bøe’s From Gothic Revival to Functional Form, based on his MPhil thesis from the University of Oxford. <sup>54</sup> These works marked an early interest among Norwegian researchers in central issues in international design history.

Although Norway was only a modestly industrialized nation in the nineteenth century, no fewer than three museums of applied art were established: in Oslo (1876), Bergen (1887) and Trondheim (1893). The background for and establishment of these important institutions is the subject of Ingeborg Glambek’s doctoral thesis Kunsten, nytten og moralen (‘Art, utility and morale’). <sup>55</sup> Conceived to improve manufacture and taste, the museums gradually gained more freedom to evolve into scholarly institutions in the twentieth century. <sup>56</sup> Much of the research produced by the museums has focused on stylistic issues, individual designers or specifi c materials. This has resulted in a number of fi ne studies of designers who have gained distinction for their work in, for example, enamel, glass, ceramics and textiles. <sup>57</sup> The Museum of Decorative Arts and Design in Oslo (since 2003 part of the National Museum of Art, Architecture and Design) has played a particularly important role in promoting central Norwegian female designers through exhibitions and publications. <sup>58</sup> However, a notable lack of critical (historical) distance to both work and designer can be discerned, particularly when contemporary designers are portrayed. Also, it appears that the close interaction among the Norwegian museums of applied art has given rise to a certain consensus on the subject matter of and approach to design history.

Surveys of Norwegian design history are even fewer and further between than in the other Scandinavian countries. Themes relating to differences between European styles and national character have been a recurring issue in the Norwegian literature, especially in older work. One early attempt to discuss these themes can be found in Thor Kielland’s chapter on modern applied art in Norsk kunsthistorie (1927). <sup>59</sup> Kielland structured his survey according to materials—a categorization which proved normative for a long period of time.

Half a century would pass until the next major survey, also published as part of a multivolume publication: Norges kunsthistorie from the early 1980s. The chapters on decorative art and design in volumes 5, 6 and 7 remain the most thorough survey of the fi eld from an art historical perspective. In volume 5, Bøe describes the period 1870–1914 as a national reformation, dominated by applied art museums, the advance of handicrafts and the dragon style. <sup>60</sup> In the 1970s, interwar design was the subject of a number of art historical studies, including Randi Gaustad’s work on the Norwegian Applied Art Association (Foreningen Brukskunst), <sup>61</sup> and this is refl ected in Bøe’s contribution to volume 6, covering the period 1914–40. Here, Bøe sustains the modernistic perspective by accentuating the work of organizations such as the Norwegian Applied Art Association in light of infl uence from the Deutscher Werkbund and the Swedish Society of Crafts and Design. <sup>62</sup> Bøe also maintains Kielland’s approach, focusing on style, form and materials and concentrating on elite products, especially furniture, tapestry, precious metals, ceramics and glass.

The postwar period receives a more tentative review by two authors in volume 7. The problematic conceptual uses of brukskunst (applied art), kunsthåndverk (handicrafts) and industrial design come to the fore, particularly in Anniken Thue’s use of the term kunsthåndverk. <sup>63</sup> Thue distinguishes between handicrafts in the years from 1940 to 1970, defi ned as ‘made by hand in conventional workshops’, and the new interpretation emphasizing the craftsperson’s control of the entire process, from initial concept to fi nished product. However, the delineation between this and applied art, or brukskunst, becomes unclear, and it is evident that the text was written during the period when handicrafts were undergoing radical changes. Bøe wrote a parallel chapter entitled ‘Kunstindustri og industridesign etter 1940’ (‘Applied art and industrial design after 1940’), in which he continued his dialogue on organizations and material groups within applied art. <sup>64</sup> In his former positions as Director of the Norwegian Design Centre and Curator at the Museum of Decorative Arts and Design in Oslo, Bøe was an eager promoter of industrial design, so it is not surprising to fi nd that he pays a lot of attention to the concept of industrial design in his writings—but it is noteworthy that his role as an actor in the fi eld is not mentioned in the text.

However, Bøe was also able to identify weak points in his own interpretation. When discussing the interwar period, he points out that the history of design often disregards both lavishly ornate objects deemed vulgar by modernist critics and products designed by engineers and technicians. Bøe’s views relate to the contemporary postmodern criticism of dichotomies such as innovation versus tradition, centre versus periphery, high versus low culture, as well as to the call for accounts moving beyond elite products and the heroic designer, a call that was emerging in international design history at the time.

Fredrik Wildhagen addresses a number of these issues in an attempt to provide a more comprehensive presentation of Norwegian design history in his book Norge i form (1988). <sup>65</sup> Wildhagen breaks away from the typical features of art history to focus instead on the relationships between handicrafts and design, between designers and industry. This issue runs through

Wildhagen’s book as a recurrent theme, and he provides in-depth discussions on the design process and aspects such as concept development, technological affordances and the role of the manufacturer. Although Wildhagen’s book represents a much more progressive approach to design history that is more conversant with developments in the fi eld internationally, it is interesting to note that international reviewers requested more on design culture unique to Norway. <sup>66</sup> Unfortunately, Wildhagen’s book lacks a clear methodical grasp and does not adhere to academic conventions in terms of references. The author’s active engagement in the international design history community undoubtedly made him an important fi gure mediating new perspectives to Scandinavian colleagues—although the impact of his effort in this respect seems to have been limited and belated.

The only recent attempt to write a survey history of Norwegian design is aimed entirely at a non-academic audience and has no scholarly merit; it is therefore of minor interest in this context. <sup>67</sup> This can be seen as symptomatic of design history’s poor standing in Norway as a distinct fi eld of study, dominated by conventional art historical approaches and the position of the museums of applied art. The University of Oslo, and to a lesser degree other universities, has fostered a number of postgraduate theses on various issues in modern design history, but very few of the graduates have gone on to pursue careers in research. From the 1990s onwards, an increase in attention to theory and history at architectural and design schools, coinciding with increased support to institutions such as the Foundation for Design and Architecture in Norway (Norsk Form) and the Norwegian Design Council, has contributed to an escalation in interdisciplinary perspectives within this fi eld, even though their publications can seldom be characterized as research into the history of design. One of the exceptions is Trygve Ask’s doctoral thesis from the Oslo School of Architecture and Design (2004) on the constitution of industrial design as a profession in Norway, which presents a number of new perspectives on educational and organizational issues.

New actors and perspectives have emerged from other sectors as well: the recent research collaboration between various museums of cultural history and museums of applied art has resulted in interesting work with a more multifaceted outlook. One such example is the research project Plastics in Modern Norway. <sup>68</sup> Yet another is the Norwegian Museum of Cultural History’s research into home and living environments, based partly on ethnological approaches, which attempts to identify a broader base of perspectives relating to social and cultural history for the interior decor and furniture design prevalent in the interwar period. <sup>69</sup> To these contributions from congruent fi elds can be added the interdisciplinary informed work of historian Kjetil Fallan on twentieth-century industrial design. <sup>70</sup> Also, at the other extreme of the practices studied by design history, handicrafts, there is a growing literature with an international orientation, best exemplifi ed by the work of Jorunn Veiteberg. <sup>71</sup>