In general, however, Norwegian design history remains underdeveloped, maintained by a small number of scholars producing only a very modest volume of research which interacts with the international community and refl ects current theoretical perspectives.

## SWEDEN

Swedish design has long been characterized by consensus, perhaps because the Swedish design community has been and still is relatively small. In other words, a limited group of people have alternated between different key roles, which has had an impact on the shaping of the content of Swedish design history. These key roles include university positions as well as those at applied art museums such as the Röhsska Museum in Gothenburg and the National Museum in Stockholm. Another infl uential institution in this context is the Swedish Society of Crafts and Design (Svenska slöjdföreningen until 1976, then Svensk Form).

In Swedish design history literature, the Society of Crafts and Design’s view on design permeates the defi nition of the design historical object. In addition, the spotlight has constantly been placed on the society’s activities, with repeated references to certain indisputable milestones, as is amply demonstrated in Kerstin Wickman’s edited volume Formens rörelse: Svensk form genom 150 år, a book published on the occasion of the society’s 150th anniversary in 1995. <sup>72</sup> Wickman, one of the more infl uential Swedish design historians in the last decades of the twentieth century, started to work for the society’s journal, Form, in 1966 and has been active in the organization ever since. In addition, she taught the history of design and crafts at Stockholm’s Konstfack University College of Arts, Crafts and Design from 1970 to 2006.

Formens rörelse is a chronological anthology outlining the history of the Society of Crafts and Design, with texts by prominent historians in the areas of crafts, design and architecture. The title of the book is intentionally ambiguous. There is an underlying claim not only to write the society’s history but also to provide a survey of Swedish design history: how design has been shaped and changed, and why. Still, the anthology remains a design history centred on the organization and its achievements. In other words, the impression is that the society’s history is synonymous with Swedish design history. Even if the society, for obvious reasons, is not given an equally prominent place in other books, it is a constantly recurring point of reference.

The formulation of modern Swedish design history has been relatively long in the making. No comprehensive survey was published until 1975, but parts of the history were formulated in a number of books in the previous decades. The early historical writing includes Nutida svensk konstslöjd (1931) by Nils G. Wollin. The book covers the period 1917–30 and comprises a limited amount of texts and a great number of images divided into materials such as ceramics, furniture, metal, textiles and glass. <sup>73</sup> Ten years later, Konsthantverk och hemslöjd i Sverige 1930–40 (1941) was published, focusing on the 1930 Stockholm Exhibition and its signifi cance. <sup>74</sup> Nyttokonst (1951) by Arthur Hald and Sven Erik Skawonius, who were both active in the Swedish Society of Crafts and Design, may be regarded as a continuation of Konsthantverk och hemslöjd i Sverige 1930–40. Just like Nutida svensk konstslöjd, it was, in the main, an illustrated work with shorter texts. Hald and Skawonius’s work chiefl y deals with the 1940s, but the book also contains a short chapter reaching back to 1915 when the society began its struggle for ‘the refi nement of production’ and ‘a sound, democratic domestic culture’. <sup>75</sup>

Yet a decade later, in 1961, Skawonius contributed an essay on crafts and applied art in Sweden to the anthology Konsthantverk och konstindustri i Norden (the US edition was entitled A Treasury of Scandinavian Design). <sup>76</sup> The same year saw the publication of Svensk Form by Åke Stavenow and Åke H. Huldt, which, in contrast to previous surveys, included a richly illustrated section on industrial design. <sup>77</sup> These authors were also active in the Swedish Society of Crafts and Design. Stavenow was the society’s president from 1936 to 1946 and then became Director of Konstfack. The aim of Svensk Form was to describe ‘Swedish applied art in the 1950s’, but just as with Formens rörelse, the perspective is ambiguous. In the early 1970s, several doctoral theses portraying modern design and architecture were published, including Per G. Råberg’s on the discourse of early functionalism, Elisabet Stavenow-Hidemark’s on early-twentieth-century Swedish villas and Bengt Nyström’s on two Swedish applied art pioneers. <sup>78</sup>

Dag Widman’s Konsthantverk, konstindustri, design 1895–1975 (1975) is the fi rst book that takes an integral perspective in a longer survey. <sup>79</sup> The book is part of the multivolume art historical publication Konsten i Sverige (1974–81), edited by Sven Sandström. Widman was one of the people who held several important positions both at the National Museum in Stockholm and within the Swedish Society of Crafts and Design. Through his double institutional affi liation, Widman thus formulated the history in writing and institutionalized it at the museum.

Widman’s presentation is chronological and begins with a review of the arts and crafts movement’s infl uence in Sweden. In the eyes of the author, it was designers and the Swedish Society of Crafts and Design that propelled the development forward and played important roles. It is evident from Widman’s choice of perspective that it is the so-called applied arts that constitute Swedish design. Industrial design is not introduced until the chapter covering the 1950s and then very briefl y.

It should be evident from what has been said thus far that Swedish design history writing initially was a rather male affair, that is produced by men—a fact that changed in the 1970s. However, comprehensive surveys continued to be rare. One such publication is Hedvig Hedqvist’s 1900–2000: Svensk form: Internationell design (2002). <sup>80</sup> In comparison to the earlier survey, this one has a more international outlook, as indicated by the title. Here, Swedish design is discussed in a wider context. It also contains other and more different examples of industrial design, but Hedqvist’s perspective is largely reminiscent of Widman’s.

As already mentioned, there are few surveys of Swedish design history but rather more anthologies. In addition to Formens rörelse, one should mention books on specifi c design media such as furniture, textiles and glass: Svenska möbler 1890–1990 (1991), edited by Monica Boman; and Svenska textilier 1890–1990 (1994) and Svenskt glas (1991), both edited by Jan Brunius. <sup>81</sup> There are also some larger works in the fi elds of art history and architectural history that encompass design: both Signums svenska konsthistoria (1994– 2005) and Att bygga ett land (1998) contain important sections on design. <sup>82</sup> There are also a number of publications that have been fully or partly funded by the Swedish Institute, including Design in Sweden (1972), by Lennart Lindkvist; Design in Sweden (1985), edited by Monica Boman; and Swedish Design (2001), by Denise Hagströmer. <sup>83</sup> The Swedish Institute is a governmental agency answering to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, tasked with boosting Sweden’s reputation internationally. Swedish design history has thus been a way of promoting Sweden abroad, and today there are a number of companies that use Swedish design history in their marketing strategies.

Since Widman’s book, industrial design has become more present, an advent that, to a degree, has changed the previously dominant applied art perspective. In Stavenow and Huldt’s book Svensk Form industrial design already enjoyed a relatively prominent position, but it was not until the National Museum’s 1978 exhibition Industridesign under 200 år (‘200 years of industrial design’) that this fi eld was incorporated properly into Swedish design history. The exhibition catalogue was published as an issue of the Swedish Society of Crafts and Design’s magazine Form, another example of how close-knit the design community has been in Sweden.

However, the decisive breakthrough for an industrial design perspective on Swedish design history came with the anthology Svensk industridesign: En 1900-talshistoria (1997), edited by Lasse Brunnström. <sup>84</sup> A former director of the Röhsska Museum, Brunnström is currently Adjunct Professor of Design History at the University of Gothenburg’s School of Design and Crafts (Högskolan för Design och Konsthantverk, or HDK). In the survey Svensk designhistoria (2010), Brunnström further develops his views on industrial design and also describes other design practices beyond the applied arts. Moreover, the book is the fi rst survey of Swedish design history in which the Society of Crafts and Design does not play a central role. Brunnström critically points to the lack of diversity in the earlier institutionalized form of Swedish design history and claims that it was characterized by ‘repetitions of relatively well-known facts and phenomena’ and that there are gaps in the knowledge concerning, for example, graphic design, packaging design and service design. <sup>85</sup> Thus, this book represents an altered understanding of the design historical object. It represented a shift in the defi nition, which was also present in several doctoral theses defended during the last decade, such as Helena Kåberg’s study of offi ce buildings as an advertising tool and Johanna Rosenqvist’s work on handicrafts and gender. <sup>86</sup>

However, this is not the fi rst or only time a different perspective has been formulated. Already in the 1960s the Swedish Society of Crafts and Design’s approach was questioned, and, as in other countries, ‘good design’ came under attack. In the mid-1990s, this criticism fl ared up again, leading to a discussion focusing on taste. This critical discourse of the 1990s was expressed in various forms, and the discussion was liveliest among designers, at galleries and in the daily press.

Among other things, the debate centred on power seen in an historical perspective but also touched upon contemporary power positions. A younger generation of craftspeople and designers disassociated themselves from traditional concepts of taste and quality, norms and taboos. One outcome of this debate was the book Svensk smak (2005) by the craftsperson Zandra Ahl, now Professor at Konstfack, and the journalist Emma Ohlsson. <sup>87</sup> Another example is Linda Rampell’s Designatlas (2003). <sup>88</sup>

Today Sweden is a transcultural country in a globalized world in the age of late capitalism. Needless to say, these new conditions affect the defi nition of ‘Swedish’ as well as the conditions for writing history, which, most likely, will be increasingly noticeable in how design history will be formulated in Sweden. The mediation of history will probably be marked by a larger number of perspectives and thus more and more varied histories.

## NOTE ON AUTHORSHIP

The section ‘Pan-Scandinavian Literature’ was written by Kjetil Fallan, and the sections on Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden were written, respectively, by Anders V. Munch, Pekka Korvenmaa, Espen Johnsen, and Sara Kristoffersson and Christina Zetterlund.