provided performance and continuity, and, for the textile artist, presiding over a weavery was a sign of status. It is noteworthy that many of them, like Skogster-Lehtinen, were in business under their own names.

I have used the term entrepreneurship to describe the activities of textile artists in the interwar period. This was not a contemporary notion but one that is widely used today to describe the work of independent actors organizing and marketing production. Kirsi Vainio-Korhonen has discussed the problematic role of women’s traditional production of services and goods in economic histories conventionally concerned with large-scale production in industrial mills. Often based at home, and eschewing public records, the business of women selling food, cloths and nurture tends to remain invisible in accounts of economic development despite the indisputable signifi cance and considerable scale of this type of manufacture and commerce. <sup>30</sup> The work of professional women designers who made a traditional Finnish craft into a business, organizing the production of their own designs and producing new meanings for crafted textiles in the context of applied art and design, can be compared to women’s entrepreneurship in this wider context.

Pursuing design business in a traditional women’s craft was certainly more readily acceptable than in other sectors. In interwar Finland, weaving fi t well with prevailing nationalistic ideologies that idealized peasant and farmer culture. Handicraft was regarded as entailing unquestionable values amidst the anxiety brought on by modern life, and it was promoted as a useful spare time activity for women both in the country and in the cities. Weaving by hand as a core function in the modern profession of textile artists realized the ideal of self-suffi ciency and rationality whilst also maintaining symbolically the traditional gender division in an age when more and more women were starting to work outside the home. A women’s culture focused on the home and reproduction was created and mediated, for example through new magazines. For the textile artists it was of great importance to participate in this project, to be able to publicly address the female makers and users of textiles, who also were their clients.

## FABRICS BY THE YARD AT THE FRIENDS OF FINNISH HANDICRAFT

The emerging method of production—the development of standard types to be mass-produced in the thousands—is an essential feature of our age, just as the Grecian temples, medieval cathedrals, and Rococo chair types belonged to the civilizations of their own times .  .  . Contemporary woven products—which are also standard products, whether handmade or produced by industry—aim at the most monochrome hues possible and calm designed forms in order to suit, in an organic manner, the spirit of modern standardized, type-planned dwellings. <sup>31</sup>

This is how the architect Elna Kiljander in 1932 presented the ‘mass- produced’ furniture fabrics, window curtains and draperies made by the Friends of Finnish Handicraft (Suomen Käsityön Ystävät, est. 1879). She was addressing the readers of Kotiliesi magazine (‘Home hearth’, est. 1923), the fi rst Finnish magazine for the housewife. Through this magazine the organization made a breakthrough in marketing their crafts products widely in Finland. Textiles for the home, mostly handwoven, and do-it-yourself (DIY) kits could even be ordered by mail via the magazine’s supplement . <sup>32</sup>

The case of the Friends of Finnish Handicraft shows how the rise of handwoven fabrics for interiors and furnishing was not the result of the so-called breakthrough of functionalism-modernism exclusively. The Helsinki-based association was founded in 1879 with the Swedish organization Handarbetets Vänner as its model. From the beginning of the twentieth century the association promoted itself as an ‘art organization’ staging textile design competitions and regular exhibitions. The association was reorganized as a limited company in 1920. In the years following Finnish independence this organization enjoyed the status of a national actor, which undoubtedly contributed to the company’s positive economic development. The functions of the Friends of Finnish Handicraft were then twofold: fi rstly, serving as a workshop that produced textiles commissioned by private customers or, very often, public institutions and architects for contemporary building projects; and, secondly, selling textile patterns and materials for hobbyists (DIY).

In the interwar years, woven fabrics by the metre became the company’s core product group. Hitherto it had focused on presenting in exhibitions textiles that were more or less singular objects—woven carpets, bench covers and wall hangings, embroidered sofa cushions, curtains and tablecloths; compared to embroidered works and sales of crafts materials, woven products were economically marginal. <sup>33</sup> The design of fabrics by the yard received more attention from the end of the 1910s, when the designer name is sometimes mentioned in the studio’s surviving documents. Before this, the fabrics were categorized mainly by structure and were listed according to the traditional bindings used in them. In the fortieth-anniversary exhibition in 1919, the company presented for the fi rst time furniture fabrics designed by the new director of the weaving studio, the crafts teacher Valborg Madsén-Himanen. The following year, more than 800 metres of different kinds of fabrics for interiors designed by her were produced, most of them to be sold in the company’s shop, but also as commissions for interior design projects, and some were offered for sale in the Helsinki department store Stockmann. <sup>34</sup> At the next annual exhibition the amount of woven fabrics was doubled, and there were new designers, such as Toini Kallio, Toini Nyström, Eva Anttila and Margareta Ahlstedt (later Ahlstedt-Willandt)—all trained at the Central School of Arts and Crafts.

In 1930 the company’s weaving studio was for the fi rst time headed by a trained textile artist, Laila Karttunen, who was recruited especially to renew the line of woven textiles. The company also hired trained designers to provide customer service and to assist architects in interior design projects. The Friends of Finnish Handicraft secured several important public commissions in this period. One of them was for the new Parliament House building in Helsinki, for which 750 metres of curtain fabric were woven in 1931, employing all of the company’s weaving studio for the spring period. <sup>35</sup> Also, two design competitions were organized in 1933 and 1938, generating publicity for handwoven fabrics for interiors.

The production was now rationalized. While in the early 1920s all the fabrics woven were rather narrow (from 70 to 85 centimetres), a decade later most of the furnishing fabrics were much broader, although the width varied a lot (from 68 to 130 centimetres). At the end of the 1930s the standard width of all furnishing fabrics was 130 centimetres and for curtain fabrics 70 or 90 centimetres. Starting in 1935 the fabrics, probably all designed by Laila Karttunen, are listed with their individual product names—for example Niitty (‘Meadow’) or Vanamo (‘Linnaea’)—and the range of the assortment is astonishing. According to the 1938 inventory the company offered at least seventy-fi ve types of furnishing fabrics and approximately seventy types of curtain fabrics, and some of the patterns were produced in different colours. However, the quantities made were mostly quite small, sometimes only 2 to 3 metres of each furnishing fabric, resulting in a total production volume of almost 700 metres. The curtain fabrics were—not surprisingly, given their use—produced in greater volumes, close to 3,000 metres in total. <sup>36</sup> These fi gures illustrate how seriously the Friends of Finnish Handicrafts worked to develop a new line of products for the consumer market, in this case the urban middle class of Helsinki.

The development can also be followed in the annual reports. In 1930 it was stated that the economic depression had lifted ‘a domestic spirit’, <sup>37</sup> and this boosted commissions and the sale of yarns. Now the studio also started making many of the fabrics used for the embroidery works themselves rather than using industrially woven ones. In a few years, increased competition in the weaving business and the decline of prices and buying power weakened the prospects—but only briefl y. The situation changed again by the mid-1930s, and the new economic boom was made manifest especially in an increased demand for woven fabrics, ‘this being a natural consequence of contemporary interior design favouring woven over embroidered’. <sup>38</sup> Furnishing and curtain fabrics, fl at woven rugs and linen tablecloths were products that sold especially well.

The outbreak of war in Finland in 1939 changed the activities radically, <sup>39</sup> but the impact on textile production was not so drastic and sudden as is often suggested. There were public commissions for interior design projects, for example in the capital and in the reconquered areas of Karelia, and fabrics were ordered by the Finnish Army, by furniture companies and by radio manufacturers. These were woven using substitute and waste materials as well as paper and, in many cases, textile material provided by the customer. According to the annual report for 1943 the weaving studio had mainly produced fabrics by the metre, for example curtains and fabrics for dresses, coats and towels, altogether 6,752 metres. In the following year, artifi cial silk fabrics for clothing were the main products, also marketed in fashion shows. <sup>40</sup> This demonstrates the fl exibility of craft-based production, even in wartime conditions. Also, as the supplier of all the fl ags for the Finnish Army since the nation’s independence in 1917, the company was now harnessed to participate in the wartime action, as were other actors in art and architecture.

Just before the war broke out in 1939, the Friends of Finnish Handicrafts staged its sixtieth-anniversary exhibition at Kunsthalle Helsinki, presenting itself above all as a manufacturer of woven textiles. The exhibition featured forty different types of furnishing fabrics and twenty-one types of curtain fabrics designed by Laila Karttunen. In a photo from the exhibition the plain, ‘functional’ setting of draped fabrics with different structures and hues is contrasted with a unique tapestry woven after a painting dating from 1900 by Akseli Gallen-Kallela, the national artist hero who had died in 1931. The tapestry, picturing a motif from the national epic Kalevala, was a showpiece demonstrating the effort and skill of the weavers ( fi g. 3.5 ). <sup>41</sup> The exhibition featured no fewer than thirty-fi ve ryijy textiles (decorative textiles with woollen pile based on a Scandinavian tradition), which had been the company’s signature product since the early twentieth century, and also a wide series of ecclesiastical textiles, the company being the foremost producer also in this fi eld.

The case of the Friends of Finnish Handicraft exemplifi es how the focus of craft-based production changed with expanding consumer markets. The case also illustrates the broad scope of products offered through this particular design and manufacturing network in the 1930s, ranging from bespoke fabrics for individual and public commissions, to off-the-shelf products sold in the company’s shop in Helsinki, to DIY craft kits delivered to the countryside through mail order. Thus, recalling the harsh criticism wielded against its Swedish sister organization by the modernist reformers in the Acceptera manifesto, the Friends of Finnish Handicraft’s production was not all ‘Rolls Royce’. <sup>42</sup> However, the ‘Rolls Royces’ were crucial in establishing and maintaining its position as a high-end national art organization. The ryijy textiles, modernized through design competitions, were used to symbolize the perpetual renewal of the company. Their artistic value and individual designs were underlined also when marketing them to Finnish consumers, notwithstanding the fact that the ‘ ryijy taste’ of most customers differed considerably from the ideas presented, for example, in exhibitions in Helsinki. <sup>43</sup> To the great irritation of design reformers who preferred textiles embedded in the architecture and interior design, the expressive and colourful modern ryijys became standard objects in international design exhibitions starting in the 1930s. <sup>44</sup> Compared