or high expenditures for advertising and marketing. The contradiction is that this debranded brand, if you wish, became a very successful marketing tool.

The anti-aesthetics of the 1970s fi nally negated all the aesthetic hierarchies that had been preached to the welfare state consumer from the 1930s onwards. The ideology of the basic products did not emphasize form in the way early functionalism did—form itself was not something one needed to be taught to appreciate. Form did not have the same intrinsic value but was rather a means for negating contemporary consumer culture. Nevertheless, there is clearly a connection between the basic products and the functionalist ideology in the emphasis on rationality, with the signifi cant difference that the idea of the basic did not comprise an ideal. If functionalist ideology implied a drive towards the most functional and rationally designed object, with beauty as a given result, the ideology behind the basic products aimed at a low price and a product that negated the commodity fetishism of late capitalist society. The focus had changed from functionality as use to functionality as economy. If the early welfare state design ideology had an ambition to cater to and educate the ‘common people’, the basic products could be seen as the end point for this project where the ambition more or less was fulfi lled. In contrast to the functionalistic commodity, which often is considered elitist, the basic products actually became part of popular culture. The concept of basic was easy to grasp and had a coherent and rapidly perceived image and a low price. It was a pop version of the functionalistic ideal, without any hierarchic ideals of beauty or divine design.

## CONCLUSION

This essay has argued that the Swedish Cooperative Union’s campaigns introducing a new consumer policy around 1970 addressed acute contradictions in contemporary society and broke ground for a new strategy in marketing and design. The campaigns could, on the one hand, be interpreted as something new, but they could also be seen as the end point of a long project of producing a welfare consumer. It was the last big project in Sweden with the expressed ambition to produce a consumer with values related to the welfare state such as solidarity, rationality, democracy and collectivity. The consumer who was supposed to buy the basic products at the end of the 1970s could be understood as the fi nal subject imagined by those who designed the welfare state.

The years around 1970 were characterized by contradictions. Western consumer society was growing to unprecedented dimensions while at the same time being subjected to severe criticism. In a Swedish context, both trajectories can be interpreted as symptoms of a welfare state increasingly under pressure. Also, both of these societal trends informed Coop’s new corporate identity coined around 1970. It was a two-front operation, where two seemingly contradictory strategies merged into one ideological message to be expressed through the new corporate identity: Coop was a commercial business producing a consumer through its marketing efforts, while simultaneously honouring its roots as a people’s movement by protecting the consumer from conspicuous consumption by means of ‘basic’ design.

In conclusion, the considerable efforts that went into designing the ‘consumer of infi nity’ in 1970s Sweden illustrate the paradoxical break from the modernistic design tradition as seen from a consumption perspective. As protest culture was channeled into the establishment of a national consumer policy, consumption criticism became a productive force eventually paving the way for the liberalistic consumer society to come. The resistance of the late capitalistic society became the best renewal of the logic of consumption.

# Designing a Hole in the Wall: The Reverse Vending Machine as Socio-technical System and Environmental Infrastructure

Finn Arne Jørgensen

Advertisements promoting beverage container recycling in Norway have one common feature: a consumer returns a bottle through a hole in the wall. This hole is a critical design component of the reverse vending machine (RVM), used for the returns of empty beverage containers in grocery stores, and has become a striking visual icon for consumer environmentalism and recycling in Norway. The design element of the hole in the wall has become embedded into the Norwegian culture of recycling. Yet analyses of the RVM as a designed artefact growing out of a Scandinavian context need to simultaneously look in through the hole in the wall, at the large technical system that makes the machine function, and out through the hole in the wall, at the position it has attained in the modern organization of beverage container recycling.

This chapter examines how the design of the RVM took place through a constellation of forces: technological development, the venturing into international markets, governmental policymaking and the onset of environmental concerns. By looking at three design parameters—inside, outside and systems—the article reveals how the RVM became both a visual symbol of and a key technical component in Norwegian recycling culture.

The Norwegian—and world-leading—RVM producer Tomra Systems is largely responsible for the creation of this technological iconography of beverage container recycling. We will look at three historical iterations of the company’s RVM in this article: the Tomra I was created in 1971 to solve a specifi c logistical problem in grocery stores. The Tomra Can-Can, launched in 1982, marked Tomra’s fi rst attempts at involving professional industrial designers in the design process. Finally, in 1996 Tomra celebrated their twenty-fi fth anniversary by releasing the Tomra 600 RVM, reaching what the company’s founders had considered their design vision since the beginning.

In this chapter, I analyse the increasingly complex system character of the three machines, concluding with a discussion of the evolving design of the RVM as a fundamentally Scandinavian design process. In exploring what

it means for a design to be Scandinavian, we need to ask whether the RVM could have been made elsewhere. What were the exact components of Scandinavian culture that were embedded in the RVM’s design? And how was this done?

## DESIGNING ARTEFACTS AND SYSTEMS

This is a case study of the design of technological products and the interactions between the engineers, designers and different users who were involved in giving the RVM its shape and functionality. Instead of examining designers or engineers as specifi c professions, or performing an ethnographic study of the relationship between engineers and designers, the article aims to keep a close eye on the object itself, Tomra’s evolving RVM models. In order to analyse this product development as a design process, we need to understand the RVM as a functional technology, an artefact that is made to perform specifi c tasks for specifi c users, within clearly defi ned material constraints. A machine without users is a failed technology, as much recent literature in science and technology studies has argued. <sup>1</sup> It follows that we need to actively consider the role of these users in technology development. Recruiting users and guiding their experience of the technology is a question of design, of identifying what needs and values the user groups have and giving the machine a shape, an image and a set of functions that align with the users’ interests. The RVM as a machine needs to process empty beverage containers in a reliable manner. The world of RVMs is far from glamorous; using it seldom gives its users aesthetic pleasure. It is a mundane technological artefact, yet the RVM has obviously been carefully designed with a function and the interactions with its many users in mind, making its design evolution of interest to design historians and historians of technology alike. As Barry Katz observed in his 1997 essay on the relationship between the history of technology and the history of design, these two fi elds have gone through a similar historiographic trajectory, from focusing on the great individuals, whether engineers, inventors or designers, to considering the broader context infl uencing technological development and design processes. <sup>2</sup>

The RVM is more than a free-standing, technological artefact. It is important to examine the relationship between its design, its designers and its users and, even more critically, to understand the RVM as an interface to a larger socio-technical system for handling packaging waste, an infrastructure that often aligns with national boundaries, cultures and mindsets. The history of the RVM reveals the complexity of the design process, how it reaches beyond the artefact itself and the formal designer, and how it extends over time, far beyond the point where the fi nal product is launched and put up for sale. The RVM needed to serve many users, both over time and concurrently. Political