The Liljeblå decoration should therefore be seen as a pattern of inclusion. It can, clearly, be positioned in a discourse formulating a material culture in search of a visual tradition of Swedishness. The worker was to be included in this tradition by anchoring the constructed visual scheme in the past. This illustrative gesture was to give the worker a recognizable aesthetic expression. With this inclusion, the threats of the workers’ poor moral and revolutionary tendencies were to be avoided. However, it is an inclusion that is highly conditioned. The worker inscribed in Liljeblå was not just any labourer. For people like drunkards and drifters, notably groups that did not contribute to production, or simply people of immoral behaviour, a severe instrument for exclusion was formulated in theories of eugenics. Such theories were invoked explicitly within the CSA as well as in Social Democratic discourse. <sup>25</sup> The worker, the ‘other’, is given a very conditioned presence but remains cut off from the subject position in this story. This is evident in the statement that people with small fi nancial means should not aspire to move away from this given place and formulate something else through ‘frippery from abroad’. The workers’ material culture is never present in itself; instead, it is a culture known as that which is to be designed, educated, improved and controlled.

## THE CONSUMER OF ‘DEMOCRATIC DESIGN’

Not everyone agreed with the strategy chosen for the Home Exhibition. For instance, Erik Folcker, Curator at the National Museum of Fine Arts, claimed that looking back into history to fi nd a way forward had never been a solution. He thought that workers, who acquired a natural sense for quality through their closeness to and knowledge of industrial production, would be unhappy with objects that reminded them of the underdeveloped production of their ancestors. They would not want household objects that marked their difference from the higher classes. Instead, according to Folcker, it was within the consumer cultures of ‘highly cultivated’ groups that ‘a peculiar fascination for the primitive’ could be found. <sup>26</sup>

The ‘highly cultivated’ people identifi ed by Folcker were obviously not found among the workers but rather within the consumer groups of the fashionable department store Nordiska Kompaniet (NK). The NK catalogue of 1918–19 features the Apollo dinnerware pattern, where it is described as ‘designed by the artist Wilhelm Kåge’. Several patterns shown at the Home Exhibition are also found in this catalogue. A blue-and-white washing set, also designed by Kåge, named Reklam (‘Advertising’) is offered alongside the Turbin (‘Turbine’) service designed by Edward Hald for Rörstrand— another object from the Home Exhibition, canonized in Swedish design history for pioneering abstract decoration inspired by industrial shapes. <sup>27</sup> The catalogue gives an indication of who appropriated the ‘democratic design’ of the Home Exhibition. <sup>28</sup>

Yet NK offers an interesting case. It clearly illustrates how a variety of styles are present at a given time—a fact not suffi ciently acknowledged by historians. <sup>29</sup> Not only peasant-inspired design was sold at NK. In 1919, two years after the Home Exhibition, NK staged an ambitious show called Bourgeois Interiors. Whole rooms, like the ones at the Home Exhibition, interpreting the 1919 version of the bourgeois interior were staged within the department store. For instance, there was a parlour in the Gustavian style that included furniture with gilded detailing, a gilded clock, a sofa with fi nely patterned fabrics, a crystal chandelier and a large oriental carpet. It was a distinctly different version of the Gustavian style than the one referred to by Brunius. NK’s Gustavian parlour represented an understanding of that style that differed from the prevalent interpretations founded at the beginning of the twentieth century. Among the architects contributing to Bourgeois Interiors we recognize Carl Bergsten and Carl Malmsten from the Home Exhibition. In a review found in the conservative home decoration magazine Svenska Hem i Ord och Bilder Carl Gernandt de Jossac praised the interiors for not presenting dull handicraft— hemslöjd—or far-fetched ideas of ‘Swedishness’. Instead, he considered the NK interiors truly international. <sup>30</sup> Vice versa, one might say this magazine did not take an interest in the Home Exhibition. They did, however, publish actual interiors designed in the fashion seen at the exhibition. For instance, the homes of both the Larssons and Ellen Key were published here and presented as ‘modern’. But the majority of the homes portrayed belonged to the Swedish elite and were closer to the ones presented in Bourgeois Interiors. This shows that the consumer of ‘democratic design’ cannot simply be located among the bourgeoisie but must be understood as part of a specifi c material culture within this group.

## MATERIAL CULTURES OF THE WORKER

In practice, it was not the economically less fortunate who were given an opportunity to buy the ‘well-thought objects’ found at the Home Exhibition as a replacement for things ‘already used’, as Elsa Gullberg would put it in the 1940s. <sup>31</sup> One possible reason why the ‘workers’ service’ did not become a common possession among workers is the simple fact that they might not have liked its design; many workers desired something else. But that answer is perhaps a bit simple because consumption is not just about taste. It is also about economic realities and material conditions. The lack of ‘well thought objects’ and the proliferation of used ones was, for many, not primarily a question of taste but of fi nancial and practical means. An episode in the novel Godnatt jord (‘Good night, earth’) by Ivar Lo Johansson, a representative of the so-called golden age of worker’s writers in the Swedish literary scene of the 1930s, illustrates the diffi culties statarna—the landless farm labourers—had in accessing modernity. <sup>32</sup> Lo Johansson depicts how the main character’s mother wins a modern lamp in a lottery. Initially it sits like a sculpture in the family’s small home, until she is told that it needs a light bulb. With a tiring journey to the city she manages to procure a bulb. But the lamp still does not work. Her small and old-fashioned home has no electricity. In this depiction Lo Johansson illustrates the diffi culty with which early-twentieth-century farm labourers would become modern consumers. This narrative forms a stark contrast to the idealism of Gullberg and the Society of Arts and Crafts. No matter how much education the family portrayed in Godnatt jord would get, certain circumstances made it impossible for them to take part in the design reforms. Perhaps it was not this particular group of people with small fi nancial means that Gullberg implied. But, if so, this lack of clarity is in itself revealing about the reformers’ rhetorical strategies concerning the worker. There is no homogeneous group that could be sorted under a single label such as the worker. <sup>33</sup> Despite all the designer attention targeting various people referred to as workers, they remained anonymous. The tendency of consumers in this social stratum to be unidentifi ed or stereotyped has since turned into a historiographic problem persisting in Swedish design history to this day.

Looking closer at some groups that could be included in the elusive concept of worker, one is struck by the diversity of living conditions. There is no such thing as a material culture of the worker; there are several. For instance, servants living with their employers usually had very limited households of their own, as their lives were intertwined with the homes in which they worked. In the Stockholm City Archive, all that is fi led as belonging to the estate of one household servant is a chest of drawers and some clothing. <sup>34</sup> Other Stockholmers listed as workers in the estate inventory have a longer record of belongings indicating a self-owned home, and these could probably afford to make a greater amount of consumer choices than the servant. <sup>35</sup> In the countryside we would fi nd groups such as cottagers and farm labourers who had their own households. But even these groups were not homogeneous. A cottager was given a house and had to pay rent in kind by working for the farmer who was letting the house. The cottagers’ lives depended greatly on the size of the cottage they were given and the size and quality of the land. The farm labourers, statarna, were married couples living with their families in rooms within houses at the farm. They got their payment mainly in groceries.

Cottagers and farm labourers acquired new objects for the home in various ways. In the countryside, local auctions seem to have been a frequent way of procuring new things. For non-used objects travelling salesmen were one supplier; occasional journeys to shops in the town provided another possible source. Furniture was usually bought from a local maker. Many goods were made at home, like towels, linens and rug rags for the fl oor. In questionnaires concerning the cottager and farm labourer found at the Nordiska Museum in Stockholm it is evident that what are called porcelain plates in these records

## 112 SCANDINAVIAN DESIGN

are common in the surveyed households, whereas other utensils were made out of materials such as metal, wood and earthenware. <sup>36</sup> There are still other groups, many of them not as present in the archives as the farm labourers and cottagers. These groups would perhaps not fi t a conventional description of worker, as they did not, for numerous reasons, have a job on a regular basis. For some of the people in this group it is possible that their income did not allow them to have a home or to own things on a long-term basis. Some of them would be found among the people without an estate inventory who, when they died, received a Fattigbevis—a certifi cate of poverty—as there were not enough belongings to make an inventory from when they died. It is, then, just the name of the deceased that is present in the Stockholm City Archive.

There is, of course, much more that should be said about the people who are called ‘workers’ or ‘people of small fi nancial means’. In the current context, it suffi ces to note that the observations regarding the material cultures of the ‘workers’ outlined here provide important information in relation to how design history has been written in Sweden. The historiography reveals how dominant the object-centred approach has been; very little effort has been made to contextualize the artefacts under scrutiny. ‘The many’ remain an anonymous mass in these narratives. In the case of the people who were the target of the ‘workers’ service’, the actual living conditions and infrastructures are absent in the historical literature, as are analyses of consumer cultures (or the lack thereof). Swedish design history has mainly been written from a sender perspective. Admittedly, it is diffi cult to depict these material cultures. Some of the disciplines cognate to design history, such as ethnography, economic history and social history, have taken an interest in the material cultures of the workers at the time of the Home Exhibition. However, most studies concerning the living conditions of people ‘with small fi nancial means’ are concerned with how housing was organized physically. Studies of this kind typically analyse issues such as housing location, costs, room size, the number of people who would share one space and the sanitation. <sup>37</sup>

In design history writing, moving beyond descriptions of material structures is important in order to—as far as possible—identify a sense of individuality in this group conventionally lumped together as ‘the masses’ or ‘the people of small fi nancial means’. Still, from the sources referred to previously it is diffi cult to gain knowledge about traditional design history concerns such as what kind of dinnerware patterns these people used. The majority of the archive records usually just state that such possessions existed, providing no information on their design or how they were procured. Detailed knowledge of the dissemination of dinnerware patterns is, of course, not always pertinent, but in some cases it certainly is—like in the present context, as a means to exploring why the decorative practices of certain groups are appropriated,