disappeared in the fi rst presentation of the fi nished product, where it was characterized simply as ‘streamlined’ and as ‘standing out considerably from our ordinary trams’, <sup>58</sup> it was not the body design in itself that made the Goldfi sh remarkable—it was the combination of the radical monocoque aluminium construction, the excellent performance and its ‘Most Advanced Yet Acceptable’ design. <sup>59</sup>

## ‘ALUMINIUM: THE MODERN ADVENTURE’—‘OUR NATIONAL MATERIAL’

Aluminium as a material is both decidedly modern and, in a sense, particularly ‘Norwegian’. When Paul T. L. Héroult and Charles Martin Hall in 1886 fi rst succeeded in producing pure aluminium through electrolysis and the Pittsburgh Reduction Company shortly thereafter began production on a large scale, aluminium quickly became intimately linked with industrial manufacture. <sup>60</sup> Its properties, especially the impressive weight-to-strength ratio, were eagerly promoted by the industry, and designers and engineers soon saw great potential in the new material, making it integral to modern design and material culture.

Norway became an aluminium hot spot early on. The fi rst production began in 1908, but it reached industrial scale only when Norsk Aluminium Co. (NACO, founded 1915) built the large works Høyanger Verk, operative from 1918. <sup>61</sup> Aluminium production is extremely energy-consuming, and the explanation for Norway’s prominent role in the industry is to be found in her vast hydroelectric power resources.

The Norwegian aluminium industry is primarily an exporter of raw materials. But producers need consumers, and in addition to their efforts to make the existing manufacturing industry design products using aluminium, Norsk Aluminium Co. set up its own subsidiary, Nordisk Aluminiumsindustri, in 1917 as a means of creating an outlet for the raw material and profi ting from the added value in semi-fi nished and manufactured goods. <sup>62</sup> As already mentioned, it was this company that delivered the aluminium of which the Goldfi sh and the other vehicles from Strømmens Værksted were built, and Nordisk Aluminiumsindustri took a keen interest in and saw great potential in the coachbuilder’s aluminium designs.

The cultural identities of aluminium have been subject to stratifi cations and signifi cant changes through space and time. So how were the modernity and Norwegian-ness of aluminium constructed and mediated in Norway in the 1930s? Taking a closer look at a few examples of how aluminium was portrayed in trade journals may provide at least a partial picture of this cultural identity construction. As the cultural identities of a material are of great signifi cance for the identities of artefacts made from it, understanding the meanings of aluminium is paramount in understanding the meanings of the Goldfi sh.

During the 1920s the world production of aluminium increased rapidly, greatly strengthening both its physical and cultural presence in society. Trikk og Buss presented aluminium as ‘the modern adventure in the kingdom of materials’ and as ‘a typical child of our time’. This intrinsic modernity of the material was explained by the power-consuming nature of aluminium production, a challenge overcome only recently by feeding the factories from large hydroelectric power plants. The explanation thus fi rmly connects aluminium both to Norway, by way of her natural resources acting as a midwife to the material’s large-scale production, and to modernity. The latter connection is reinforced by references to aviation: ‘Characteristically, it is one of the very youngest industries, the aeroplane industry, which has really opened up the eyes of the age for the signifi cance of the light metals.’ <sup>63</sup>

Sigurd Klouman, director of Strømmens Værksted’s materials supplier, Nordisk Aluminiumsindustri, also referred to aircraft technology when, in a commentary on the fi rst-generation aluminium buses, he wrote that they were made from ‘Duralumin [which] is the same material used in the all-metal “Junkers” aeroplanes of the type employed in North Pole aviation’. <sup>64</sup> By way of this seemingly trivial reference Klouman effectively tied the bus design not only to the progressive imagery of aircraft technology and the adventurous ambience then associated with aviation but also to the theme of arctic explorations—a subject that in the 1930s was still saturated with heroic sentiment and national pride in Norway. <sup>65</sup>

Oslo Sporveier’s publication continued informing its readers about aluminium: its history, production, properties and applications. A piece from 1935 entitled ‘Aluminium—the Material of Our Time’ announced that ‘the world is about to leave the Iron Age and venture into the age of the light metals, where aluminium and its alloys will assume a leading position’. Here, then, aluminium was not only the modern material but even the material of the future. Interesting in this respect are two of the examples chosen to illustrate the advantages of aluminium: the previously mentioned Union Pacifi c M-10,000 train and Strømmens Værksted’s buses—two decidedly streamlined designs. National pride is induced by reporting that ‘Norway is third amongst the aluminium exporting countries’ and by announcing that the most modern production method for aluminium oxide—employed for example at Høyanger Verk—was ‘invented by Professor [of metallurgy] Harald Pedersen at the Norwegian Institute of Technology’. <sup>66</sup> The weaving of aluminium with modernity and Norwegian-ness continued, and in 1939 aluminium was proclaimed ‘our national material’ and portrayed as an important contribution to the national economy: ‘As the light materials gain entry to more and more domains, al[uminium] production will become of greater and greater economic signifi cance for our country.’ <sup>67</sup>

The national economic signifi cance of aluminium would to a large extent hinge on Norsk Aluminium Co. and Nordisk Aluminiumsindustri. It would be appropriate, then, to round off this discussion on the material’s cultural identities by looking at an advertisement Nordisk Aluminiumsindustri ran in the motoring magazine Norsk Motorblad in 1938. <sup>68</sup> Under the heading ‘Aluminium— for Speed and Progress’, the company aimed to convince the manufacturing industries to use more aluminium. The accompanying illustration showed an airplane, an ocean liner, a race car and the Union Pacifi c M-10,000 darting out radially from a point somewhere in an urban centre only hinted at through a couple of skyscrapers. The Norwegian company thus sought to imbue aluminium with connotations of modernity, streamlining and transport design. The Goldfi sh may not have been depicted in the advertisement— although the streamlined train can be said to stand proxy— but such imagery nonetheless contributed greatly to the co-production of meaning encompassing the new tram.

## CONCLUSION

This study has recounted the history of the streamlined aluminium trams that took to the streets of Oslo in 1937. Making use of advanced construction technology, a material couched as both absolutely modern and particularly Norwegian and a design language as typical of contemporary international transport design as it was atypical of Norwegian design practice, these Goldfi sh memories constitute a fascinating episode in Norwegian and Nordic design history. Moreover, this case study contributes to the debunking of the popular myth that streamlining is quintessentially American, supporting instead Nicholas Maffei’s claim that streamlining is to be recognized, ‘not as a purely American style . . . , but as a complex product . . . of a transatlantic collaboration that embodied the contradictions of modernity’. <sup>69</sup> The reading of motoring magazines, company newsletters and engineering journals has revealed that streamlining was appropriated and developed in Norway as an alternative face of modern design within the public transport business, the motoring trade and the mechanical engineering profession—completely on the side of the ‘offi cial’ discourse on modern design being played out in the sphere of architecture and applied art. As some sort of ‘freewheelers’ the engineers designing the Goldfi sh thus have much in common with what Judy Attfi eld has termed ‘trade designers’, <sup>70</sup> who also fi gure in Minna Sarantola-Weiss’s contribution to this volume in that they are not socialized into the community of art school-trained designers and do not feel compelled to adhere to the confi nes of ‘sanctioned’ design.

What makes the case of the Goldfi sh even more intriguing, though, is that in addition to representing an unsanctioned and outlandish form of modernism in terms of design, it also became a symbol of both Norwegian-ness and modernity by way of the cultural meanings shaped around its aluminium construction. The Goldfi sh may also be construed as an instance of using modern design to invigorate what was by many considered an outdated technology: In the 1930s improvements in bus construction and performance, perhaps aided by the allure of automobility, led many to consider the bus to be the future of urban public transport and spurred debates on the future of the tramway. Much as the prominence of streamlining in American trains of the period is often portrayed as an effort to revitalize this transport sector, greatly threatened as it was by the proliferation of cars and the onset of air travel, designing a gleamingly modern model like the Goldfi sh may be interpreted as an attempt to give the tram a new lease on life. The modernity of the Goldfi sh, then, was a complex and controversial but converging one.

In Fredrik Wildhagen’s gloss, the Goldfi sh emerged on the streets of Oslo as an unequivocal symbol of modernity: ‘The tram appeared as an image of the new, modern times—here were no reminiscences of horse-drawn trams and the olden days; here was the means of transport for the people of the time; busy, modern and effi cient.’ <sup>71</sup> In its exploration of the cultural meanings of streamlining and aluminium this article goes a long way in corroborating Wildhagen’s rendering of the contemporary perception of the Goldfi sh. But: sic transit gloria mundi. Even the most glorious of worldly things are fl eeting. In service for almost half a century, Oslo’s streamlined trams witnessed design trends come and go and survived many plans for closure of the tram network. Audaciously modern in 1937, the Goldfi sh eventually became an aesthetic anachronism, embodying more than anything a faded past vision of the future. In 1971 the poet Johan Fredrik Grøgaard expressed his love for the ageing Goldfi sh, caring particularly for its characteristic ‘duck-tail’, a mainstay of its by then unfashionable streamlined design:

we are older now

reason has at times trumped fortune

but we bear our age well, right

when you’re passing by on Drammensveien and I

gently caress your sloping back

with a giant child’s hand. <sup>72</sup>