# Creature Comforts: Soft Sofas and the Demise of Modernist Morality in 1970s’ Finland

Minna Sarantola-Weiss

In 1972 the Finnish furniture manufacturer Sopenkorpi advertised its new Tower sofa group as follows:

In recent years we have lived in a freely developing society with its hurried life and worries. These rapid developments have defi nitely given us a higher standard of living and thereby the opportunity to spend more on decorating our homes. Perhaps this spirit of our times has matched the harshness of everyday life with the need for a more romantic and liberating setting and way of thinking in our leisure moments at home. With these ideas in mind, we set out to develop a furniture suite responding to this romantic need. The fi rst details of our present Tower products were outlined through long-term research and design. <sup>1</sup>

The Sopenkorpi company was a large furniture manufacturer by Finnish standards, with 300 employees in the early 1970s. With decreasing sales in the late 1960s, it began to look for a new product for the mass market. <sup>2</sup> Product development led to Tower, which became one of the most widely sold Finnish sofa groups of the 1970s ( fi g. 8.1 ). Taking this design-politically incorrect product as a case, this study explores how the remarkable popularity of such mass-produced sofas contributed to the demise of modernist morality in 1970s Finland.

The process of designing Tower began with a market analysis. The factory’s representatives fi rst considered the products currently being offered on the domestic market, followed by a review of international trade fairs in the furniture sector. A source of inspiration was found in a Czech sofa suite of a kind that was not offered on the Finnish market. Back home, the company’s production and marketing experts pooled their skills to create the Tower sofa group, which was introduced for Christmas 1971. The chipboard frames of the pieces were lined with dark-stained oak veneer, and the upholstery was in green Dutch furniture plush. The items employed a sumptuous and bourgeois idiom of form, resembling, for example, furniture seen on the British television series Upstairs, Downstairs (1971–5), which was highly popular in Finland.

The process of designing Tower was typical of the Finnish furniture industry at the time. Sopenkorpi partly relied on professional designers, designing and producing, for example, seating for Finlandia Hall in Helsinki (architect Alvar Aalto, 1971). These products were featured in interior design magazines, but the revenue generated by such special commission products was fairly limited. Therefore, products of a more commercial nature destined for private consumption, like the Tower suite, were often designed as described earlier, in a process continuing a tradition established before professional design education. The company management’s notion of product quality in this case did not hinge on uniqueness in design but rather on production technology and the fi nish of the work. Ultimately, however, quality was gauged with sales fi gures. The mismatch between designers and industry has been a recurring issue in Finnish design, particularly in the 1970s, as Pekka Korvenmaa observes in his contribution to this volume.

In the history of design, mass-produced sofa suites such as Tower form a parallel to the notion of ‘history from below’, as phrased by Edward P. Thompson. <sup>3</sup> Anonymous mass products challenge the grand narrative of modern design, good taste and rational consumers in the welfare state. The demand for sofa groups peaked in the Finnish market around the turn of the 1960s and 1970s, and the growth of sales was terminated only by the economic downturn that followed the oil crisis of 1973. From the perspective of design history, we may speak here of the relationship of high and low. The former consists of products enshrined in the canon of sublime objects and celebrated designers appreciated by a cultural elite, while the lower realm is the domain of mundane, anonymously designed, mass-produced objects catering to the pluralistic tastes of a broader public.

This case study sets out to explore the factors behind the remarkable success of products that do not conform to contemporary notions of ‘good design’. Such ‘non-appropriation’ of design propaganda and the complementary appropriation of the comfortable sofa group may offer an object lesson on the preferences and power of consumers. Furthermore, the Tower case opens an alternative perspective on a decade that—at least in terms of home furnishings—is often described as a rather uninteresting, even ridiculous, interlude between the more dynamic 1960s and 1980s. In design history, the 1970s are not remembered for interior decoration but rather for an increasingly politicized design discourse. This, however, does not detract from the signifi cance of sofas. Underlying the success of sofa suites was the acceptance of a more hedonistic and comfort-oriented lifestyle. Tower, in particular, also involved the rise of nostalgia as one of the main commercial trends of the 1970s.

## FROM LUXURY PRODUCT TO EVERYDAY NECESSITY

The sofa group is a good example of a bourgeois luxury product that has become an everyday necessity. The sofa group became an established feature of bourgeois salons during the nineteenth century. In Finland, it was for a long while a product made to order, and it included not only the actual sofa but also several matching pieces of furniture, such as chairs, armchairs and a table. The production process is best described as machine-assisted craftsmanship. <sup>4</sup> From the 1940s onwards, the set of furniture was standardized to a three-piece suite consisting of a sofa and two armchairs. By the 1960s, the production process, technology and materials had become so different that the modern mass-produced sofa groups had very little in common with their bourgeois antecedents. Prices had also declined signifi cantly during the process.

The use of the sofa group also changed during the twentieth century. The bourgeois sofa group was a highly social set of furniture emphasizing a feeling of community. It was a symbol of sociability and lifestyle, marking the owner’s status and taste. Åke Daun points out that the phrase ‘please, have a seat’ is the fi rst step in a social process in which the person seated is included in the social dynamic of the interior and its social order. To sit on a sofa is different from sitting on a chair. <sup>5</sup> The bourgeois sofa and its successors are involved in a complex social act intertwining identities, social hierarchies and gender roles.

The sofa group of the 1960s gained new functions and meanings, with the emphasis shifting from community to private pleasure. Leisure was increasing amongst the lower and middle classes, and people spent more time at home. A great part of this time was spent watching television or listening to music. While the introduction of radio in the 1920s had already provided a new function for the sofa, television changed its role entirely because it required the transformation of the seating group to an auditorium. Many families bought their fi rst sofa together with their fi rst television set.

The spread of television evoked plenty of moralizing comments from the university-educated elite, in Finland as much as elsewhere, because television symbolized a commercial and passive lifestyle. On the other hand, the Finnish market saw in 1968 the fi rst sofa suite that was specifi cally designed for the ritual of watching television. The Bonanza seating group had wide armrests with space for the coffee cup and sandwich plate. <sup>6</sup>

The sofa combined comfort with the private escapism offered by television. This combination was by no means a modern phenomenon. Theodor Adorno pointed to this escapist dimension of the sofa in his reading of Søren Kierkegaard (1813–55). In Adorno’s analysis, the sofa serves as the comfortable base from which the creative mind of the genius wandered to consider the wonders of the world. Many more ordinary readers also spent their time on bourgeois sofas. But it was not until the mass production of consumer goods that the combination of comfort and escapism became a mass phenomenon.

## LIMITS AND LIBERTIES OF HOME DECORATION

A three-piece sofa suite is among the more expensive purchases when furnishing a home, and it also requires a great deal of space. Although economic and spatial restrictions set limits for the home decorator, these resources increased considerably in Finnish society from the 1960s onwards. In the international perspective, the transition of Finland into an urban consumer society took place late but very rapidly. In the early 1950s, a typical family home consisted of two rooms and a kitchen and was located somewhere in the countryside. One generation later, a typical dwelling was a fl at with three to four rooms in a suburb or urban housing area. <sup>7</sup>

With increasing space, the activities of habitation could be separated within the dwelling. Parents and children fi nally had separate bedrooms, and some lucky teens even had a room of their own. A new and important space for the home decorator was the living room, which had been introduced in the functionalist apartments of the 1930s but became a standard feature only with the large-scale housing schemes from the postwar reconstruction years onwards. The design reformers intended the living room to be the shared space of the family, but to a large extent it remained a representational space. In many homes, the doors of the living room were opened to everyday activities only when television became more widespread.

Space was thus no longer a limitation if one had money, and growing numbers of people now had it. Like other Western economies, the Finnish economy expanded almost without interruption from the end of the Second World War until the oil crisis of the early 1970s, resulting in an enormous growth in real household income. Private consumption trebled between the 1950s and the 1970s. A major portion of the new wealth was used to improve the standard of housing, with the dwelling as one of the most important arenas of Finnish consumer culture.

## THE SOFA DISCOURSE

This chapter began with a quotation from an advertisement for the Tower sofa group where the manufacturer described the product and the needs to which it was to respond. The text tells us that everyday life is hard and hectic and that romantic products could soften up this unpleasant side of modernity. The quotation also alludes to the commonplace middle-class idea of the private sphere as a refuge from the harsh world outside. The home is discussed as a space of consumption, with the presumption that consumers want to use their income to decorate the home.

If we take our cue from the systemic approach laid out in Part 1 of this book, Tower and other three-piece suites can be understood as actors in a network that consisted of various players in the furniture market, designers and other arbiters of taste, and the actual users of the sofa groups. Together, these actors created the discourse of domestic interior decoration. In its Foucauldian sense, discourse is not only textual but also material and can therefore encompass objects such as sofas. The mute object can act as a subject that can use and create power in the same way as texts or speech do. Foucault was not alone in presenting this idea. Several writers, among them Michel de Certeau and Jean Baudrillard, have suggested that objects and their order refl ect and generate the prevalent practices and value judgements of our everyday lives. In consumer society, commodities, debates, market mechanisms and changing everyday practices have been woven into dynamic interaction.

For many years, the Finnish discourse on architecture and design was marked by discussion of ideal homes, good taste and rational consumers, all of this being merged with discourse on the nature of Finnish culture and modernity. As late as the 1950s, the debate was dominated by nationalism and an ethos of popular education following the ideal of creating a modern and rational society. The modernist ideal was not just a rhetorical device; consi derable efforts went into its realization both in architecture and in consumer goods. Like other concepts in design history, the modern is at the same time an analytical category, an ideology and simply a fashionable style. The Finnish elite was quite small, and Finnish society was relatively homogeneous, which meant that a single style could permeate the whole of society in an effective manner.

As in other countries, the Finnish design discourse was dominated by a small yet infl uential group of design professionals and other universityeducated members of the middle class. They formed an elite in matters of taste, and their opinions dominated the arenas of discussion on interior design such as published guides for home decoration and the trade press. The consumer/home decorator was addressed from a position of expert authority, and the discourse often had the character of advice. However, as the postwar reconstruction effort was gradually completed, competing ideals began to emerge alongside rationalism and modernism.

In the 1960s, the balance of power within the home decoration discourse began to change. The prevailing ideals of rational modernism were now challenged by new, more hedonistic approaches to interior decoration accepting a variety of different lifestyles. The furniture industry became a more dominant force in design discourse through the sheer volume of advertising and other expanding media. The debate and the players can be found in the pages of