taste and identity and effective demarcation of distance to the mainstream was never even implied in the mediation at this point, but it is only fair to assume that such issues were considered a key attraction by consumers in the actual encounter.

So whereas the seven-degree sloping fronts were also functionally motivated, products do function in several other respects as well, most evidently economically and symbolically. As Tony Fry has argued, ‘products are clearly central to the building of identity, image and reputation of a manufacturer’. <sup>9</sup> Exactly this kind of broader function also seems to have been a prime motive for Tvis/Modulia. What the company obtained from the collaboration with Jacob Jensen Design was also a kitchen with an unusual visual profi le that invited both visual consumption and discursive notice and thus catered to media exposure. In this way it could function as the central prop in the establishment and staging of the Lifa Design chain of shops and serve a fl agship function in the longer run.

After 2007 and the metamorphosis of Lifa into Jacob Jensen Kitchen 1 a rather different type of mediation than the quasi-modernist adherence to form following function can be discerned. It featured, somewhat paradoxically but cleverly in terms of product placement, as a central prop in the set design of the Danish soap opera 2900 Happiness depicting the lifestyle of the absurdly and demonstratively rich in the suburbs north of Copenhagen. Thus the luxuriousness and exclusivity of owning a Jacob Jensen Kitchen 1 were fi rmly stated and heavily instilled into the public. The disengagement of the kitchen from the fl agship function made way for a more singular status as another masterpiece of Jacob Jensen Design and the cultural profi le usually conferred on such an object.

As discussed in the introduction to this volume and exemplifi ed by the case studies making up Part 3 of this book, there is an emerging trend within design history to consider questions of mediation along with those of production and consumption in the study of design. According to Grace Lees-Maffei there are three categories of mediation studies in design history: the role of different media in the mediation between production and consumption, the design of mediating channels and, fi nally, mediation in or by designed objects. <sup>10</sup> In continuation thereof it could be argued that this particular case study points to the ever more pervasive presence of media as a calculated and integrated factor in design. A growing mediatization of design could thus be said to be taking place.

## PREPARING APPROPRIATION BY DESIGNER PERSONALIZATION

The engagement of Jacob Jensen Design by Tvis/Modulia seems to have been prompted by a need to shortcut the mediation between production and consumption in a situation where the connection had been lost overnight by

Ballingslöv’s acquisition of Svane Køkkenet A/S and had to be re-established fast for Tvis/Modulia to stay in business. The shortcut could be said to have been obtained by a brand marriage between a plain and reliable company in the kitchen trade in unfortunate circumstances and a high-profi le design consultancy with an international reputation, with Lifa Design and the Lifa kitchen as the offspring with some degree of claim to ‘designer’ status and meaning. Furthermore, a key component in making the shortcut possible could be described as a pre-appropriation by the producer on behalf of the consumer. The concept of appropriation is rather broad in colloquial use and has a great many specifi c meanings within academia. The meaning drawn upon here is the one developed within some realms of anthropology and material culture studies in particular. The concept refers in this tradition to the active and culturally productive process of rendering anonymous commodities meaningful in the course of consumption in the face of the modernity’s general tendency to alienate objects of production. <sup>11</sup>

Drawing on this conception, Guy Julier has made the case that what designers deliver within the framework of a design culture is the smoothing of this appropriation by ‘de-alienating’ products in advance for the consumer by anchoring them in networks of meaning by ‘sophisticated construction of meanings to be supplied with the object and to be identifi ed with it’. <sup>12</sup> The designer thus frees the consumer from part of the burden of interpreting and rendering alien consumer goods meaningful. This is, however, as Julier points out, also a strategy whereby not only the physical content of goods but also their interpretation is considered and sought to be controlled within the design and production process.

The phenomenon appears to be central to modern and, maybe even more so, late-modern design culture. Parallel to Julier’s conception of design as a facilitation of appropriation, inspired by material culture studies, media studies and cultural studies in general, similar but different analytical conceptions have been developed within and infl uenced by science and technology studies (STS). Most notably, Kjetil Fallan, drawing on Madeline Akrich’s ideas, has shown the pertinence of the concepts ‘scripts’, ‘scripting’ and ‘subscription’ in the study of design as mediation of meaning in design history. <sup>13</sup> Also, Steve Woolgar’s idea of the ‘confi gured user’ could be cultivated in a similar fashion. <sup>14</sup>

Returning to Julier, the idea of design as ‘de-alienation’ supports his general point about the leading trend within current design culture being a closer and closer integration of design, marketing and advertising. By extension, the design consultancy could be said to be moving away from its former model, the architectural fi rm, and identifying and sharing more traits with the advertising agency. In this environment Julier describes the meaning management taking place as follows: ‘The designer, in combination with other professionals, must take decisions regarding the degrees and mechanisms of de-alienation. The designer can entirely hand over the object to be received “as it is”, to allow the consumer to build their own meanings or none at all.’ <sup>15</sup>

Following this, the case of the Lifa/Jacob Jensen Kitchen 1 appears to be a result of the highest possible degree of de-alienation, strived for by infusing Jacob Jensen’s persona into the product and thereby at the same time drawing the kitchen into the extraordinary and distinct category of ‘designer goods’, leaving only a tight margin for interpretive creativity on the part of the consumer. This pre-appropriation was facilitated by the consultancy’s strategic move in which the tendency of convergence identifi ed by Julier was taken a step further: becoming a brand itself.