itself equally well from all sides. However, the photograph takes over or dictates with its optical elements our perceptual conception of the furniture. <sup>13</sup> They change the furniture from artefacts we can touch and sense the propositions of to surfaces seen in varied perspectives. However, this always occurs according to an artistic principle of composition based on ideal patterns of eye movement and aesthetic order.

## MODERN STILL LIFE

Repeatedly emphasized in the literature about Kjærholm’s design is the coexistence of material and immaterial elements, carried out by an exquisite monochrome palette and graphic contrasts, fi ne choices of materials and manufacturing and a perfectly adjusted scale. The presentation of Kjærholm’s work has, as with so many other ‘grand’ designer personalities, been mostly hagiographical: no dissonance is found in his design nor in Helmer-Petersen’s photographs of it. It is all presented as a fl awless harmony, so exactly drawn up and brilliantly carried out that it ought only to be the furniture’s high manufacturing costs and selling prices that prevent the demand for and acquisition of the furniture.

This praise has probably also led to and infl uenced the dedication to Kjærholm’s design from leading art museums like MoMA and Louisiana outside Copenhagen. Here the furniture is included in the interior setting and has been displayed separately as design-historical ‘masterpieces’ and canonized ‘oeuvre’. The approval of Kjærholm by these sacrosanct art institutions has therefore contributed to the distinguishing function and the meanings constructed around his design. Yet it is noteworthy that this aspect has not been subjected to refl ection in exhibition designs or catalogue texts.

Even in Louisiana’s latest and otherwise-excellent exhibition of Kjærholm’s work, shown in 2006, this artlike mediation of his furniture—not just in Helmer-Petersen’s optics but by the art museum too—as primarily semiotic objects within the conceptual frame of high modernism remains tacit. <sup>14</sup> This seems somewhat peculiar since the scholarly community within aesthetic and cultural studies apparently never grows weary of demonstrating critically that modernism is not an unambiguous generic and static notion, nor is it dominated by innocent and immortal conceptualizations.

In this process of ‘artifi cation’, each piece of furniture is assigned added value in terms of cultural capital and a status as exhibitable artefacts. But they have, in addition, been lifted out of their prosaic functional contexts in high-end interior decorating, in which Kjærholm’s designs have never gained great distribution—in many cases simply because the prototypes he developed were never put into production but only came to function as exhibition models for the gaze and admiration among design connoisseurs. Instead, the modernistic mediation has helped to make Kjærholm’s furniture, not least in Denmark, become dominant icons in semipublic places like company lobbies and in exclusive lifestyle magazines. In an orthodox fashion, these spread the design writers’ views and promote the furniture as a masterful testimony to ‘good taste’, entirely in accordance with its present manufacturer Fritz Hansen’s newest visual mediation strategies. Its interest, however, is solely in the commercial aspects and not, as argued in this case study, that (1) the aesthetic framework of Kjærholm’s cooperation with Helmer-Petersen is anchored in an effort to create cultural and historical awareness and to defamiliarize the symbolic values of the objects and the spaces, and (2) it was through an affi nity to modern abstract painting that they came to represent an acquisition of knowledge about ‘high culture’ that did in fact become increasingly powerful as a mechanism for exclusion and achieving ‘distinction’ by integration in an idealized and desired lifestyle.

Yet it isn’t certain that the visual mediation of Kjærholm’s design will maintain this reception-aesthetic effect in the future. In step with changed consumption patterns and aesthetic conventions, new contextual conditions for the conception of the furniture have already been established, reshaping their ‘image’ as a type of negation of the cultural values attached to the home. This is in fact how they looked in Helmer-Petersen’s optics: as an opposition not only to the overloaded ‘tassel homes’ but also to the practically oriented functionalistic ideal of a home. In this way they are manifestations of a design strategy and spatial conception that refuses to take on tradition-bound middle-class conventions.

Perhaps this is in fact how we should best comprehend these variations of mass-produced delicate steel frameworks, glass and stone tabletops, which lack both a warm organic sense and the ethos that is linked—not least in a Danish context—to wood and craftsmanship. What is missing is the comfortable padding and physical volume in favour of tight hand-sewn and plaited covers in canvas, leather, wicker or fl ag halyard. All the ‘hard’ and ‘cold’ parts have the simplest repertoire of shapes and colors, which are further stressed in the ascetic, some would say antiseptic, showrooms and visual mediation of them. Kjærholm hereby meshed his design in a modernistic ‘spin’ of cultural signs related to the modern enlightened human free from the weight of tradition yet constrained by obtrusive feelings of estrangement and unhomeliness.

Interpreted within the concept of the uncanny or unheimlich, this doesn’t mean, however, that the furniture itself possesses uncanny properties. As Anthony Vidler has shown on the basis of a number of hermeneutic studies, one might rather interpret the uncanny as a cultural frame of reference that confronts modern human beings’ desire for a cosy home and a struggle for domestic security with its apparent absence. Thus both design and images hereof

act, historically or culturally, as representations of estrangement. If there is a single premise to be derived from the study of the uncanny in modern culture, it is that there is no such thing as an uncanny architecture, but simply architecture that, from time to time and for different purposes, is invested with uncanny qualities. <sup>15</sup>

The defamiliarization that was expressed through the aesthetic mediation of Kjærholm’s design had the intention of fortifying the furniture with an aura of permanent value both fi nancially and culturally. It was to transcend welfare capitalism by being good investments for a still-growing group of consumers, whose basic physical needs were met fully and who therefore should allow themselves the same luxury that had been acquired by the modern prosperous individual; to appreciate basic aesthetic qualities and challenge comfort.

# The Advantages of Being Swedish: Volvo in America

Jeff Werner

No doubt about it, America is the real homeland of cars, even though evil tongues proclaim that the world’s fi rst car was made in Europe. Nowhere has the car been so admired for so long, been so much a part of everyday life and culture, or so profoundly (re)shaped the land as in the United States.

The automotive industry is an important ingredient in national pride all over the world. Few other industries are so closely intertwined with national sentiments. In the USA this is further enforced by popular culture such as movies and advertising. There is hardly an action movie without a car chase or a college movie without a make-out scene in the backseat of a car. The American dream is captured by the view through the windshield of a straight highway that stretches out into an open horizon.

This chapter is a study of the signifi cance Volvo’s Swedishness has had in the American market. American car magazines, which have constituted an important source for my study, contain careful analyses of the technical attributes of cars, but their discussions of topics like gender and ethnicity are perhaps a little naive. But with enormous circulation and good relations to the car companies, these magazines play an important role as mediators between manufacturers and consumers. They are thereby co-producers of perceptions and values about cars, which among other things touch on their ethnic identities.

In discussing Volvo’s design and its reception in the USA, we need methods to analyse the relations between design, national symbols and their political, cultural and social connotations. With its identity as a Swedish car, the product of Scandinavian design, Volvo inhabits a complex network of national stereotypes, political beliefs and cultural references. This is why conservatives in the 2004 Iowa caucuses could describe the Democrats as ‘tax-hiking, government-expanding, latte-drinking, sushi-eating, Volvodriving, New York Times-reading, body-piercing, Hollywood-loving, left-wing freaks’. <sup>1</sup>