## CONCLUDING REMARKS

This historical cross-section of Finnish design, which began its development as an institutionalized activity in the 1870s, is just one passage illustrating the entwinement of policymaking—(non)political, multilevel strategies of guidance, management and governance—and politics stemming from ideological positions and manifesting itself as parties or other groups. An illustrative case could also have been the founding period with its patriotic underpinnings and tensions between the countryside and the capital, the agrarian and the industrial; or, to take a more recent case, the fi nal breakthrough and success of conceptualizing and implementing a national design policy in the fi rst years of this millennium. But here we are already in a period where ideologies are supposedly dead, and the only remaining shared activity, both nationally and globally, is consumption. In this regard, the 1960s and 1970s were richer in argumentation, tensions and convictions. Alternatives were sought and found, sometimes in counterproductive ways. But as the French philosopher Jean Jaurès has said: ‘Take from the altars of the past the fi re—not the ashes.’ Although history cannot and should not be repeated, it may inspire. Present and coming young designers might take a look at the late 1960s when trying to make design a part of the solution of pressing global problems. As was often repeated in the 1960s: if you’re not part of the solution you’re part of the problem.

## Epilogue

## Kjetil Fallan

This book has sought to offer a selection of alternative histories of Scandinavian design based on the premise that the hegemonic narratives in this fi eld have been so persistent—particularly in its international and popular reception—as to dwarf and suppress the development and propagation of critical, complementary, unorthodox, nonconformist accounts, which in many other fi elds of history writing have proliferated with the demise of the grands récits brought about by poststructuralist theory and the so-called linguistic, or cultural, turn and more recent historiographic shifts. Clearly, the dozen case studies presented here are only a fraction of the wealth of potential alternative histories that can be told. Our alternative histories do not purport to cover any representative ground regarding which types of ‘otherness’ merit mention; nor do they profess to constitute a new orthodoxy in the sense that ours are more decisive or defi nite accounts. They do, however, make up a contribution— however modest—to the expansion and diversifi cation of Scandinavian design history, both its subject matter and its approaches.

The case studies presented here have taken us far and wide in the landscape of Scandinavian design history: we have discussed objects as diverse as furnishing fabrics, reverse vending machines, trams, sofas and chocolate bars. We have visited early-twentieth-century working-class homes, interwar public urban arenas, postwar retail spaces and contemporary lifestyle kitchens. We have explored aspects of design culture ranging from legal protection and consumer policy via socio-technical infrastructures and ideological power to photographical representation and image construction.

Despite their heterogeneity, our accounts are intended to form a collective and have therefore been structured according to their analytical approaches. Part 1, Networks, highlighted the thoroughly systemic and networked character of design and how pervasive this feature is, taking design into the realms of jurisprudence, manufacturing systems, professional and educational structures, corporate strategies, marketing and retail practices and political planning. Part 2, Appropriations, demonstrated how design is fundamentally relational by looking at some of the many ways in which specifi c ideas or phenomena become elements in processes of making sense of design culture and producing meaning on many different levels or scenes: the selective appropriation of history when writing history and forming design policy; the local interpretation of and contribution to international design movements and design as cultural valuation of materials; the non-appropriation of ascetic aesthetics and modernist morality as the mirror image of the appropriation of comfortable furniture; and the transference of celebrity ‘aura’ and re- employment of formal vocabularies in branding new products. Part 3, Mediations, explored examples of how design mediates meaning and how the meaning of design is mediated: through products and advertisement; through photography; through promotional material and journalism; and through professional discourse and design policy.

These three categories of approaches, or themes, are obviously not the only valid ones—nor do they by any means cover the fi eld in a representative manner. However, emphasizing these themes at the expense of others in the structure of the book is a way of acknowledging their perceived centrality in design history today and may, hopefully, increase this publication’s relevance beyond the cohort of students of Scandinavian design history. But, as already mentioned, it is not only the book’s thematic structure that is partial; so is its content. The case studies offered here are just a small part of the many alternative histories that could be told. So what remains to be done, then? With so many ‘white spots’ on the Scandinavian design historical map, it is diffi cult to make any prioritized suggestions, but it may still be worthwhile to mention a few issues that merit greater attention in future work in the fi eld.

Regarding the need to mitigate the pervasive reductive accounts of Scandinavian design history, at least in terms of addressing a broader audience, one of the more obvious and effective ways would be to improve and expand the roster of survey books. Certainly, survey histories represent a notoriously diffi cult category in design history writing, and the broad strokes and quick pace they require are an effective deterrent to many scholars. Nevertheless, both Finland and Sweden have recently seen the publication of new national survey books that refl ect a scholarly approach more in tune with international developments in the fi eld: Pekka Korvenmaa’s Finnish Design and Lasse Brunnström’s Svensk designhistoria. <sup>1</sup> These books are a good start, but their equivalents in Denmark and Norway have yet to be written. Even more compelling, perhaps, in keeping with the internationalization of design culture, is the need for a pan-Scandinavian survey history. A daunting task, to be sure, but it is to be hoped that the challenge will be met. Survey histories have their limitations, especially in terms of scope, selection criteria and analytical depth, but will continue to be an essential species in the fl ora that is design history literature.

For the fi eld’s own development, however, there are other, more pressing concerns. Some of these are direct results of the limited impact postmodernist theory has had on Scandinavian design history. Many issues that were raised as part of the heterogenization of the humanities from the 1970s onwards remain unsatisfactorily addressed in Scandinavian design history. The most profoundly infl uential analytical categories to emerge in this process were probably the trinity of gender, class and race, which, combined, signifi - cantly changed the agenda of research throughout the humanities and has since become part and parcel of our scholarly consciousness. And whereas these categories—at least gender and, to a certain extent, class—have made their distinctive mark on design history internationally, such impact is harder to trace in the Scandinavian literature.

Given the strong feminist movements and the early and fast advances in women’s rights in Scandinavia, one might have expected gender to be embraced by Scandinavian design history more emphatically than it has been. There is nothing to indicate that design practice has not been subject to the same gender segregations in Scandinavia as elsewhere, nor that Scandinavian objects have been less gendered than those of different origin, nor that the stereotypes and actual practice in the consumption and use of these products differs signifi cantly from international experiences. Of course, also in Scandinavia research has been done on women designers, a genre that might in part be inspired by feminist art history—albeit in its most basic form—but even these rarely apply a critical approach to gender issues. Other, less rudimentary ways of addressing gender issues can of course be found—the notion of women entrepreneurs, for instance, as discussed by Leena Svinhufvud in this book—but this approach to design history remains under-explored in Scandinavia and clearly warrants more attention. <sup>2</sup>

The second category, class, which arose primarily in the form of Marxistinspired social history, has not coloured the Scandinavian design historical map the way it has the broader fi eld of history. As Christina Zetterlund points out in her contribution, the class aspect has been virtually absent among both reformers (beyond their ‘educational’ attitude to ‘the masses’) and historians, making it increasingly diffi cult to access the nuances in the material cultures of various social classes beyond the elites—a problem only worsened by the generally poor documentation of the material cultures of the lower-income strata of the population in museums and archives. Approaching this topic from another angle the sociologist Kjetil Rolness put considerable effort into ridiculing educated middle-class missionaries of modernism whilst hailing the interior decoration practices of homeowners from the lower middle class and working class less than enthused by ‘good design’. <sup>3</sup> Minna Sarantola-Weiss in this volume moves beyond easy satire in her exposure of the limited impact of the cultural elite’s tastemaking strategies, exploring instead an array of social and cultural developmental patterns in the maturation of Finnish consumer society and the accompanying empowerment of working-class consumers.

At the other end of design culture—the production sphere—where Marxist theory and social history could be appropriate approaches to exploring the class aspects of the organization of design and manufacturing processes, the potential is equally unresolved. After a marked and much-needed shift in focus from production to consumption and mediation over the recent couple of decades, design history may now be on the brink of a renewed interest in production as a result of several developments in contemporary design processes and manufacture systems: the international scope of design consultancies and industrial corporations; the globalization of manufacture and trade, with the ensuing spotlight on working conditions and labour rights (cf. the media attention to ‘sweatshops’); and an increased public and political interest in sustainability. Combined, these factors may very well herald a new, critical attention to the infrastructure and ethics of the production of goods in design history—and class could become a key category, even in the allegedly ‘classless’ Scandinavian society of today.

As opposed to gender and class, race—or perhaps ethnicity is a more appropriate term—has not been a prominent feature in design history internationally either. When it has failed to become a major issue in design historical strongholds like Britain and the USA, both societies with a long history of multi-ethnicity, it is hardly surprising that it is not at the top of the agenda in Scandinavia either. Although relative newcomers in terms of signifi cant non-European immigration, the Scandinavian countries have become multicultural societies—a fact that is profoundly refl ected in our material culture and therefore should concern design historians. An interesting example that might point in this direction is to be found in a project at the Norwegian Museum of Cultural History (Norsk Folkemuseum): an apartment building from 1865— donated by its owner, Oslo Cooperative Housing Cooperation—was rebuilt at the museum in 1999–2001. It featured a number of fl ats furnished as (re)constructed homes representing different moments in time, social strata, living conditions and interior styles in Oslo from the late nineteenth century up to the present. One of these fl ats is a contemporary (2002) ‘Pakistani home in Norway’, constructed in an ethnographic manner based on acquisitions made in collaboration with a Pakistani immigrant family. <sup>4</sup> The exhibit shows how multicultural homes in Norway are not wholesale transpositions of immigrant customs but products of negotiations between different cultures and time periods. This project can serve as a valuable reminder that Scandinavian design history—past, present and future—is not as ‘white’ as it might appear in its literature. But this challenge does not extend only to the recognition of recent intercontinental migrants’ design and consumption practices but equally to the region’s own indigenous people—the Sami—and ‘older’ ethnic minorities whose material culture is just as absent from Scandinavian design history.

In addition to the insuffi cient implementation of these three analytical categories, there are numerous other issues that could be addressed in more detail in future work and thereby contribute to the expansion and development of the fi eld. Some topics that have been signifi cantly under-represented in

Scandinavian design history literature are touched upon in this volume but remain in need of further studies. Examples include the methodologically notoriously challenging sphere of consumption, probed by both Christina Zetterlund and Minna Sarantola-Weiss; the highly rewarding approach informed by business history and the history of technology, which has been little exploited by design historians but is demonstrated here by both Finn Arne Jørgensen and Stig Kvaal and Per Østby; and marginalized sectors of design practice such as graphic design and packaging, discussed by both Helena Mattsson and Kvaal and Østby. Other sectors of design practice little explored in Scandinavian design history and also not covered by this book comprise categories such as toys, sports gear, interiors, military equipment and amateur/do-it-yourself practices.

Design history in Scandinavia has suffered not only from a too narrow subject matter in term of design practices and object categories but also from a modernist bias—both synchronic and diachronic. The synchronic modernist bias is partially addressed in this book through discussions of several aspects of design culture that do not conform to modernist ideals, but the diachronic modernist bias is not mitigated correspondingly. Studies of designs from early glass works, ceramics manufacturers, and so on exist, but beyond the applied art sector very little work has been done on the premodern period (before 1850). In addition to older material, there are other, more thematic aspects that have not received much attention, such as politics and power, the incorporation of which could help bring design history closer to the domains of other, more established fi elds of historical scholarship.

Perhaps more pressing, and probably more plausible, in terms of future developments in the fi eld, is the need to engage with topics like sustainability and ethics—topics that are becoming key concerns in design practice, policymaking and consumer behaviour and that therefore will command the attention of design historians as well. Among other phenomena that have and will continue to transform design culture but still await signifi cant historical scholarship are computer-aided design and manufacture (CAD/CAM) and other digitization technologies as well as the so-called new media. <sup>5</sup>

Acknowledging the vast ground still to be covered and pointing out a few possible leads for future work, the accounts featured in this book and the composite they make up are nevertheless offered as a contribution to the diversifi cation and development of Scandinavian design history in the belief that it may provide a basis for other alternative histories, be they complementary, corrective or confl icting.