# 2 INTRODUCTION / 12 INTRODUCTION

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Scandinavian Design Alternative Histories (Kjetil Fallan (editor))\Scandinavian Design Alternative Histories (Kjetil Fallan (editor))\Scandinavian Design Alternative Histories (Kjetil Fallan (editor))\auto\Scandinavian Design Alternative Histories (Kjetil Fallan (editor)).md

## 2 INTRODUCTION

underrepresented fi elds such as transport design, engineering design, packaging and corporate identity, and the cases focus on unconventional topics like anonymous design, systems design, design photography and design legislation. Each is approached from different perspectives, focusing variously on production, mediation and consumption—or a combination thereof. The cases also represent different nations/regions, different industries, different time periods and different theoretical perspectives and methodological approaches.

Any volume with the term ‘Scandinavian Design’ in the title must include a clarifi cation of that term, as its meaning is far from given. First of all, we need to bear in mind the crucial distinction between the concept ‘Scandinavian Design’ (often signifi ed with a capital D) as an actor’s category and the term ‘Scandinavian design’ (with a lower-case d) as an analytical category. As an actor’s category the defi nition of the term and the meanings ascribed to it are that of historical actors, based on their sociocultural context and their motives and agendas. As an analytical category, on the other hand, the term becomes a tool with which historians describe and categorize historical phenomena. It should be fairly obvious that signifi cant discrepancies may occur between the two, and it is essential to distinguish between them—especially since any historical study of Scandinavian design will have to manage both.

The geographical component of the term ‘Scandinavian design’ may seem to be quite straightforward, but even this needs some deliberation. Strictly speaking, the geographical defi nition of Scandinavia is limited to the three countries Denmark, Norway and Sweden, whereby the latter two comprise the Scandinavian Peninsula. In other words: Finland is not part of Scandinavia by such a geographical defi nition. Finland is, however—alongside Iceland and the Scandinavian nations—a Nordic country. But geography is complicated by politics. Finland was part of the Swedish kingdom for centuries until it was ceded to Russia in 1908. An independent republic since 1919, it nevertheless harbours a Swedish-language minority to this day. Iceland was populated by Norwegians in the ninth century and joined when the union of Norway and Denmark was established in 1380—a union which for an extended fi fteenth century also included Sweden. Whereas Iceland remained under Danish rule until independence was declared in 1944, in 1814 Denmark lost its dominion over Norway, whose subsequent union with Sweden lasted until full independence was won in 1905. Thus, in a historical geopolitical perspective, the divide between the Nordic and the Scandinavian is not at all clear-cut, and these countries’ common history has resulted in a signifi cant cultural unity— although by no means eradicating national differences. Also, when from the early nineteenth century on nationalist movements made their mark all over Europe, in Scandinavia they were paralleled by an ideological and political Scandinavianism conceived as a convenient meso sphere, or buffer, between these small nations and the world at large. <sup>1</sup>

But why, then, is Finland included in most understandings of and publications on Scandinavian design, whereas Iceland (mostly) is not? This is where the signifi cance of ‘Scandinavian Design’ as an actor’s category becomes so manifest: when that phrase was coined as a specifi c concept in the midtwentieth century, the actors involved in its construction chose to include Finland in their defi nition of the concept and the events that underpinned it. Their habitual exclusion of Iceland may be largely due to a relative lack of corresponding infrastructures but perhaps partly also to that country’s relative remoteness, minute size and late independence.

The term ‘Scandinavian Design’ also has a temporal component requiring clarifi cation. It was coined in a specifi c historical context in connection with exhibitions showcasing contemporary design from Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden in Britain and North America in the 1950s. As an actor’s category, then, it has a severely restricted use and meaning as it pertains to a narrow defi nition of design made and presented during a distinct and limited period in time. To apply the term to older and more recent design, then, implies a shift in the understanding of the concept from actor’s category to analytical category.

In addition to these geographical and temporal dimensions the concept Scandinavian Design is delineated by a material aspect as well: far from representing a cross section of Nordic design culture, the products promoted under the catchphrase—or brand—‘Scandinavian Design’ formed a particular and carefully orchestrated blend of gourmet objects selected from a very narrow segment of the region’s design practice. This clearly is to be understood in light of the concept’s origin as a promotional tool, and it is only to be expected that exhibitions of the kind through which the term ‘Scandinavian Design’ gained currency for strategic reasons displayed almost exclusively objects for the home conforming to a modernist notion of aesthetic quality. What is worrying, though, is that this conception of Scandinavian Design, through a seemingly unrefl exive blurring of actor’s category and analytical category, to a large degree has been perpetuated, creating a homogenizing effect resulting in narrow design historical accounts that push the rest of the highly varied design production in Scandinavia out of sight.

Because of the currency attached to Scandinavian Design as a shorthand signifi er, the term has been chosen as the title of this book. This does not mean that the subject matter of the book and the understanding of design it conveys are restricted to that described in the preceding as the actor’scategory version of the term. Although—coherent with the actor’s category— the present study includes Finland and excludes Iceland from its purview, Scandinavian design is here intended as an analytical category. This is refl ected in how the book covers a time period that far exceeds that normally associated with the designation-cum-title and treats an array of design culture that pushes far beyond what is conventionally considered under the heading of Scandinavian Design. As an analytical category, the term is disconnected from the restricted use and meaning assigned to it by its conceptual architects and may be appropriated as a category simply denoting design from Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden.

What, then, is Scandinavian about Scandinavian design? Is there anything specifi cally Scandinavian about Carlsberg, Nokia, Helly Hansen and IKEA—or Scandinavian Airlines for that matter? The notoriously diffi cult question of national and regional design styles has long haunted design history and has taken on renewed importance in the wake of the massive increase in international trade and global production and consumption networks over the last several decades. Far from unproblematic in the many studies of the role of design in late-nineteenth-century nationalism—particularly prevalent in thenemerging nation states like Finland and Norway—and in studies of design as an economic and cultural catalyst in countries that—like Greece, Portugal and Spain—made the leap from dictatorships to European Union membership in the 1970s and 1980s, the question becomes even more convoluted in the age of globalization. No matter the historical context, pinning down ‘national characteristics’ is a futile task normally resulting in a list of adjectives that are superfi cial and stereotypical at best, outright demeaning and petty caricature at worst. Equally reductive are the merely stylistic pigeonholes whereby a whole nation’s or region’s design output is summarized in a few idiosyncrasies.

Scandinavian design has had more than its share of such simplistic characterization, especially in design journalism and popular history accounts, which tend to be littered with words like ‘humane’, ‘democratic’, ‘organic’ and ‘blond’. Whatever its shapes and guises, the question of national and regional design styles is also fed back into promotional processes. What does it mean when a company like Muuto adopts as its slogan ‘New Nordic’? Viviana Narotzky considers this practice a vulgarization of the issue of design and regional and national identity: ‘The distancing of nationalism and ideology, and the former’s reduction to commodity-led, business-oriented formalism, became the cornerstone of approaches to design and national identity . . . throughout the late twentieth century.’ <sup>2</sup> Although not a study that reclaims the notion of national style from the realm of commerce and promotion, this book refrains from all essentialist defi nitions of national and regional traits in products and people alike.

While this volume does have a regional framework, it does not make a case for a particular ‘regional style’ of Scandinavian design; on the contrary, one of its ambitions is to challenge and nuance the image of Scandinavian design. Regions and nations are complex and contested units but nonetheless make viable arenas for studying design history. The mesh of cultural, social, political and economic confi gurations and codes that makes up our society clearly contributes to maintaining the regional and the national as valid categories of demarcation and identity. It is thus both possible and meaningful to discuss Scandinavian design in its own right and on its own terms, without striving to fi nd some innate ‘Scandinavian-ness’ in its form. <sup>3</sup>

As announced, this book presents alternative histories: a set of cases that run counter to the master narratives and complement established histories. While such re-evaluation and supplementation are the mark of healthy scholarship in history at large, it seems particularly appropriate in the history of Scandinavian design. At least since Jean-Francois Lyotard pronounced the demise of the master narratives— grands récits—more than thirty years ago, and with it the fragmentation of history, <sup>4</sup> we have witnessed a growing awareness of the relativity and plurality of historical accounts—a development catalysed by the work of scholars like Hayden White and Dominick LaCapra on the literary and rhetorical nature of historical writing. <sup>5</sup> In this sense, the postmodern challenge to history implies a crisis in the narratives’ abilities to compel consensus—and thus become master narratives.

From an early stage many design historians have acknowledged this requirement for histories in the plural as a response to the discipline’s monistic tendencies, such as its modernist hegemony and class and gender bias. Fran Hannah and Tim Putnam, for example, argued in 1980 that ‘the meaning of design is continually being re-constituted’ and that ‘therefore there must be multiple histories of design’. <sup>6</sup> Similarly, in 1989 John Walker reminded us that ‘there are always multiple histories, various histories of design’. <sup>7</sup>

When the history of Scandinavian design, at least in its popular and international reception, seems to have cultivated rather than challenged lingering master narratives, it is pertinent to question whether its research literature is too conformist and homogeneous—in other words: whether it has taken on the challenge posed by recent historiography and by theoretical discourses in international design history. In Scandinavia, design history remained for a long time relatively conventional in its subject matter, disciplinary framework, theoretical underpinnings and methodological approaches. This is not to detract from the quality or signifi cance of research carried out in this context; surely, much fi ne work on important topics has been produced under this traditional paradigm. But at the same time it should be clear that such a setting is not ideal for challenging conformity—a key ambition in recent historiography.

The situation has changed signifi cantly over the last decade or two, however, with a considerable expansion of the scholarly community, a broadening of the empirical horizon and increased interdisciplinarity. The result has been a marked growth in output, much of which is characterized precisely by an invigorating multiplicity, heterogeneity and criticism. Unfortunately, most of this work has received only a limited readership due to language barriers and publishing venues with less than optimal distribution. This volume is a modest effort to improve this situation, by drawing on current research that in various ways challenges the orthodoxies of established design history in Scandinavia and presenting it in an accessible form as a coherent selection of alternative histories of Scandinavian design.

The histories offered here represent alternatives in that they both enrich and disrupt established historical narratives. It is paramount, though, to emphasize that the ambition of the book is not merely to fi ll in a few blank spots in the canonical accounts. The poverty of such an enterprise was made evident by one strand of early feminist art and design history, whose desire to recover (great) women artists and designers amounted to little more than a (slight) expansion of the orthodox canonical system. <sup>8</sup> New empirical material— whether it concerns female practitioners or other less explored areas on the design historical map—should move beyond the additive aspect and be employed also in raising new questions contributing to the historiographic discourse. The work gathered here seeks to do so in a number of ways, with the common aim to invite new perspectives on design culture.

Although design history is just as much history from things as it is history of things, a history of ideas as much as a history of artefacts, material objects remain key to our endeavour. In its engagement with artefacts, this volume is dominated by everyday objects, quotidian things. Despite the prominence awarded to exclusive objects in much design history, considering more mundane objects is nothing new. But when everyday objects have been included in design historical writing, they have often been aestheticized and mythologized and thus effectively lifted out of their quotidian context. Particularly common in museums, this is also what led Theodor Adorno to declare that ‘museum and mausoleum are connected by more than phonetic association’. <sup>9</sup> The Museum of Modern Art in New York has perfected this approach, from the Machine Art exhibition in 1934 to the Humble Masterpieces show in 2004. <sup>10</sup> In contrast, this book strives to understand everyday objects primarily in terms of the many and varied relations they form part of. When exclusive objects do feature, they are subjected to analyses that constitute critiques of the very processes of aestheticization and mythologization already mentioned, thus joining rank with their more modest brethren under the banner of counter-history. <sup>11</sup>

For the notion of alternative histories to make sense, an understanding of established histories is required. Recognizing the scarcity of English-language academic publications on Scandinavian design, this volume starts off with a chapter outlining the historiography of design in the region. The chapter is divided into fi ve sections: one discussing literature with a pan-Scandinavian or pan-Nordic scope, followed by four sections discussing the national literatures of Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden respectively. Most of the design history literature from the Nordic countries is published in native languages only, and since hardly anyone outside the region speaks our languages, these considerable resources are thus not accessible to the rest of the world. By offering an English-language historiographic survey we hope that this book may provide non-Nordic students and scholars with a fuller knowledge of the region’s design history literature, past and present. Such a survey could surely merit a volume in its own right. Therefore, given the restricted space available in the present context, the historiography presented here will have to be compendious. Necessarily more descriptive than analytical in character, its chief ambition is to offer an overview of the existing literature and its subject matters, themes and approaches. As far as the format allows, however, the literature surveyed is discussed in a critical manner, thus affording a more informed reading.

Following the historiographic survey, the book is structured in three parts: Networks , Appropriations and Mediations. This structure refl ects the theoretical ambitions and thematic approaches of the individual chapters but also serves as a pedagogical device clarifying the book’s contribution to contemporary developments in design history’s theory and method. Any organizing principle necessarily entails a certain rigidity and risk of simplistic categorization. Several of the texts included here touch upon issues that are pertinent to more than one of the three subheadings. Despite its ‘impurity’, it is hoped that the thematic grouping will help improve coherence in an otherwise heterogeneous collection of texts and show that their value as a whole is greater than the sum of the parts.

Contrary to the popular myth of the genius individual and disinterested experience, design is by no means an autonomous phenomenon. Far from it; design is fundamentally embedded in the societal texture. Consequently, what Hazel Conway has dubbed ‘the heroic approach’ is ill suited in understanding design culture. <sup>12</sup> In acknowledgement of this, design historians are taking a greater interest in how design is enmeshed in systems and networks and are studying how these are constructed and how they function. Although true of all types of design, everywhere and at all times, the cooperative and relational nature of design emphasized by a systems or networks perspective is perhaps particularly evident in design for industrial manufacture.

The systemic and networked nature of design was made abundantly clear already in the early stages of the Industrial Revolution, when Adam Smith used the example of the labourer’s coat to demonstrate the virtually endless number of connections that can be made in tracing the network underpinning the manufacture of this unassuming product. <sup>13</sup> More recently, Vilém Flusser has remarked how ‘industrial production, including design, has developed into a complex network .  .  . Consequently, it has become necessary to act in teams combining human and artifi cial components’. <sup>14</sup> What is especially interesting about these two descriptions, written more than 200 years apart, is the prominence given to the non-human inhabitants of the networks. How material matters has been subject to much attention both in design history and in several other neighbouring fi elds, but the explicit elaboration of how nonhumans and humans are integrated in socio-technical systems is probably articulated most radically under the auspices of actor-network theory (ANT), an approach which—along with other, related theoretical frameworks developed in science and technology studies (STS)—has been met with considerable interest in design studies. <sup>15</sup> One specifi cally rewarding feature of these approaches is that they circumvent the conventional production–consumption dichotomy that long proved so tenacious in the histories of design and technology alike.

The fi rst part of this book explores the systemic and networked nature of design in a variety of ways. Through a case study basking in a decidedly underexploited reservoir—design’s legislative framework—Stina Teilmann-Lock uncovers the intricate systems constructed to regulate and enforce legal protection of design in Denmark. Investigating how Danish courts have interpreted copyright law from its 1908 revision to include applied art until today, Teilmann-Lock traces a network crucial to the power relations of design in terms of economics, ethics and aesthetics.

Leena Svinhufvud’s contribution maps out networks of design in at least two distinct, but related, conceptions. Taking a closer look at Finnish textiles sold by the yard from the interwar period, she effectively problematizes some stubborn assumptions regarding manufacturing systems, disrupting demarcations between artistic creativity, craft skills and industrial technology. At the same time, the case chosen shows how the textiles in question played a central but subdued role in broader portrayals of modern design, thus critiquing discriminatory practices administered through professional and promotional networks.

A different take on the systemic approach to design is represented by Helena Mattsson’s study of the Swedish Cooperative Union’s grand effort at confi guring its consumers through the introduction of a new corporate policy around 1970. This organization, with offi cial and highly developed links to the spheres of manufacture, distribution and retailing as well as to governmental bodies and political agencies, was in a unique position to forge elaborate networks and establish a comprehensive design strategy and a carefully orchestrated design practice. Despite this favourable setting, Mattsson argues, the concerted attempts at designing the eternal consumer would prove a far less predictable and more arduous task than designing products.

Just how heterogeneous, complex and signifi cant networks of design can be is revealed in Finn Arne Jørgensen’s analysis of the reverse vending machines (RVMs) for beverage container recycling manufactured by the Norwegian company Tomra Systems. The remarkably inconspicuous design of these objects, which are little more than holes in supermarket walls, belies the density of meaning permeating the socio-technical system through which they work. Designing a hole in the wall is no easy feat but rather a constellation of forces ranging from technological development and international business management to governmental policymaking and the onset of environmental concerns.

Part 2 of this book explores appropriations. It follows from the understanding of design as something fundamentally systemic and networked that both the making and meaning of design more often than not are conditioned by existing experiences. One way of making sense of this acknowledgement is to ask how ideas about design move through time, society and space and are appropriated, translated and converted into new entities of mind and matter. The notion of appropriations applied here is drawn from the work of Mikael Hård and Andrew Jamison, whose studies of intellectual and cultural appropriations of technology have proved the value of the concept. <sup>16</sup> A key feature is that the visions and ideas in question are always negotiated and that they are adapted to the cultural settings in which they are introduced while the appropriators simultaneously also adjust to what is being appropriated. Hård and Jamison defi ne appropriation as the process whereby people seek to make sense of new products and concepts, but, clearly, historical artefacts and ideas are also subject to appropriations—as evidenced, for example, by Elisabeth Guffey’s investigation of retro culture. <sup>17</sup> Although empirically dissimilar, the texts making up this second part of the book all engage with such processes of appropriation where design culture—new and old—is negotiated and transformed.

In her contribution, Christina Zetterlund questions the contemporary use of the Swedish design ‘heritage’, tracing central features of the particular and partial picture thus created of a much more diverse historical reality to the marginalization of the decorative in early-twentieth-century Swedish design ideology. Zetterlund thus construes canonization as the appropriation of select designs meeting specifi c criteria laid down by a professional and cultural elite along distinct ideological and political guidelines, whilst at the same time also revealing the selective appropriation of Swedish design history by governmental bodies for promotional purposes and by commercial businesses for marketing purposes.

Shifting focus from the usage of domestic heritage to the international fl ow of ideas and local interpretations of a design paradigm normally considered foreign to Scandinavia, my own chapter investigates the curious case of Oslo’s streamlined aluminium trams. The Norwegian appropriation of streamlining, which is primarily associated with the USA, provides a favourable opportunity to explore the centre-periphery model featured in recent discourse on design history’s geographical biases and to critique its implicit hierarchies of signifi cance. <sup>18</sup> In another sense, the monocoque aluminium tram under scrutiny also illustrates how design constitutes an appropriation of new technology, as design is the interface through which technological artefacts acquire and articulate meaning.

In a study which portrays the non-appropriation of ‘good design’ as the mirror image of the appropriation of comfortable furniture, Minna Sarantola-Weiss charts the massive popularity of the upholstered sofa group in Finland in the 1970s and 1980s as a physical manifestation of the onset of what she terms a hedonistic consumer culture. Part of a design culture completely at odds with the ascetic ideals of modernist Finnish design, this type of furniture, in all its ubiquity, represents a sobering reminder of the limited success of the ‘good design’ movement and comprises solid testimony of consumers resistance to missionaries of taste.

Processes of appropriation work on many levels. This becomes particularly evident in the fourth and last chapter of part 2, Hans-Christian Jensen’s critical analysis of a contemporary Danish ‘lifestyle’ kitchen—the Lifa kitchen designed by the consultancy Jacob Jensen Design. This case study simultaneously depicts the appropriation of the personal ‘aura’ of a famed designer to promote the services of a company and peddle its eponymous product line and the appropriation of a signature formal language developed through the consultancy’s collaboration with Bang & Olufsen from the 1960s onwards to (ever) new settings and products. Jensen even proposes a third conception whereby the meticulous management of meaning in the design and mediation of the Lifa kitchen can be seen as a pre-appropriation of it on behalf of the consumer. Personality cults and branding strategies are core issues in this much-needed critique of the way design and ‘designer goods’ tend to be portrayed in the media and the public realm.

The third and fi nal part of the book discusses mediations: the sites, processes and agents involved in the mediation of and by design. Mediation is a process where information is communicated, but mediators are never neutral conveyers; they inevitably affect and transform the message. <sup>19</sup> Mediations can thus be seen as translations. And as surely as meaning can be lost in translation, meaning can also be gained in translation. As fl uid, relational spaces in which the meanings of things are formed, mediations are increasingly acknowledged as a particularly fertile ground for understanding design culture, both by design history and by related fi elds such as the history and sociology of technology. <sup>20</sup> Although thirty years have passed since Dick Hebdige pointed to mediation as one of three ‘moments’ in the design cultural continuum alongside production and consumption, <sup>21</sup> it is only in more recent years that the amount of research into this sphere can be said to have reached critical mass, making mediation a central concern in design history. Following a long-standing tradition of focusing on the production side of design, and the later interest in the consumption of design, mediation has recently been identifi ed as, in the words of Grace Lees-Maffei, ‘a third stream in design history, with three currents’: studying how design is mediated through various communication channels, studying the design of these channels/ platforms and studying designed objects as mediators of meaning. <sup>22</sup> The fi rst of these streams is probably the strongest as of now and has resulted in a strand of studies on how design is mediated in, for example, retailing, television, fi lm, magazines, museums, and exhibitions. <sup>23</sup> This conception of mediation is represented in the texts included here as well, but these also provide a broader understanding of the concept, spanning from corporate branding practices to national design policies. Moreover, the notion of designed objects as mediators appears in at least two of the case studies in this section.

Through a case study venturing into areas of design practice that normally fl y under the radar of design history—foodstuffs and packaging—Stig Kvaal and Per Østby follow the Norwegian chocolate bar Stratos through hardship and mutations since its inception in 1936, focusing on a massive rebranding campaign in the 1980s. Providing a fascinating picture of how product design, packaging design and advertising design combine to form a dynamic force in mediating the product, Kvaal and Østby demonstrate how, on the one hand, design is a crucial component in the mediation of the product, while, on the other hand, the designed product itself also becomes a mediator in the sense that it co-shapes human experience. <sup>24</sup>

Photography is one of the most manifest modes of mediating design, but it remains all the same little explored in design history. In what might seem fairly objective representations, objects of high modernism are typically portrayed in white spaces with few distracting elements. Yet such framing of design creates aesthetic, historical and ideological meanings that are far from neutral. Through an analysis of photographer Keld Helmer-Petersen’s portrayal of Poul Kjærholm’s furniture design, Malene Breunig argues that iconic products do not derive their status primarily from their intrinsic properties but that their meaning to a large extent is constructed by how they are mediated in images.

Branching out from the very literal understanding of image as photographic representation to a fi gurative conception of image as constructed meaning, Jeff Werner challenges the geography of identity, meaning and design in his case study of how Volvo cars have been portrayed and perceived in the USA. As the car industry has become fundamentally international, national imagery persists in its mediation practices. This essay examines the design, promotion and reception of Volvo in the USA, probing its mediated ‘Swedish-ness and investigating the relationship between image, brand and design.

Expanding the scope from the corporate to the political scene, Pekka Korvenmaa demonstrates the broad range and rich texture of the mediation concept through an analysis of Finnish national design-promotion strategies. Here, mediation takes the form of professional, public and political design discourse. Tracing how central institutions revised their views on the role of design in response to the drastic changes in international trade, business structures, manufacturing systems, design practice, consumption patterns and political ideologies in the 1960s and 1970s, Korvenmaa demonstrates how design policies became politics.

## 12 INTRODUCTION

The three themes outlined here do not cover the theoretical ground of the recent historiography of design any more than the twelve cases presented provide a survey of Scandinavian design history. There are, of course, many issues and approaches which could be valuable in a reappraisal of the topic at hand that are not explored here, but these will have to wait for future publications presenting further alternative histories. Nevertheless, the ambition of this book is to highlight some of the more current concerns in design history—in Scandinavia and elsewhere—through a selection of case studies that, although by no means exhaustive, represent alternative histories of Scandinavian design and also go some way in providing a representative image of the current state of design historical scholarship in Scandinavia.

