# 8 8

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Scandinavian Design Alternative Histories (Kjetil Fallan (editor))\Scandinavian Design Alternative Histories (Kjetil Fallan (editor))\Scandinavian Design Alternative Histories (Kjetil Fallan (editor))\auto\Scandinavian Design Alternative Histories (Kjetil Fallan (editor)).md

# 8 8

Fig. 4.3 Sketches for the infi nity symbol. Photograph courtesy of KF Library and Archive.

must list all the correct expressions that we use’. <sup>22</sup> The weekly newsletter Symbolinformation was also a way of distributing information internally in the organization.

Instead of launching products Svea launched a consumer, ‘Mrs Nilsson in apartment building number 37’. <sup>23</sup> She had an indefi nite age, indefi nite social status and indefi nite consumer habits—but surprisingly her body had a concrete form: short and plump. The indefi nite character of this consumer would later be described in more positive terms as something basic. This was a person who would never be materialized, nor feature in any pictures or verbal descriptions; she is just an imagined character standing in for the anonymous consumer in the abstract process of creating a market. Still, Ove Lundström of Svea formulated ten points explaining what Coop should do for this constructed consumer: I would listen to her; I would speak to her; I would defend her; I would make her feel good; I would thank her; I would try to gain her trust; I would introduce her to my friends; I would stop having secrets; I would try to get her to love me; I would speak up on her behalf. <sup>24</sup>

In a rather patronizing tone Svea formulated a strategy for catering to this consumer: ‘Instead of offering candy to the kids, we will offer Mrs Nilsson a pair of glasses and the chance for a chat in our new “recreational corners” that will be set up in the shops.’ <sup>25</sup> These small corners were supposed to feature information on consumer goods as well as small libraries containing literature on consumer issues. Consumption would be promoted as a democratic act, and the new logo in the shape of the infi nity symbol was to function as a guarantee for rationality and consumer satisfaction. In short, this campaign can be seen as a reconceptualization of the established idea of the welfare state consumer, formed by functionalistic values, by means of a new imagery and mediated by new marketing techniques. As Björn Petersson put it a year before the introduction of the infi nity symbol:

Let us be grateful for the symbol, it gives us a wonderful opportunity to say the old things in a new and persuasive way. The intertwining of ideology and commodity advertising will be extremely interesting. <sup>26</sup>

According to Coop’s market research, 42 per cent of Swedes recognized the logo as early as fourteen days after its introduction on 1 January 1967. By February the number had risen to 57 per cent, by April to 71 per cent and by December to 89 per cent. The introduction was considered a success by those involved in producing the campaign. But how was the response from the public and in the media?

The campaign got a lot of media attention and a diverse response. Severe criticism arose within the organization, especially from the local coop societies and members in the countryside, who saw the campaign as an expression of increased centralization: ‘This will lead to a minority rule which means that Coop could not be described as a democratic movement any longer.’ <sup>27</sup> In Metallarbetaren (a newspaper published by the Metal Workers’ Union) it was stressed that the centralization would have a negative effect on life in the countryside. ‘The year 1967 . . . the Swedish Co-op presents the new guidelines. They are so radical that the old Coop pioneers are turning in their graves. What did they know of concepts like effi ciency, large-scale operation, rationalization? Not much . . . The old believed in idealism, solidarity and a yearly dividend.’ <sup>28</sup> This criticism must be understood in light of how the campaign can also be said to have coincided with, or even catalysed, an ongoing restructuring of Swedish cities characterized by the centralization of consumption and the localization of shopping outside the cities. In 1967 there were 3,500 Coop stores, and the plan for the mid-1970s was to decrease the number to 920. However, the defi nite breakthrough for this transformation of the commercial life in cities, as well as of the consumer culture, had to wait another decade. <sup>29</sup>

Whereas the critics of the campaign made themselves heard, there was no shortage of positive responses. In one of the major national newspapers, Aftonbladet, the graphic designer Olle Eksell described the campaign as an excellent way of working with environmental questions through aesthetics, a simple, unifi ed design that managed to connect different scales—from receipts to trucks and stores. <sup>30</sup>

