## Introduction On the night of 14 July 1791 Joseph Priestley, scientist, dissenting minister, and radical advocate of the principles of the French Revolution, rushed away with his wife, Mary, to shelter with friends. A Church and King mob thronged the road from Birmingham on the way to torch Priestley’s house. Shortly before this they had destroyed his church, the New Meeting House, in the town. Many of Birmingham’s leading dissenters had attended a dinner earlier in the day to celebrate the second anniversary of the French Revolution. But Priestley stayed at home, warned of the tension in the town, and that he would be a prime target. From a garden half a mile away the Priestleys watched under clear moonlight as furniture was thrown from the windows, scientific instruments broken, and books and manuscripts burned. One witness recalled that ‘the highroads for full half a mile of the house were strewed with books, and that on entering the library there was not a dozen volumes on the shelves, while the floor was covered several inches deep in torn manuscripts’. Eventually the house too was torched.The mob was soon on its way again, now to the Russells’ house, and both families together with friends retreated to the night-time roads in search of safety, returned to the house for a few hours before dawn, then left again as the rioters returned. Priestley left Birmingham for London later in the day; Mary went to their daughter, then stayed on with Samuel Galton’s family. The New Meeting House and Priestley’s home were the first of four meeting houses and twenty-seven homes to be attacked, all carefully selected to include those of the radical dissenters and their friends.¹ The possessions and their values that Priestley later listed for compensation before the Warwickshire assizes provide us with some insight into just ## Introduction what a man of letters, a religious dissenter, a man of the middling classes living just outside one of Britain’s leading industrial towns owned and lived with as the eighteenth century drew to its close.² Priestley counted his losses in total at a value of $\mathbb { A } , \cup 8 3$ 10s. $3 d .$ , with his household goods making up $\mathcal { L } _ { \mathrm { { I } } , 3 0 7 } 8 s$ . Eventually, two years later, he was compensated for $\scriptstyle \mathcal { E } _ { 3 } , \supset 9 6$ raised through the rates. The house was large enough to accommodate Priestley’s library and laboratory, as well as two small servants’ rooms and another small room in the attic. But the main accommodation was two bedrooms, a front and back parlour, a kitchen, and a storeroom. His possessions included large quantities of mahogany and japanned furniture, cotton window curtains, carpets, pier and swing looking glasses, tea urns and other tea equipment, large amounts of chinaware, silver-plated table, dessert, and tea spoons, cut glass, as well as smaller modern or fashionable items of ornament and display. Prominent among these furnishings was a range of quality consumer goods created, invented, and made fashionable over the course of the eighteenth century. The mahogany furniture included a knee-hole dressing table, a ladies’ work table, card tables, chairs, a dining table and tea tables, as well as a four-poster bed. The four-poster bed had cotton bed furnishings lined with calico muslin, and the value of the bed, its covers, and curtains was the princely sum of £25 10s.The smaller tables were valued at £1 $5 s .$ , the dining table at $\mathcal { L } _ { 2 }$ 10s., and a set of eight mahogany chairs and two elbow chairs at £11 10s. There was a good deal of japanned ware—chairs, tea urns, plate warmers, trays, and tea boards. The window curtains in the two front bedrooms and the front parlour were cotton or calico with the substantial values $\not \in { 3 } \ 3 ^ { s } . , \not \in { 4 } \ 4 ^ { s } .$ , and £6 6s. There were several looking glasses ranging in value from 16s. to $\mathcal { L } _ { 4 }$ 10s. There were colossal amounts of chinaware: valuable china ornaments in the parlour, a set of Nankeen table china of 108 pieces valued at $\mathtt { \xi } _ { \mathtt { w } 1 6 }$ 2s. Nankeen ware was a generic name for export ware porcelain imported from China. There were three sets of Wedgwood ware, green edged valued at $\mathcal { E } _ { 5 }$ 9s., blue edged valued at $\mathcal { E } _ { 4 } \ 4 s .$ , and a yellow set at $\mathcal { L } _ { 3 }$ 13s. There was Queen’s ware in the kitchen—three dozen plates and twelve dishes valued at £2 2s. There were several sets of tea china, including a Nankeen Tea set at $\mathcal { E } _ { 4 } \ 4 s .$ . There were punch bowls, coffee and tea pots, chocolate cups, sugar basins, coffee sets, sets of custard cups, dessert plates, and china plates. The silver ware included cream jugs and sugar tongs, as well as a set of eight tablespoons and four dessert spoons valued at £8 12s. There were various types of glasses including cut glass cruets. There were patent princess metal candlesticks and snuffers. There were special branded goods and recent inventions: a Magellan timepiece, Wedgwood black inkstands, and a Boulton & Watt copying machine.There were new forms of ornamental ware and medallions: plated buckles, mourning buckles, and knee buckles; medallions of Priestley and Wilkinson, another medallion of Newton, and four different medallions of Franklin. A purse contained other medals and pocket pieces valued at 3 guineas. This inventory provides an arresting image of the material culture of an established middling-class intellectual at the end of the century. Priestley had married well, into the Wilkinson ironmaking family, and lived, if not on the same scale, with a similar type of furnishings, ornament, and tableware as the families of industrialists, merchants, and other intellectuals who formed his social circle and who no doubt assisted his support in Birmingham. The sum at which Priestley valued his losses was as high as the annual incomes of substantial aristocrats and the wealthiest group of gentry families. Leading merchants and industrialists could claim similar incomes. A superior clergyman (not including bishops) in 1803, when Colquhoun drew up his social tables, expected to earn £500; a lesser Anglican cleric and all dissenting ministers could expect only £120. Priestley’s income compared poorly with that of an average master manufacturer at £800, and with that of many lawyers who earned £350.³ Let us put these possessions in some perspective. The quantities of his possessions may surprise us now, the more so because Priestley was a radical and a dissenting minister. But the domestic interiors lived in by the elites and wealthier industrialists a hundred years before this were also full of furnishings and ornamental goods. In Whickham, on the north-east coalfield, rapid economic development in the later seventeenth century allowed the lesser gentry, prosperous yeomen, and the commercial and industrial middling sorts to accumulate numerous domestic possessions. The minor gentleman William Jackson lived in a sevenroom house crowded with furnishings: large numbers and various types of tables and chairs, curtained bedsteads, carpets, chests of drawers, pictures, and even a mirror and window curtains. He had large amounts of linen and pewter, iron, and brass utensils in his kitchen.⁴ It was not the quantities of domestic possessions to be found in the houses of the better-off middling classes that stand out between these two centuries, but the range, diversity, materials, closely identified types, and even brands of the goods. Priestley’s house had willow and Scotch carpets, his curtains were cotton, striped, Manchester or calico, his silverware was plated, he had cut glass, and Nankeen and Wedgwood chinaware, his furniture was mahogany and japanned, and there were tea urns, coffee and tea pots, plated buckles, and patent candlesticks. These were not goods passed down through generations, but new modern goods, displaying their patents, mechanized technologies, and new materials in fashionable style. The variety of their types and values also made at least some of them accessible to more ordinary middling groups and even to tradespeople and craftsmen in their times of prosperity. Though newly invented, and more available to the middling classes than were the luxury goods of the past, these items were still expensive, quality goods. The money spent on the Nankeen tea set valued at £4 4s. might have employed a female servant in Yorkshire for over a year.⁵ The set of mahogany dining-room chairs valued at £11 10s. was worth more than a year’s rent for a small London house in the eastern and southern suburbs suitable for better-off artisans.⁶ The mahogany tea table at £1 7s. might exchange for a fashionable cotton printed gown owned by one of the servants; indeed Sarah Rawlinson, Priestley’s maidservant, valued her chintz gown at £1 8s. But the four patent princess metal candlesticks were worth more; so were the two tea urns with plated cocks and heaters at between £2 10s. and £2 19s. The buckles and medals valued at between 9s. and £1 were equivalent to the weekly wage of a common London artisan.⁷ Priestley’s domestic possessions were Britain’s new luxuries, conveying modernity, refinement, and pleasure, not just among the elites, but among the middling classes. In the Universal Magazine of Knowledge and Pleasure, an essay entitled ‘Of the Manners of the Age, as Refined by Luxury’ was published in 1772. Here the question was posed ‘What can be more universal than the effects of riches on manners in England?’ The answer was to be found in the commodities now available to ‘all ranks of the people’ who were ‘increasing in expense and endeavouring to vie with their superiors in the extent of it’. They had a ‘strong desire to signalise themselves in dress, equipage, houses, furniture, amusements etc.’. These things were signs of the ‘general effects of riches spreading through the people, and with them more polished manners’. The effects on the smaller middling and tradespeople were immense: ‘their tables are served as well as those of rich merchants were an hundred years ago: their houses good and ornamented . . . the furniture strangely improved from the last age; in dress, see the sons and daughters tricked out in all the little ornaments . . . thousands of ribbons where packthread once sufficed. See the amusements of these people; they resort to their theatres and are busy in visits and tea drinking and cards; as much ceremony is found in the assembly of a country grocer’s wife as in that of a countess.’⁸ Luxury and Pleasure provides a history of those new consumer goods. Three sections of the book, ‘Luxury, Quality and Delight’, ‘How it was Made’, and ‘A Nation of Shoppers’, explore the cultural discourse and invention of the new goods, their manufacture and marketing, and who consumed them and how. It tells the stories and analyses the historical development that led from a global trade in Eastern luxuries in the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries to a new global trade in British new consumer goods by the end of the eighteenth century. Many of our consumer goods of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, non-necessities, but nonetheless important material adjuncts to personal identities, cultural and symbolic display, and social interaction were luxuries to the people of the eighteenth century. They enjoyed shopping for them; they took pleasure in their beauty, ingenuity, or convenience. All manner of new products appeared in shop windows; sophisticated mixed-media advertising seduced customers and created new wants. This unparalleled ‘product revolution’ provoked philosophers and pundits to proclaim a ‘new luxury’, one that reached out to the middling and trading classes, unlike the old elite and corrupt luxury. Statesmen and economists debated the impact of a dramatically intensified world commerce in such luxuries on their economies, national identities, and the behaviour and expectations of their common people. Where now the concept ‘consumer culture’ dominates social analysis of the West, and with globalization extends more frequently also to the East, in the eighteenth century commerce, luxury, and new products provided a parallel conceptual framework. Customers and shoppers, retailers and advertisers did not share the common political identity we recognize today as ‘consumers’, but they nevertheless engaged in a shared language of commerce, luxury, and products.⁹ Though a ‘consumer revolution’ may misconceive eighteenth-century European and even British societies, there is no denying the crest of products that rose on the ‘wave of gadgets’. Industrialization and commercial modernity in the eighteenth century was, above all, about consumer products. This was a ‘product revolution’ made by inventors and manufacturers, merchants, retailers and advertisers, and above all by the people who bought ‘new luxury’. The new products were not the endless stuff of questionable taste that darkened Victorian parlours.They were the material products of enlightenment and modernity, of fashion and global commerce. Montesquieu, the Anglophile French philosopher, praised the commerce, gentle and sweet, that ‘polishes and softens barbarous mores, as we see every day’.The leading Scottish philosopher David Hume endorsed ‘innocent luxury’; this ‘refinement in home manufactures’ provided both the ‘pleasures of luxury’ and the ‘profits of commerce’.¹⁰ The new products proclaimed their modernity by their imitative materials and their advanced manufacturing systems. Such systems frequently meant mechanization, though for much of the eighteenth century little of this was powered by steam; it sometimes meant large-scale workshops and even factories, but it always meant division of labour either within one workplace or outsourced to many. The products were high design, invoking ‘art and industry’; quality went with price competitiveness, and the middling classes bought them not because they were cheap, but because they were fashion leaders. That fashion leadership was, for some parts of the middling and elite classes, an access to ‘polite’ and genteel society. Some of the goods were what John Styles has called ‘indispensable props in the genteel performances that constituted politeness, whether in the dining room or the assembly room. Your gentility was judged by whether you owned the right items, whether they were sufficiently genteel in their design, and whether you were capable of using them in the right way.’¹¹ But a product development that assumed revolutionary proportions went much broader and deeper than polite society. It extended to the satirical inversion of genteel polite society and middling-class respectability in the demi-monde of London’s theatres and the sexual subculture of the city’s libertines, mistresses, and prostitutes. The mistress, who even more than a wife was an object of conspicuous consumption, won with ‘fine buckles and beautiful china’, might take the ‘harlot’s progress’, trading her trappings for the Bridewell jail.¹² The profusion of products decorated the new housing terraces and tenements of England’s and Scotland’s growing towns and cities; it ornamented the bodies of tradesmen and women who lodged there, and of journeymen, apprentices, and even at times of the itinerant labouring poor who sheltered in their rented rooms and back quarters. Indeed fostering a taste for the new goods became part of the discourse of moral reformers who sought the social improvement of the labouring poor.They believed that those among the labouring poor who sought the accoutrements of tea drinking, fashionable clothing, and better furnishings joined in the wider commercial improvement in contrast to their fellows caught in a vicious cycle of gin drinking, idleness, and poverty.¹³ The new consumer products were international, quickly becoming global commodities: Birmingham buckles on French shoes, Sheffield forks and knives in Connecticut and Barbados, Staffordshire chinaware on Anglo-Indian tables. The product revolution took shape as it did in the framework of the global economy. A pre-existing global trade in consumer luxuries from Asia and the Caribbean stimulated Britain’s own manufacture of distinctive British products. Manufacturers and entrepreneurs, ready to exploit the opportunity offered of potential markets, created British consumer products capable both of delighting domestic buyers and of seducing foreign princes and merchants. This product revolution and the brand of goods it carried into global trade was British. Most of these better-quality goods were manufactured mainly in England, but many were made with Welsh iron and copper, or they were sold with prominent Scots linens and fine cottons. The goods were carried out to the rest of the world by merchants from Glasgow and Swansea as well as Bristol, Liverpool, and London. Itinerant Scots pedlars carried these wares into Polish parlours and New England farmsteads. Scots army captains in Madras and East India Company private traders in Canton bought British. The ‘British identity’ acquired by the new products was, to be sure, a part of that wider development of Britishness in the eighteenth century, defined above all by war against the French. British historians sometimes see this ‘national identity’ as English, and sometimes as British. It is, in Benedict Anderson’s phrase, an ‘imagined community’; the Great Britain that brought together England, Scotland, and Wales was, as Linda Colley argues, forged by war and entrenched by empire.¹⁴ Opposition to the French and Catholicism provided one way of making connections among peoples of the British Isles. But identities were also made in trade and empire, in facing the ‘otherness’ of different civilizations and cultures. When Macartney led the first diplomatic mission to China in 1793 he and the members of his expedition defined their common Britishness in the hostility between two self-declared superior civilizations. From this time, British participants in empire, both at home and abroad, defined themselves against differences in creed, race and ‘conditions of life’.¹⁵ Those conditions of life were about the goods. The goods taken out to other parts of the world represented the power of the nation; they also provided a defining material identity to those trading, travelling, and living far from their homes. More and better goods conveyed economic improvement. Britishness, in the century leading up to this confrontation with China, conveyed both commerce and commodities produced in the British Isles and her colonies. The Scots perceived their Britishness as a route to liberty and economic modernity. Their Union with England in 1707 ‘liberated’ them from archaic institutions, and allowed them full access to the markets of empire.¹⁶ The Scots would gain from a union of trade.Their own manufactures would improve and sell on world markets. Their own consumption of decencies and even luxuries might be provided to advantage from within the British Isles, shifting tastes from high-priced French imports to more ‘commodious’, recently invented, and certainly cheaper British alternatives. The economic modernity the Scots sought in the Union was, therefore, not just about trade and industry; it was also about goods, consumption, and ‘conditions of life’. The greatest theorists of British economic improvement, David Hume and Adam Smith, Scots who also saw themselves as British, linked commerce, manufacture, and commodities.¹⁷ Our recent historical concern with ‘identity’—personal, social, and national—may be anachronistic, more a concern of present preoccupations than of eighteenth-century ways of looking at the world,¹⁸ but there is no doubt that goods from Britain came with particular associations. They sold in Europe, the wider world, and at home with the image of Britannia, who represented liberty and commerce. She cast aside the old props of traditional society, modernizing government and trade. She nourished the national arts; the goods she sent out to the world were not ‘French fancies’ or aristocratic luxuries, but new modern commodities.¹⁹ The eighteenth century is the defining moment in the history of consumer culture in the West. Neil McKendrick claimed for it a ‘consumer revolution’ coinciding with the classic period of the industrial revolution from 1760 to 1820. He identified it with an explosion of new goods and a spirit of emulation which stimulated people to buy these commodities. Britain’s greater and more evenly distributed wealth than her neighbours and her relatively open society provided the opportunity for more to partake in this benevolent revolution. McKendrick linked consumption to modernity and both to industrialization. Historians immediately found fault with a concept that tried to say too much, and it went the way of so many revolutions, deconstructed to the extent of denial of any significant discontinuity.²⁰ The theoretical framework for the consumer revolution was set in economic theories of the origins of economic growth and neoliberal theories of capitalism and democracy prevalent in the 1960s. Prominent social scientists then believed that high mass consumption of consumer durables was the end result of a long-standing success story of Western economic growth and industrialization.²¹ Many historians, however, denied the premisses of the model. Standards of living for most of the population during the eighteenth century did not rise fast enough to sustain a ‘consumer revolution’; if anything incomes for most of the population declined. Economic historians whittled away at estimates of economic growth, and condemned a sluggish manufacturing sector where cotton manufacturing eventually emerged as a lone and fortuitous star.²² This so-called ‘consumer revolution’ was surely no more than a panegyric to metropolitan elites ‘puffed’ by the advertisers from overextended newspaper and periodical proprietors. Other historians, often isolated or working against the grain, slowly but doggedly gathered evidence in wills and probate inventories from right across the country of increasing accumulations and a greater diversity of possessions across large groups of relatively ordinary and modest middlingclass people. There were more goods, more people bought them, and many of them were not necessaries, but superfluous, either decencies or luxuries. But discovering more goods in the eighteenth century led others to push the frontiers back earlier and further afield. Historians working across many different countries or different historical periods identified more sophisticated material cultures than in earlier generations and claimed priority for the first consumer revolution or the birth of consumer society. A ‘consumer society’ with widespread new spending patterns, advertising, and retailing already prevailed in the seventeenth century. Historians of Ming China and Renaissance Italy identified vibrant consumer cultures before this, and archaeologists discovered specialized shops and exotic market emporia in ancient Greece and Rome.²³ As John Brewer has argued, too many historians were more concerned to claim disciplinary or national priority than to ask why we were seeking the origins of consumer society. The impact of claims to ‘we were there first’ has been to flatten out change, and to deny what was really distinctive about the consumer goods and patterns of their consumption in various countries and historical periods.²⁴ Many of the accounts of eighteenth-, nineteenth-, and twentieth-century consumer revolutions assumed a pre-industrial past or simple consumer needs and a moral economy of customary rather than commercial relations. Evidence gathered of longstanding global consumer cultures undermined these assumptions, but the real challenge was to connect evidence of consumer goods and consumption to wider historical processes. If we go back to the eighteenth century, what was it about the goods and their consumers that connected to wider economic change? Jan de Vries in the early 1990s took up the cause of the consumer revolution once again, arguing that in spite of static standards of living, ordinary people did buy more; they were especially attracted by fashionable and luxury goods.They gave up necessaries and worked harder, or in other ways to gain more cash income so that they could buy these things. In working harder and more frequently in the market economy, in giving up time spent in household management and provisioning they simultaneously provided the labour forces for new industries. Their consumption thereby contributed to the origins of industrialization through changes in the household and labour force. Now households both bought and provided the labour for new domestically produced goods which imitated the characteristics of former globally traded luxuries.²⁵ This reconfiguration of consumption from needs to desires coincides with the move in our own priorities since the 1980s. The branding revolution depicted in Naomi Klein’s No Logo (2000) showed the extent to which consumer taste in the West has recently shifted away from mass consumption to designer goods. The concept of luxury, once associated with the super-rich, now features commonly in the language of advertising. Lifestyle choices, distinction, diversity, and individuality are now major priorities of consumerism. The Western affluence that underpins these values is set in a framework of globalization. Indeed, consumption is a key marker of inclusion and exclusion as set out in United Nations development reports and social surveys on poverty. Social scientists now seek measures of the ‘quality of life’ and comparative measures of amenities rather than calories. Perception of social division within Western economies is now about a division of consumer cultures as much as it is about incomes, wealth, and employment. Membership of European, American, and even global trading communities and networks is about much more than international marketing agreements; it is also about accessing perceived higher standards of living, even ‘world-class’ social amenities. This includes individual access to designer and fashion goods whose production and marketing frameworks are indeed global, with production outsourced to Asia and the biggest potential markets being developed in South-East Asia and China. This is a salutary reminder of the very close parallels between our current globalization and the global framework of Britain’s consumer products at the very genesis of her industrialization. Britain’s new consumer products in the eighteenth century also arose in a context of wider world trade; a global trade in newly discovered luxuries from Asia and the Americas as well as an older trade with Europe opened tastes to a different material culture from that which had gone before. This global framework stimulated the British manufacture of new alternative consumer goods which sometimes copied, but more significantly ‘imitated’, the spirit of global luxury.²⁶ Such new products were also technological achievements. Made with new materials, fabricated with novel production methods deploying the division of labour and all manner of hand, horse, water-powered, and eventually steam-powered machinery, they were the success story of an industrial revolution.They, in turn, were global products, taking their British brand to the Americas, the empire, and the rest of Europe. While social and cultural historians, literary scholars, and even social scientists regard the eighteenth century as the turning point in the rise of consumer society, associating consumption with modernity, they write remarkably little about the material reality of that society. As Jean-Christophe Agnew has argued, ‘the world of goods’ has become entirely cut off from the work that made it. Those concepts once associated with the analysis of the material world, ‘production’, ‘fabrication’, indeed ‘craft’, ‘capital’, and ‘work’ have become the metaphors of cultural representation.²⁷ Despite the intense historical and literary investigation of aspects of eighteenth-century consumer culture over recent decades we still have incorporated into our wider histories very little about the products people were buying. Research on the material goods is divided off into the specialism either of museum curators and arts researchers, or of the archaeologists and anthropologists who have inspired material culture studies. The focus of the museum product-based research is design styles as well as individual objects and their provenance, objects which have been collected because they are the best of their kind or the top end of the market.²⁸ Alternatively, as material culture the products become objects in a ‘vernacular’ style.²⁹ As historians we do know about the symbolic values of particular goods, and about the numbers of goods featuring in the inventories of various groups across the social spectrum. We know about the shopping proclivities of a few elites, about polite social behaviour, about cultural goods, and about the literary representation of nearly all of this. This history of eighteenth-century consumer culture is, however, almost completely disconnected from the study of the material world of consumption. It is either so rarified that the commodity becomes just another way of discussing our personal identity, or the generic product is itself simply a ‘by-product’ of industrial development. Actual products, what they were, how they were designed and made, what they were used for, get lost in this dichotomy between the cultural and the economic. We need a history of those new consumer goods that inspired fashion desire and transformed the domestic spaces of the eighteenth-century household. Priestley’s elegant furnishings and delightful ornament found their counterparts down the social scale. Special, refined, and sought-out consumer goods were set apart by all social groups from their necessities. Items of convenience and display and intricate inventive modernity meant far more than the mundane articles of the everyday.The furniture, carpets, chinaware, glass, silver-plated ware, candlesticks, and brass locks and furniture handles which we have come to connect with eighteenth-century interiors and Georgian houses became identifiably British over the course of the century.The stamped buttons, plated buckles, and commemorative medals that provided the smart accessories to men’s and women’s dress were sought out as British adornments and tokens of esteem.These were the new ornamental and decorative goods that came to compete with and to take over from the exotic luxuries of the global emporium. In London’s new shopping streets in Piccadilly, St James’s, and the Haymarket were to be found a whole range of new and fashionable British goods: Wedgwood’s creamware and ornamental vases had their own well-appointed gallery. Other shops showed off Sadler & Green’s new transfer-printed earthenware. Matthew Boulton showcased at Christie’s and Ansell’s in Pall Mall his newly invented and latest design silver plate tea urns and candlesticks, and his fashion luxury ormolu and blue john, or cut steel jewellery. Cut glass chandeliers and glasses glittered in front of large mirrors lit by patent lamps, and nearby in Piccadilly cabinetmakers, upholsterers, and upholders sold mahogany and veneered dining and tea tables, and displayed the clever locks and springs of their ladies’ desks and dressing tables. These goods were made in Britain; they were modern in design; they were made with the latest tools, machinery, and chemical processes: they were intriguing imitations of former craft and oriental luxuries. They delighted spectators and buyers, and were specifically sought out for their new designs and technologies. ‘New invented’ became a descriptor of British goods. Benjamin Franklin, visiting London in 1758, sent his wife some cotton ‘printed curiously from Copper Plates, a new Invention’.³⁰ Another visitor to London in the early 1780s described its streets as a show cabinet of art and industry with ingenious novelties, paintings, machines, and precious objects displayed behind great clear-glass windows. Shop windows vied with electrical demonstrations and popular science lectures on optics and hydraulics. The new domestic and decorative goods from machinewoven carpets and copper-plate printed curtains to stamped brassware and pinchbeck, japanned snuff boxes, steel buttons, and pocket watches declared modernity, enlightenment, and fashion. Reinhold Angerstein, the Swedish industrial spy who wrote and drew his way round England in the mid-1750s, reported back to his government and transcribed in his diary detailed drawings and descriptions of the new machines that stamped buttons or pressed out teacup handles and endless other mechanisms, most turned by hand or horse power where the British, even at this stage, excelled over the rest of Europe.³¹ Adam Smith noticed the curious fascination of his countrymen for ingenious trinkets and toys conveying convenience and utility. James Bisset, the Birmingham ‘toymaker’, the contemporary term for a manufacturer of small ornamental metalware, rescued himself from homelessness and debt as a young journeyman by his new invention of painted glass ornament.³² Edward Thomason, son of the Birmingham bucklemaker, assiduously invented all manner of improved consumer goods. He was especially proud of his patented retractable carriage steps and his ‘patent ne plus-ultra Corksrew’. These were followed by his sliding toasting fork made in silver, gilt, plated, and brass, and his sliding hearth brushes in the same material, but with a case of papier mâché. His show shop with its expensive gadgets ensnared the unwary, first captivated on a tour around his modern manufactory.³³ Mrs Montagu well before this took pleasure in her visit to the Soho Manufactory, where she saw beautiful objects of exquisite taste and was intrigued by the admirable inventions and secrets of chemistry and mechanic powers she found there.³⁴ A burgeoning middling class extending from professionals, merchants, and industrialists to ordinary trades people and artisans embraced these new consumer goods with the modernity, politeness, respectability, and independence they conveyed.They were to be had in a seemingly infinite variety of designs, qualities, and prices—what mattered was the look, elegance, and price. Dorothy Ridgeway, a wealthy Sheffield spinster, bequeathed her silver ornament, table and tea ware, and her best set of ‘nantz’ (or Chinese export porcelain) china to her nieces. Her poor counterpart, Elizabeth Lynes, a Birmingham toymaker, left to her daughter a silver snuff box among her modest furnishings and best clothes. Joseph Marks left a will in Bristol in 1746 with assets at less than £50, but he owned chinaware and chocolate cups,a teapot, a pier glass, a clock and case, a japanned cupboard, and five silver teaspoons. William Taylor, a mid-century London butcher, when³⁵ set uponby robbers on his way to work one morning, lost a fustian frock coat withtwelve plate buttons valued at 40s., silver shoe buckles valued at 60s., and aperiwig valued at 10s., among other clothing. A treasured³⁶ silver snuff box passed down to a beloved daughter or a fashionable display of gleaming andsparkling buttons and buckles on a prosperous tradesman conveyed an emotional connection to new semi-luxury commodities, goods saved for, prized, and displayed among the tradespeople and artisans. Here we explore the invention, making, and buying of new, semi-luxury, and fashionable consumer goods during the eighteenth century. We can follow these goods, from teaware and metal ornament (or ‘toys’) to small items of fashion furnishings as they were used and displayed in the private domestic spaces of Britain’s urban middling classes. The language associated with these goods at the time conveyed aspirations for a new kind of consumption—one focused on modern and fashionable products. Their key words were ‘ingenuity’, ‘imitation’, ‘convenience and utility’, ‘taste and style’, and above all, ‘delight’. That proliferation of new commodities, which we have come to know as the consumer revolution, was not just a concept; it was real products. My book sets out the characteristics of the products, their diversity and qualities, how they were made and in what volumes, how they were bought and what prices people paid for them, and above all why they were desired across various consumer groups. We need to know more about these goods—which of them were new, why they were attractive, which were fashionable, which mundane, and how people invented and responded to them. The making of these goods was also their consumption. As The Wealth of Nations declared, ‘Consumption is the sole end and purpose of all production.’ We thus follow the consumers of these goods, how they bought their new commodities and incorporated them into their lifestyles. How did they endow the new goods with fashion and make shopping for them into a national pastime? Above all, how was it that the new consumer goods were so quickly and effectively branded British, and became world-class commodities by the last third of the eighteenth century? The markets for new consumer goods were made at home and in the empire, and especially in the American colonies. Success in these Atlantic markets reinforced markets at home and also made them fashion and brand leaders throughout Europe.