## Conclusion Those new British goods so enthusiastically invented, produced, shopped for, and displayed were also the subjects of introspection, misgivings, and social exclusion. Young James Bisset’s painted and japanned snuff boxes may have been delightful, but he worked twelve-hour days, painting ‘upwards of twenty gross of snuff boxes in a week with roses, anemonies and various coloured flowers with three tints to every flower and three to every leaf ’.¹ William Pegg, a highly esteemed porcelain painter at the Derby porcelain works, when apprenticed to china painting at the beginning of the 1780s, worked fifteen-hour days with only Sundays to study drawing and the arts.² Pegg became a Baptist, then a Quaker; his religious scruples over using his artistic skills to minister to ‘mere luxury’, for ‘articles more of show than use’, forced him to abandon his trade not once, but twice. Joseph Priestley, as we have seen, maintained radical religious convictions alongside a richly endowed consumer environment. Pegg, self-taught in his theology, took a stricter line. Leaving porcelain painting, he moved to Bedworth then Hinckley in Leicestershire where he took up stocking knitting. He earned but a pittance, and fell into poverty, debt, and despair, so much so that he was asked by the Friends to leave Hinckley. He passed ‘twelve years of poverty and discomfort in the prime of life’ when ‘I did not earn enough to clear my expenses, so that I kept sinking all the time, and at the end of that period I was in a state of embarrassment, tho’ I had received some small assistance. Even the Friends with whom I stood in social connexion manifested their disapprobation of the sacrifice I had made. Ultimately Pegg returned to the china works, having ‘lost that feeling which induced me to give up china painting’. He once again took to studying the art of painting, though he had once burned all his drawings and drawing books. His return to his craft lasted seven years before he again felt ‘increasing feelings of condemnation’: ‘I now do wish I could take myself to some other business for a living, which if I do not, I feel sure that my peace of mind is broken. I have long felt, and been inwardly convinced, that I was acting contrary to what was required of me, in taking to and continuing in the China business.’³ William Pegg’s crisis was not one over his possessions, but over the meaning of his work. He now found abhorrent those objects of luxury, ornament, and delight which over the course of the eighteenth century had inspired such inventiveness among his fellow artisans and tradespeople as well as acquisitiveness among the middling classes and the elites. Montesquieu’s commerce was not so sweet, not so inclusive or civilizing as the English paradox in favour of luxury appeared to convey. Not only did luxury, even if for the middling classes, arise from inequality. Luxury also penetrated the psychology, and consumer objects took power over self-identity. Social theorists at the end of the eighteenth century turned the discussion of consumer society to the search for the sources of inequality.⁴ James Bisset and William Pegg both reflected on their work; for the one it was a mechanical activity that yielded a high output; for the other it was a pandering to consumer idolatry. Both connected their work to the consumer goods they produced. Let us reiterate Adam Smith’s statement, ‘consumption is the sole end of production’. He put the point more sharply: ‘The desire for objects of frivolous utility . . . keeps in continual motion the industry of mankind.’⁵ Consumption needs to be connected with production. Luxury and Pleasure is not only a book about modern consumer society and its products during the later seventeenth and eighteenth centuries; it is a book about the origins of industrialization. At this crucial stage Europe responded to a commodity trade with the wider world; inventing, producing, and consuming new European, and especially British goods provoked the changes in technologies, the uses of new materials and forms of energy, and the reorganization of labour that became the industrial revolution. World markets stimulated this process in the first place; success then led to global ascendancy. For international and well as home markets were what ‘identified’ British goods; global markets for those consumer goods of private and domestic life inspired the industrial revolution; they also underpinned a success story that the British turned into their own throughout the following century. What happened in the nineteenth century to these products that had ‘won the world’ is another question. The products multiplied, newly democratized and available to all. The romantics rejected the ‘principles of taste’ associated with an ordered society, pursuing a synthesis of historical and non-European designs. Visual choice was now so available that the early Victorians saw their ‘present age’ as one ‘with no style which can properly be called its own’.⁶ For some this cacophony of choice needed ‘reordering’; a new business for the professional design reformers. For others this was the true mark of the plenitude achieved by British industrialization. The marginal economist, Philip Wicksteed, in a marked departure from the presentation of use and exchange values developed by Smith, Ricardo, and Marx, wrote of ‘a vast number of things which I desire’ entering into a ‘circle of exchange’ based on choice.⁷ The choice and availability of objects were not enough to ensure their international supremacy. Industrial tourists who in the eighteenth century had been captivated by the ‘Magazin Anglais’, by the early years of the nineteenth century had lost their enthusiasm.⁸ Though entranced by the technologies they witnessed in Britain, they were not impressed with the products they saw. These were ‘grotesque and tasteless’, or of poor quality. A German visitor wrote: ‘woollen cloths and cashmeres are not so good as those made in France while printed calicoes are much inferior to those made on the continent’. The Italian visitor, Lanza, later attributed this lack of taste and quality to the English pursuit of ‘utility’ at the expense of ‘beauty’.⁹ The Great Exhibition of 1851, which celebrated the achievements of British technology, was also an initiative to improve standards of manufacturing and to educate the public in matters of taste.¹⁰ As such it was not a success. William Morris, who visited the exhibition as a young man, found the objects inside it ‘wonderfully ugly’; critics found the omnium gatherum of Victorian goods an ‘artistic disaster’.¹¹ Was this the apotheosis of the work, technology, the art and industry, and the global trade which had made the product revolution of the eighteenth century? The new technologies and materials, the response to exotic and Asian luxuries, the marketing of new-invented products to the middling classes—this extensive consumption of new goods—signalled the modernity of the British in the eighteenth century. But technology, the factory, choice, and democracy were all blamed by the mid-nineteenth century for a loss of direction. Taste needed to be controlled for the ‘good of the nation’, and choice directed to signify social identity. This Victorian ‘overproduction’ of goods, styles, and choice became the harbinger of a new modernity, the mass culture and its associated mass consumption of Western economic development in the twentieth century.That mass consumer society of the mid-twentieth century was the occasion for social and political investigation of a distinctive social concept, ‘consumer society’ and the social conformism and political passivity associated with it. A new left critique provided the vehicle of a fresh wave of cultural criticism and radical resistance. This was, in turn, overtaken by a postmodern debate connecting consumption to choice and identity.¹² An intense interest in origins of consumer society has pervaded history, the social sciences, and popular culture during the past twenty-five years. Mary Douglas and Baron Isherwood in their seminal The World of Goods, first published in 1978, argued that ‘goods, work and consumption’ had to be restored to their unity, and set together into the social process.¹³ Theirs was an argument with economists; but social and cultural theorists and historians since have abstracted consumption. ‘Consumption’, disembodied, semiotic, has in Agnew’s words, ‘expanded to fill the available analytical space’.¹⁴ Social identities defined by consumer society make no reference to the goods or how they are made. We need to restore that unity between consumption and production—in twenty-five years we have not done this. What we do know a great deal more about is why people buy goods. We are also constantly aware of the global framework of this consumer society. A global consumer society is not any invention of the post Cold War world, but the very foundation of the industrial world. We have seen how, over the course of the later seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, consumer goods from Asia were transformed into our own European and Western commodities, and endowed with meanings in a new consumer culture. Wedgwood’s pleasure in displacing ceramics production from Asia to Europe is another global story today. Manufacturing consumer goods has once again become a story of Asia, transposed this time from Europe and America: those classic British products, Wedgwood and Royal Doulton, have transferred production to China.¹⁵ Luxury and Pleasure has attempted to restore something of that unity— goods, work, and consumption—in its framework of conception, making, and shopping. But it investigates only a very few consumer goods in any depth, and neglects the social framework of credit and debt that made the making and buying of these goods possible. Other studies have addressed some of these gaps, but much still remains to be done.¹⁶ This book conveys the optimistic reception by enlightened observers of the spread of consumer goods and the expansion of world commerce; it investigates the consumer roots of industrialization. But there are also more disturbing stories that need to be told: of consumerism and the growth of inequality, of the transformation of wider world discovery and world trade into slavery, colonialism, and imperialism. Consumer boycotts against British goods, identified with imperial power and infringement of liberty, fuelled radical protest and helped to shape the American Revolution. Other consumer protests in Britain and America against the systems of slavery that brought sugar to the tea tables of Europe and the Atlantic world gave voice and coherence to dissenting values and feminist consciousness.¹⁷ Other wider world perspectives show the history of the part played by imperial and global goods in the widening social inequalities across the North–South divide.¹⁸ Those issues over the goods and the imperial and class power they entailed were at the heart of the debate on consumption when Douglas and Isherwood called for that unity in the study of consumption and production. Indeed The World of Goods opened with the statement: ‘There is obloquy for merchandising and guilt in ownership. A growing swell of protest ## Conclusion against the consumer society sets the background to this book.’¹⁹ Paradoxically, a book written in this political context of protest against consumer society led the way into the intense study of consumption and consumerism among social scientists, cultural theorists, and historians. Now consumer society is not in question. The citizen is a consumer; the modern self reflects on his or her desires.There is a sense in which those desires in our own age are more about the experience of consuming than they are about fixed possessions. Consumers take part in the context within which goods lay; advertisers dematerialize the object into its contextual signs and symbols.²⁰ Consuming, however, still relies on a growing flow of material objects, objects now made in parts of the world other than where they are mainly consumed.The globalization that now frames consumption remains fundamentally about products and their production. And the history of those consumer desires must also be a history of the products. Any historical discussion of consumption needs to be reconnected to the goods and how they are made; this must be a response to world trade now, as it was in the past. In the eighteenth century a global trade in luxuries and manufactured consumer goods provided not just the labour and the materials that went into making of new goods, but the designs, fashions, and sophisticated marketing that shaped the product development of the period. Consumer products, if not consumption more broadly, were forged then in a global economy. This world history of the products and their production processes is vital to any history of consumption and consumers; it is equally vital to our current understandings of globalization.