# Select Bibliography ## manuscript sources Birmingham Central Library, City Archives Address to the Inhabitants of Birmingham from A Friend to Birmingham and the Constitution (29 Apr. 1793), 325311. Birmingham Button Disputes, MSS, George Madeley (16 Aug. 1799). Birmingham Riots, Inventory of the House and Goods of Joseph Priestley, 399801/IIR30. Diary of Julius Hardy (1788–93), Button-Maker, of Birmingham, 669002, MS 218. Matthew Boulton Papers, 307, 330/331, 361, DBF, Letter Books. Bodleian Library, Oxford John Johnson Collection of trade cards. ## Borthwick Institute of Historical Research, University of York Sheffield Probate Records. ## Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Library and Museum, Wilmington, Delaware Benjamin Hadley, Trade Catalogue, 1815. John Jenks Papers 1751–1817, Joseph Downs Collection 295. Samuel Powell, London Order Book, Philadelphia, 1724, Joseph Downs Collection 232, 1. Samuel Rowland Fisher, manuscript journal, microfilm, Nov. 1783. [Samuel Rowland Fisher], Catalogue of English Hardware (Birmingham, 1783–9). Historical Society of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia Clifford Family Papers. John Reynell Papers. Owen Jones Papers, Jones & Wister Letterbook. Keele University Archives Wedgwood Papers, Correspondence. ## Bibliography Lichfield Joint Record Office Birmingham Probate Records. ## National Archives, London Inspector generals’ ledgers of imports and exports, PRO, Cust. 3. Chancery Masters Exhibits George and William Panter, C112/61. Nathaniel Barrell, Forsaith v. Forsaith, C110/163. Nathaniel Torriano, C112/24. Vulliamy (Order Book for Silver), C104/58 Part 1. New York Historical Society, New York Peter Stuyvesant Letters. Royal Society of Arts Archives, London Josiah Tucker, ‘The Elements of Commerce and Theory of Taxes’, Society of Arts, Commerce, and Manufactures, MS, 1755. Society of Arts, Commerce, and Manufactures, Guard Books. Sheffield City Archives Bradbury Records. Thomas Nowill (1786–1825) Papers. Stafford Record Office Hicken Glass Business, Bilston, Staffs., D1798/647. Whieldon Papers, Notebook on Hiring and Wages. Warwick County Record Office Memoir of James Bisset (1818), CR1526/246. ## printed primary sources Abridgments of the Specifications Relating to Pottery (prepared by Dugald Campbell) (London, 1863). Ackerman, R., The Repository of Arts, Literature, Commerce, Manufactures, Fashions and Politics (London, 1809). Anderson, Adam, An Historical and Chronological Deduction of the Origin of Commerce, from the Earliest Accounts to the Present Time, 2 vols. (London, 1764). Angerstein, R. R., Illustrated Travel Diary, 1753–1755: Industry in England and Wales from a Swedish Perspective, trans. Torsten and Peter Berg (London, 2001). ## Bibliography Aris’s Birmingham Gazette. Arts Companion: or, A New Assistant for the Ingenious (London, 1749). Bamford, Samuel, The Autobiography of Samuel Bamford, i: Early Days, ed. W. H. Chaloner, 2 vols. (London, 1967). Barbon, Nicholas, A Discourse on Trade (London, 1690). Barrow, John, A New and Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (London, 1751). Bisset, James, A Poetic Survey round Birmingham; With a Brief Description of the Different Curiosities and Manufactories of the Place. Intended as a Guide to Strangers. Accompanied by a Magnificient Directory (Birmingham, 1799). —— Memoir of James Bisset: Written by Himself (1818), ed. T. B. Dudley (Birmingham, 1904). Campbell, R., The London Tradesman (London, 1747; reprint 1969). Cary, John, An Essay towards Regulating the Trade and Employing the Poor of this Kingdom (2nd edn., London, 1717). Chippendale, Thomas, The Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker’s Director (London, 1754). Croker, Revd Temple Henry, The Complete Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, 3 vols. (London, 1765–6). Defoe, Daniel, A Plan of the English Commerce (London, 1728). —— The Complete English Tradesman (London, 1726). Dossie, Robert, Memoirs of Agriculture and Other Oeconomical Arts (London, 1768). —— The Handmaid of the Arts, 2 vols. (2nd edn., London, 1764). Encyclopedia Britannica, 10 vols. (2nd edn., Edinburgh, 1778–83). Ferguson, Adam, An Essay on the History of Civil Society (Edinburgh, 1767). Fiennes, Celia, Journeys of Celia Fiennes 1662–1741, ed. Jonathan Hillaby (London, 1983). Gay, John, ‘The Streets of London’ (1715), in Trivia, and Other Poems (London, 1899). —— ‘To a Lady on her Passion for old China’ (1725), in Gay, Trivia, and Other Poems (London, 1899). Gee, Joshua, The Trade of Great Britain Considered (London, 1729). Gerard, Alexander, Essay on Taste (London, 1756). Hall, William Henry, The New Royal Encyclopaedia, 3 vols. (London, 1788). Hanway, Jonas, ‘An Essay on Tea’, in A Journal of Eight Days Journey, 2 vols. (London, 1757), vol. ii. Haslem, John, The Old Derby China Factory: The Workmen and their Productions (London, 1876; repr. Wakefield, 1973). Hogarth, William, The Analysis of Beauty (1753), ed. Ronald Paulson (New Haven, 1997). Holt, Mrs Dorothy, Address to the Ladies of Great Britain on Lace (London, 1757). Hume, David, Essays Moral, Political and Literary, ed. Eugene F. Miller (Indianapolis, 1985). —— Essays Moral, Political and Literary (London, 1903), Part II, Essay 1, ‘Of Commerce’ (1752). Essay 2, ‘Of Refinement in the Arts’ (1752) pp. 259–274, 275–289. Hutton, Catherine, A Narrative of the Riots at Birmingham, July, 1791 (Birmingham, 1875). Hutton, William, A History of Birmingham to the End of the Year 1780 (Birmingham, 1781). —— An History of Birmingham (3rd edn., Birmingham, 1795). —— The Life of William Hutton to which is Subjoined the History of his Family Written by Himself and Published by C. Hutton (London, 1816). —— Life of William Hutton, introd. Carl Chinn (Birmingham, 1998). Jaucourt, M. Chevalier de, ‘Mode’, Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers (Paris, 1751–80), x. 198. Journals of the House of Commons. Kenrick, William, An Address to the Artists and Manufacturers of Great Britain: Respecting an Application to Parliament of New Discoveries and Invention in the Useful Arts (London, 1774). Macpherson, David, and Anderson, Adam, Annals of Commerce, Manufactures, Fisheries and Navigation, Comprehending Part of Mr. Adam Anderson’s History of Commerce (London, 1805). Malthus, T. R., Principles of Political Economy (2nd edn., London, 1835). Mandeville, Bernard, The Fable of the Bees; or Private Vices, Public Benefits, ed. F. B. Kaye, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1924). —— The Fable of the Bees (1714), ed. Philip Harth (Harmondsworth, 1970). Melon, J.-F., Essai politique sur le commerce (Paris, 1734). ‘Of Luxury’, in A Political Essay upon Commerce, written in French by Monsieur M\*\*\*. Translated with some Annotations, and remarks by David Bindon, Esq. (Dublin, 1739). Middleton, Erasmus, The New and Complete Dictionary of Arts and Sciences or an Universal System of Useful Knowledge (London, 1778). Montesquieu, Charles Louis de Secondat, De l’esprit des lois (1740), trans. A. M. Cohler (Cambridge, 1989). Pennsylvania Gazette: On Line Version, Accessible Archives. Place, Francis, The Autobiography of Francis Place, ed. Mary Thrale (Cambridge, 1972). Postlethwayt, Malachy, ‘Of Arts and Manufactories’, Dissertation XXXIII of Britain’s Commercial Interest Explained and Improved, 2 vols. (London, 1757), vol. ii. —— The Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce. Translated from the French of . . . Monsieur Savary . . . with large additions and improvements, 2 vols. (2nd edn., London, 1757). Prosser, R. B., Birmingham Inventors and Inventions (Birmingham, 1881). Rees, A., The Cyclopedia: or Universal Dictionary of Arts, Sciences and Literature (London, 1802–20). ## Bibliography Reynolds, Sir Joshua, Discourses on Art (2nd edn., London 1997). Rolt, Richard, A New Dictionary of Trade and Commerce (London, 1756). Ryland, Arthur, ‘The Birmingham Assay Office’, in Samuel Timmins (ed.). The Resources, Products and Industrial History of Birmingham and the Midland Hardware District (Birmingham, 1866), 499–510. Sheraton, Thomas, The Cabinet Maker’s London Book of Prices (London, 1788). —— The Cabinet Maker and Upholsterer’s Drawing Book (London, 1793). The Pennsylvania Gazette. Smith, Adam, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759; 1790), ed. D. D. Raphael and A. L. McFie (Oxford, 1976). —— The Wealth of Nations (1776), ed. R. H. Campbell and A. S. Skinner (Oxford, 1976). Smith, William Hawkes, Birmingham and its Vicinity as a Manufacturing and Commercial District (London, 1836). Thomason, Sir Edward, Sir Edward Thomason’s Memoirs during Half a Century, 2 vols. (London, 1845). Tucker, Josiah, Instructions for Travellers (London, 1757). Universal Magazine of Knowledge and Pleasure, ed. J. Hinton (London, 1747–1815). Whitehead, James, Designs for Sundry Articles of Earthen-Ware, Winterthur Museum, 1798. The Wonders of Nature and Art: Being an Account of Whatever is Most Curious and Remarkable throughout the World, 4 vols. (London, 1750). Woodcroft, Benet, Titles of Patents of Invention, Chronologically Arranged from March 2, 1617 (14 James I) to October 1, 1852 (16 Victoriae), 2 vols. (London, 1854). Subject-Matter Index of Patents of Invention (London, 1857). ## secondary sources Agnew, Jean-Christophe, ‘Coming up for Air: Consumer Culture in Historical Perspective’, in John Brewer and Roy Porter (eds.), Consumption and the World of Goods (London, 1993), 19–39. Alder, Ken, Engineering the Revolution: Arms, Enlightenment and the Making of Modern France (Princeton, 1997). Allan, D. G. C., William Shipley, Founder of the Royal Society of Arts (London, 1968). The Virtuoso Tribe of Arts and Sciences: Studies in the Eighteenth Century Work and Membership of the London Society of Arts (Athens, Ga., 1992). Anderson, Benedict, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (London, 1991). Appadurai, Arjun (ed.), The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective (Cambridge, 1986). ‘Introduction: Commodities and the Politics of Value’, in Appadurai: (ed.), The Social Life of Thinge, 3–63. Armitage, David, and Braddick, Michael J. (eds.), The British Atlantic World 1500–1800 (Basingstoke, 2002). Auslander, Leora, Taste and Power: Furnishing Modern France (Berkeley, 1996). Bailyn, Bernard, ‘The Idea of Atlantic History’, Itinerario, 20 (1996), 19–44. Barker-Benfield, G. J., The Culture of Sensibility: Sex and Society in Eighteenth-Century Britain (Chicago, 1992). Barnett, David, London, Hub of the Industrial Revolution: A Revisionary History 1775–1825 (London, 1998). Barrell, J., The Political Theory of Painting from Reynolds to Hazlitt (New Haven, 1986). Baudrillard, Jean, For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign (Paris, 1981). Bauer, Arnold J., Goods, Power, History: Latin America’s Material Culture (Cambridge, 2001). Bemrose, William, Bow, Chelsea and Derby Porcelain (London, 1989). Ben-Atar, Doron,‘Alexander Hamilton’s Alternative:Technology Piracy and the Report on Manufactures’, William and Mary Quarterly, 52 (1995), 389–414. Bennett, Jim, ‘Shopping for Instruments in Paris and London’, in Pamela Smith and Paula Findlen (eds.), Merchants and Marvels (London, 2002), 370–98. Berg, Maxine, ‘Product innovation in Core Consumer Industries in Eighteenth-Century Britain’, in Maxine Berg and Kristina Bruland (eds.), Technological Revolutions in Europe: Historical Perspectives (Cheltenham, 1998), 138–60. —— ‘Commerce and Creativity in Eighteenth-Century Birmingham’, in Berg (ed.), Markets and Manufacture in Early Industrial Europe (London, 1991), 173–204. —— ‘Small Producer Capitalism in Eighteenth-Century England’, Business History, 35 (1993), 17–39. —— ‘Women’s Property and the Industrial Revolution’, Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 24 (1993), 233–50. —— ‘Women’s Consumption in Eighteenth-Century England’, Journal of Social History, 30 (1996), 415–34. —— ‘Manufacturing the Orient: Asian Commodities and European Industry 1500–1800’, Proceedings of the Istituto Internazionale di Storia Economica ‘F. Datini’ (Prato), 29 (1998), 385–419. ‘French Fancy and Cool Britannia: The Fashion Markets of Early Modern Europe’, Proceedings of the Istituto Internazionale di Storia Economica ‘F. Datini’ (Prato), 32 (2001), 519–56. — ‘From Imitation to Invention: Creating Commodities in Eighteenth-Century Britain’, Economic History Review, 45 (2002), 1–30. — ‘In Pursuit of Luxury: Global History and British Consumer Goods in the Eighteenth Century’, Past and Present, 182 (2004), 85–142. — and Clifford, Helen, ‘Commerce and the Commodity: Graphic Display and Selling New Consumer Goods in Eighteenth-Century England’, in Michael North and David Ormrod (eds.), Art Markets in Europe, 1400–1800 (Aldershot, 1998), 187–200. Berg, Maxine and Clifford, Helen (eds.), Consumers and Luxury: Consumer Culture in Europe 1650–1850 (Manchester, 1999). and Eger, Elizabeth (eds.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century: Debates, Desires and Delectable Goods (London, 2003). ‘The Rise and Fall of the Luxury Debates’, in Berg and Eger (eds.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century, 7–27. Bermingham, Anne, and Brewer, John (eds.), The Consumption of Culture 1600–1800: Image, Object, Text (London, 1995). Berry, Christopher, The Idea of Luxury. A Conceptual and Historical Investigation (Cambridge, 1994). Berry, Helen, ‘Rethinking Politeness in Eighteenth-Century England: Moll King’s Coffee House and the Significance of “Flash Talk” ’, Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 11 (2001), 65–81. —— ‘Polite Consumption: Shopping in Eighteenth-Century England’, Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 12 (2002), 375–94. Beurdeley, Michel, Porcelain of the East India Companies (London, 1962). Bianchi, M., ‘Taste for Novelty and Novel Tastes: The Role of Human Agency in Consumption’, in Bianchi (ed.), The Active Consumer: Novelty and Surprise in Human Choice (London, 1998), 64–86. Blake Roberts, Gaye, ‘Printing in Liverpool: The Association between Wedgwood and Sadler and Green’, Journal of the Northern Ceramics Society, 14 (1997), 45–70. — ‘Wedgwood to America: Trading Concerns during the 18th Century’, Ars Ceramica, 4 (1987), 4–8. —— ‘Patterns of Trade in the 18th Century’, English Ceramics Circle, 14 (1990), 93–105. Borsay, Peter, and Proudfoot, Lindsay (eds.), Provincial Towns in Early Modem England and Ireland (Oxford, 2002). Bourdieu, Pierre, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Cambridge, Mass., 1984). Breen, T. H. ‘An Empire of Goods: The Anglicization of Colonial America 1690–1776’, Journal of British Studies, 25 (1986), 333–57. — ‘ “Baubles of Britain”: The American and Consumer Revolutions of the Eighteenth Century’, Past and Present, 119 (1988), 73–104. ‘The Meanings of Things: Interpreting the Consumer Economy in the Eighteenth Century’, in John Brewer and Roy Porter (eds.), Consumption and the World of Goods (London, 1993), 249–60. —— The Marketplace of Revolution (Oxford, 2004). Breward, Christopher, The Hidden Consumer: Masculinities, Fashion and City Life 1860–1914 (Manchester, 1999). Brewer, John, ‘Commercialisation and Politics’, in Neil McKendrick, John Brewer and J. H. Plumb (eds.), The Birth of a Consumer Society (London, 1982), 197–264. —— The Pleasures of the Imagination: English Culture in the Eighteenth Century (London, 1997). — ‘The Error of our Ways’, Lecture to the Cultures of Consumption Programme, The Royal Society, 23 Sept. 2003, Working Paper No. 12, www.consume.bbk.ac.uk/publications.html. Sentimental Murder: Love and Madness in the Eighteenth Century (London, 2004). —— and Porter, Roy (eds.), Consumption and the World of Goods (London, 1993). Briggs, Asa, ‘Metals and the Imagination’, Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, 128 (1980), 665–70. —— Victorian Things (Harmondsworth, 1988). Tim Brook, The Confusions of Pleasure. Commerce and Culture in Ming China (Berkeley, 1998). Brown, E. Myra, and Lockett, Terence A. (eds.), Made in Liverpool: Liverpool Pottery and Porcelain 1700–1850 (National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside) (Liverpool, 1993). Brown, Peter and Schwartz, Marla, Come Drink the Bowl Dry (York, 1996). Buckley, Francis, A History of Old English Glass (London, 1925). ‘The Birmingham Glass Trade 1740–1833’, Transactions of the Society of Glass Technology, 11 (1927), 374–86. Burke, Peter, The Italian Renaissance (Cambridge, 1986, 1999). Burnett, John, A History of the Cost of Living (Harmondsworth, 1969). Bushman, Richard L., The Refinement of America (New York, 1993). Campbell, Colin, ‘The Desire for the New: Its Nature and Social Location as Presented in Theories of Fashion and Modern Consumerism’ (1992), in Daniel Miller (ed.), Consumption: Critical Concepts in the Social Sciences, 4 vols. (London, 2001), i, 246–61. Carr, Lois Green, and Walsh, Lorena S., ‘Changing Lifestyles and Consumer Behavior in the Colonial Chesapeake’, in Cary Carson, Ronald Hoffman, and Peter J. Albert (eds.), Of Consuming Interests (Charlottesville, Va., 1994), 59–166. Carrier, James, Gifts and Commodities: Exchange and Western Capitalism since 1700 (London, 1995). Carson, Cary,‘The Consumer Revolution in Colonial America: Why Demand?’, in Carson, Hoffman, and Albert (eds.), Of Consuming Interests, 483–697. —— Hoffman, Ronald, and Albert, Peter J. (eds.), Of Consuming Interests:The Styles of Life in the Eighteenth Century (Charlottesville, Va., 1994). Carter, Philip, Men and the Emergence of Polite Society 1660–1800 (London, 2001). Chalklin, C. W., The Provincial Towns of Georgian England: A Study of the Building Process 1740–1820 (London, 1974). Chapman, Colin, How Heavy, How Much and How Long? Weights, Money and Other Measures Used by our Ancestors (Dursley, 1995). Chapman, S. D., The Cotton Industry in the Industrial Revolution (2nd edn., London, 1987). Chapman, S. D., and Bartlett, J. N., ‘The Contribution of Building Clubs and Freehold Land Societies to Working-Class Housing in Birmingham’, in Chapman (ed.), The History of Working-Class Housing: A Symposium (Newton Abbot, 1971), 221–47. and Chassagne, S., European Textile Printers in the Eighteenth Century: A Study of Peel and Oberkampf (London, 1981). Charleston, R. D., English Glass and the Glass Used in England, circa 1400–1940 (London, 1984). Chartres, J., ‘The Marketing of Agricultural Produce’, in J. Thirsk (ed.), The Agrarian History of England and Wales, v: 1640–1750 (Cambridge, 1985), 406–502. and Turnbull, G. L., ‘Road Transport’, in D. H. Aldcroft and M. J. Freeman (eds.), Transport in the Industrial Revolution (Manchester, 1983). Chaudhuri, K. N., The English East India Company. A Study of an Early Joint Stock Company 1600–1640 (London, 1965). —— The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company 1660–1760 (Cambridge, 1978). ‘European Trade with India’, in T. Raychaudhuri and I. Habib (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of India, 2 vols. (Cambridge, 1982), i. 382–406. —— Trade and Civilization in the Indian Ocean (Cambridge, 1985). — Asia before Europe: Economy and Civilisation of the Indian Ocean from the Rise of Islam to 1750 (Cambridge, 1990). Christie, C., The British Country House in the Eighteenth Century (Manchester, 2000). Clark, Peter, ‘Small Towns 1700–1840’, in Clark (ed.), The Cambridge Urban History, ii. 733–74. —— British Clubs and Societies 1580–1800 (Oxford, 2000). —— (ed.), The Cambridge Urban History of Britain, 3 vols. (Cambridge, 2000). Clayton, Tim, The English Print 1688–1802 (New Haven, 1997). Clifford, Helen, ‘Concepts of Invention, Identity and Imitation in the London and Provincial Metal-Working Trades, 1750–1800’, Journal of Design History, 12 (1999), 241–56. ‘Making Luxuries: The Image and Reality of Luxury Workshops in Eighteenth-Century London’, in P.S. Barnwell, M. Palmer and M. Airs (eds.), The Vernacular Workshop: from Craft to Industry, 1400–1900 (York, 2004), 17–27. ‘A Commerce with Things: The Value of Precious Metalwork in Early Modern England’, in Maxine Berg and Helen Clifford (eds.), Consumers and Luxury (Manchester, 1999), 147–69. —— Silver in London: The Parker and Wakelin Partnership 1760–76 (New Haven, 2004). Clifford, Timothy, Designs of Desire: Architectural and Ornament Prints and Drawings 1500–1850 (Edinburgh, 1999). Clunas, Craig, Superfluous Things: Material Culture and Social Status in Early Modern China (Cambridge, 1991). —— ‘Modernity Global and Local: Consumption and the Rise of the West’, American Historical Review, 104 (1999), 1497–511. Cocks, Anna Somers, ‘The Nonfunctional Use of Ceramics in the English Country House during the Eighteenth Century’, Studies in the History of Art, 25 (1989), 195–215. Colley, Linda, Britons: Forging the Nation 1707–1837 (New Haven, 1992). —— ‘Britishness, and Otherness: An Argument’, Journal of British Studies, 31 (Oct. 1992), 309–29. Collingham, E. M., Imperial Bodies: The Physical Experience of the Raj, 1800–1947 (Cambridge, 2001). Collins, B., ‘Matters Material and Luxurious: Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth-Century Irish Linen Consumption’, in J. Hill and C. Lennon (eds.), Luxury and Austerity (Dublin, 1999), 106–20. Conway, Stephen, ‘From Fellow-Nationals to Foreigners: British Perceptions of the Americans, circa 1739–1783’, William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd ser. 59 (2002), 65–100. Copeland, David, Debating the Issues in Colonial Newspapers (London, 2000). Corfield, Penny, Power and the Professions in England 1700–1850 (London, 1995). Coulter, Calvin, ‘The Import Trade of Colonial Virginia’, William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd ser. 2 (1945), 296–314. Cox, N., and Cox, J., ‘Probate Inventories: The Legal Background’, Local Historian, 16 (1984), 133–45; 217–27. Cox, Nancy, The Complete Tradesman: A Study of Retailing, 1550–1820 (Aldershot, 2000). Crafts, N. F. R., British Economic Growth during the Industrial Revolution (Oxford, 1985). Craske, Matthew, Art in Europe 1700–1830 (Oxford, 1997). — ‘Plan and Control: Design and the Competitive Spirit in Early and Mid-Eighteenth-Century England’, Journal of Design History, 12 (1999), 187– 216. and Berg, Maxine, ‘Art and Industry: The Making of Modern Luxury in Eighteenth Century Britain’, in Economia e arte, Proceedings of the Istituto Internazionale di Storia Economica ‘F. Datini’ (Prato), 33 (2002), 823–6. Crom, T. R., Trade Catalogues 1542–1842 (Melroze, Fla., 1976). Crouzet, François, ‘England and France in the Eighteenth Century: A Comparative Analysis of Two Economic Growths’, in R. M. Hartwell (ed.), The Causes of the Industrial Revolution in England (London, 1967). Crowley, John E., The Invention of Comfort (Baltimore, 2001). Daunton, Martin, and Hilton, Matthew (eds.), The Politics of Consumption (Oxford, 2001). Davies, Rebecca, ‘Rags or Ruffles? The World of Goods of the Respectable Artisan, c.1780–1830’ (MA dissertation, University of Warwick, 2002). Davis, Lance, and Engerman, Stanley, ‘The Economy of British North America: Miles Travelled, Miles Still to Go’, William and Mary Quarterly, 56 (1999), 9–22. Davis, Ralph, ‘English Foreign Trade 1700–1774’, in W. E. Minchinton (ed.), The Growth of English Overseas Trade (London, 1969), 99–120. —— The Industrial Revolution and British Overseas Trade (Leicester, 1979). de Bellaigue, G., ‘The Vulliamys and France’, Furniture History, 3 (1967), 45–53. de Certeau, Michel, The Practice of Everyday Life, vol. i (Berkeley, 1984); vol. ii (Minneapolis, 1998). de Grazia, Victoria, and Furlough, Ellen (eds.), The Sex of Things: Gender and Consumption in Historical Perspective (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1996). De Marchi, Neil, ‘Adam Smith’s Accommodation of “Altogether Endless” Desires’, in Maxine Berg and Helen Clifford (eds.), Consumers and Luxury (Manchester, 1999), 18–36. — and Van Miergroet, H. J., ‘Ingenuity, Preference and the Pricing of Pictures: The Smith–Reynolds Connection’, in N. De Marchi and C. D. W. Goodwin (eds.), Economic Engagements with Art (Durham, NC, 1999), 379– 412. Deng, Gang [Kent], Chinese Maritime Activities and Socioeconomic Development c.2100 B.C.–1900 A.D. (Westport, Conn., 1997). ‘The Foreign Staple Trade of China in the Pre-modern Era’, International History Review, 19 (1997), 253–83. —— , ‘A Critical Survey of Recent Research in Chinese Economic History’, Economic History Review, 53 (2000), 1–28. Devine, T. M., ‘The Urban Crisis’, in T. M. Devine and Gordon Jackson (eds.), Glasgow, i: Beginnings to 1830 (Manchester, 1995), 402–16. de Vries, Jan, ‘Between Purchasing Power and the World of Goods’, in Brewer and Porter (eds.), Consumption and the World of Goods, 85–132. ‘Luxury in the Dutch Golden Age in Theory and Practice’, in Berg and Eger (eds.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century, 41–56. Doerflinger, Thomas, A Vigorous Spirit of Enterprise: Merchants and Economic Development in Revolutionary Philadelphia (Chapel Hill, NC, 1986). Douglas, Mary,‘Why do People Want Goods?’, in S. H. Heap and A. Ross (eds.), Understanding the Enterprise Culture: Themes in the Work of Mary Douglas (Edinburgh, 1992), 19–31. —— Thought Styles: Critical Essays on Good Taste (London, 1996). and Isherwood, Baron, The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption (Harmondsworth, 1978). Earl, P., Lifestyle Economics: Consumer Behaviour in a Turbulent World (New York, 1986). Earle, Peter, The Making of the English Middle Class (London, 1989). Eatwell, Ann, and Werner, Alex, ‘A London Staffordshire Warehouse— 1794–1825’, Journal of the Northern Ceramics Society, 8 (1991), 91–224. Edwards, C., Eighteenth-Century Furniture (Manchester, 1996). Eger, Elizabeth, ‘Luxury, Industry and Charity: Bluestocking Culture Displayed’, in Berg and Eger (eds.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century, 190– 206. Elliott, J. H., ‘Afterward: Atlantic History. A Circumnavigation’, in David Armitage and Michael J. Braddick (eds.), The British Atlantic World 1500–1800 (Basingstoke, 2002), 233–49. Ellis, Joyce, ‘Regional and County Centres 1700–1840’, in Clark (ed.), The Cambridge Urban History of Britain, ii. 673–704. Elvin, Mark, The Pattern of the Chinese Past (Stanford, Calif., 1973). Engerman, Stanley, ‘Mercantilism and Overseas Trade, 1700–1800’, in R. Floud and D. McCloskey (eds.), The Economic History of Britain since 1700, 3 vols. (2nd edn., Cambridge, 1994), i. 182–204. and O’Brien, Patrick K., ‘The Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective’, in Roderick Floud and Paul Johnson (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain, i (Cambridge, 2004), 451–64. Estabrook, Carl B., Urbane and Rustic England: Cultural Ties and Social Spheres in the Provinces 1660–1780 (Manchester, 1998). Everitt, A., ‘The Marketing of Agricultural Produce’, in J. Thirsk (ed.), The Agrarian History of England and Wales, 6 vols. (Cambridge, 1987), iv. 466– 589. Eversley, D. C., ‘Industry and Trade 1500–1800’, Victoria County History of Warwickshire (London, 1964), vii. 81–139. Ewins, Neil, ‘ “Supplying the Present Wants of our Yankee Cousins . . .”: Staffordshire Ceramics and the American Market 1775–1880’, Journal of Ceramic History, Special Issue, 15 (1997), 18–20. Fairchilds, Cissie, ‘The Production and Marketing of Populuxe Goods in Eighteenth-Century Paris’, in John Brewer and Roy Porter (eds.), Consumption and the World of Goods (London, 1993), 228–48. Fawcett, T., ‘Bath’s Georgian Warehouses’, Costume, 26 (1993), 32–8. Federer, Andrew, ‘Payment, Credit and the Organization of Work in Eighteenth-Century Westminster’, unpublished paper, SSRC Conference on Manufacture in Town and Country before the Factory, Oxford, 1980. Feinstein, C. H., ‘Pessimism Perpetuated: Real Wages and the Standard of Living in Britain during and after the Industrial Revolution’, Journal of Economic History, 58 (1998), 625–58. Ferdinand, C. Y., ‘Selling it to the Provinces: News and Commerce round Eighteenth-Century Salisbury’, in John Brewer and Roy Porter (eds.),Consumption and the World of Goods (London, 1993), 393–411. Finer, A., and Savage, G. (eds.), The Selected Letters of Josiah Wedgwood (London, 1965). Finlay, Robert, ‘The Pilgrim Art: The Culture of Porcelain in World History’, Journal of World History, 9 (1998), 141–89. Finn, Margot, ‘Men’s Things: Masculine Possession in the Consumer Revolution’, Social History, 25 (2000), 133–56. —— The Character of Credit: Personal Debt in English Culture, 1740–1914 (Cambridge, 2003). Fisher, F. J., ‘The Development of London as a Centre of Conspicuous Consumption in the 16th and 17th Centuries’, in E. M. Carus Wilson (ed.), Essays in Economic History, ii (London, 1962), 197–207. Fitzmaurice, Lord, Life of William Earl of Shelburne, 2 vols. (London, 1912), vol. ii. Fontaine, Carolyn, ‘Parcours d’une marchande de modes française en Italie’ (Mémoire de maîtrise, Sorbonne, Paris, 1997). —— ‘The Fashion Trade in the Encyclopédie’ (MA dissertation, University of Warwick, 1998). Fontaine, Laurence, The History of Pedlars in Europe (Cambridge, 1996). Foster, S., ‘Going Shopping in 18th-Century Dublin’, Things, 4 (1996), 36–62. Frank, A. G., ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age (Berkeley, 1998). Frank, Robert, Luxury Fever: Why Money Fails to Satisfy in an Era of Excess (New York, 1999). Freudenberger, H., ‘Fashion, Sumptuary Laws and Business’, in G. Wills and D. Midgley (eds.), Fashion Marketing (London, 1973), 137–46. Frisby, David, and Featherstone, Mike (eds.), Simmel on Culture (London, 1997). Garlick, P., ‘The Sheffield Cutlery and Allied Trades’ (MA thesis, University of Sheffield, 1951). Gilboy, Elizabeth, ‘Demand as a Factor in the Industrial Revolution’ (1932), in R. M. Hartwell (ed.), The Causes of the Industrial Revolution in England (London, 1967), 121–38. Gill Conrad, Merchants and Mariners of the Eighteenth Century (London, 1961). Gilruth, Mary M., ‘The Importation of English Earthenware into Philadelphia 1770–1800’ (MA thesis, Winterthur, n.d.). Girouard, Mark, The English Town (New Haven, 1990). Gleeson, Janet, The Arcanum (London, 1998). Godden, Geoffrey A., Oriental Export Market Porcelain and its Influence on European Wares (London, 1979). Eighteenth-Century English Porcelain: A Selection from the Godden Reference Collection (St Albans, 1985). Godfrey, Eleanor, The Development of English Glassmaking 1560–1640 (Oxford, 1975). Goldin, Claudia, and Sokoloff, Kenneth, ‘Women, Children and Industrialization in the Early Republic: Evidence from the Manufacturing Censuses’, Journal of Economic History, 42 (1982), 741–74. Goldthwaite, Richard, Wealth and the Demand for Art in Italy, 1300–1600 (Baltimore, 1993). Goodman, Dena, ‘Furnishing Discourses: Readings of a Writing Desk in Eighteenth-Century France’, in Maxine Berg and Elizabeth Eger (eds.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century, 71–88. Gould, Eliga H., ‘An Empire of Manners: The Refinement of British America in Atlantic Perspective’, Journal of British Studies, 39 (2000), 114–22. Greenhalgh, Paul, ‘The Great Exhibition’, in Michael Snodin and John Styles (eds.), Design and the Decorative Arts in Britain 1500–1900 (London, 2001), 376–9. Griffiths,T., Hunt, P., and O’Brien, P., ‘Inventive Activity in the British Textile Industry, 1700–1800’, Journal of Economic History, 52 (1992), 880–906. Guillery, John, The Small House in Eighteenth-Century London (New Haven, 2004). Gutteridge, Joseph, ‘Lights and Shadows in the Life of an Artisan’, in V. E. Chancellor (ed.), Master and Artisan in Victorian England (London, 1969), 75–238. Hallett, Mark, The Spectacle of Difference: Graphic Satire in the Age of Hogarth (New Haven, 1999). Hamilton, Henry, The English Brass and Copper Industries to 1800 (London, 1926). Hancock, David, Citizens of the World: London Merchants and the Integration of the British Atlantic Community, 1775–1785 (Cambridge, 1995). Hardy, J., ‘Western Japanning 1670–1770’, in W. Watson (ed.), Lacquerwork in Asia and Beyond (London, 1982), 159–74. Harley, C. Knick, ‘Trade: Discovery, Mercantilism and Technology’, in Roderick Floud and Paul Johnson (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain, i (Cambridge, 2004), 175–203. Harris, J. R., ‘Saint-Gobain and Ravenhead’, in J. R. Harris (ed.), Essays in Industry and Technology in the Eighteenth Century: England and France (Aldershot, 1992), 34–77. —— Industrial Espionage and Technology Transfer: Britain and France in the Eighteenth Century (Aldershot, 1998). Harte, N. B., ‘Why Did Men Wear Wigs in the Eighteenth Century?’, unpublished paper presented to the Warwick Eighteenth-Century Seminar (Mar. 2001). ‘State Control of Dress and Social Change in Pre-industrial England’, in D. C. Coleman and A. H. John (eds.), Trade, Government and Economy in Pre-industrial England (London, 1976), 132–65. Hayward, M. E., ‘The Elliots of Philadelphia and the Looking Glass Trade 1755–1810’, MA thesis, University of Delaware, 1971. Henderson, W. O., Industrial Britain under the Regency: The Diaries of Escher, Bodmer, May and de Gallors 1814–18 (London, 1968). Hey, David, The Rural Metalworkers of the Sheffield Region (Leicester, 1972). ## Bibliography Hilaire-Pérez, Lilianne, L’Invention technique au siècle des lumières (Paris, 2000). ‘Diderot’s Views on Artists’ and Inventors’ Rights: Invention, Imitation and Reputation’, British Journal for the History of Science, 35 (2002) 129–50. Hildyard, Robin, ‘British Supremacy’, in Reino Liefkes, Glass (London, 1997), 82–103. Hill, Bridget, ‘Catherine Hutton (1756–1846): A Forgotten Letter-Writer’, Women’s Writing, 1 (1994), 35–50. Hillier, Bevis, Pottery and Porcelain 1700–1914 (London, 1968). Hirsch, Fred, Social Limits to Growth (London, 1977). Hirschman, A. O., The Passions and the Interests: Political Arguments for Capitalism before its Triumph (Princeton, 1977). Hitchcock, Tim, English Sexualities 1700–1800 (Basingstoke, 1997). Ho, C., ‘The Ceramic Trade in Asia, 1602–82’, in A. J. H. Latham and H. Kawakatsu (eds.), Japanese Industrialization and the Asian Economy (London, 1994), 35–70. Holderness, B. A., ‘The Birth of a Consumer Society’, English Historical Review, 99 (1984), 122–4. Hopkins, Eric, Birmingham:The First Manufacturing Town in the World 1760–1840 (London, 1989). Hoppit, Julian, A Land of Liberty? England 1689–1727 (Oxford, 2000). Horn, James, ‘British Diaspora: Emigration from Britain, 1680–1815’, in P. J. Marshall (ed.), The Oxford History of the British Empire, ii (Oxford, 1998), 28–52. Howell, Martha, ‘Fixing Movables: Gifts by Testament in Late Medieval Douai’, Past and Present, 150 (1996), 3–45. Hubbard, Philippa, ‘Transatlantic Clothing Cultures: Britain and her North American Colonies 1750–1800’ (MA dissertation, University of Warwick, 2003). Hudson, Pat (ed.), Regions and Industries (Cambridge, 1990). Hughes, G. Bernard, English, Scottish and Irish Table Glass from the Sixteenth Century to 1820 (London, 1956). English and Scottish Earthenware 1660–1860 (London, 1961). Hummel, Charles F., ‘Samuel Rowland Fisher’s Catalogue of English Hardware’, Winterthur Portfolio, 1 (1964), 188–97. Hundert, Edward, ‘Mandeville, Rousseau and the Political Economy of Fantasy’, in Berg and Eger (eds.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century, 28–40. —— The Enlightenment’s Fable (Cambridge, 1995). Hunt, Alan, Governance of the Consuming Passions: A History of Sumptuary Law (London, 1996). Hunt, Margaret, The Middling Sort: Commerce, Gender and the Family in England 1680–1780 (Berkeley, 1986). Hutchins, Catherine E. (ed.), Everyday Life in the Early Republic (Winterthur, Del., 1994). Huth, H., Lacquer of the West (London, 1971). Impey, Oliver, Chinoiserie: The Impact of Oriental Styles on Western Art and Decoration (Oxford, 1977). —— ‘Japanese Export Lacquer of the 17th Century’, in W. Watson (ed.), Lacquerwork in Asia and Beyond, Colloquies on Art & Archaeology in Asia 11 (London, 1982), 124–59. —— ‘Japanese Export Market Porcelain’ in J. Ayers, O. Impey, and J. V. G. Mallet (eds.), Porcelain for Palaces (London, 1990), 25–36. Irwin, John and Schwartz, P. R., Studies in Indo-European Textile History (Ahmedabad, India, 1966). Irwin, John, and Brett, Katherine, Origins of Chintz (London, 1970). Jackson, Peter, and Thrift, Nigel, ‘Geographies of Consumption’, in D. Miller (ed.), Acknowledging Consumption (London, 1995), 204–38. Jardine, L., Worldly Goods: A New History of the Renaissance (London, 1996). Jensen, Arthur L., The Maritime Commerce of Colonial Philadelphia (Madison, Wis., 1963). Jeyes, S. H., The Russells of Birmingham in the French Revolution and in America 1791–1814 (London, 1911). Johnson, E. A. J., ‘The Mercantilist Concept of “Art” and “Ingenious Labour” ’, Economic Journal Supplement (1930–3), 234–53. Jones, Colin, The Great Nation: France from Louis XV to Napoleon (Harmondsworth, 2002). Jones, E. L., ‘The Fashion Manipulators: Consumer Tastes and British Industries, 1660–1800’, in P. J. Uselding (ed.), Business Enterprise and Economic Change (Kent, Oh., 1973), 198–226. —— Growth Recurring: Economic Change in World History (Oxford, 1988). —— Frost, Lionel, and White, Colin, Coming Full Circle: An Economic History of the Pacific Rim (Boulder, Colo., 1993). Jones, Peter, ‘ “England Expects . . .”: Trading in Liberty in the Age of Trafalgar’, in M. Crook et al. (eds.), Enlightenment and Revolution: Essays in Honour of Norman Hampson (Aldershot, 2004), 187–204. Jorg, C. L., Porcelain and the Dutch China Trade (The Hague, 1982). Joy, Edward T., ‘Some Aspects of the London Furniture Industry in the Eighteenth Century’ (MA thesis, University of London, 1955). —— ‘English Furniture Exports to America 1697–1830’, Antiques (1964), 92–8. —— ‘The Overseas Trade in Furniture in the 18th Century’, Furniture History, 1 (1965), 1–11. Karp, I., and Lavine, S. D. (eds.), Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and Politics of Museum Display (Washington, 1990). Kidd, Colin, Subverting Scotland’s Past: Scottish Whig Historians and the Creation of an Anglo-British Identity, 1689–1839 (Cambridge, 1993). —— British Identities before Nationalism (Cambridge, 2000). ‘Identity before Identities: Ethnicity, Nationalism and the Historian’, in Julia Rudolph (ed.), History and Nation (Lewisburg, Pa., forthcoming 2005–6). Klein, Laurence E., Shaftesbury and the Culture of Politeness: Moral Discourse and Cultural Politics in Early Eighteenth-Century England (Cambridge, 1994). Klein, Laurence E., ‘Politeness for Plebes’, in John Brewer and Roy Porter (eds.), The Consumption of Culture 1600–1800 (London, 1995), 362–82. —— ‘Politeness and the Interpretation of the British Eighteenth Century’, Historical Journal, 43 (2002), 869–98. ‘The Polite Town: Shifting Possibilities of Urbanness, 1660–1714’, in Tim Hitchcock and Heather Shore (eds.), The Streets of London: From the Great Fire to the Great Stink (London, 2003), 27–39. Kowaleski-Wallace, Elizabeth, Consuming Subjects (New York, 1997). Landes, David, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations (New York, 1998). The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present (Cambridge, 1969). — Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World (Cambridge, Mass., 1983). Langford, Paul, A Polite and Commercial People: England 1727–1783 (Oxford, 1989). —— ‘The Uses of Eighteenth-Century Politeness’, Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 12 (2002), 311–31. Leader, Robert, Sheffield in the Eighteenth Century (Sheffield, 1901). Lemire, Beverly, ‘Second-Hand Beaux and “Red-Armed Belles”: Conflict and the Creation of Fashions in England, c.1660–1800’, Continuity and Change, 15 (2000), 391–417. —— ‘Peddling Fashion’, Textile History, 22 (1991), 67–82. Fashion’s Favourite: The Cotton Trade and the Consumer in Britain 1660–1800 (Oxford, 1991). —— Dress, Culture and Commerce: The English Clothing Trade before the Factory 1660–1800 (London, 1997). —— ‘Domesticating the Exotic: Floral Culture and the East India Calico Trade with England, 1600–1800’, Textile, 1 (2003), 65–85. Leopold, E., ‘The Manufacture of the Fashion System’, in J. Ash and E. Wilson (eds.), Chic Thrills: A Fashion Reader (London, 1992), 101–18. Levine, David, and Wrightson, Keith, The Making of an Industrial Society: Whickham 1560–1765 (Oxford, 1991). Lindert, P. H., and Williamson, J. G., ‘Revising England’s Social Tables, 1688–1812’, Explorations in Economic History, 19 (1982), 395–408. Lipovetsky, G., The Empire of Fashion: Dressing Modern Democracy, trans. Catherine Porter (Princeton, 1994). Lloyd, G. I. H., The Cutlery Trades (London, 1913). Looney, J. Jefferson, ‘Cultural Life in the Provinces: Leeds and York 1720–1820’ in A. L. Beier, David Cannadine, and James M. Rosenheim (eds.), The First Modern Society. Essays in English History in Honour of Lawrence Stone (Cambridge, 1989), 483–510. Lubbock, Jules, The Tyranny of Taste: The Politics of Architecture and Design in Britain 1550–1960 (New Haven, 1995). Lunsingh-Scheuleer, D. F., Chinese Export Porcelain (London, 1974). McCloskey, D. N., Knowledge and Persuasion in Economics (Cambridge, 1994). McCracken, Grant, Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities (Bloomington, Ind., 1988). McCray, Patrick, The Fragile Craft: A History of Venetian Glass (Aldershot, 1999). McCusker, J. J., and Menard, R. R., The Economy of British North America 1607–1789 (Chapel Hill, NC, 1985). McKendrick, Neil, ‘Josiah Wedgwood and the Commercialization of the Potteries’, in McKendrick, Brewer, and Plumb, The Birth of a Consumer Society, 100–45. ‘The Commercialisation of Fashion’, in McKendrick, Brewer, and Plumb, The Birth of a Consumer Society, 34–99. (ed.), Historical Perspectives: Studies in English Thought and Society (Cambridge, 1974). Brewer, John, and Plumb, J. H., The Birth of a Consumer Society: The Commercialization of Eighteenth-Century England (London, 1982). MacKenzie, J. M., Orientalism, History, Theory and the Arts (Manchester, 1995). MacLeod, Christine, Inventing the Industrial Revolution: The English Patent System 1660–1800 (Cambridge, 1988). Mallet, J., ‘European Ceramics and the Influence of Japan’, in J. Ayers, O. Impey, and J. V. G. Mallet (eds.), Porcelain for Palaces (London, 1990), 38–51. Marshall, Alfred, Industry and Trade (London, 1921). Marshall, P. J. (ed.), The Oxford History of the British Empire: The Eighteenth Century, ii (Oxford, 1998). ‘Taming the Exotic:The British and India in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries’, in G. S. Rousseau and R. Porter (eds.), Exoticism in the Enlightenment (Manchester, 1990), 46–65. Mason, Frances Norton, John Norton & Sons, Merchants of London and Virginia (Richmond, Va., 1937). Mennell, Stephen, Norbert Elias: Civilization and the Human Self-Image (Oxford, 1989). Midgley, Clare, Women against Slavery: The British Campaigns, 1780–1870 (London, 1992). Miller, Daniel (ed.), Acknowledging Consumption: A Review of New Studies (London, 1995), 264–95. —— Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Oxford, 1987). —— Jackson, Peter, et al., Shopping, Place and Identity (London, 1998). Miller, George L., Martin, Ann Smart, and Dickinson, Nancy S., ‘Changing Consumption Patterns: English Ceramics and the American Market from 1770 to 1840’, in Catherine E. Hutchins (ed.), Everyday Life in the Early Republic (Winterthur, Del., 1994), 219–48. Miller, George L., and Hunter, Robert, ‘How Creamware got the Blues: The Origins of China Glaze and Pearlware’, in Robert Hunter (ed.), Ceramics in America (Milwaukee, 2001), 135–61. Miller, Lesley, ‘Paris–Lyons–Paris: Dialogue in the Design and Distribution of Patterned Silks in the Eighteenth Century’, in R. Fox and A. Turner (eds.), Luxury Trades and Consumerism in Ancien Regime Paris (Aldershot, 1998), 139–68. Mitchell, David (ed.), Goldsmiths, Silversmiths and Bankers: Innovation and the Transfer of Skill, 1550–1750 (London, 1995). Mokyr, Joel, The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy (Princeton, 2002). Money, John, Experience and Identity: Birmingham and the West Midlands 1760–1800 (Manchester, 1977). Morgan, Ken, Bristol and the Atlantic Trade in the Eighteenth Century (Cambridge, 1993). —— ‘Business Networks in the British Export Trade to North America, 1750–1800’, in John J. McCusker and Kenneth Morgan (eds.), The Early Modern Atlantic Economy (Cambridge, 2000), 36–64. Morrison, Kathryn, English Shops and Shopping (New Haven, 2004). Mountford, Arnold R., ‘Thomas Wedgwood, John Wedgwood and Jonah Malkin, Potters of Burslem: Analysis of Certain Unpublished Eighteenth-Century Documentary Sources with Particular Reference to the Manufacture and Distribution of Earthenware and Stoneware’ (MA thesis, University of Keele, 1972). Mui, H., and Mui, L., Shops and Shopkeeping in Eighteenth-Century England (London, 1989). Muir, Julia, ‘Printing Persuasion: Advertising Goods in Eighteenth-Century England’ (MA dissertation, V&A/Royal College of Art, 2000). Mukerji, Chandra, From Graven Images: Patterns of Modern Materialism (New York, 1983). Muldrew, Craig, The Economy of Obligation: The Culture of Credit and Social Relations in Early Modern England (Basingstoke, 1998). Nava, M., ‘Framing Advertising’, in M. Nava, A. Blacke, I. McRury, and B. Richards, Buy this Book: Studies in Advertising and Consumption (London, 1999). Nef, John U., Cultural Foundations of Industrial Civilization (Cambridge, 1958). Nenadic, Stana,‘Middle-Rank Consumers and Domestic Culture in Edinburgh and Glasgow 1720–1840’, Past and Present, 145 (1994), 122–57. —— ‘Print Collecting and Popular Culture in Eighteenth-Century Scotland’, History, 82 (1997), 203–22. ‘The Middle Ranks and Modernisation’ in Tom Devine and Gordon Jackson (eds.), Glasgow, i: Beginnings to 1830 (Manchester, 1995), 278–311. Newman, Gerald, The Rise of English Nationalism: A Cultural History 1740–1820 (London, 1997). Nishida, H., ‘Japanese Export Porcelain during the 17th and 18th Century’ (D.Phil. thesis, Oxford, 1974). O’Brien, P. K., ‘From the Voyages of Discovery to the Industrial Revolution’, in H. Pohl (ed.), The European Discovery of the World and its Economic Effects on Preindustrial Society 1500–1800 (Stuttgart, 1990). —— and Keyder, C., Economic Growth in Britain and France 1780–1914 (London, 1976). Ormrod, D.,‘Northern Europe and the Expanding World-Economy:The Transformation of Commercial Organisation, 1500–1800’, in S. Cavaciocchi (ed.), Prodotti e tecniche d’oltremare nelle economie europee, Secc. XIII–XVIII (Atti della XXIX Settimana di Studi, 14–19 aprile 1997) (Florence, 1998), 671–700. Overton,Mark,‘Geographies of Consumption in Early Modern England’,paper presented to the conference on Georgian Geographies, Paul Mellon Centre, London (Sept. 2000). —— Whittle, Jane, Dean, Darron, and Hann, Andrew, Production and Consumption in English Households, 1600–1750 (London, 2004). Palk, Deirdre, ‘Private Crime in Public and Private Places: Pickpockets and Shoplifters in London, 1780–1823’, in Tim Hitchcock and Heather Shore (eds.), The Streets of London (London, 2003), 135–50. Parthasarathi, Prasannan, ‘The Great Divergence’, Past and Present, 116 (2002), 275–93. Philipson, Nicholas, ‘Politics, Politeness and the Anglicisation of Early Eighteenth-Century Scottish Culture’, in R. A. Mason (ed.), Scotland and England, 1286–1815 (Edinburgh, 1987), 17–34. —— Hume (London, 1989). Phillips, J. G., China-Trade Porcelain (Cambridge, Mass., 1956). Pointon, Marcia, Strategies for Showing: Women, Possession and Representation in English Visual Culture 1665–1800 (Oxford, 1997). Polak, Ada, Glass: Its Makers and its Public (London, 1975). Pomeranz, Kenneth, The Great Divergence: Europe, China and the Making of the Modern World Economy (Princeton, 2000). Poni, Carlo, ‘Fashion as Flexible Production: The Strategies of the Lyons Silk Merchants in the Eighteenth Century’, in C. Sabel and J. Zeitlin (eds.), World of Possibilities: Flexibility and Mass Production in Western Industrialization (Cambridge, 1997), 37–74. Porter, Roy, Enlightenment (London, 2002). Price, Jacob M.,‘The Imperial Economy 1700–1776’, in P. J. Marshall (ed.), Oxford History of the British Empire, ii., 78–104. —— Joshua Johnson’s Letterbook, 1771–1774 (London, 1979). —— Capital and Credit in British Overseas Trade: The View from the Chesapeake, 1700–1776 (Cambridge, Mass., 1980). Puetz, Anne, ‘Design Instruction for Artisans in Eighteenth-Century Britain’, Journal of Design History, 12 (1999), 217–41. Quickenden, Ken,‘Boulton and Fothergill Silver: Business Plans and Miscalculations’, Art History, 3 (Sept. 1980), 274–92. Rabuzzi, Daniel,‘Eighteenth-Century Commercial Mentalities as Reflected and Projected in Business Handbooks’, Eighteenth-Century Studies, 29 (1995–6), 169–89. Reilly, Robin, Wedgwood, 2 vols. (London, 1989), vol. i. Reynard, P. C., ‘Manufacturing Quality in the Pre-industrial Age: Finding Value in Diversity’, Economic History Review, 53 (Aug. 2000), 493–516. Ribeiro, A., The Art of Dress: Fashion in England and France, 1750–1820 (New Haven, 1997). Richards, Sarch, Eighteenth-Century Ceramics: Products for a Civilized Society (Manchester, 1999). Riello, Giorgio, and O’Brien, P. K., ‘Reconstructing the Industrial Revolution: Analyses, Perceptions and Conceptions of Britain’s Precocious Transition to Europe’s First Industrial Society’ (unpublished paper, 2003). Roberts, Lisa, ‘A World of Wonders, a World of One’, in P. H. Smith and Paula Findlen (eds.), Merchants and Marvels (London, 2002), 399–411. Robinson, D., ‘The Styling and Transmission of Fashions Historically Considered: Winckelmann, Hamilton and Wedgwood in the “Greek Revival” ’, in G. Wills and D. Midgley (eds.), Fashion Marketing (London, 1973), 20–35. Robinson, Eric,‘Boulton and Fothergill 1762–1782 and the Birmingham Export of Hardware’, University of Birmingham Historical Journal, 7 (1959–60), 60–79. ‘Eighteenth-Century Commerce and Fashion: Matthew Boulton’s Marketing Techniques’, Economic History Review, 16 (1963–4), 39–60. ‘Matthew Boulton and Josiah Wedgwood, Apostles of Fashion’, in R. P. T. Davenport-Hines and Jonathan Liebenau (eds.), Business in the Age of Reason (London, 1987), 98–114. Roche, Daniel, The Culture of Clothing: Dress and Fashion in the Ancien Regime (London, 1996). —— Histoire des choses banales: naissance de la consommation dans les sociétés traditionelles xvii<sup>e</sup>–xix <sup>e</sup> siècle (Paris, 1997). Ross, Catherine, ‘The Flint Glass Houses on the Rivers Tyne and Wear during the Eighteenth Century’, Glass Circle, 5 (1986), 75–85. Rydèn, Göran, ‘Metallurgic Industry: Historical Overview’, Oxford Encyclopedia of Economic History, iii (Oxford, 2003), 490–3. Said,Edward, Orientalism: Western Conceptions of the Orient (1978; Harmondsworth, 1991). Sargentson, Carolyn, Merchants and Luxury Markets:The Marchands Merciers of Eighteenth-Century Paris (London, 1996). Sarti, Raffaella, Europe at Home: Family and Material Culture 1500–1800 (New Haven, 2002). Saumarez, Smith, Charles, Eighteenth Century Decoration: Design and the Domestic Interior in England (London, 1993). Schlereth, Thomas J. (ed.), Material Culture Studies in America (Nashville, 1982). Schor, Juliet, The Overspent American (New York, 1998). Schumpeter, Elizabeth, English Overseas Trade Statistics 1697–1808 (Oxford, 1960). Scitovsky, Tibor, The Joyless Economy: An Enquiry into Human Satisfaction and Consumer Dissatisfaction (New York, 1976). Scott, Katie, ‘Art and Industry—A Contradictory Union: Authors, Rights and Copyrights during the Consulat’, Journal of Design History, 13(20), 1–21. Sekora, John, Luxury:The Concept in Western Thought, Eden to Smollett (Baltimore, 1977). Sennett, Richard, ‘Consumer’ Lecture series, ‘The Culture of the New Capitalism’, Rothermere American Institute, Oxford, 18 May 2004. Sewell, William, Work and Revolution in Nineteenth Century France (Cambridge, 1982). Shammas, Carole, The Pre-industrial Consumer in England and America (Oxford, 1990). ‘Changes in English and Anglo-American Consumption from 1550–1800’, in John Brewer and Roy Porter (eds.), Consumption and the World of Goods (London, 1993), 177–205. Sharpe, Pamela, ‘Population and Society 1700–1840’, in Clark (ed.), The Cambridge Urban History of Britain, ii. 491–528. Sherratt, Andrew, ‘Reviving the Grand Narrative: Archaeology and Long-Term Change’, Journal of European Archaeology, 3 (1995), 1–32. — and Sherratt, Susan, ‘From Luxuries to Commodities: The Nature of Mediterranean Bronze Age Trading Systems’, in N. H. Gale (ed.), Bronze Age Trade in the Mediterranean ( Jonsered, 1991), 351–86. Shields, David S., Civil Tongues and Polite Letters in British America (Chapel Hill, NC, 1997). Singleton, H. R., A Chronology of Cutlery (Sheffield, 1970). Smail, J., Merchants, Markets and Manufacturers: The English Wool Textile Industry in the Eighteenth Century (London, 1999). Smith, S. D., ‘The Market for Manufactures in the Thirteen Continental Colonies, 1698–1776’, Economic History Review, 51 (1998), 676–708. Smith, Sheenah, ‘Glass in Eighteenth-Century Norwich’, Glass Circle, 2 (1975), 49–65. Smith, William Woodruff, Consumption and the Making of Respectability (London, 2003). Snodin, Michael,‘English Rococo and its Continental Origins’, in C. Hind (ed.), The Rococo in England (London, 1984), 27–33. —— ‘Style’ and ‘Who Led Taste’, in Snodin and Styles (eds.), Design and the Decorative Arts in Britain 1500–1900, 340–9, 369–71. —— and Styles, John (eds.), Design and the Decorative Arts: Britain 1500–1900 (London, 2001). Sokoloff, Kenneth L., and Zorina Khan, B., ‘The Democratization of Invention during Early Industrialization: Evidence from the United States, 1790–1846’, Journal of Economic History, 50 (1990), 363–78. Solkin, David, Painting for Money: The Visual Arts and the Public Sphere in Eighteenth-Century England (New Haven, 1992). Sombart, Werner, Luxury and Capitalism (1913; Ann Arbor, 1967). Spufford, M., ‘The Limitations of the Probate Inventory’, in J. Chartres and D. Hey (eds.), English Rural Society 1500–1800 (Cambridge, 1990), 139–74. Steensgaard, Niels, ‘The Growth and Composition of the Long-Distance Trade of England and the Dutch Republic before 1750’, in J. D. Tracy (ed.), The Rise of Merchant Empires (Cambridge, 1990), 102–52. Stewart, Susan, On Longing (Durham, NC, 1993). Styles, John, ‘Manufacturing, Consumption and Design in Eighteenth-Century England’, in John Brewer and Roy Porter (eds.), Consumption and the World of Goods (London, 1993), 527–54. ‘The Goldsmiths and the London Luxury Trades, 1550–1750’, in David Mitchell (ed.), Goldsmiths, Silversmiths and Bankers (London, 1995), 112–20. —— ‘Product Innovation in Early Modern London’, Past and Present, 168 (2000), 124–69. —— ‘Georgian Britain 1714–1837: Introduction’, in Snodin and Styles (eds.), Design and the Decorative Arts: Britain 1500–1900, 157–85. ‘Involuntary Consumers? Servants and their Clothes in Eighteenth-Century England’, Textile History, 33/1 (2002), 2–21. — ‘Plebeian Fashion in Eighteenth-Century England’, in Berg and Eger (eds.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century, 103–18. Sussman, Charlotte, Consuming Anxieties: Consumer Protest, Gender and British Slavery, 1713–1833 (Stanford, Calif., 2000). Sweet, R. H., ‘Topographies of Politeness’, Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 12 (2002), 355–74. Thirsk, Joan, Economic Policy and Projects: The Development of a Consumer Society in Early Modern England (Oxford, 1978). ‘Luxury Trades and Consumerism’, in Robert Fox (ed.), Luxury Trades and Consumerism in Ancien Regime Paris: Studies in the History of the Skilled Workforce (Aldershot, 1998), 257–62. Thomas, Brinley, ‘The First Atlantic Economy 1700–1760’, in B. Thomas (ed.), The Industrial Revolution and the Atlantic Economy: Selected Essays (London, 1993), 34–59. Thomson, J. K. J., ‘State Intervention in the Catalan Calico-Printing Industry in the Eighteenth Century’, in M. Berg (ed.), Markets and Manufacture in Early Industrial Europe (London, 1991), 57–92. Thrift, Nigel, and Glennie, Paul, ‘The Spaces of Clock Times’, in Patrick Joyce (ed.), The Social in Question: New Bearings in History and the Social Sciences (London, 2002), 151–74. Toppin, Aubrey, ‘The China Trade and Some London Chinamen’, English Ceramics Circle Transactions, 3 (1935), 37–57. Trentman, Frank,‘Beyond Consumerism: New Historical Perspectives on Consumption’, Journal of Contemporary History, 39 (2004), 373–401. Turnbull, G., ‘Canals, Coal and Regional Growth during the Industrial Revolution’, Economic History Review, 40 (1987), 538–60. Uglow, Jenny,‘Vase Mania’, in Berg and Eger (eds.), Luxury in the Eighteenth Century, 151–64. Unwin, George, The Guilds and Companies of London (London, 1908). Van Glahn, Richard, Fountain of Fortune: Money and Monetary Policy in China 1000–1700 (Berkeley, 1997). Vickers, Michael, ‘Value and Simplicity: Eighteenth-Century Taste and the Study of Greek Vases’, Past and Present, 116 (1987), 98–137. —— and Gill David, Artful Crafts. Ancient Greek Silverware and Pottery (Oxford, 1996). Vickery, Amanda, ‘Women and the World of Goods: A Lancashire Consumer and her Possessions 1751–81’, in Brewer and Porter (eds.), Consumption and the World of Goods, 274–304. —— The Gentleman’s Daughter: Women’s Lives in Georgian Britain (New Haven, 1998). Voth, H. J., ‘Work and the Sirens of Consumption in Eighteenth-Century London’, in M. Bianchi (ed.), The Active Consumer: Novelty and Surprise in Consumer Choice (London, 1998), 143–73. —— ‘Time and Work in Eighteenth-Century London, Journal of Economic History, 58 (1998), 28–58. Walsh, Claire, ‘Shop Design and the Display of Goods in Eighteenth-Century London’, Journal of Design History, 8 (1995), 157–76. ‘Shopping in Early-Modern London c.1660–1800’ (Ph.D. thesis, European University Institute, Florence, 2001). Weatherill, Lorna, ‘The Business of Middleman in the English Pottery Trade before 1780’, in R. P. D. Davenport-Hines and J. Liebenau (eds.), Business in the Age of Reason (London, 1987), 51–76. —— The Pottery Trade and North Staffordshire 1660–1760 (Manchester, 1971). ‘The Growth of the Pottery Industry in England, 1660–1815’, Post-Medieval Archaeology, 17 (1983), 15–46. —— ‘A Possession of One’s Own: Women and Consumer Behaviour in England 1660–1740’, Journal of British Studies, 25 (1986), 131–56. —— The Growth of the Pottery Industry in England 1660–1815 (London, 1986). —— ‘Consumer Behaviour and Social Status in England, 1660–1750’, Continuity and Change, 1 (1986), 191–216. Consumer Behaviour & Material Culture in Britain 1660–1760 (London, 1988). ‘The Meaning of Consumer Behaviour in Late Seventeenth- and Early Eighteenth-Century England’, in John Brewer and Roy Porter (eds.), Consumption and the World of Goods (London, 1993), 206–27. Weatherill, Lorna, ‘Consumer Behaviour, Textiles and Dress in the Late Seventeenth and Early Eighteenth Centuries’, Textile History, 22 (1991), 297–311. Welch, Evelyn, Art in Renaissance Italy (Oxford, 1997). Wernick, A., Promotional Culture: Advertising, Ideology and Symbolic Expression (London, 1991). Westerfield, R. B., Middlemen in English Business (1915; repri. Newton Abbot, 1968). Whatley, Christopher A., Scottish Society 1707–1830 (Manchester, 2000). White, Jonathan,‘Representing Plebeian Consumption in Eighteenth-Century England’, (Ph.D. thesis, University of Warwick, 2001). —— ‘The “Slow but Sure Poyson”: The Representation of Gin and its Drinkers, 1736–1751’, Journal of British Studies, 42 (2003), 35–64. White, Philip L., The Beekmans of New York in Politics and Commerce 1647–1847 (New York, 1956). Wilson, Kathleen, The Sense of the People (Cambridge, 1998). The Island Race: Englishness, Empire and Gender in the Eighteenth Century (London, 2003). Wilson, R. G., and Mackley, A. L., ‘Building the English Country House, 1660–1880’, Economic History Review, 52 (1999), 436–68. Wiskin, Christine, ‘Women, Credit and Finance in England, 1780–1826’ (Ph.D. thesis, University of Warwick, 2000). Wrigley, E. A., ‘Urban Growth and Agricultural Change: England and the Continent in the Early Modern Period’, in Wrigley, People, Cities and Wealth: The Transformation of Traditional Society (Oxford, 1987), 157–93. Young, Hilary, English Porcelain 1745–95: Its Makers, Design, Marketing and Consumption (London, 1999). Zahedieh, Nuala, ‘London and the Colonial Consumer in the Late Seventeenth Century’, Economic History Review, 47 (1994), 239–61. —— The Capital and Commerce: London and the Atlantic Economy in the Late Seventeenth Century (forthcoming).