## Preface In the modern world, human life experience is largely played out in interior spaces. We may love the outdoors for the open air and sky, for the escape it offers from life inside enclosure, but the joy of being outside reflects the reality that so much of life is spent inside. Most of the time, most of us live inside a house, an apartment, or a room. We sleep, eat, cook, bathe, and spend free time “at home”—that is, inside. Work takes place in an office, a factory, a specialized work space such as a hospital, concert hall, museum, school, or college . . . the list is endless. There have been human beings on earth, scientists estimate, for about 1.7 million years. The detailed record of events and developments that we call “history” stretches back for only about six or seven thousand years. There have been many speculations about when and where people first learned to use shelters and what the earliest habitations were like. Early shelters existed to provide the interior spaces that offered comfort to their inhabitants. Those interior spaces influenced the lives of their occupants. Interior design, whether professional or not, is an aspect of life that is impossible to escape. In addition to the domain of one’s own home, the interiors of the homes of friends and relatives, of offices, stores, restaurants, schools, hospitals, transport vehicles, and every other sort of place where modern life is lived, make up the modern world as we know it. It is obvious that people in bygone times had a different life experience, in large measure because they occupied interiors that were different from those that are now commonplace. To consider for a moment the life of a medieval serf living in a farm dwelling, a knight in a castle, a monk in a monastery, the lord and lady in an eighteenth-century mansion, a Victorian family in a city row house brings to mind a life pattern based on the spaces created in such past times. Social, economic, and political realities also influenced life in the past and these forces have had a major impact on built environments. Buildings and their interiors are planned to serve the purposes and styles of the times of their origins, but they exert their influence on the activities and lives that they house as long as they continue in use. The study of interior design, its development and change through history, is a useful way both to explore the past and to make sense of the spaces in which modern life is lived. Professional interior designers are expected to study design history, to know the practices of the past in terms of “styles,” and to know the names and the nature of the contributions of those individuals who generated the most interesting and influential approaches to design. Since the interiors that one might wish to visit are scattered across the globe and often difficult to access, it becomes necessary to turn to photographs, descriptions, film, television, and the Internet to gain an insight into the history of humanly constructed interior space. The purpose of this book is to deliver, in one volume of reasonable size, a basic survey of six thousand years of personal and public space. Development of such a book is inevitably beset by a number of complications. Interiors do not exist in isolation in the way that a painting or a sculpture does, but within some kind of shell—a hut, a building, even a ship or airplane. They are also crammed with a great range of objects and artifacts: furniture, lighting, textiles, sometimes art. This means that interior design is a field with unclear boundaries, overlapping as it does the realms of construction, architecture, art, the crafts, the technologies of heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting, water and drainage equipment, and what is now called “product design,” in the forms of appliances, plumbing fixtures, and other kinds of equipment. The number of interiors that have been created over time is staggering. The author of one compact history is thus faced with a vast range of choices about what to include and what to exclude. No two writers in this field will make the same choices and the decisions made in writing this book are those of the writer. The reader is encouraged to seek further discussion of periods, examples, personages, and related subjects. The bibliography provided will serve as a guide to books that offer extended coverage of innumerable aspects of interior design.Best of all, of course, is visiting the spaces that are of interest. While time and expense will limit such visits for most readers, seeing some examples that are closer to hand will fill out the limits of any book and offer a richer experience of the realities of interior space. —John Pile, 2000 ## Preface to the Fourth Edition John Pile had a career of more than five decades as a respected designer, author, and teacher. Facing the challenge of revising what is probably the most important and influential of his twelve books is not a task I took on lightly. John’s narrative of architectural and design history is essentially as accurate and readable as when it was first written, requiring only occasional additions. Most are factual—companies no longer in business, architects or designers no longer living. The most obvious change has been the replacement of many black-and-white images with color, and the inclusion of several new illustrations. Editorial revisions are primarily in the latter chapters: adding information from the closing decades of the twentieth century that has become apparent with the perspective of distance, projects that have proven more significant than they seemed when first built, and designers omitted in the original text. In recent years, dramatic social change and unprecedented advances in technology have reshaped the world, generating an explosion of new design and altering the ways in which design is planned and implemented. Architecture and interior design are now practices with ethical issues, no longer free to exploit and consume natural resources, the results of which have damaged the world we inhabit. Interior designers have assumed new responsibilities as formgivers of the built environment and implementers of social change. These changes called for an entirely new chapter—a separate narrative dealing with developments affecting interior design during the first decade of the twenty-first century. These developments have crystallized into several perceptible directions, though no dominant style trend; indeed, the global nature of today’s design world suggests that the time of a “one size fits all” aesthetic vocabulary is past. It remains to the decades, and the centuries, that follow, to decide whether the innovations of this century prove timeless, timeworn, or something else. Some designs from this turbulent era will be relegated to the margins of historical narrative, but the best of them, hopefully most of those documented in these pages, will become icons of the future. Though it faces radical change, the future of interior design seems increasingly broad and undeniably bright. I hope that I have been able to effect a smooth transition from one century to the next, and from one author’s view to another’s. —Judith Gura, December 2012 ## Preface to the Fifth Edition It is challenging to contribute to a book that has established itself as a definitive history of interior design. Judith Gura said in her preface to the fourth edition that John Pile’s account of what is, in effect, all but the last two hundred years of the book’s six-thousand-year time span needs no revisions but those last two hundred years come with a diverse body of newly discovered material to be assessed and newly formed opinions to be sifted. In this edition, more attention is given to those designers who preferred to work on the edges of the modernist mainstream, who were wary of objective functionalism, and for whom the interior was more art than science. Among such pioneers were women, who have often been assigned minor roles when their contribution has been crucial. This view is changing as women have established their professional independence and creative influence, and so the work of their predecessors is being reappraised. The history of interior design has too often been treated as a by-product of architecture. Such a tactic has failed to acknowledge that interior designers, whatever their training, are now engaged in a distinct professional occupation. It is an activity that works primarily in the commercial sectors where change is rapid but, having proved its worth in the market place, its potential is being recognized in less commercial areas. The interiors of the palaces and cathedrals that once solely represented temporal and spiritual powers have also become tourist attractions. They exist is an increasingly prosperous and egalitarian world in which interior design has created its own audience, not by giving people what they want but by introducing them to environments and experiences they could not have imagined. In her revision to this book, Gura described very well the early impacts of social and technological changes on the way interior designers worked and on the world in which they operated. This edition will continue to record and assess those changes in the light of more recent projects, particularly those in which concerns for ecological responsibility have become important for both designers and their clients. Digital media has eroded many global barriers but it would be wrong to argue for a worldwide interior design aesthetic—the profession is too loosely structured to impose uniformity, which may be its strength. What is shared across continents and evidenced in the work recorded in the final chapters of this edition is a shared creative ambition and a unique way of thinking. —Drew Plunkett, January 2023