# WHY SHOULD ANTHROPOLOGY AND DESIGN ENGAGE?

You can argue that humankind has always designed, because design is what makes us human. Every artefactual creation is the result of some kind of intentional activity and cultural work, with the aim of exercising an effect upon the world, large or small.

Alternatively, you can argue that design is a human cultural patchwork, something which happens at certain places and times. There are emergent historical traditions which are called design, and they can be very different from one another; there are groups of people who are designers and others who are not and there are material things and sites which one can say have been designed, while others have not been. We can admire the achievements of extraordinary design movements, such as Silicon Valley in California, Mingei thinking in Japan or Participatory Design traditions in Scandinavia, each of which constitutes design in a very different way. From this viewpoint, we just happen to live at a time when design seems universal because of a global mindset of industrial modernity, but that perception hides the actual diversity.

These two positions are not, as facts, mutually exclusive, but they are perspectives which it is difficult to hold simultaneously. If humankind has always designed, we have no reason to consider why we should design, or engage with people who design, because it is a part of who and what we are. Through design, people exercise thoughts and action in concert, and they coordinate groups of collective thinking and action. Design gives meaning to us ourselves. If, however, we see design as an irregular, diverse and culturally constituted field, we need to think carefully about why to design, why to work with designers and why design should do research with non-designers, because the reasons will change and we will need to adapt. The kinds of work which design involves, the skills, thought acts, relationships and training, may all change according to social and cultural situations and purposes. It is questionable whether better design work emerges from relative monocultures, work teams of people who feel they understand each other and their customers, or from diversity and alterity, in which design works with and across a world of cultural boundaries and many different sorts of people. Design anthropologists work across these cultural and institutional boundaries, and between people who think in terms of universal human sameness, and those who consider themselves to be unique and different, and think that it is necessary to research other peoples’ lives. Design anthropology consequently changes as the nature of boundaries, diversity and alterity change.

It is 2007. I am working on a design project with Intel, Ireland, spending days with different people in their homes in different parts of the country. I do the things which I have learned to do as an ethnographer and an anthropologist – taking notes, asking questions, recording conversations and taking pictures. I am trying to fit in, as much as I can, into peoples’ lives. As the days go by, and I meet more people, what I know and learn will build up into an understanding of something bigger – the many cultural contexts and lives of elderly people in Ireland. I will also begin to behave differently, learning how best to talk and fit in. The experience will change me.

Back at Intel, in a group-meeting room with engineers and designers, I will find ways to communicate these peoples’ lives so we can all try to understand what the key issues are, think about the particular technologies which the company offers which might fit them and explore the particular forms, products, services, conversations or policies which may help the issues and the responses fit together. In order to do this, I do not do anthropology in the traditional way of writing out a book or text. I show videos and images. I draw. I map and sketch. Sometimes I build a little model with someone. I argue and debate with other ethnographers and weigh up different understandings.

Over time, I return to visit the people who I have spent time with and develop the ideas, the designs and the technologies further. My personal aim is not directly the production of better designs, but rather critical social and cultural interpretation. The company is paying me, but as an anthropologist, even in the office or lab, talking with designers, my heart is with my informants and I am imagining myself back in the field.

This type of project is one example of what might be called design anthropology. It involves working with a range of people to explore issues which are relevant to design. But design anthropology is a broad field. As I will later outline, it is only since 2002 that ‘design anthropology’ developed a proper consciousness of itself – and the people with an interest in it work in many different ways and see it as very different things. The project I have just outlined was very corporate, technological and involved engaging with engineering and scientific thinking. Some anthropologists are working in very large corporations in this way. Others are doing art, using ethnographic work to build sculptures or installations. Yet others may be very graphical and do anthropology and ethnography by sketching environments, places, routines and people. Others are working in ways which are very like social or community work, in which the aim is to achieve a more equitable and socially better world. My own motivation, as an anthropologist who is a social scientist, is to think constructively and collaboratively about peoples’ lives, culture and society. My own outputs are mainly textual. While I have worked with projects exploring imaging, audio, memory, independent living in ageing, home interiors, corporate meeting rooms, smart textiles and materials innovation, I am only a secondary expert when it comes to designing, engineering or marketing such things. I am an expert on working ethnographically, and on certain aspects of human culture, with a ‘material culture’ angle. My inadequacy as a designer and my colleagues’ inexperience as social scientists form an important basis for productive collaboration.

Design anthropology is a set of skills and practices which work across the boundaries, relationships and contestations which criss-cross the political economy of design, negotiating the diverse, often unfeasible, aspirations of creativity and innovation. It works across the hierarchies of design, between moments when good design can be done only by trained design professionals and moments when everybody lays equal claim to designing. It works between mutual moments of cause and effect, when change is seen to originate in studios, and when it is seen to originate outside. It works across diversity and unity, where good design is seen to originate from many mutually unaccountable people and communities in a social multiverse and also seen to originate in singular, coherent and clear communities who know what they are doing. In designing for others, we design for social selves, because design is understood as part of a social fabric.

At the heart of design anthropology is working to understand holistically the lives of people in many contexts around the world, and to constructively think about the social and cultural implications of those understandings in design environments, or collaboratively with designers of different kinds.

As well as discussing various motivations for working in design anthropology, I make two key arguments in this chapter. First, the history of design anthropology shows how we are currently living in a social, political and economic environment founded largely on design concepts (see Manzini 2015). This is to say that people understand their societies, environments and roles not only as about a well-made world but a well-thought world. Second, while there are many reasons for design anthropology, they are all founded upon human centredness. People themselves provide sufficient justification. What design anthropology does is work to re-establish a focus on people in a world dominated by things and institutions. To do this, the work involves an everchanging appreciation of the social and cultural constitution of people and their lives, and especially their capacity to function fully within our new kinds of social organisation founded upon the production, circulation and deployment of concepts and ideas.

The key questions, however, are for you as a reader: Why do you think it is important to ‘engage’? Why talk to other people, different from you and similar to you, and try to participate in their lives? Why conversely would they participate in your own work? Why should you do social research and interpretation within design, and undertake design within social research? Why is it important for design and anthropology to connect? What are your own personal motivations, based on your skills, your interests, your own social and cultural world and background, and the sorts of work environments, teams and projects you see yourself working within? None of these questions are simple ones. Design anthropology work does not just work with other people, it helps create a relationship of ‘othering’. The work is morally loaded, teeming with intrusive goodness and pernicious compromise, because design anthropologists are obliged to take a position on the value of their work for people and for institutions. The conditions of work are by definition changing, so even the subject of your work – the idea of what a person is in a particular situation – will shift. If you work with ‘mothers’, for example, by the time you finish, ‘motherhood’ will have changed. In design anthropology, the most seemingly reliable things, upon which you would have staked your own confidence about what the world comprises, can change by design.

In the rest of this chapter, I address these questions by setting out a brief history of design anthropology and a range of examples of what motivates projects. This territory sets out a foundation for the rest of the book, and parts of it will be explored in more detail later. I start by outlining a history of ideas going back to the 1970s, set out in two important phases before and after 2002, the year when design anthropology ‘came of age’. This history is followed by examples of the aims of design anthropology work, loosely grouped as ‘success’, ‘debate’ and ‘crisis’. I then conclude by arguing that we have now been precipitated into the third age of design anthropology in which the territory of work has shifted.

## The story of design anthropology

Give me a place to stand and a lever long enough and I will move the earth. (Ascribed to Archimedes, often cited to illustrate living with relativity)

There are many good definitions, histories, discussions and outlines of what design anthropology comprises (Clarke 2017; Gunn et al 2013; Suchman 2011). Increasingly, social research, thinking and consideration are popularly understood as a part of this designed world, and so we have entered a moment when not only design but also design anthropology helps constitute the social fabric in many instances. Let me set out a brief history of how this came about, how design anthropology originated and developed. I suggest thinking about three particular phases – the first a phase of widespread anthropological research for product and service design which was known but not celebrated; the second a phase from 2002 when design anthropology became a self-conscious set of practices and skills undertaken by a self-declared group of professionals; and then an incipient third age at the time of writing in which it has become recognised as normative in an era of dispersed creativity. This brief story of design anthropology work is a story of changing motivations, principles and ways of knowing and representing the social world. It is a history of knowledge as much as institutions and methods.

Anthropologists have been working with designers for decades. During the 1970s, anthropological work formed an important part of technological systems innovation, and the groundwork was established for what it can achieve. In Silicon Valley, at Xerox Parc, anthropologists in the Work Practice and Technology research group, headed by Lucy Suchman, undertook workplace ethnographies which informed various visions of the future of workplaces. They did not invent technologies, rather they tended to build accounts of why various technologies might not work or might work (Suchman 2007). These envisioned technologies, many of which have become mainstream, included e-mail (imagined as textual communication without paper), icon-based computer interfaces and the PC (the idea of individuals having access to their own separate computing power) (Sellen and Harper 2001). Meanwhile in Denmark and Sweden, the roots of a different anthropological research tradition were being laid in Participatory Design (Simonsen and Robertson 2013, Schuler and Namioka 1994). In those countries, social democratic governments passed laws which required consultation with employees when new technologies were implemented. When ethnographers were employed to undertake research in workplaces, it transpired that these engagements were very productive in conceptualising new informational and computational systems and interfaces.

So anthropologists proved their worth during the later 20th century, especially in computing design, but they worked for many different reasons. In some places, the work was about political consultation and workers’ rights, while in others it was about innovation, profit, patented technologies and products. If we look beyond the context of the Euro-American technology– driven economy of the time, we can also see diverse other traditions. In Japan and in India, for example, there had been a long-standing approach in design circles by which designers undertook ethnography with craftspeople and communities, building design concepts in engagements with cottage industry. The Japanese tradition drew on Mingei philosophies (Moeran 1997; Kikuchi 2004), while related Indian work included such ideas as the ‘barefoot designer’ (Balaram 2011; Ory DeNicola and DeNicola 2012).

With each passing decade, the work of anthropologists in design changed. The topics, the questions being asked, the kinds of knowledge developed and the basic understanding of what constitutes humanity shifted (Drazin 2020). During the 1970s, ethnographies were very influenced by ethnomethodological approaches and emphasised the study of groups, group work and workflows within organisational systems. This work led to the establishment of the CSCW movement (computer-supported collaborative work) in the 1980s, a forum where sociocultural issues and work cultures were debated for their own sake as well as to benefit design or technology. At the same time, the birth of the idea of ‘user-centred design’ (Norman 1988) began to move attention to individuals. Many projects became much more individually focussed, exploring how different rationalities were at play in work, and the more subjective worlds of culturally situated persons (Suchman 1987). Towards the end of the 1990s, an emphasis on ‘experience’ grew in global business circles (Pine and Gilmore 1998).

So from the 1980s to around 2000, several primary knowledge paradigms about human life developed, laying a primary emphasis on different phenomena as socially generative: anthropologists worked with all of these in different spheres, focussing on ideas, including efficiency or utility, work, situated practice, group collaboration, rationality, the individual and experience. Each kind of work might produce different kinds of knowledge product, mappings, conceptualisations or ideas, and these were largely circulated in paper and report forms, comprising text, graphics and tabulated statistics, with some photography.

There were various tensions, problems and developments with these ways of working. There was a tremendous emphasis on the idea of ‘work’ and ‘practice’ as the ways that culture, identity and relationships were created. Even though anthropologists were developing detailed and critical accounts of how people lived, not just aiming to produce better technological designs; nonetheless, the underlying message was that cultural change originated in workplaces. Until around the year 2000, the various kinds of social research in design all basically involved a model of ‘designing for users’. ‘For’ is the operative term in that phrase, implying a boundary between the places where design happens and the places of consumption, where it is used. So the work of anthropologists was of necessity very linear, moving across and interpolating this boundary, between one site of (users’) work and another site of (designers’) work. In addition, many anthropologists working in corporate and government design and engineering teams felt peripheral to the anthropological work of cultural and social interpretation and critique, even though that was at the heart of their individual projects. Academic anthropology departments tended not to maintain good contacts with their graduates working in business, only those in policy and development. This meant that the work of the design anthropologists of the time was in some ways ‘below the radar’, that their interpretive work was misunderstood as purposeful more than explorative, and as creating value rather than critiquing.

It was in the early 2000s that design anthropology came of age as a self-conscious discipline, heralding what I call its second age. In the United States, the ‘Anthrodesign’ network was founded, becoming in time EPIC (the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference), which remains at the heart of design anthropological debates and publication. Across the world, other people flocked to this banner and declared themselves to also be design anthropologists. These included social scientists who were exploring humanity through studio work, sketching and making; designers who were more interested in cultural commentary than in creating design concepts; various local and national creative traditions who saw themselves as engaged in cultural ways of designing; and people who engaged in social innovation. Hence it was from very early a movement which was not only about computing research, but also about understanding human lives. There were nonetheless a range of understandings of the sociocultural object with which design anthropology concerned itself, from a critical social science, to an engaged social practice, to culturally embedded ways of designing.

The movement thrived within a wider economic and political environment which favoured new understandings of how value is created, and what drives cultural construction and change. There was a marked shift away from designing for function and the achievement of tasks or work, towards designing for experiences which would cultivate peoples’ social worlds, sensations and sense of selfhood. Rather than user-centred design, there were moves towards user experience design (a term in common use in computing since the mid-1990s), contextual design (Holzblatt 2004), human-centred design (Wakeford 2004) and participatory approaches (Frascara 2002). Rather than providing information which would help people design ‘for’ other peoples’ lives, a lot of design anthropology celebrated building a subjective understanding of their lives, straddling workplaces and homes. This shift favoured seeing design as conceptual work (Drazin 2013), more than as working with forms, styles, functions and services. Businesses began to understand that the value and meaningfulness of their products is often created not by companies’ marketing, but by the people who consume them (sometimes called the ‘new economy’, see Foster 2007). Of course, a lot of these developments were connected to the digital revolution, whereby peoples’ capacity to comment on and communicate about products and services was hugely expanded, relative to companies’.

These changes meant that anthropologists’ work was increasingly seen as being creative work. Back in the 1970s, many social researchers developed social reports or presentations and communicated them to engineers and product designers; and this meant a paper wall existed between much social research and the creation of design proposals, prototypes and technologies. But once the value was recognised as something created in consumption and use, within peoples’ own lifestyles, then ethnography came to be seen as intrinsic to the conceptualisation and shaping of a product or service. The value of a service or product can be ‘discovered’ within peoples’ practices, values and priorities, as much as made for them. Hence design anthropologists came to be at the heart of an accelerated emphasis on creativity and innovation. There was renewed interest in defining and observing ‘creativity’, and it was often harnessed to ideas of progress and development, a phenomena seen as contagiously spreading, especially in major cities. The notion of the ‘creative classes’ (Florida 2002) became highly influential. In its original version, the creative-classes idea envisaged growing groups of people in a knowledge economy, whose influence was not limited to what they did at work, but crossed over into everyday life and consumption. Florida (2004) suggested that the creative cultures reflected by the presence of these people might be indicated by three things: technology (particularly patents and IP), talent, and tolerance or cosmopolitanism (being open to diverse and alternative ways of living).

In the 2000s, there was a re-framing and broadening of the field, which went beyond simply adding to the battery of existing approaches. If in the 1970s studies of group work called for accounts of work processes which emphasised finding the social ‘facts’ which could inform new products, in the 2000s, there was a need for accounts of ‘experience’ and ‘user journeys’. Both might seem similar – linear accounts of a series of events and actions – but the narratives of the 2000s were presented with a much heavier emphasis on the sense of creating something new, subjective, with perhaps a slightly fictional feel, and potentially valuable. Since innovation was by definition collaborative, approaches developed which sought to straddle the boundaries of professional and everyday environments. The data-gathering exercises of discussion groups often became collaborative workshops, reinforced by the new honesty of being able to assert the value of anthropological participatory approaches. In design circles, there was a tremendous expansion of ‘design thinking’, which celebrated design work as not a shaper of goods and services so much as a solver of problems. The celebration of design work as conceptual and creative problem-solving also affected the perception of anthropological and social research outputs, which themselves were increasingly recognised as thinking work rather than data.

In addition to the broadening of approaches to include narrative, experience, collaboration and more conceptual work, there was a marked increase in the celebration of materialised and fashioned outputs by design anthropology. Things such as prototypes, models, sketches and so forth now began to accompany the older text-and-image outputs. Videoclips of course, as in everyday life, became the bread and butter of many projects. In a more interactive age, all of these kinds of research artefacts were increasingly understood as fluid informational conduits. This is to say that design anthropology was working with not only new forms of representation of data and of field sites but also with new forms of information which themselves were often interfaces with an informational domain and with other communities of practice. The material culture of design anthropology work was in other words changing and developing alongside the nature of the work.

So the new frontiers of design through the 2000s were not so much the invention of new technologies and kinds of thing, informed by social research data, but also the uneasy relationship to the promotion of something called creativity (which many anthropologists have critiqued, see Ingold and Hallam 2008). The essential motivations and justifications for the work shifted in corresponding ways, as broader policies and infrastructures were established to support cultures and economies of creativity, more than of manufacturing. Governments as well as companies turned to the idea of design as a solution for perceived social and political problems, often orienting around economic stagnation, post-industrial malaise, post-socialist politics, and seeking alternatives to the idea of ‘development’.

Different recipes for change sought different answers in design. In the case of China, one overarching paradigm has been the project of moving from ‘made in China’ to ‘designed in China’ (see Davis 2000; Justice and Xiangyang 2012). Between about 2000 and 2010, China created about a thousand new design education programmes. Rather than have goods and services which are conceptualised and patented in the United States or Europe, and then manufactured in China, the aspiration is for an economy of goods designed in China and made wherever. This formula envisages profit and value as a function of ownership of intellectual property, rather than manufacturing. In India, design schools have been expanded as a way of offering a sense of ‘rescue’ for local craft communities and traditions; conversely, those authentic traditions offer a sense of moral ‘redemption’ to the more high-tech centres of design (Ory Denicola and Denicola 2012). Comparable patterns have been seen across Europe, Africa and the Americas, with different governments and companies developing their own claims and aims. Design and design work became emblematic of the potential for all sorts of different kinds of improvement, change and development.

There have been many difficulties with this dominance of creativity and innovation as ways to rescue or redeem society, economy, politics and morality. One of the main ones is that creativity comes to be something defined, designated and separated, and a resource to be controlled. Hence to talk of ‘creative classes’, as one example, in itself suggests that creativity exists in some sectors of the population but not others and flows and diffuses from those places. In many organisations, the creative ‘teams’ or segments of work are separated out from production and administration, as an elevated and privileged form of work. Reckwitz (2015: C4) suggests that there are conflicting cultural processes going on here, between visions of endless innovation and progress (a vision shared for example by Karl Marx), as against visions of control, stagnation and rationalisation (shared by Max Weber). The result is a set of misunderstandings of how change happens, as innovation which originates in organisations and impacts outside of those organisations. Many anthropologists in the past two decades have found themselves effectively working across these frontiers of creativity.

These kinds of partitioning of the world, according to how products and services come about, have had significant implications for anthropological information and thinking. If society were a social body, in a Durkheimian sense, only some parts are seen here to be doing the thinking and knowing. The work of anthropologists and design researchers becomes divided: knowledge which moves from the ‘periphery’ into the design studios and companies is merely ‘information’, while knowledge which moves the other way is ‘thinking’. The understanding of such processes in such a hierarchical manner, however, does not do justice to the extraordinarily prolific variety of forms of knowledge and thought. In the same way that language is rather a limited tool when it comes to being precise about the material world and material experience, the default nature of which is to be infinitely unique, so with trying to describe ‘knowledge’ or ‘thinking’.

## A range of principles, motivations and ways of knowing

Design anthropology is therefore diverse and ever-changing. It is one intellectual and professional current alongside many others. The most common story of its conception is a Western, capitalist, corporate and IT-based narrative, but that is deceptive because it brings together many strands. Nonetheless, by around 2010, some underlying principles or assumptions had become clear underpinning it. Some of these apply more from an anthropological perspective, others design and some for both:

It is a valid and useful activity, in both anthropology and design, to explore questions of humanity, culture, society and ways of living. Both are acts of social and cultural understandings and (potentially) critique, and in the current global political economy, this in itself is a way to create value.

Anthropology can be improved by engaging with design and its many approaches, providing new more immediate social research approaches, and exploring alternative ways of working. Design is one way to justify anthropology to non-anthropologists, made more visibly relevant, and given secondary purposes by working in designerly ways. These, however, do not replace, but augment, traditional ways of working.

Sociocultural knowledge invariably has a material dimension, existing in images, digital things, objects, prototypes and other objects. Materiality is not the product of design anthropology knowledge, it constitutes that knowledge. Anthropology, therefore, is not only practised in ethnographic field sites and universities, because design anthropology recognises studio work, corporate work and work in other institutions as equally valid explorations of the human condition.

Concurrently, in design, studio-based work is often insufficient in itself. Design should reach out and engage with the people, places and practices where design will be relevant. Social research generally improves design. Good design can be informed by an idea of cultural diversity and difference, rather than by a (global) monoculture.

Design work is a part of culture. This means there is a need to recognise and promote diverse, local and global, traditions of creativity and making as design. Design studios and professions form a part of society, they are not outsiders. Design, therefore, is not only about innovation, but participation. This means one is not only designing ‘for’ certain people or activities, but also achieving social consultation, support, and forming new publics.

Design anthropology continues to change and evolve. The questions change as well as the answers. Contrary to what many readers may believe, we no longer do design anthropology research just in order to ‘create’, nor even ‘be creative’, but because at the time of writing we live in a society, where the problems with the concept of creativity are becoming more obvious. So design anthropology helps to reconceive as much as to inform design work. In particular, there are difficulties with the relativity of so-called creative or innovation work. Many of the people reading this book will feel under an obligation to be creative or innovative, both professionally and personally, and their organisations and governments likewise signify their success through design and innovation. Design anthropologists are working with and across many different ‘creative’ processes and people, in a complex cultural ecosystem, where they used to work within one single current. Stated in simple terms, the different dimensions of this basic transformation from the singular to the contextual preoccupy practitioners at the current moment.

Before we discuss in more detail some of the particular problems and motivations at the time of writing, let us look at some examples of what motivates different kinds of design anthropology work. When you, the reader, are asking yourself ‘Why engage?’, you should consider three particular kinds of answer which may appeal to you. I call them the ‘success’, ‘debate’ and ‘crisis’ answers.

## Why engage? 1. Success

We have the technology, we have the capability to build the world’s first bionic man… He will be better than he was before. Better. Stronger. Faster.

(Introduction to The Bionic Man, TV Series 1974)

For some people, success motivates design research. Social research can make design better, and vice versa, depending on the people and the project. But even more importantly, designs need to just ‘work’. Success in this sense can be viewed as the moment when metaphorically the wheel hits the road, when professional designs meet the test of real life. In this moment designers, engineers and social researchers must let go of their precious creation and see if it goes independently. It is commonsense that researching contexts of use can help make this type of success a reality, and that the people with experience of contextual research, in all its messiness, are anthropologists.

There are many dimensions to achieving this kind of success, and different thinkers have different recipes. One of the most successful anthropologists in product and service innovation has been Susan Squires. She sets out three clear, purposeful uses of ethnography in product and service design work: exploration to identify opportunities, definition to hone a concept and evaluation to test a proposed design. One of her earlier projects provides a good example of exploration (Squires 2002). A company making breakfast cereals gave her and her team the brief of exploring ‘the American breakfast’, to understand what kinds of routines, work, values, ideas and aspirations underlay how people were eating in the mornings. How was morning eating changing, was it a family event or an individual one, was it perceived as a ‘meal’ or not? The experience of one family gave typical insights into some of the issues. Attending one family’s breakfast in the morning, the ethnographer listened to the stressed mother explain her ideas about breakfast, how it should be healthy, social, a family event and a happy start to a good day. As she talked, every other family member was doing things in absolute contradiction to this vision. The cupboard held not only the healthy cereals but sugary ‘treat’ breakfasts, ones which the father wished he had been allowed to eat as a boy. The son filled his bowl with a cereal which turned the milk blue and crept off to eat it in front of the television with his father. The daughter seemed to eat very little, in the rush to get ready for school. To understand the bigger picture of how the morning routines formed a part of a whole day’s patterns, the ethnographers also met members of the family at work and school. So they could infer what breakfast did for people later in their day, and the meaning of different kinds of eating event one against another, some seen as ‘meal’s, some not. One of the children would eat their sandwiches at morning break because they were hungry, throwing out the presumed pattern of breakfast–lunch–dinner. As is typical in so much ethnographic work, there were here both an emergent vision of a good life, coherent, better, happy, caring; and a cacophonic, sometimes liberating, diversity of social phenomena. Any coherent vision was undermined by the reality of events, and by the social weave of many people acting alone and together, to create a rich unfolding social life.

In this example, the product design team were faced with bringing together many apparently contradictory values and visions. In particular ‘healthy’ and ‘fun’ do not go together. How do you create a product which effectively is a mutual lie (my own word, not Squires’), which seems healthy and caring to one parent, but seems like a kids’ treat to another parent, but seems like subversive fun for children? Many ‘good’ product designs have these sorts of multiple layered truths. The resulting idea (later defined, evaluated and launched) was Go-gurt, a colourful packaged yoghurt based which proved a big success, generated large profits and spawned a host of other kinds of ‘fun-healthy’ foods. The foundations of Go-gurt lay in working with ideas and actual experiences in peoples’ homes. Its individual packaging, its substance, its colours and how it would be eaten were conceived alongside observation of what people valued as healthy, what they thought ‘fun’ means, and the constraints and opportunities of space and time in their homes and their days. While food scientists could have made a fruit yoghurt product which was fun and healthy with no social research, they would not have really known ‘why’, nor been able to confidently put together the specific design from an infinite array of possibilities.

The design successes of design anthropology and ethnography surround us, and across our world, skilled anthropological consultants are working away to build better, more appropriate goods and services. The standard examples given are icon-based computer interfaces, the PC, email and so forth, but many cars, mobile phones, health devices, social and government services, museums and the designs of many other kinds of thing have benefitted from the input of anthropological researchers. It is clear here that success does not only refer to finished goods, but also to ideas. Working with ideas is crucial. In design, ideas are not all speculations but realities, and the exercise of imagination is not always imaginary. Successful designs are both well conceived in themselves and well understood in use. Madsbjerg and Rasmussen (2014) describe some of this work as ‘sensemaking’: through ethnography, it is possible to re-conceptualise social life and how it is changing, and how one’s own business can fit within it, aiming to achieve sudden but fitting paradigm shifts in understanding.

Because it works in this way at a conceptual level, design anthropology success can be seen as a certain kind of knowledge operation. Rather than only working to represent, abstract or reflect upon social life, the measure of knowledge success here is in demonstration or instantiation. The work process in the example mentioned earlier had a phase of abstraction (the meaningfulness of various produced visions of ‘the American breakfast’) and instantiation, creating breakfasts which are also demonstrative or non-representational. In that sense, design anthropological success is not just better design work, but demonstrative thought products. Working with design can thus make social thinking engaged, more valid, more legitimate, more respectful of peoples’ lives and more serious about their concerns. If you are the sort of anthropologist who really respects your informants’ lives, and who appreciates design, then you will recognise Go-gurt and similar designed things as intellectual products, successful instantiations of cultural thinking. These everyday artefacts can be as culturally important in everyday life as West African masks, Amazonian blowpipes, Polynesian funeral sculptures or other kinds of artefact. Go-gurt resonates with ideas of kinship, personhood, the body, responsibility, and with what is good in life, within the American context. So its creation and success reflects a cultural skill. Most anthropologists would not attempt to design a breakfast, but it is something most anthropologists should attempt.

To put this more simply, the yoghurt is a concept of the American breakfast. The anthropologists first produced ethnographic information. Then they analysed that data by taking it apart and making it abstract, disassembling it into key parts such as responsibility, busyness, fun, health, practices and many other disparate elements. Then they put these same proven elements back together into a material concept of breakfast. That concept-assemblage turned out to be a yoghurt.

The cultural–conceptual work of moving from the American breakfast to a yoghurt is challenging and potentially leads to understandings which traditional anthropological methods do not broach. Although sociocultural research should be valued for its own sake, sometimes design engagements are seen to give research a redeeming purpose. Products and services, as cultural instantiations, can seem disillusioning or demystifying to many anthropologists: there is a phase of work when the ordinary comes to seem very special, and then a phase when these special insights become a new kind of ordinary. These design anthropology work processes reproduce design and anthropological thinking as an element of the world. So well-thought products and well-produced thoughts proliferate, enter everyday routines and endure for longer, helping people construct and stabilise their lifestyles in a world of change. Increasingly, as industrial and transport capacities accelerate, this work of rethinking and remaking the world (redesigning) comes to be more normative. This is especially the case with digital goods and software, with alpha, beta and gamma versions launched and updated continuously, but it is also true in other ways in fields such as interior design and fashion. Home design has come to be an ongoing process in many parts of the world, of continuous research (often digital based) and reinstantiation of improvements.

While making your work more successful is the most straightforward answer to the question of why anthropology and design should engage, it is not necessarily the most satisfactory. Of course, one wants to make ones work more successful – but that does not help us with the specifics. The question of ‘success’ is ultimately fairly simple and utilitarian. It implies social research needs justification, when it is generally valuable in itself. Success also implies a mutuality of interests, it does not at root consider that different people involved may have different interests, indeed that people involved may by definition have different interests, and that is what makes them who they are, and of interest to design anthropology. Design problems frequently concern difference, partiality, many motivations, many resources, contestation, (often) inequality and (on occasion) exploitation.

## Why engage? 2. Debate

Types of design anthropology follow a tradition of Anti-Design that has striven to question or undermine the corporate, market-driven relations of object culture.

(Clarke 2011: 11)

Many people who identify as design anthropologists aspire to make a difference in peoples’ lives through ways other than the creation of things which succeed in what is directly expected of them. Rather, one actually achieves progress by appreciating the tensions and contestations in social relationships, critiquing and unbalancing the normative status quo. This confrontational tendency takes several forms. Some (like Clarke, above, as well as myself) emphasise that material things are usually the point of tension, debate and critique within significant politicised social relationships. Another current of thought recognises global design traditions as themselves manifestations of normative ideologies, which often serve to obfuscate the interests of less wealthy and less powerful groups. Design anthropology (as well as properly progressive design) then works to confront the misunderstandings of most professional design. Such critique is ultimately constructive. The third aspiration is by designers who seek not so much themselves to produce confrontation, but rather use design to open up the ‘third space’ of ongoing social debate, in different ways. All these kinds of reasons for doing design emphasise it as a political phenomenon and recognise that design is one of the modern institutions upon which political order and processes depend.

The Scandinavian tradition of Participatory Design provides an environment in which this type of work can flourish. One example is the FabLab@School project in Denmark (Smith and Iversen 2018). This was a design project in which the proposed outputs were not going to be new artefacts or technologies, but social outputs such as value, skill, knowledge, new practices and new ways of using technologies. The project established a number of Fab Labs in Danish schools between 2013 and 2017, spaces of making and fabrication using various technologies for education. Fab Labs are particularly intended for learning about problem-solving design approaches. In this instance, following Participatory Design principles, practically every stage of the establishment of the Fab Labs was achieved through an engaged dialogue. Before ever commencing with any of these spaces, the researchers undertook ethnographic work with pupils and teachers in schools, to observe and explore what sorts of ways people were developing their ideas, in writing, sketching, and through IT. This ethnographic work, film, fieldnotes and imagery provided a background throughout of the design work, informing it about questions such as how pupils conceive of and experience their own creative work. There followed a ‘scoping’ phase, during which pupils and staff were placed in a position where they were not ‘users’ or ‘recipients’ of design education, but protagonists. The different schools undertook structured design games where they designed their own Fab Lab concepts and worked on the learning potential of several technologies for the spaces, such as smart textiles and Arduino. During a ‘developing’ phase, they worked collaboratively on different kinds of educational formats, types of session and the sorts of design briefs which might produce more subtle and socially informed work from students. The final ‘scaling’ phase implemented these, instituted the spaces and the infrastructures which would exist on an ongoing basis. The implementation also involved using the ethnography and a quantitative survey to identify the diversity of kinds of student which the spaces would cater for, clustering five kinds of types of Fab Lab student who might each use them differently.

Work such as this deliberately aims at long-term, sustainable social change. Tangible creations (artefacts) are viewed as short-term epiphenomena, but are not in themselves a measure of final ‘success’, because this is a process with potentially no termination. What is important is not that any individual thing is well designed or well thought, but that things constitute relationships, communications, dialogue, participation and the capacity to be an active social protagonist. Just as with a commercial product, the physical aspects of the design work in FabLab@School are very precise: the work guides the design to particular preferences, forms, colours, interior spaces and even time frames and timetables. Yet these aspects are seen not only as functional or to fulfil aims but also as manifesting social dialogues and gatherings. This understanding of design as achieving ‘participation’ can extend to the experience of things and services more generally. Murphy (2015), in his study of Swedish design, proposes a notion of ‘cultural geometry’, by which people experience and appreciate being a part of design in Sweden, and participating in society in this way.

Participation is an increasingly necessary part of this kind of work, because the social circumstances where design operates are increasingly complicated. What appears to be a small difficulty (e.g. getting to the shops) transpires to be a compounded issue of transport, communication, isolation, responsibility for others and urban planning. A difficulty getting to the shops is likely to actually be a manifestation of two or more of these issues. Hence increasingly designers work with what are called ‘wicked problems’ (Buchanan 1992). These sorts of problems are less likely to be solved by direct, linear approaches; instead, they call for more heuristic and social problem-solving. Projects will therefore tend to bring the experiences of many people and stakeholders together and try out different proposals to find what works best. Establishing participation creates an ongoing infrastructure for such approaches.

In the FabLab@School example, the design research element aspires ultimately to build agreement, and a design which ‘works’. Not everybody views design politics this way. Some people envisage a much more confrontational kind of encounter. Tunstall (2013) persuasively argues that design anthropology is largely about destabilising design itself, at least design in its current form. The spread of design institutions, ideas and work practices across the globe in recent decades is for her similar to colonialism, in that it can subjugate and silence the extraordinary diversity of design-like ways of working. Many creative traditions become disparaged as ‘local’ or ‘sub’ cultural. Anthropological work which celebrates what people themselves value in their lives and work can challenge the centralised ideologies of global design, as manifested in large corporations. Progress here emerges not only from creating but also from breaking down the cultural obstacles and dominating ideas. Although Tunstall phrases her argument in global terms, most design is intrinsically contested, in that it involves balance between designer figures, inevitably under the authority of organisations, and people in their everyday lives. At the same time, it is normative and legitimising in the sense that it aspires to materialise the world as self-evident, to collapse the distinction between abstract aspirations and the present world as is. So the question is not really whether there is contestation, as how intransigent or flexible the different political entities are, and whether that inflexibility is a reason for a design anthropologist to get to work.

A related set of aspirations for design anthropology work, combining notions of participation and contestation, seeks to create arenas of debate, critique and negotiation. These kinds of reasons for doing the work would intrinsically ally design with the idea of an open society, where critique is possible and human diversity of identity and opinion is celebrated. Dunne and Raby (2001, 2013) and Dunne (2008) have developed a range of work in this vein. By presenting speculative design ideas, and conceptual futures in art galleries, they open up provocative debate about both potential design and about the potential consequences of current human action and design.

DiSalvo (2015, influenced by Mouffe 2005) argues that ‘adversarial’ design is possible, not a design which maintains the current political order nor directly confronts it, but which enables the expression of differences of opinion. Design work can include ‘tactics that can be used to do the work of agonism - revealing hegemony, reconfiguring the remainder, and articulating collectives… Through the process of making contestational objects, adversarial design is a kind of inquiry into the political condition’ (Mouffe 2005: 115–6). For DiSalvo, networked and digital artefacts in particular offer unprecedented opportunities for agonism. On the one hand, professional designers can create speculative designs which are inquiries into social and political conditions; and on the other, digital products and services themselves can create agonistic spaces, if designed appropriately. A host of conceptual designs can bear witness to the various kinds of political work in which design approaches make possible. There are plants whose life connects to the share price of the shop where they were bought (Spore 1.1, by Easterly and Kenyon 2004), umbrellas which foil CCTV cameras (CCD-Me Not Umbrella, by Shepard 2009) and kitchen blenders which make people learn to communicate with them using whirring blender noises (Blendie, by Dobson 2007). These kinds of devices create new digital publics, frustrate the technologies of political order and interrogate the changing condition of being human. They illustrate how, by engaging with design methods, anthropology and social science can interrogate political and social conditions in new ways, not only ‘analyse’ it using traditional ‘data and interpretation’–based research.

Design work which objectifies and instantiates a sociocultural critical commentary has high aspirations but often remains experimental and gallery based. Whatever our aspirations, we cannot necessarily easily have an authentic, new version of Athens’ ancient Agora in our living room, a parliament in a box. What we have are mobile phones and smart speakers, which do open new political possibilities, but not always as we imagined. Where the work of design which ‘critiques’ meets the work of design as ‘normative’ is sometimes hard to pinpoint. The interface and the wider infrastructure are mutual contingencies.

For some, this is not about designed things as modes of interrogation into abstracted social or political realities (ideologies, structures, markets, corporations), but about things themselves. Clarke (2017) discusses design anthropology as one of many reactions to changes in the sense of ‘thingness’ in the world. For social scientists interested in material culture, culture itself is constituted as a process of objectification, whereby it is in engaging with objects and materials, making, appropriating, consuming, using and disposing, that people negotiate their own subjectivity and their social condition. A range of philosophical terms and schools of thought underlie these ideas, each one different, ranging from Heideggerian to Marxist, to other kinds of materialism. In the contemporary world, Clarke argues, notions of ‘things’ are profoundly and significantly changing. People now rather perceive the material world as much more malleable and changeable and attempt to find ways of re-appropriating, re-adapting the powerful material formats which are presented to us by virtue of the authority of corporations. The material world is the prime point of articulation of these relationships and shifting meanings and is also the primary point of manifestation and negotiation of design per se.

Hence social science is compelled to engage with design in order to understand the new instabilities, the new negotiations and the new social processes which are happening. A reason to engage between design, anthropology and communities, is changes in the materiality of their world. Things are different, be it because of politics, information technologies, community relations or other reasons. Friedman and Stolterman (2011: xi), for example, observe that one of the substantive challenges design is ‘information content that often exceeds the value of physical substance’. ‘Materiality’ is here an imprecise term (Ingold 2007). It can be used methodologically: developing an intellectual focus on objects and materials in order to gain a critical viewpoint on the social and cultural contexts. More appropriately here, it describes social paradigms by which people understand and approach their material world (see Tilley 2007). In this latter sense, the challenge for design anthropology is that design is a paradigm of materiality, it refers to how people increasingly understand the world around them as a ‘thought’ world, considered and conceived by other people. Consequently, design does not just affect their identities and relationships, rather knowing about design underpin peoples’ conception of who they are, how they relate to one another and what their actions and work achieve.

When social research meets design, not only can it result in fascinatingly new types of artefacts, but it can change one’s perspective on the material world. Where materiality was previously seen as object of study for social science, or as output for design, it becomes framed as mode of inquiry. Things can become recognised as ‘inventive methods’ (Lury and Wakeford 2013). Celia Lury and Nina Wakeford discuss such methodological approaches in social design work as the anecdote, the list, the tape recorder, probes or the screen. Each of these is inventive both in the sense that it explores and directly engages with a specific problematic in a social research context, and also that it is a moveable, repeatable or replicable phenomenon or thing. But a method often arises from the specific observation of a context or project and is emergent, often unique, but adaptable. The double force of such phenomena, therefore, lies in their ‘constitutive’ aspects and ‘generative’ ones, forming a ‘thing in context’ and also ‘making a difference’. Hence the method itself is here recognised as shaping new ‘things’ as a part of the research, and in doing so raising problems and issues. The things of research work are both about fixity and are destabilising. The question we asked earlier, ‘why engage?’, is implicitly answered by such inventive methods, because they make ‘a method answerable to its problem’ (Lury and Wakeford 2013: 7).

For Lury and Wakeford, inventive methods open up a particular knowledge space for debate, specifically between what is sensible (in both denotations of the word) and what is knowable; between capture and inspiration and between neutral transferable knowledge and making a difference in a specific instance. Building such a space is a prime reason for the work.

## Why engage? 3. Crisis

The above-mentioned dimensions of design anthropology, success and failure, the agonistic and the inventive, account for most of the questions of ‘why’ people do design anthropology. The third set of arguments move beyond the notion that the work produces dialogues and participation between communities, arguing that humanity itself, collectively, is the protagonist, beneficiary and victim of design research all at once. Human societies confront challenges which they have never before encountered: poverty, disease, environmental degradation, the rise of AI, war, an absence of leadership or a combination of these evince the possible end of our world. To confront these issues, not only is it possible that past traditions, understandings and cultures are inadequate as a basis for a response, but even that our pasts may be the cause of current crises. In other words, some form of humanity, as it has existed, is recognised as the problem for humanity, as it will (putatively) exist. When we think of the main reason to engage in social research being based on crisis, we frame design anthropology as primarily about temporality on a grand scale. Designs as inventions, or as politicised arenas of debate, are subsidiary phenomena within this grander schema of change and survival.

The first sense of crisis in design was a social one, a crisis of ideas which impacted on the economy and on politics (Buchanan 1998). Throughout the 20th century, there was a selfconfidence about professional design based on a set of core values which derived from the modernist principles of the 1920s. Designers would create things which were more functional and more aesthetic, for modern, efficient, purposeful and also calm lifestyles. That vision allied itself with a global Cold War political system which was understood as hierarchical, within which better lifestyles accompanied technical and political national superiority. However, towards the end of that century and extending into our current time, that modernist ideology was challenged. This presented design with the option of either creating a new set of global values or else becoming very relativistic, designing each thing on a small scale according to an infinitude of variable demands and needs. Buchanan (1998) argues that a new kind of design should see itself as working with people and communities to understand their values and design ways in which they are able to build those senses of value. A postmodern crisis of values therefore clearly suggests one reason why design anthropology work has exploded over the past two decades.

A crisis of values, if we think in these terms, means that design has itself changed in its nature. The problems we face in the current moment are not crises of function, of efficiency or of health, they are much better thought about as social and cultural crises. We are therefore no longer talking about simply a set of disparate design skills which each considers a different aspect of material life as an isolated phenomenon: architecture, clothing, computing, etc. Instead, we can envisage a broad set of disciplines which all help shape the material world, in response to socia issues. The products of design here are seen as manifestations of social and cultural values in themselves, and the remit of design expands into all spheres of human activity.

Other thinkers propose that the crises and problems faced by design go beyond a localised definition of values, extending to human survival itself. Counter-intuitively, a lot of design anthropology work sees human interest as a long-term project, such that addressing peoples’ needs or wants in the short term is a part of the problem, not a part of the solution. Unlike most anthropology, one of design’s particular talents is the skill of duplication. A project may do research or ethnography with a community, identify and define a problem, and develop a solution to that problem which it also can test with the community; but then, importantly, design also develops ways of duplicating that solution. More successful research and design results in an unending proliferation of goods and artefacts, each one a clear solution to a problem or need. Evidently, this situation spurs many calls for circular and environmentally driven design (Braungart and McDonough 2002). Many of these approaches are very different from user- or human-centred design, not anthropocentric but almost misanthropic because they often frame people as the problem not the solution. Human-centred approaches, as exist by definition in design anthropology, can exacerbate problems.

The situation has also changed because of the general realisation that the world we live in is now no longer natural, but mostly fashioned by humankind. We can call this realisation the ‘anthropocene’ moment. Fry (2008, 2012) has developed a range of arguments on this point. We no longer, he argues, should consider the world as simply ‘out there’, in the sense of humans working on nature. Rather, we work with a world which has in most respects been shaped by human action, directly or indirectly. So design work is inevitably working within a temporal chain of prior action, each designer increasingly responding to the profound problems created by prior designs, thoughts and plans. Design itself becomes more ‘humanised’, a pre-populated domain. Designers and design anthropologists risk forever attempting to swim against the current and also forever going backwards as they resist previous design. Fry suggests, among other things, that design work should concern not so much identifying solutions to human problems, as re-shaping what it means to be human. Design anthropology, in this sense, comes to extend into designing humanity itself, beyond understanding humanity or designing ‘for’ humanity.

Otherwise, he convincingly argues, we face collective extinction by our own designs.

Design has always worked with a sense of changing problems and of crisis, but the sense of crisis is more compelling than ever before. At the same time, the increase in the immensity of the sense of crisis is matched by an unprecedented increase in the capacity of people to act upon their own environment. The two are, of course, connected. It is demonstrably now possible for humanity to change the world, and schoolchildren now take this for granted from a young age. Hence, given the scale of the visions of problems and solutions, how is it possible for us to translate these grand visions into what we might call middle-sized issues, ones which it is feasible for practitioners to act on?

One important area in this respect concerns social complexity. Friedman and Stolterman (2011) provide some welcome coherence, setting out ‘ten challenges’ for contemporary design. Their ten challenges combine long-standing design issues (such as addressing human needs) with questions which design has never faced before, and increase in scope from ‘performative’ to ‘substantive’ to ‘contextual’ challenges. Most significant for design anthropology are their contextual challenges. It is, they point out, no longer possible for design to operate alone. Designers work in ‘a complex environment in which many projects or products cross the boundaries of several organizations, stakeholder, producer, and user groups’ (Friedman and Stolterman 2011: xi). In this, they are echoing Don Norman:

Designers have become applied behavioural scientists, but they are woefully uneducated for the task. Designers often fail to understand the complexity of the issues and the depth of knowledge already known.

(Norman 2010)

The design anthropologist comes to the fore in a couple of ways with regard to responding to crises. Anthropology itself is a study of human lives first and foremost, ways of thinking about culture, society, human difference and sameness, identities, relationships, practices, materialities and communications. In this situation, it re-frames its subjects, such that people come to be the protagonists of solutions, not only the problem to be responded to. Second, design anthropology comes to be one of the mediators which helps different dimensions of the socially and culturally complex design ecosystem to engage and operate. Anthropological knowledge is itself, in its various forms, a mode of managing friction and lubrication with and between people. One particular dimension of this, third, is anthropology’s dedication to holism as an interpretive and explanatory method. Anthropologists often understand specific situations with reference to wider social contexts, as a basic ethnographic principle, relating part-to-whole. In collaborating with design, the discipline operates to help individual elements to conceptualise themselves in relation to the entire, complex, environment.

## Into the third age of design anthropology

Invention, participation, agonism and the compulsion of crisis are all reasons to undertake design anthropology. Invention is something we will explore more in Chapter 5 through the idea of recontextualisation, and how finding, creating and working with contexts for design can be epiphanic. Agonism, and debating and transforming systems of values, we will discuss in Chapter 6. Crisis and change are dealt with in Chapters 7 and 8. Together, however, these reasons add up to a lot more. Design anthropology is not a simple case of being presented with a situation and doing a certain kind of anthropological work. In practice, all of these happen together and can be mutual. Viewed systemically, innovation and success emphasise certain stopping points in a longer term chain of projects and relationships which represents progress and improvement. In recent years, all of these design purposes and progresses have spiralled beyond professional practice and into vernacular ways of living. Structures of participation, debate and critique involve the production of ongoing politicised social environments and conversations capable of sustained change, which not only justify but also compel design anthropology.

The realisation of the ubiquity of design knowledge and capacities can be unpleasant. To illustrate, we can consider a much-quoted moment of cynical disillusionment from the Hollywood film The Devil Wears Prada. The intimidating head of a fashion house, a character called Miranda, puts her new assistant in her place through her clothes:

You think this has nothing to do with you. You go to your closet and you select, I don’t know, that lumpy blue sweater, for instance, because you are trying to tell the world that you take yourself too seriously to care about what you put on your back. But what you don’t know is that that sweater is not just blue. It’s not turquoise. It’s not lapis. It’s actually cerulean. And you’re also blithely unaware of the fact that in 2002, Oscar de la Renta did a collection of cerulean gowns. And then I think it was Yves Saint Laurent, wasn’t it, who showed cerulean military jackets? And then cerulean quickly showed up in the collections of eight different designers. And then it, uh, filtered down through the department stores and then trickled on down into some tragic Casual Corner where you, no doubt, fished it out of some clearance bin. However, that blue represents millions of dollars and countless jobs and it’s sort of comical how you think that you’ve made a choice that exempts you from the fashion industry when, in fact you’re wearing a sweater that was selected for you by the people in this room from a pile of stuff.

(Miranda, The Devil Wears Prada, played by Meryl Streep)

In this much-cited filmic moment, a character who believes that she thinks independently is made to realise that she does not (yet). It is a moment of transition from believing that one ‘consumes’ objects, through choice, to believing that one engages with ‘design’ by actively thinking about others’ thoughts. ‘Desiring’ clothes is displaced by ‘designing’, which is a more conscious but not necessarily free activity. The disparaging fashion boss also evidently values her assistant not as an individual, but as a thinking person within the company. Her transformation to a thinking person involves both being aware of the wider political and economic situation and considering or ‘caring’, especially about herself. The objects concerned, the clothes, are in one way superficial, but on the other, it is exactly their details of colour, cut, fabric and form, which possess a value-laden political resonance far beyond themselves. These social intimations of how to be a ‘proper’, self-respecting person lie in the notion of design (or, fashion). The patternings of form and material intimate an endless hall of mirrors through which to conceptualise objects and people.

I argue that the third age of design anthropology is one ‘after creativity’, a time when anthropologists must wrestle with the implications of a set of profound transformations in the nature of design, which range from structure, to process to constitution. It is no longer justifiable to focus on certain centres of productive and imaginative work. Laboratories, studios, workshops and so forth do exist, but as they proliferate and as the work enters peoples’ lives, there is a ‘creative inversion’, by which design work and thinking comes to offer itself in everyday lives (following Manzini 2015). Studios, previously exclusive sites, become public resources. There is not a single, linear, design workflow here. There are rather multiple work processes, in the act of being woven together.

The metamorphosis of design is suggestive of Peter Sloterdijk’s critique of the implicit cynicism in contemporary culture. In the modern world, he proposes people often rationalise away what would otherwise be problems, in order to protect themselves. It is as if, upon being robbed at a cashpoint, one withdrew more money from the cashpoint, and got on with life, so as to mentally protect oneself (from Sloterdijk 1988; Couture 2015). In his work on ‘foams’ (Sloterdijk 2016; a part of a trilogy of much more complex philosophical works), he examines how bubbles of mutual existence, created by these cynical rationalities, come to characterise contemporary life and are the mode by which the material world comes to be operationalised. His notion of foams is, for me, like the experiment which many children learn at school, when they make butter. You put cream in a jar and shake it. Chemically, the cream contains molecules of water and molecules of fats. At first, the liquid shakes around in a fluid way, but a moment comes in the churning when it begins to solidify into glutinous butter. In its liquid phase, the jar contains an emulsion, which is to say bubbles of fatty molecules which float in the water. As it churns, the bubbles of fats begin to join up, invert and form an interlinking structure. Eventually, one no longer has fat bubbles floating in water, one has a semi-solid fatty structure, which contains the water in-between them.

Manzini (2015) characterises the changes in design to ‘an emerging civilisation’ (Manzini 2015: 25). What he means is that we are living at a time of the emergence of distributed design systems, rather than centralised design, during which it becomes impossible to distinguish between what is technical and what is social:

These new, complex organisational models challenge traditional mainstream ones, going well beyond the conventional polarities of private versus public, local versus global, consumer versus producer, need versus wish. The solutions of social innovation propose models where these polarities blur. They are, at the same time, both local (ie. rooted in a place) and global (i.e., internationally connected to similar models); producer and user roles tend to overlap (given that everybody tends to actively participate); the personal motivations of wish and need tend to coincide, since people participate because they like it, but at the same time, because they need to.

(Manzini 2015: 12)

The metamorphosis of design’s professions, industries and studios has therefore involved an infusion of knowledges, projects, rationalities and purposes into everyday life. The need for metamorphosis is particularly advocated in the notion of Transition Design, as taught at Carnegie Mellon University (Irwin 2015). Design has become vernacular and is understood to be a part of social structure and material culture. The metamorphosis has involved moving from an artefactual ‘made’ world to a ‘thought’ world; from ideologies of utility and desire to care and lack of care; from centralised to partially distributed design and from creative classes to unremarked, normative creativity. One of design anthropology’s roles now is to provide a sense of ‘a place to stand’ within a relativistic world of distributed design, in which there are fewer design certainties. A sense of place within the design space provides a relevant sense of cultural traction for design work.

An example of a project which is broaching some of these issues is ASSA (the Anthropology of Smartphones and Smart Ageing). ASSA is based on the Anthropology Department at UCL in London (https://www.ucl.ac.uk/anthropology/assa/) and is happening as I write. It is not only a design anthropology project, it is (frankly) much bigger than that, but it is a useful example to think about the contemporary issues faced by design anthropology. The work involves ten field sites across the world, from Chile to Japan, and ten anthropologists who are spending at least a year in each. The work is exploring smartphone usage, m-health, and the social, personal and health issues of ageing among people who are currently in middle age, for whom smartphones will be the norm as they grow older. At the time of writing, ASSA researchers are in the field, but aim to produce a range of publications to unpack the cultural diversity of smartphones, how they make sense and are used and thought about in different ways in varied sites. Other publications will focus on the themes which emerge cross-culturally. For example, a theme such as menopause (‘the’ menopause as a biologist might call it) may manifest in contrasting ways in two sites but then seem less important in another. Hence the nature of the research is interesting because it happens locally and globally, in parallel. The ethnographers Skype regularly and adapt their investigations to both be specific to their own research contexts, but capable of flexible comparison and contrast with other sites; and this is done while the ethnography is happening, not only retrospectively during ‘interpretation’. Amazingly, ethnographic work on this scale about smartphones is rare. Corporate work is rarely published and is piecemeal, tending to be about specific functions, more than about the phones and people per se. ASSA is all about critical sociocultural exploration and interpretation, but may involve later some conceptual design work, and software and app implementations. As a publicly funded project, the outputs of the entire work are freely available.

This project illustrates many aspects of the ‘third age’ of design anthropology. It illustrates the increasing cultural importance of ‘well-thought things’. It is not only technology which is ‘smart’ here, but there is such a thing as ‘smart ageing’, and that has many senses, not only technological. Any design engagement in this space is not only a linear affair, with professional designers and companies shaping what is going on, but instead amounts to mutual engagements by different people engaged in design-like creative work. People shape their own lives. The phones themselves already facilitate people in building social action: most ideas for new kinds of social action are, in fact, addressed by existing functions, such as just setting up a new WhatsApp group. In smartphones, the technical capacities for some elements of design exist locally. That distributed technical capacity is accompanied by distributed imagination and aspiration. Many people across the world can aspire to make a difference in multiple ways through their ITs. The phones are themselves social, informational and personal microcosms. Smartphone users and their lives are in one sense fixed givens, suitable as data, but in another sense, these people are shifting projects. Hence ASSA shows us an example of how, globally, there is a need for more ethnographic work. The greater the design capacities, the greater the realistic imaginations and aspirations to make a difference in everyday life; and researching those capacities calls for research which has depth, more than breadth. A quantitative survey encompassing global markets will not adequately inform you about what people envisage in their lives, but hanging out in a community for a year will give you some glimpses into the depth and complexity of what is going on.

When ethnographers work in this kind of space, it is ultimately the people themselves who are the best justification for the work. While a philosopher such as Sloterdijk might paint a pessimistic world, ASSA’s informants exhibit a huge range of rationalities, experiences and emotions. They are cynics and they are optimists, they are celebratory and they experience tragedy, they are pragmatic and they are imaginative. Their social and cultural contexts vary tremendously and make a huge difference which cannot be ‘rationalised’ away. Because of this, although one might think research such as this is about a certain technical project or a hypothesis, in the event the people involved outweigh that. A key reason for working with several thousand people is that they are several thousand people who exist in the world, in all their complexity, and they deserve attention.

## Consequences

What reason do you have to engage in design anthropology? You have a wide choice. Some projects are motivated by making better products and services, and others are powerfully politicised and dialogical. The most convincing reasons often appreciate that all humans are worth engaging with and deserve to be considered. That, however, is also a very broad and demanding reason, which appreciates but does not usefully address the complexities and contradictions of human life. Design anthropology produces conceptual outputs which are necessary for the inhabitation of a well-thought social world. To be self-respecting, many people expect a world of goods and services which constantly indexes conceptualisation and consideration by other people. Collective, often industrialised, consideration makes human environments normal.

This normal designed world has certain kinds of properties. Goods and services are expected to be conceptually ‘plastic’, in other words, to facilitate adaption to contexts, routines lifestyles and circumstances. Everything is a prototype, and there are invariably other people and networks capable of taking up an idea and working with it. This conceptual plasticity can of course be disturbing. In design, a computer can become a phone, a taxi can become an app. However, within a world of conceptual work, the most significant outputs of design anthropology are wellobserved accounts of the social world of capacities and possibilities which both evoke a sense of ‘what if’ and also are truthful to existing contexts.

Design anthropology works with a particular framework and understanding of humanity. For traditional anthropology, persons are cultural entities, constituted in many fragmentary and plural ways. Most anthropologists take ‘personhood’ as cultural and accept that an individual as a phenomenon changes according to the situation (e.g. Strathern 1988). Design generally tends in the other direction, seeing people as subjects for whom they design. The various individuals they encounter motivate design and are in some ways consistent. Design anthropology appreciates above all how human progress happens around shifting notions of what makes a person whole and functioning in society. Design anthropologists then constantly work to shift attention from the various constellations of interpretations of persons (Drazin 2020), or the idea that design is all about goods and services and technologies, to the fact that the work is about real people. The outputs of the research, profiles, images, narratives and vignettes constantly draw attention back to the actual people involved in the design ecosystem.

If you think that the work is only a linear process to support creativity, you are likely to be disappointed. I have argued that contemporary design anthropology comprises a collaborative sociocultural work, which involves thinking with things. It is a supremely value infused, and hence moralised, kind of work. Its emphases are more on problem-raising and clarifying issues than on solutions. It raises ‘third spaces’ for debate and criticism. Most design anthropology negotiates the boundaries and relations between institutions, people and communities and adapts to their changing nature and constitution in different values and social phenomena. The anthropologists work with, across, and against such social boundaries.

## Summary

There has been an explosion of interest in design across the globe in the past two decades, in social, political, economic, technical and heritage terms. Expectations of what design can achieve for peoples’ benefit have never been higher.

Anthropology and design should be considered as different professions and work practices, which nonetheless collaborate. They have different kinds of aims, expertise, skills, motivations and work processes which sometimes overlap but can also work against one another.

Among the historical roles of design have been functional aims (helping people to do things better) and social coordination (helping people relate better). At present, the third role is coming to the fore. In most parts of the world, design is especially important as a way to ‘make sense of’ products and services.

Ethnographic work has changed, away from its role of providing data, towards situated critical thinking. This affects its collaborative role, no longer being only the data provider for various forms of design work, but providing the motivation for them. Anthropologists may ask design-relevant questions as often as designers do.

Anthropology as a discipline is often misunderstood. Its work processes, cultural topics and aims are more opaque than in comparable disciplines. Other people do not yet know what we do. Engaging with design is one way to make itself more clear and relevant.

Anthropology has a responsibility to engage with the material worlds of its informants, and a collaboration with design is one way to achieve this. Design anthropology can contribute to more successful design work, to sociocultural commentary and critique. It can respond to other peoples’ problems or can simply be for personal fulfilment.

Corporations, and similar institutions, are ubiquitous in human life. In design, corporate presences infuse how people live, their purposes, aspirations and social strategies; and yet corporations are often treated as culturally neutral or invisible by social research.

Design work is iterative and often involves movement between a studio environment and a field site or user community. This means that you, the professional figure, are not always the expert about what is important, when in the field.

Design anthropology happens and has importance in a wider ecosystem of design knowledges. Both design work and anthropological work are open-ended, producing more potential pathways than they resolve. It is through the collaborative circulation of knowledge that insights, concepts and testimonies can be taken up again and advanced.

This chapter has argued that we are now in the ‘third age’ of design anthropology, where culturally and socially aware design is an expectation of modern life. One of design anthropology’s key roles now is working between professional and everyday forms of design.

## References

Balaram, S. 2011 Thinking Design, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Braungart, M., W. McDonough 2002 Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make Things, New York: Vintage.

Buchanan, V. 1992 ‘Wicked Problems in Design Thinking’, Design Issues 8(2): 5–21.

Buchanan, V. 1998 ‘Branzi’s Dilemma: Design in Contemporary Culture’, Design Issues 14(1): 3–20.

Clarke, A. (Ed) 2011 Design Anthropology: Object Cultures in the Twenty-First Century, New York: Springer Publishing.

Clarke, A. (Ed) 2017 Design Anthropology: Object Cultures in Transition, London: Bloomsbury.

Couture, J.-P. 2015 Sloterdijk, Cambridge: Polity Press.

Davis, D. (Ed) 2000 The Consumer Revolution in Urban China, San Jose, CA: University of California Press.

DiSalvo, C. 2015 Adversarial Design, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Drazin, A. 2013 ‘The Social Life of Concepts’, in W. Gunn, T. Otto, R. Smith (Eds) Design Anthropology: Theory and Practice, London: Bloomsbury, pp. 33–50.

Drazin, A. 2020 ‘Design for and Against Digital Anthropology’, in H. Geismar, H. Knox (Eds) Digital Anthropology, London: Bloomsbury.

Dunne, A., F. Raby 2001 Design Noir: The Secret Life of Electronic Objects, Basel: Birkhauser.

Dunne, A. 2008 Hertzian Tales: Electronic Objects, Aesthetic Experiences and Critical Design, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Dunne, A., F. Raby 2013 Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Florida, R. 2002 The Rise of the Creative Class, New York: Basic Books.

Florida, R. 2004 Cities and the Creative Class, London: Routledge.

Foster, R. 2007 ‘The Work of the New Economy: Consumers, Brands and Value-Creation’, Cultural Anthropology 22(4): 707–731.

Frascara, J. (Ed) 2002 Design and the Social Sciences: Making Connections, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

Friedman, K., E. Stolterman 2011 ‘Series Foreword’, in C. DiSalvo (Ed) Adversarial Design, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Fry, T. 2008 Design Futuring: Sustainability, Ethics and New Practice, London: Bloomsbury.

Fry, T. 2012 Becoming Human by Design, London: Bloomsbury.

Gunn, W., T. Otto, R. Smith (Eds) 2013 Design Anthropology: Theory and Practice, London: Bloomsbury.

Holzblatt, K. 2004 Rapid Contextual Design, Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufman Publishers.

Ingold, T. 2007 ‘Materials Against Materiality’, Archaeological Dialogues 14(1): 1–16.

Ingold, T., E. Hallam (Eds) 2008 Creativity and Cultural Improvisation, Oxford: Berg.

Irwin, T. 2015 ‘Transition Design’, Design and Culture 7(2): 229–246.

Justice, L., X. Xiangyang 2012 The Design Revolution in China, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Kikuchi, Y. 2004 Japanese Modernisation and Mingei Theory: Cultural Nationalism and Oriental Orientalism, London: Routledge.

Lury, C., N. Wakeford (Eds) 2013 Inventive Methods: The Happening of the Social, London: Routledge.

Madsbjerg, C., M. Rasmussen 2014 The Moment of Clarity, Brighton, MA: Harvard Business Review Press.

Manzini, E. 2015 Design, When Everybody Designs: An Introduction to Design for Social Innovation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Moeran, B. 1997 Folk Art Potters of Japan: Beyond an Anthropology of Aesthetics, London: Routledge.

Mouffe, C. 2005 On the Political, London: Routledge.

Murphy, K. 2015 Swedish Design: An Ethnography, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Norman, D. 1988 The Psychology of Everyday Things, New York: Perseus Books Group.

Norman, D. 2010 ‘Why Design Education Must Change’, blog post on Core77, 26 November 2010: https://www.core77.com/posts/17993/Why-Design-Education-Must-Change.

Ory DeNicola, A., L. DeNicola 2012 ‘Rescue and Redemption: Design Schools, Traditional Craft and the Nation State in Contemporary India’, Cultural Studies 26(6): 787–813.

Pine, B., J. Gilmore 1998 ‘Welcome to the Experience Economy’ in Harvard Business Review, July–August 1998.

Reckwitz, A. 2015 The Invention of Creativity: Modern Society and the Invention of the New, Cambridge: Polity.

Schuler, D., A. Namioka (Eds) 1994 Participatory Design: Principles and Practices, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

Sellen, A., R. Harper 2001 The Myth of the Paperless Office, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Simonsen, J., T. Robertson (Eds) 2013 Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design, London: Routledge.

Sloterdijk, P. 1988 Critique of Cynical Reason, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Sloterdijk, P. 2016 Foams: Plural Spherology (Spheres Volume III), Cambridge: Polity Press. Translated by W. Hoban.

Smith, R., O. Iversen 2018 ‘Participatory Design for Sustainable Social Change’, Design Studies 59: 9–36.

Squires, S. 2002 ‘Doing the Work: Customer Research in the Product Development and Design Industry’ in S. Squires, B. Byrne (Eds) Creating Breakthrough Ideas: the Collaboration of Anthropologists and Designers in the Product Development Industry, Westport. CT: Bergin and Garvey, pp 103–124..

Strathern, M. 1988 The Gender of the Gift: Problems with Women and Problems with Society in Melanesia, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Suchman, L. 1987 Plans and Situated Actions, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Suchman, L. 2007 ‘Anthropology as “Brand”: Reflections on Corporate Ethnography’, paper presented at the Colloquium on Interdisciplinarity and Society, Oxford University, 24 February 2007. Available for download from Lancaster University: https://www.lancaster.ac.uk/fass/resources/sociology-online-papers/papers/suchman-anthropology-asbrand.pdf.

Suchman, L. 2011 ‘Anthropological Relocations and the Limits of Design’, Annual Review of Anthropology 40: 1–18.

Tilley, C. 2007 ‘Materiality in Materials’, Archaeological Dialogues 14(1): 16–20.

Tunstall, D. 2013 ‘Decolonizing Design Innovation: Design Anthropology, Critical Anthropology and Indigenous Knowledge’, in W. Gunn, T. Otto, R. Smith (Eds) Design Anthropology: Theory and Practice, London: Bloomsbury, pp. 232–251.

Wakeford, N. (Ed) 2004 Innovation by People-centred Design – Lessons from the USA. Report of a DTI Global Watch Mission, published by DTI, Incite, and University of Surrey.