# WHAT IS DESIGN MATERIALITY?

This chapter takes up Clarke’s (2011: 9) comment about design anthropology, ‘Thingness is simply not what it used to be’, by discussing how material culture ideas can inform our approaches to design. Material culture is an interdisciplinary field of study which looks and cultural and social issues through objects and substances. It is as old as anthropology itself, which from its conception was associated with collecting so-called exotic objects as a way of knowing about other cultures, but it has experienced a particular renaissance since the late 1980s (Appadurai 1986). Since then, the field has produced a number of critical approaches for thinking about culture in new ways. Without an interest in material culture, culture and society are often studied through abstractions, for example systems of meanings, languages, beliefs, practices or institutions such as markets or governments. With material culture thinking, however, it is normal for researchers to appreciate everyday objects and substances as culture in themselves, not simply reflections of an abstract cultural pattern in the minds of people and communities. This chapter presents a potted history of how different currents of thinking in material culture studies can be applied to understand design culture, a discussion which continues the previous chapter’s and sets out suggestions for how to think about design’s materiality.

A simple example of how material culture can produce alternative understandings comes from my own work on care (Drazin 2001, 2002, 2011). Care used to be analysed by asking how and why household work has so often been seen as gendered, and hence could be an exploitative system generally undertaken by women more than men. In 20th century analyses, care was often analysed as a sort of labour-exchange mechanism, where different genders were supposed to do different sorts of work for one another, but the balance of which was very unequal. A common understanding was that women’s labour was unacknowledged and silencing. In many homes, women were understood as quietly doing the necessary work, while men were supposed to provide words of thanks in exchange.

When I undertook a study of the material culture of care in a Romanian town in the 1990s, while I did talk with people about housework, I focussed much more on the explosion of soaps, cleaners, shampoos, floor cleaners, deodorants and other ‘care products’. Post-socialist Romania experienced a glut of soaps from all across the world, with multinational companies moving in, evangelical multilevel marketing organisations, and market trading of soaps from Hungary, China, Turkey, Germany and Italy. Teenagers experimented with new never-smelled-before scents, and home owners sought out new cleaning sprays. Soaps became one of the gifts of choice in the earlier 1990s when visiting someone, as well as a key business opportunity for the small-scale trader. Soaps were a common gift for mothers on women’s day, as well as between the city and the countryside. At this time, homes and offices changed. Surfaces looked different and smelled different. Bodies and hair also changed in subtle ways.

These experiences and transformations would be missed by traditional approaches to care, which might examine how many hours somebody spent cleaning and probably consider government policy. When material culture is included in the equation, the mechanics of care cultures make a lot more sense. In material culture, we come to understand care as actively creating people, identities and relationships. We can also appreciate that care, even if silent, is visible and enveloping. Homes in Romania are often pervaded by an awareness of the work of cleaning, and of who has cleaned. Work might be silent but is not necessarily invisible. In some cases, work could also be a form of aggressive giving, an expression of emotion and with a sense of power about it. Control over cleanliness can be a way of also controlling children and partners. Care can still be interpreted as exploitative, and exploring objects is only one possible approach, but it does reveal a more complicated, contested, tense and power-infused culture of care, sometimes harmonic and sometimes jarring. The anthropological interpretation changes radically through introducing material culture paradigms.

In a similar fashion, material culture approaches are an essential part of properly understanding design culture, which as we have seen is a forceful field, pervaded with an unavoidable sense of push-and-pull in its stance to change. Theorists of ‘design things’ are most prominent in these interpretations, including Clarke (2018), Binder et al (2011), Yaneva (2013), Verbeek and Kockelkoren (1998), Anusas and Harkness (2014) and Atzmon and Boradkar (2017). Julier (2013: 249) suggests ‘the study of design culture begins and ends with materiality’, and there are several reasons for this.

There is first the implicit alterity. All design evokes an imagination of other people who will use the designs, and this acts as a manifestation of purpose. From an ‘us’ point of view, we become involved in providing innovative changes and creative rethinkings for various ‘them’ figures, who are seen as engaged in building stable, consistent and reliable lifestyles. This alterity means that design studios and everyday sites act as ‘significant others’ for one another, locked into mutual relationships of creativity. Material things are the key mediator of these imaginations. Each group constantly works on material supplied by the other, as people use designed products and services, and designers work on design situations, providing mutual validation. To put this another way, design exists within a political economy of thoughts and thinking, in which people constantly examine one another’s attitudinal orientations, considerations, purposes, trajectories and agendas. Material culture becomes the key support for design cultures because it is able to manifest these processes of thinking and also able to mediate concepts through many contexts by being transacted and presented. In conceiving of design through material culture, we are conceiving of material things not as static end points, as only products of design work, but as the moving axes through which design works to exercise change.

Empirical studies of design commonly put ‘materiality’ at their heart, and there are several arguments about why and how this is the case. Design professionals aim to produce material outputs, and use material (i.e. non-textual) ways of thinking (Otto and Smith 2013), and are simply intensely concerned with material details. ‘Materiality’ describes the work, the products of the work and the social currency. It is sometimes a poorly defined term, however (see Ingold et al’s 2007 critique of Miller 2005). Some argue that the term is deficient in that it can imply that material stuff is culturally passive, ‘merely’ symbolic, whereas Henare et al (2006) suggest that anthropology should see things as actually constituting thoughts and meanings in themselves. In design studios, Binder et al (2011) describe as ‘design thinking’ the way that thinking emerges in a material way, often in group work. Others describe processes of ‘embodied’ thinking (e.g. Sennett 2009; see also Bourdieu 1977), a history of ideas going back to Donald Schön’s ethnographic work with architects, whom he described as ‘reflexive practitioner’s (Schön 1982). Cross (1982: 225, 2011) meanwhile argued that the wide spectrum of design disciplines, from architecture to fashion to graphics, shares ‘designerly ways of knowing’, which are embodied and deploy objects, and which distinguish them from sciences or humanities. Thinking processes in most contemporary design are heuristic, sensing conceptualisations and re-framing problems over time to realise the solution which fits best. Kimbell (2009) makes the point that some design researchers have worked to rise above a ‘mere’ concern with objects, by emphasising abstracted social and cultural insights. But she also argues the pendulum is swinging the other way, with the majority now considering design thinking as happening within material practices. In design, many objects become prototypes, things which are also hypotheses or conceptual experiments.

A lot of people therefore assert the importance of materiality to design and design anthropology work. When I use the term ‘materiality’, I mean reflexive social paradigms by which material objects, things and substances come to have social resonance. Design comprises a professional and popular discourse by which people appreciate, approach, evaluate and work with material things. Design, in this sense, transcends any particular thing but is also a set of expectations and ways to understand the material world and its importance to people. Tilley (2007: 17) argues, ‘We need to recognize that each object has its own material properties but that these are processual and in flux … The concept of materiality is one that needfully addresses the “social lives” of [things] … in relation to the social lives of persons’. Design is a materiality in the sense that it is a cultural paradigm of material culture, comparable to and engaging with such paradigms as consumption, art, technology or heritage. It is not a privileged analytical framework, by which only anthropologists or design professionals could authoritatively dictate what is design, it is an engaged framework, responsive to situations, and also varying internationally and historically. The question, however, remains, what sort of materiality is design? How does this paradigm operate in practice? What characterises this particular material culture phenomenon?

This chapter proceeds with a description of material culture in a design studio, to illustrate the kinds of phenomena which we need to understand and explain. This is followed by an overview of approaches to the key concept of ‘objectification’ (Miller 1987), which is a term important to understand how culture happens in and around material things. We then examine three critical commentaries which have developed objectification as an approach to design culture, and alternatives to objectification. Finally, I present an argument for an alternative way to think about design culture and what it does in society. My argument is that in design, objects are recognised as manifesting ‘concepts’. Hence objectification comes to be obvious and explicit as a cultural process. Because of this, design anthropologists should be working more to develop ‘new critical materialisms’ (Tilley 2000; Witmore 2014), meaning recognising how material objects are the key means to actively question existing culture. In order to do this, I suggest, we need to move away from a simple theory of design ‘things’, towards thinking about designed goods and services as ‘wave-like’.

## The social life of concepts

Professional design cultures, or ‘studio’ cultures (Farías and Wilkie 2015), illustrate just how material things relate to thinking, because it is not really the thinking itself, it is about how it happens. My own immersive experience of design environments is largely based on working in several hi-tech multinationals and design schools (Drazin 2013). Based on these experiences, I would argue that design work is distinctive and recognisable to a lot of people across the world. When people witness the whiteboards, the post-it notes, the sketches which litter design studio environments, it is often clear that some kind of designing is going on. These kinds of material things are, globally, the signs of institutional modes of thinking and planning. What makes this really interesting is not only the material signs but the rituals of creativity. Individual designers and design teams are wonderful at producing new ideas for products and services, and given time and persistence, design work will usually deliver something which is clearly a step forward. Design innovates, very often by repeating the same steps over and over. It is not that there is a recipe for innovation, but there are patterns which everybody recognises, and there are ways of organising design events.

Many events begin with clear spaces – clear boards, papers or events which are going to be filled. Wiping down the whiteboards is very careful. The pens or pencils are tested to check that they work. Although a lot of designers prefer the tactility of paper and whiteboards, some use digital forms, in which case new collaborative documents are opened and created, there are open, blank white screens which make the aspiration clear. As the collective thinking emerges, it all has to be ready to catch the ideas, none of this equipment should let you down when the team gets into the flow. Groups will often go over past work, establish the stage where they left off at the end of the last event and have on hand what they produced before, which act as resources for the next stage of thinking. Presentations are a key element, with people standing up, often in turn, to present their part of the work. This kind of format establishes the groundwork for everybody pitching in – design group work happens in an environment of equality, where everybody matters. One presentation would be just a lecture, but multiple presentations are a sharing of information and an invitation. Importantly, the types of material presentation can in very subtle ways invite engagement and criticism. Objects like post-it notes invite you to express an alternative opinion, they are not ideas ‘set in stone’, and a designer might also take care over the exact colour and handwriting they use, so even a post-it can be crafted and aesthetic. This says to the group that a designer has put effort into this thought, there is thinking work in it and personal investment and also that you are invited to challenge it, use it and improve it.

Designers have a host of methods, tools and approaches which a team will recognise. Out of repetitive, communal rituals, a sense of creativity and originality emerges. If you ask the team what they are doing at any one moment, then almost always they will have a road plan for progress. At the same time, their plans are adaptable. If you know exactly how the work is going to go, it is unlikely you will produce something very different, or learn anything which challenges you along the way. A huge amount of design work is ‘iterative’, that is it moves back and forth between thinking in the studio and thinking about the community where designs will be used, proposing and testing new concepts as it goes along. In the grand scheme, the work moves through stages: from processes of observation, to trying to work out the remit of design or the opportunity, to conceptualising and proposing possible responses, to actually developing prototypes and working models and to thinking about manufacture. When embedded in the workflow, however, design work typically feels like a series of rhythms, and it is somehow in these rhythms that one gets the feeling of progress.

One key rhythm is between group work and individual work. For a period of time, individual members of the team prepare the parts of the work they are responsible for, and then the group convenes, the work is presented, after which the group disperses and individuals work on their parts again. The presentation events in the group mark the moments of realisation of progress, and conversely as individuals the team members look back on the last group event they realise the progress made. In practice, the group events also form small hierarchies which build up: so a pair of people or small team might meet daily, then perhaps every 2 weeks convene a larger group meeting, and every 6 weeks present to somebody more important, all building up to the grand presentation every few months where funding is decided.

Rhythms also exist in the particular treatment of the ‘stuff’ of design work. There are phases which are ‘opening’ and phases which are more about ‘focussing’. Open phases involve covering as much ground as possible, producing as many ideas or points as possible or going over everything you have. They are inclusive parts of the work. It is very important, however, that having produced all of this material and possibilities, the team focuses it down and makes decisions about what is the best part of all this information to work on going forwards.

Nested within the rhythms of opening and focussing is another cycle, between grouping and prioritising. If you have an artefact like a poster with all sorts of ideas on it, such as post-its or photographs or quotations, which are seen as observations or design proposals or themes, then one can organise those thoughts in different ways. When the poster is flat on the table, then people are able to stand around it and easily group the information in different places. This idea goes with that one, or this observation is about that concept. Grouping work treats all the bits of information as on an equal footing, and associates and separates bits of the corpus. Following grouping, there is often a stage of ranking, where the groups are prioritised. When a team ranks information, it begins to have a vertical axis, an up and a down. The clusters or themes come to be organised one above another, until you have worked out which are most and least important for the work. When a ranking like that is posted on the wall, or board, or presented to a group, it assumes a kind of fixity. The information has assumed a form which begins to feel quite set. And then the ranking may be brought down on the table, and its fluidity is reasserted as it can be moved around or re-grouped.

A highly significant final rhythm in a lot of design work is the one between studio and design site. At an early stage, working in the site or community where a design is to be used amounts to research and is generally very open. As the work progresses, visits to the site involve bringing concepts and ideas to talk about and evaluate. At a later stage still, there are prototypes and models and specific proposals. This movement back and forth is one of the primary rhythms and primary axes of work which involves design anthropology. It means that the anthropologist is one of the primary engines of the thinking work in design.

## Design as working with concepts

What are we to make of these kinds of evidently ‘material’ ways of working? The first point to make is that the knowledge and thinking work is of a particular kind. It is primarily about concepts. While design works with different kinds of knowledge, such as ‘facts’ and ‘ideas’, the most significant kind of thought, the one which design is intent on, is ‘concepts’. In the same way that a lot of scientific work goes towards proposing and testing scientific facts, the rhythms and processes of design work I have tried to convey are about producing and working with concepts. The rhythms are about constantly probing, evaluating, making bits of information and thinking and finding out if they can count as concepts (Drazin 2013). The sense of rhythm and the passing of time which underlie so much iterative design work are crucial for developing the qualities which make thoughts conceptual, and to feeling progress. The rhythms are experienced as looking back and looking forwards to past work and future work. It is perfectly normal to produce a sketch, poster or PowerPoint slide and declare ‘this is the concept’; and then later on, in the light of reflection and looking back, declare that what you produced last week ‘demonstrates the concept’. In other words, as the work moves on, and aspires to the next conceptual phase, there is a sense of divergence and convergence of the conceptual and the material, with sometimes concepts which are physical and at other times material things which indicate an abstracted conceptual dimension which existed in the past, or may exist in the future if the concept is realised. This ebb and flow, moving back and forth across a temporal horizon, reflects how this kind of thinking and knowledge crosses time as well as space.

The second observation to make is that this kind of thought is quite a good one for thinking about social contexts and sites. When describing thought as concepts, we frame thought as relational both to people and to places. There are a range of ways of talking about knowledge and thoughts in design work, including describing them as themes, insights, facts, ideas and so forth. Each term is used for particular reasons and purposes as a part of the work. Facts present knowledge as very impersonal and often placeless, communicating a truth about the world which can pretty much be repeated in any circumstance. Ideas are understood as arising from individual people, their authors, and even carry a sense of ownership. Concepts as they occur in design work are often extensions of contexts (as will be discussed in Chapter 5). Usually, the context or site explains the concept, rather than the other way around. So a chair designed for work ‘makes sense’ in relation to an office and the working day. An outfit designed for evening wear only makes sense if we have the reference point in mind of the relevant kind of social event. This is the opposite of some other forms of knowledge, for example facts and ideas are understood as thoughts which explain material things. The capacity for concepts to be explained by contexts happens because of the progress of the work and the social life of the concepts, as they develop over time during a project. It is a relation made possible because of the particular rhythm of thinking work as it moves between the studio and the context of use.

Most forms of contemporary design work start with some kind of research. My own experience is mainly in product and service design work, in which an element of social research is the norm. Architecture also often involves a period of immersion or observation in a site. Fashion research is very different, not necessarily so driven by actually talking with people, but taking account of trends and media and with an awareness of broad currents and social agendas. Other areas of design can be more technical, involving fewer examples of social research, such as graphic design or textile design. Whatever the field, observations derived from research will be circulated and commented upon at an early stage. Whether they are ethnographic or media, these empirical points are presented so as to form a foundation, a necessary starting point. The twin pillars of commencement of a design project are the research and the brief. As the work proceeds, it will ‘conceptually’ transform these early observations to produce something new and better. So while most of the work of ethnographic observation involves trying to understand, analyse or interpret what is going on, the work of conceptualising for design starts early, and even as social research is going on, already researchers will make observations about peoples’ lives which are actually speculative imaginations of future potentials. In order to legitimately transform a situation, it helps for this information to be rendered as ‘concept’s. So car journeys are conceptualised as transport, books and computers become informational concepts, and so forth.

The Danish SPIRE project has developed ways of defining concepts more precisely in design anthropology and has distinguished anthropological concepts from design concepts. Anthropological concepts are more useful in thinking about ethnographic observation and about social and cultural formulations and can sometimes incorporate expressions of problems or opportunities. Design concepts incline towards the proposition of interventions, innovations or solutions. As design work and design anthropology work progresses, concepts are therefore used in different ways. They are not necessarily consistent nuggets of information. The ongoing work of defining, testing and expressing concepts actually changes them. One can combine a concept about information or communication with a concept about relationships, realising at some point that they seem to be the same concept; alternatively, a concept can be split into multiple concepts. Some concepts are more clear than others, better defined.

Within design culture environments, then, the material culture of sketches, models, prototypes, post-its and all of these commonly recognised things are seen to comprise concepts, the forms of which enable people to work with them. Properties of malleability and fixity become important. For example, if an ethnographic environment is rendered in multiple still images and photographs, then that means the designers and anthropologists can work with those, group them, move them around, rank or separate them. When the information is rendered as a poster of all the images, or as a videoclip, then it renders the ‘case study’ as a site of design use which is relatively fixed and unchanging.

When studio work results in actual products and services, the contextual relationship continues and is one of the elements of popular culture which renders everyday environments as designed and as conceptual. Many products, services, buildings, clothes, graphics and other elements of the world are seen as manifesting a ‘concept’, and that concept has reference to a ‘type of place’ or a certain way of living, the expression of a contingent possibility by which designed things shape capacities around them. A designed thing very often works then not as a symbol, like marketing (this chocolate means love) but by evoking material associations (this food facilitates this sort of meal and kitchen at this moment of the day).

This discussion of design work should show several things. The material culture of design bears a certain kind of relation to thinking, which distinguishes the sort of materiality which design manifests. The conceptual dimension of design, because it has reference to contexts of use, is actually one which crosses time. The conceptual dimension of designed things is temporally dependent both in that it unfolds in ongoing iterations, and also in that it only makes sense because of the extended life of a design as thought. Studio work is conceptual partly because it bears a relation to eventual products and services in the homes and workplaces and public spaces it evokes; and designed things when in use bear a reference back in time to the context of the studio, where the earlier thinking work was undertaken. In Chapter 4, we will examine the ways in which design anthropologists characterise this sort of cultural thinking, and what the transformation of knowledge, from site to studio and back again, can achieve.

## Objectification in design and its tensions

The social life of design concepts illustrates how design culture is predicated upon material things. This approach, that material things are a necessary precondition for the existence of cultural understandings and relationships, is commonly addressed through the idea of objectification, which Tilley (2006: 60) asserts is ‘at the heart of all studies of material culture’. In this section, I wish to set out the basic idea of objectification, which has several threads, and then take account of three critical viewpoints on it, in which each arises from the study of design.

Objectification is an approach which combines human processes of being and of knowing (ontology and epistemology). It is an idea which aims to transcend the dualisms of those social science approaches which would make a clear, natural division between subjects and objects.

Seeing culture as objectification means that people realise who they are through an ongoing, contested process of engagement with a material world of things and substances. Hegel proposed objectification as a process of consciousness, by which people come to be aware of themselves as something distinct from an external material world. As this process of consciousness unfolds, concepts and rules become manifest, which then over time become differentiated and dissolved into multiple micro-conceptualisations.

We can identify at least three classical traditions of thinking about objectification. Hegel argued that this process is creative and destructive of personal existence, in the sense of involving both consciousness raising and also conceptual annihilation (Vernichtung). By contrast, Marxist ideas of objectification, while based upon Hegel, radically transform them into a social, more than personal, dialectical process. For Marx, objectification is connected to a battle of ideas between groups in society, by processes of exchange, and hence becomes fundamental to power struggles. It is because of such struggles, Marx argues, that social change can ultimately happen. This Marxist tradition is one of the strongest in influencing European thought, but is not the only one. The third tradition derives from Durkheim’s work on totemism and has become just as influential in anthropology (see Keane 1997). In Durkheimian thinking, certain objects come to be manifestations of the collective idea of society, and of what culture means. Durkheimian objectification generally envisages that (unlike for Hegel and Marx) the process generally establishes relatively stable and enduring concepts of society, rules and ideals.

Objectification for contemporary thinkers then does not refer simply to a moment of production of a thing which expresses an abstract idea or internal thought. It is an ongoing process of material experience, incorporating realisation of the subject. In other words, it is not separate from a process of subjectification. Miller (1987) argues that a problematic process of objectification is pervasive within industrial modernity, intrinsically contested. The process involves moments of externalisation of culture in material form, and moments of sublation or appropriation, which do not progress with reassuring certainty. Cultural selves are realised in confrontational encounters with alien material ‘other things’, and by sublation where things are consumed in ways that can be self-changing. If we use objectification to understand what is going on in design, then design is certainly not simply about thinking subjects joyfully acting on a passive object world, but a mutual negotiation which involves mutual change.

As an example of how design can be understood as objectification, we can turn to an example from design history, the celebrated study of the Italian motor scooter by Hebdige (1988). Hebdige points out how mopeds such as the Vespa did not develop from an evolution in form of the motorbike, nor did they develop from market research exploring ‘what people want’. From the 1920s, designers focussed on ideas of what sorts of ‘transport’ might work well in the European cities, for the kinds of people living in them at that time. This work meant considering a range of abstracted functions which a mode of transport should manifest. It imagined the context, positing a lifestyle which would require a convenient, reliable everyday way to zip about town over relatively short distances. Urban life was imagined with commuting distances beyond walking but not too far, and likewise a social life covering perhaps a few miles. The design put these elements and considerations together into a machine which had small wheels, which wrapped around the body of the rider (rather than the rider straddling it), and for which a small engine was a virtue not a liability. Importantly, this form emerged from deliberately abstracted concepts, derived from observations and re-imaginations of contexts. The marketing of these machines, by contrast with the design, began to ‘personalise’ them more, in other words pictured them as person-like, and envisaged them as feminine. The advertising was initially targeted at women, and unlocked a huge market, as the design responded to the immense, even revolutionary, changes in society in post-war Europe and the growing independence of women.

While the engineering-dominated car industry in Britain disparaged the scooter, its lack of power, its smallness and its consequent unmanliness, many people in the design professions celebrated it for exactly the same reasons. Scooters had sleek lines and elegance, they celebrated function, utility and ease of use, they were easily mass-manufactured and they fitted into urban environments without drawing too much attention or seeming what they were not. They were controversial, but evoked a degree of social-conceptual work when people encountered them. This dialectical opposition of ideas about mopeds in 1950s Britain heralds for a new phase of the objectification process: ‘The object splits. And is re-assembled in use…’ (Hebdige 1988: 144). Adopted as an ‘image’ (for which we can also read ‘social concept’ in a Hegelian sense) for Mod subculture, the scooter became an image of cool masculinity, it suited the kinds of clothes worn by Mods (long parka coats, for example, because one rode the scooter with legs together, not apart), the individualism of Mods, modes of social gathering and metropolitan travel. If then, one process of objectification had occurred among the Italian designers of scooters, another occurred in collective consumption. And then, over time, this concretised image of the scooter, Hebdige notes, was disassembled. Other elements of lifestyles and designs emerged, and the scooter (and Mod associations) came to be a part of nostalgia.

The story of this object, heralded as a design classic or icon, makes clear that through objectification it has formed a part of a kind of conceptual work both in its development and in its use. Its development was not exactly about a market niche, as if some people want motorbikes and others want mopeds, that was a choice which came later. Rather, it was about a way of living. So when people first encountered mopeds, they encountered a concept of a lifestyle and were being asked how they might fit into it. The associative qualities of the object changed over time, so to ride one was always to be a part of a larger social process, always implying new associations, clothes, genderings and so forth. It could change people in profound ways, sometimes with a sense of ease and sometimes with a sense of discomfort.

Yet objectification (like materiality) is a very loose concept. This is not to say that it is not useful, rather it is to say that it is flexible, and useful according to the way it enables deeper exploration and specification by us. When it comes to design, three critical commentaries are very relevant: by Gell, Ingold and Buchli. Each of these authors takes a different stance on design, significantly affecting, and critiquing, ideas about how objectification works.

## Extended agency and design

The traditional viewpoint on design as a form of social objectification by which both individual people and society come to understand themselves resonates very well with the work of designers in American and European industry. Most of their work is premised upon a certain consumer society–style individualism, which envisages persons’ identities as nested within groups. Anthropologists, however, work with diverse, wholly different cultural ideas. The work of Gell (1998) on art and design, on the one hand, provides a very solidly based example of the objectification of thoughts (or, of mind), but also questions these Western presumptions about the nature of personhood and individualism.

The initial stages of Gell’s argument seem to support a quite individualistic approach, showing how many objects can be ‘read’ as objectifications of the qualities of a person. He is arguing, in short, that art objects are like people. He writes about the patterns on a shield in the New Guinea Asmat tradition:

these designs seem to have been composed in a mood of terror, and we are terrified by them (or can easily imagine being terrified by them) because, submitting to their fascination, we are obliged to share in the emotions which they objectify… the shield terrifies by persuading us that we are what it shows.

(Gell 1998: 31)

This shield might as well be a motor scooter, the designer expressing person-like qualities which assume an independent existence, and which may then be appropriated by others. Yet having convinced us of a form of objectification in which people are identified with objects, as if each person has one single mind, intention and experience, Gell elaborates on them as indices of intentionality, by which artworks become ‘involuted’, manifesting relationships themselves:

What is seen is the visible knot which ties together an invisible skein of relations, fanning out into social space and social time.

(Gell 1998: 62)

Art objects, he proposes, do not only signify meanings or peoples’ thoughts, but relationships between minds. So art is appreciated as having biography and genealogy, a thing carrying the weight not only of the individual artist’s intention but also of precedent artists, within a tradition of artists who have witnessed one another’s work.

It is at this point in Gell’s argument that he sets out how he thinks design distinguishes itself. For Gell, design really concerns repetitive patterns, forms, styles and surfaces which seem ubiquitous in everyday life (Gell 1998: 73; he also implies this is linked to the politics of gender). People experience a designed world in which patterns, surfaces, and styles are profoundly important, and yet are difficult to read as relationships, more difficult than typical artworks. They are in a sense socially or psychologically ‘unfinished business’ (Gell 1998: 81). Designed things are read as the product of repeated human actions, potentially involving more people and more repetitive pieces of work than can be easily perceived. But unlike in artworks, the minds of the people who created designs can seem obscure. The unfinished social business of design is therefore potentially repeatable ad infinitum, inviting the possibility of social reproduction. When patterns are not exactly representations of minds, but rather difficult-to-read manifestations, they become what he calls socially sticky or viscous, objectifications in a different sense, in that they present engaging, relatively fixed points in social experience.

Ultimately, therefore, Gell begins with a revolutionary critical commentary on Western art but moves towards an even more revolutionary fundamental critique of Western notions of what a person is. Citing Küchler, he advocates undermining the distinction ‘between the material and the mental (or cognitive) with respect to material culture’ (Gell 1998: 228). Distribution and connection (of objects, persons and minds) must be mutual, the ability to be a distributed entity being mutual with the capacity to be connected. Objectifications which enable movement and distribution are simultaneously objectifications which constitute relationships and complicated patternings of relationships. To put this more simply, in studying art objects in particular, but also designs, it is erroneous to see persons as discrete entities, the production of separation; rather, we can see persons as made by relationships, and hence distributed across space and time.

The move from reading designed things as indexing the intentions of designers as individuals, to seeing the personhood of the designer as themselves a node in a skein of relationships, reflects what many ethnographers working in Polynesia and Melanesia have observed (e.g. Munn 1996; Strathern 1988). Coupaye (2013: 270) suggests that Gell’s work does not adequately account for the role of technical work, something often indivisible from intentionality, in constituting relationships. Garvey (2017) uses Gell’s ideas to help understand IKEA consumption in Stockholm, proposing the concept of ‘distributed design’. IKEA forms are not only ubiquitous in consumption, everywhere from homes to restaurants to government offices, but design relationships are themselves nested within Swedish life, cross-cutting between homes, design studios and other places.

Understanding design objectification through distributed personhood challenges both the Hegelian and Cartesian notions of personhood, which understand it as the formation of conscious individuals. For some, this school of thinking about design offers a way of redeeming Western social experience, rooted in an industrial heritage, through alternative conceptions of nonindividualistic persons:

It may not be so aberrant to suggest that what persons are externally (and collectively) is a kind of enlarged replication of what they are internally… Seen in this light, a person and a person’s mind are not confined to particular spatio-temporal coordinates, but consist of a spread of biographical events and memories of events, and a dispersed category of material objects, traces and leavings, which can be attributed to a person and which, in aggregate, testify to agency and patienthood during a biographical career which may, indeed, prolong itself long after biological death.

(Gell 1998: 222)

## Design and flows

Another group of commentaries on design emphasise that material flows and textility can be advanced as either alternative, or preferable, concepts to objectification per se. Ingold (2000, 2011) synthesises some of these critiques in his various works. As a critical commentary on Miller’s (1998) observations on what people do with objects, and how people create worlds of practices using objects, Ingold argues:

neither brick nor mortar, nor soil, nor the ingredients in the kitchen, nor paints and oils, are objects. They are materials. And what people do with materials, as we have seen, is to follow them, weaving their own lines of becoming into the texture of material flows comprising the lifeworld. Out of this, there emerge the kinds of things we call buildings, plants, pies and paintings.

(Ingold 2011: 96)

One of the targets of this critique is the broad historical tendency to see design as separate from making. This is to say that many designers working in the wake of the industrial revolution came to concern themselves with object forms, often through drawing them in outline, and then consequently working on the materials and the manufacture. But design did not have to develop in this way, it was not inevitable. It was Fordist industry which normalised this separation from manufacturing in mainstream C20th design. Ingold points out that this separation of design from making is related to the fallacy of hylomorphism, by which people think of form as something separable from material. The result of his critique of hylomorphism is that we can understand the social world as constituted by a long history of design work and action, more than by current considerations. The everyday world of objects presents itself as an endless sequence of solutions to problems, desires or needs, when, in fact, our modes of action are more often than not suggested by those very objects. He, therefore, compares the designer figure to a ‘trickster’ (Ingold 2013: 62, following Flusser 1995), discussing the complexities of eating breakfast. Why pick up a spoon to eat from a bowl, when it would be more simple and easier to pick up the bowl and just drink? What is the need for chairs and sitting at a metre-high table, when you could have a lower table and no chairs?

Instead of seeing the world as comprising objects which make sense in terms of their present purposes, he argues for examining the world as processual flows. Through sketching and making, objects themselves can be appreciated as flows: ‘As the philosopher Martin Heidegger put it, rather enigmatically, the thing presents itself “in its thinging from out of the worlding world” (Heidegger, 1971: 181).’ (Ingold 2010: 96). Objects are simply stopping points in the flow of materials in the world, much as he conceives of images as stopping points in the flow of consciousness (see Ingold 2013). By seeing the world in these alternative terms, he argues, the design anthropologist can begin to appreciate alternatives to the status quo (see Anusas and Harkness 2014).

Analyses of design which emphasise flows of making and of materials are speaking to a longer-standing set of debates about what design can tell us about human action in general, and whether people are more concerned with the work or with the outputs. These perspectives are illustrated by the work of two major and hugely influential social theorists, Herbert Simon and Georg Simmel. Simon (1988: 67) notes, ‘Everyone designs who devotes courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones’. He emphasises purposive action, where design as a process occupies the middle ground between means and ends. He also emphasises the role of institutions in coordinating purposive actions between many people, and so being a cradle of design culture. His is a very open definition, and in that sense optimistic, since anybody can work to improve a situation.

Simmel, by contrast, begins from a pessimistic point of view. The ‘tragedy of culture’ in modern times, he argues, is constituted in an overwhelming and multiplying object world, of buildings, fashion, money and goods. Any claims to particularity, of unique qualities, in people and things risk being quickly overwhelmed by a sense of sheer numbers and quantities (see also Miller 1987). Simmel considers this situation in terms of objectification, which envisages both the problem and responses to it. Whereas for Simon, means and ends are found as abstract rationalities, or ideas, for Simmel, cultural concepts are usually reified, by which I mean they take material form. Money, for Simmel (2004: 211), is a thing which is also in modern society the most important means for achieving an end: ‘money is the purest reification of means, a concrete instrument which is absolutely identical with its abstract concept…’. To put this simply, rather than fixing, crafting, making or designing, most people will buy something. However, this ultimate ‘objectification of means’, because it takes material form, becomes potentially separable from the kinds of ends which are envisaged. Money becomes the end in itself, and most people, rather than working to achieve a definitive cultural difference, are therefore occupied in the pursuit of possibility, capacity and value, rather than significant change for the better.

The notion of seeing design culture as flows of materials, making and consciousness is one way of circumventing the difficulties of these earlier ‘means and ends’ debates. It reminds us that there are in fact many ways in which the means and the ends of human action may be related. Within a flow, the argument runs, design work can make sense as it happens and as things are being produced. It also shows us how flow-based approaches are not only trying to understand a limited topic, design culture, they are using that to think differently about all human culture, and about what it means to be human and to act as humans.

If we take a flow-based approach to design culture, it has several implications for our understanding, both positive and negative. By connecting designing with what it is to be a human at all, it is a very democratic perspective. We can appreciate that designing is within the grasp of anyone. But as we have seen, design is a broad social field, a globalised one, in which many different peoples, contrasting points of view, kinds of work, and resources, are involved. Flowbased arguments do not account very well for people who consider themselves to be privileged, more skilled, or more personally purposeful, when it comes to working with things and making. It does not account for plural creative traditions which may be engaged in unequal relationships. In short, these accounts struggle when people who call themselves designers assert their difference or distinction.

Flow accounts also struggle with the problem of distance. Most design professions emerged as a part of what we might call ‘modernity’, with industrialisation, a separation of work roles and separation of production from consumption. Very many things are designed in one place and manufactured in another: an iPhone is planned and conceptualised in the United States, and halfway across the world in China, an iPhone comes into being, transcending the immense distance with no flow of materials at all. Seeing flows does help us to appreciate the manufacture of the phone, as a gathering point of different resources, but it does not help us appreciate the distance which has produced the most crucial element, the design as an abstracted and communicable image or pattern.

To conceive of design as material flows, rather than objectification, therefore is to reject modernity as a necessary element of design. It uses a single tool to reveal the cultural problems of design, when there are many such problems for design and in design, indeed when the role of design anthropology is about framing social and cultural problems first, and envisaging possible responses second.

A piece of ethnographic work with lacemakers and how they engage with designs and designing can show us what all these ideas can mean in practice. Makovicky (2010) works with the lacemakers in Špania Dolina in Slovakia, and she witnesses how there is a very powerful pressure to preserve and archive a growing corpus of lace patterns which might represent ‘traditional patterns’. These patterns are viewed as a goldmine of heritage by women across Slovakia, especially in the cities, who can draw on them for ‘authentic’ lace. However, in the village itself, women often just use such schematic plans as talking points in order to be able to better learn how best to make lace and acquire the skills. Many of the village women see the archive as a record more of what they used to make. Instead of always reproducing those styles, they find they can make a better living by always innovating within the tradition, a way of working which is much more interesting. So in this example, there is both the idea of a living tradition as existing in a material archive, and in the bodies and minds of the community. We can clearly say that the significance of lacemaking as a form of creative work is not straightforward, it is debated, and that the grounds for debate are actually about contrasting ideas of ‘means’ and ‘ends’. Urban women think that the end aim of the work is ‘preserving a heritage archive’, while village women consider the means much more important, and that the meaning is in the doing. The tension and debate is itself an important feature of what is going on.

Makovicky therefore takes a critical stance on the idea that the schematic plans of lace pieces actually show us any kind of underlying thought, concept or design for Špania Dolina lace. It is deceptive, she argues, to think that it is possible to separate out ‘propositional’ knowledge of a design kind, from the ‘tacit’, embodied knowledge which people learn in the community itself. However, she also documents how there has been a historical ‘recontextualisation’ of tradition, by which the archives of lacemaking patterns and objects enabled the state to take responsibility for, and hence control of, Slovak traditions. The objectified designs, frozen in time, also inspire and reassure many urban women to make lace, those who live away from the village. The archive is very active in what we might call the design politics: authority, motivation, control and resistance.

To sum up, a focus on material flows and making is largely about how people can respond to an intrinsically alienating modern condition by ‘designing’ as a form of ‘making’. However, it does not adequately account for the potential existence of an alienating modernity within design and its institutions. Flow-based approaches, which aim to reconcile the knowledgefragmentations around contemporary ways of making and producing, work very well in many localised, situated traditions where craft meets design. They manifest a need to redeem a problematic anonymous Western or globalising condition by re-establishing alternative traditions. Design is understood as a potentially redeeming force within capitalism. Seeing design as a form of making appreciates the creativity within objects, for example the way that the best lace artefacts are innovations arising from tacit skilled knowledges. But this viewpoint does not appreciate design as itself a recontextualisation across distance in a global economy (as explored in Chapter 5). Some of these political issues of modernity are better addressed by our next critical thinker, Buchli, who uses context and a problematic political situation as starting points for examining objectification in design, specifically in architecture.

## Design objectification and ideology

In the previous chapter, we discussed how many approaches to design culture recognise how it can be ideological. In this section, I look at the implications when ideology is seen to take a material form. There are two points to be made about how design objectification connects with ideology. One is that designed things affect perception. Design ‘flatters to deceive’. The second is that it in doing so, design invites a personal commitment, and hence changes your own stance. Anthropologists who study design culture are themselves changed, and any claims to an objective viewpoint are even more suspect than usual. It is then necessary to challenge and question design. These points are made by various anthropologists, but especially in Buchli’s (2013) study of the anthropology of architecture.

Buchli gives the example of Maori meeting houses, a highly decorated architectural form (he is here building on the work of Gell, whom we discussed earlier). From the point of view of European colonists from the 19th century, these meeting houses were static pieces, works of art which contained in themselves, in their form and substance, their value. The Maori communities who made and used them, meanwhile, understood them more as a distributed continuity, each house not merely standing for itself, but indexing multiple works and intentions by multiple people across many communities, and stretching back in time. In this colonial situation, the inside and outside viewpoints are profoundly different but can coexist.

The house is in many respects a fetishization (Carsten and Hugh-Jones 1995: 8), but a necessary and productive fetishisation and misrecognition of relationships in order to forge a new set of relations that ensure continuity over time.

(Buchli 2013: 72)

The keyword in this quotation is ‘misrecognition’. Buchli’s discussion of objectification as potentially ideological builds on and synthesises a longer history of ideas. That history includes Althusser’s idea of ‘material ideology’, which he himself drew from Lenin (see also Miller 1984; Shanks and Tilley 1992). Buchli is supplementing Gell’s arguments about distributed persons and objects, with Levi-Strauss’s ideas of houses as ‘illusory objectification’, and Bourdieu’s (1977) ideas of embodiment. These thinkers show it is necessary to explain how architectural things enable many different subjectivities to function together in an intrinsically conflictual world. Going deeper, however, one must recognise that these conflicts are not only of perception and meaning, but also of vested ‘conflicting commitments’ (Buchli 2013: 5) within everyday situations.

In this analysis, an object does not have one single materiality (being, for example, art, or design), it has multiple ‘modalities of materiality’. Concepts such as fetishism, misrecognition and ideology are not only negative, in the sense of being untruthful, but are productive in the sense of enabling social relationships to function. Objectification here does not mean that it is possible to gain an objective viewpoint, from a distance, which everybody can equally subscribe to, but quite the opposite. Objectification facilitates partial and contradictory understandings, which are charged with contrasting senses of value and resources. From this point of view, working with design is generally not only about shared cultural interpretation, but also active collaboration in a mutual agenda, creating a bubble effect.

My most intense experience of this phenomenon came while conducting research into meetings: the workflows, experiences and material culture of office meetings. This work was based at the Technical University of Eindhoven and formed a part of the EU-funded CHIL Project (Computers in the Human Interaction Loop). The wider project aimed to inform the design of smart meeting rooms using embedded sensors and computing technology to support business meetings with minimal actual computer interfaces. In one part of the work, having observed a meeting in the Dutch civil service, I proceeded to interview various participants to understand their different experiences of meetings, ideas of productive and unproductive meetings, how that event fitted into a longer term workflow, and so forth. As I talked with one man in his office, and explained my work, he became very excited about how best to organise group work and meetings. He began to sketch on his whiteboard the understandings emerging from our conversation. Naturally, a large part of his work comprised in meetings, and he did not just attend them, he organised them. The better he could organise them, the better his work. Our conversation went on longer than our allotted time. When a colleague of his came to the door and asked if he was free, he apologised, saying ‘sorry, I’m in a meeting’. Our discussion was beginning to progress beyond just talking ‘about’ meetings, to a degree of involvement and commitment. It was becoming an important conversation. Ours was a meeting about meetings.

I came to realise that this tendency for the subject to spiral into self-referentiality was not a methodological mistake, but something I needed to learn about how design culture operates, through my participation. It also applied to the original meeting I had attended, which I discovered was about addressing disagreements and difficulties which had emerged in a previous set of meetings. This illustrated of how important the topic of ‘meetings’ was: I was in a meeting about the problems of designing meetings where we were discussing the design of another meeting which had been about the problems of designing other meetings.

This cultural phenomenon was actually a cipher for examining a wide range of ways of working in organisations and in groups, about commitment, responsibility, productivity, communication, decision-making and other phenomena. Meetings, we had to understand, were not only informational events but self-designing social events. So on our project, we had to consider not only the appropriate facilitation of communication, such as lists, decisions, minutes, conversations and so forth, we also had to consider a range of social purposes, strategies, relationships and structures which were being actively shaped through understandings of what was, or was not, a ‘meeting’. These problems of definition were not unique to my own work but were shared by my informants. This is the nature of meeting culture, and it is an extreme example of a phenomenon which is particularly common in design and is exacerbated even more in IT and computing design. Many design and engineering projects begin with designing for content but must design for context. And context is usually something which you are a part of, which exists and happens because you discover yourself to be a part of it. Many design researchers experience something similar to this. Because in design work, informants share your project, that means you find yourself intentionally or unintentionally on the ‘inside’. The researcher is faced with the choice of struggling to achieve an objective perspective, which is unrealistic, or struggling with the limitations of the insider’s view.

Another example of the bubble effect which design can have on the researcher’s perspective is the history of the Domestic Information Machine, by Cubbin (2015). This design project, undertaken in the Soviet Union in the 1960s–70s, envisaged a ‘socialism for the information age’, brought about within peoples’ homes. The work envisaged bringing informational resources to bear at home such that people would have access to any information they needed, as determined by the central state apparatus of the USSR. At the time, this was a revolutionary idea, and it took many more decades before most people had networked PCs at home, so we can clearly see how it was an idea both of its time and also ahead of its time. Some of the work concerned developing technological capacities, while other aspects of the work comprised envisaging the usage of the concept. A type of ‘domestic theatre’ was employed, envisaging a customised space set apart in the home, which might be changed and adapted at the touch of a button for different informational purposes. So a Soviet home was imagined as including a dedicated space for informational work, in the same way as it might include a kitchen for working with food. At a certain point in this project, it became not only about a design project looking ‘at’ the home, but also enabling the ways in which people in their homes look ‘out’, and envisage a new society. The ‘Domestic Information Machine’, from a starting point where society and the state would design the home, became inverted such that the home would be facilitated in designing a new society. ‘Socialism for the information age’ became not so much providing information for citizens, as enabling people to reimagine socialist society, and mobilising design capacities for the nation.

Because engaging with design so often becomes a project of designing, it has a microcosmic effect. The social researcher starts by looking ‘in’ on design, but because they are working with people who are designing (professionally or as amateurs), they find themselves spun around, not looking in, but looking ‘out’. Within a designerly environment, one often experiences a microcosmic vista. Since design culture is generally constituted in ties which are anonymous, this sharing of viewpoints can be considered a methodologically justifiable act of participation, by which an anthropologist begins to experience and learn a culture. It feels right for strangers to design together, providing a sense of collaboration. And yet the bubble effect, the ideology, of design culture is also very problematic if it is not challenged.

Genevieve Bell has been a leading voice in exposing the risk of people and companies simply designing for people like themselves. For many years, before Bell and some of her anthropological colleagues and contemporaries shook up research in Silicon Valley, the main American computer companies were designing primarily for Californians. The way that engineers conceived of homes and workspaces, of temperature and of relationships, family and personal motivations was very limited. Endless 1990s designs seemed to be created by American middle-class white-collar professionals, who might want to be able to work remotely in a cafe;

and they were targeted at enabling relatively wealthy middle-class white-collar Americans to work remotely in cafes. Design anthropology is crucially concerned with this kind of cultural effect, because it must work with it constructively and also expose and puncture it.

## Implications for understanding design through objectification

Although exploring design through material culture can help us to think about the different dimensions of the ‘in-betweenness’ of design, between professional studio sites and everyday sites, this creates difficulties, and it is important to be clear about these.

Design connects people who do not know one another but have nonetheless considered and thought about one another. However, this very mutual entanglement renders design culture very difficult to study, because gaining any sense of perspective on it is problematic. In the light of commentaries by Gell, Ingold and Buchli, researching design culture merits not simply an explication, but a radically decentred way of thinking about social space-time. Thinking about design has been one way to critically comment on Euro-American notions of personhood and individualism and to demonstrate the unpacking of persons and the distribution of qualities of mind across space and among people.

We have also seen that design changes perception of the world, in its objectification. As a materiality, design renders subjects and objects closer in interests and in relationships, more engaged in mutual projects. At a global level, the anonymity of modernity is here essential to the workings of design, articulating many different peoples in different places in mutual agendas. Some have argued on the basis of this expansive, inclusive character that design can become a colonising, globalising force (Tunstall 2013). Design material culture intrinsically responds to a problematic social state of industrial modernity, variously called alienated, disenchanted, tragic or commoditised. Some responses, such as thinking about flows, turn to non-industrial roots: making, crafting and the diversity of human cultural traditions. Other responses embrace the idea of a unitary global design field which acknowledges a necessary modernity with its accompanying fragmentations and opportunities.

It can be argued that ‘untruthful’ culture, such as ideology and misrepresentation are central to design, because of the almost inevitable subjective position to which it renders observers. The work of design is often deliberately anonymised, and sometimes concealed, such that not only products and services but also the work of using them can be appropriated by design users. One of the intriguing aspirations in design is the effort to produce complicit thinking among people who are implicit others.

## Design materialities as wave-like

In response to these issues, design anthropologists need a wider range of tools to think about the nature of the materiality of design. These need to be appropriate for considering the engaged stance in which the anthropologist of design finds themselves, between push-and-pull perceptions. We need to recognise that material things have social significance as manifestations of thoughts, but that designs are often transmitted without any flow of material objects, but rather with a reproduction of patternings across global distances. A great deal of design happens between people who do not know one another, in fact are deliberately obscured from one another, and yet can at some level share conceptual understandings about culture and society. In the final part of the chapter, I explore the possibilities of seeing design materialities as wave-like, rather than as the coming into being of objects or things.

Just a week before writing this, I was at the beach in Dublin with my son. Wearing a wetsuit, he was bodyboarding in the surf. On the beach, you can see the waves moving. They move in one direction, quite clearly. My son stands in the surf, looking out to sea, trying to identify which wave holds the best chance for him to ride into the shore. As each wave hits and surrounds him, he sways with the impact and then resumes his place. Each wave appears to the eye as a distinct thing but is also comprised in movement.

A wave does not really happen because water flows. The water tends to move up and down, and a little back and forth, but not far. If the tide is coming in, the water gradually shifts in the same direction as the waves, but if the tide is going out, the water is moving in the opposite direction from the incoming waves, backwards as it were. So waves move long distances, while their substance just oscillates in one place. In one sense, waves are the epitome of a thing which is hylomorphic, demonstrating how form and substance can be separate. From one moment to another, the material substance of a wave changes while it retains its form and is apparently a distinct thing.

In spite of this lack of much actual movement, the waves still have force. One feels their impact, not the impact of a flowing jet of water, but an impact nonetheless, as the water rises and falls. For some kinds of waves, one might feel the impact of an increase in pressure (for example the pressure wave from an explosion). This is partly because they have the quality of trajectory. Often, they coexist, with different waves moving in different directions, through one another. Waves are then like vectors, things which possess not only an intrinsic existence, but also the property of direction (a vector can be a number which not only has a property of quantity but directionality, or to put it another way a number with multiple dimensions). Indeed, waves only exist because of their trajectory, in one or more directions, moving forwards and backwards, up and down, side to side. They have a necessary rhythmic quality.

As my son stands in the surf, trying to position himself at the exact point where the biggest of the waves will curve and break, transforming from smooth waves into white-topped curling and falling breakers, his point of view is important. Constituted in movement, waves are perceptible relative to the observer’s position. Standing still, one sees a wave as an approaching thing, or from behind as a receding thing. Catching the wave and moving with it, makes it more difficult to perceive, as one is within the water itself. Sometimes, a wave can simply be the horizon. The thing moves, we do not move exactly with it, and that relative difference enables perception of it.

In writing about my own experience of working with design anthropology concepts, I have tried to emphasise the sense of rhythm, of oscillations, iterations and pulsations in the work. The experience of moving back and forth between the studio and the field site is especially important for me in the realisation of concepts, which of necessity have contextual reference. Design things are wave-like, or like a flux (Drazin 2013; in fact, the Latin word fluctus might be more appropriate, but I use the anglicised flux). A wave is very different from a flow (Appadurai 1996), but none of these terms are exclusive: there are infinite ways of characterising materialities, and new materialities are emerging all the time.

Metaphors such as this do not explain the world, but they can help us to understand it. We can evoke instances or phenomena characterised by movement or stillness, form, substance, by properties which are consistent or change, by effects at a distance or in contact. When I describe how I have experienced design concepts as material things in design work, and experienced working with the stuff of concepts, it seems unusual. But, in many ways, it is just like waves, and waves are very familiar and do not have to be perplexing. This helps us try to understand how through the iterations of the work, the spaces of user-centred design acquire their dimensions, in particular the sociospatial field between contexts and design centres, which we explored in the previous chapter. Movements within these spaces then form a key engine of thinking work in design.

We earlier saw the example of a Billy bookcase from IKEA. The designation ‘Billy’ is of course a form of branding, although the brand proper is IKEA. In comparison with bookcases which may appear very similar, there is a consciousness around a Billy of the design itself, in this case one which is fairly unchanging over the years. As a type of object which is evidently an internationalised one, but with roots in Sweden, the Billy appears as a thing which has ‘arrived’ in a particular home. From its inception, its purpose as design was to be here. It is not the material thing or manufacture which has this sense of ‘arrival’ exactly, the forming of the material thing is in this case unknown and probably irrelevant (unlike some objects where ‘made in Y’ may be at the forefront of its nature). What has arrived to this place is an objectified concept, not a particularly special one but very ordinary. There is also the possibility of movement onwards: a bookcase may not be materially valuable or unique, but conceptually the bookcase has the capacity to move on to other homes and other people who also will be easily able to make sense of it. Even bookcases require some thought, but this one has largely been prethought.

Wave-like social properties are even more evident in software. One of the contemporary staples of design education is the ‘app’, which features in a lot of designers’ portfolios to demonstrate they are able to conceptualise and create one. The iterations of the app persist through use, constantly updating, and this pulsing connection with the software programmers and designers gives many apps a sense of origination and arriving on an ongoing basis, across the distance between design studio and smartphone.

These wave-like design materialities help form the cultural articulations between the lives of people and of things, shaping the degree of their engagement over time and the sense of fitness and appropriateness in contexts. Social lives are in this sense not only lived but also ‘thought’ in a globalised material world.

## Consequences

In the contemporary world, as Clarke (2011) observes, ‘things’ are not as they were. We rather perceive the material world as much more malleable and changeable and attempt to find ways of re-appropriating, re-adapting the powerful material formats which are presented to us by virtue of the authority of corporations. The material world is the prime point of articulation of powerful relationships and shifting meanings. The material culture of design is not as simple as things which present intentions. It is rather a material field of relationships constituted as artefactual concepts. Design is politically intrinsically contested, in that it involves balance between designer figures (including many under the authority of various organisations and companies) and people in their everyday lives. At the same time, it is normative and legitimising in the sense that it aspires to manifestly collapse the distinction between abstract aspirations and the present world-as-is. Any adequate account of design culture must be a theory which navigates the territory between ‘impact’ or ‘push’ notions of design and ‘contextual’ or ‘pull’ ones.

Design incorporates the infrastructures, actions, groups and activities which act to create things as contexts for persons, and mutually create persons as contexts for things. The production of mutual fitness is what is aimed for, in which the meaningfulness of designed things is not primarily indexical, where the things signifies a designer or a designer’s intention. This interpretation is hence not an ‘impact’ focussed interpretation of design. Nor is it exactly an ‘open’ interpretation, where everybody can be a designer, because, usually, the designer needs professional skills and an authoritative infrastructure to achieve change. Design is a cultural process capable of producing personhood, within a situation of mass-production.

## Summary

Design is fundamentally concerned with material culture. There is an underlying presumption that human engagements with things make a difference, and that working with material things is the way to achieve change for the better. Most designers work in material ways and are enchanted by material things.

There are many ways of thinking about the material culture of design, including approaches to material culture as objectification, as ‘things’, as flows and as material ideologies. These approaches take different stances on what characterises design.

This chapter has argued for the merits of appreciating design as a form of materiality, meaning a popular cultural paradigm by which people understand the nature of their engagement with material things and substances, and in so doing conceive of their own social existence.

The chapter has also argued that the study of the material culture of design should be about understanding the profound challenges posed by global industrial modernity, and that these challenges are always different and developing. Design is currently at the heart of unfolding forms of social dysfunction which present problems for individual peoples’ social lives. Design is also the key means to respond to and address these problems.

One of the primary tensions in thinking about designed things is the eternal contrast between objects as products of meaningful human work, and objects as exchange items which support communicative relationships between people.

Theories of the material culture of design take different stances to whether it involves clear recognition of a chain of thought and intention, or misrecognition and obfuscation. An appropriate theory of design should account for both the consciousness that something has been designed and conceptualised and the relative anonymity of most design work.

Design culture opens up potentially very radical implications for personhood. Acknowledging that design distributes concepts and thinking across society potentially challenges notions of the Cartesian individual.

Designed things can be thought about as wave-like, especially in the sense of design forms having social trajectory, and a sense of being deliberately directed ‘for’ certain people. The sense of social purpose by which design establishes institutional and anonymised relatedness is one of its defining characteristics.

## References

Anusas, M., R. Harkness 2014 ‘“Things Could be Different”: Design Anthropology as Hopeful, Critical and Ecological’, Online Working Paper, KADK Research Network for Design Anthropology: Ethnographies of the Possible. Available at https://kadk.dk/en/seminar-1-ethnographies-possible-april-2014.

Appadurai, A. (Ed) 1986 The Social Life of Things, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Appadurai, A. 1996 Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalisation, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Atzmon, L., P. Boradkar 2017 ‘Design and Theories of Things’, in Encountering Things: Design and Theories of Things, London: Bloomsbury, pp. 1–18.

Binder, T., G. De Michelis, P. Ehn, G. Pacucci, P. Linde, I. Wagner 2011 Design Things, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bourdieu, P. 1977 Outline of a Theory of Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Buchli, V. 2013 An Anthropology of Architecture, London: Bloomsbury.

Carsten, J., S. Hugh-Jones (Eds) 1995 About the House: Levi-Strauss and Beyond, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Clarke, A. (Ed) 2011 Design Anthropology: Object Cultures in the Twenty-First Century, New York: Springer Publishing.

Clarke, A. (Ed) 2018 Design Anthropology: Object Cultures in Transition, London: Bloomsbury..

Coupaye, L. 2013 Growing Artefacts, Displaying Relationships, Oxford: Berghahn.

Cross, N. 1982 ‘Designerly Ways of Knowing’, Design Studies 3(4): 221–227.

Cross, N. 2011 Design Thinking: Understanding How Designers Think and Work, London: Berg.

Cubbin, T. 2015 ‘The Domestic Information Machine: Futurological Experiments in the Soviet Domestic Interior 1968- 76’, Home Cultures 11(1): 5–32.

Drazin, A. 2001 ‘“Omul Se Va Mobila” – “A Man Will Get Furnished”: Wood and Domesticity in Urban Romania’, in D. Miller (Ed) Home Possessions: Material Culture Behind Closed Doors, London: Bloomsbury Academic.

Drazin, A. 2002 ‘Chasing Moths: Cleanliness, Intimacy and Progress in Romania’, in R. Mandel, C. Humphrey (Eds) Markets and Moralities Ethnographies of Postsocialism, Oxford: Berg.

Drazin, A. 2011 ‘Towards an Anthropology of Care: Cleanliness and Consumption in Urban Romanian Homes’, Slovak Ethnology 5(59): 499–515.

Drazin, A. 2013 ‘The Social Life of Concepts’, in W. Gunn, T. Otto, R. Smith (Eds) Design Anthropology: Theory and Practice, London: Bloomsbury, pp. 33–50.

Farías, I., A. Wilkie (Eds) 2015 Studio Studies: Operations, Topologies and Displacements, London: Routledge.

Flusser, V. 1995 ‘On the Word Design: An Etymological Essay’, Design Issues 11(3): 50–53. (trans. J. Cullars).

Garvey, P. 2017 Unpacking IKEA: Swedish Design for the Purchasing Masses, London: Routledge.

Gell, A. 1998 Art and Agency, London: Athlone Press.

Hebdige, D. 1988 ‘Object as Image: The Italian Scooter Cycle’ in Hiding in the Light: On Images and Things, London: Routledge, pp. 77–115.

Heidegger, M. 1971 ‘The Thing’ in Poetry, Language, Thought, New York: Harper Perennial. Translated by A. Hofstadter).

Henare, A., M. Holbraad, S. Wastell (Eds) 2006 Thinking Through Things: Theorising Artefacts Ethnographically, London: Routledge.

Ingold, T. 2000 The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill, London: Routledge.

Ingold, T. 2010 ‘The Textility of Making’, Cambridge Journal of Economics 34(1): 91–102..

Ingold, T. 2011 Being Human, London: Routledge.

Ingold, T. 2013 ‘The Sighted Watchmaker’ in Making, London: Routledge.

Ingold, 2007 ‘Materials Against Materiality’ and Associated Responses, Archaeological Dialogues 14(1): 1–38.

Julier, G. 2013 The Culture of Design (3rd Ed), London: Sage.

Keane, W. 1997 Signs of Recognition: Powers and Hazards of Representation in an Indonesian Society, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Kimbell, L. 2009 ‘Beyond Design Thinking: Design-as-Practice and Designs-in-Practice’, paper presented at CRESC Conference, Manchester, September 2009.

Makovicky, N. 2010 ‘“Something to Talk About”: Notation and Knowledge Among Central Slovak Lace-Makers’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 16: 80–99.

Miller, D. 1984 ‘Modernism and Suburbia as Material Ideology’ in Ideology, Power and Prehistory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 37–50.

Miller, D. 1987 Material Culture and Mass Consumption, Oxford: Blackwell.

Miller, D. (Ed) 1998 Material Cultures: Why Some Things Matter, London: Routledge.

Miller, D. (Ed) 2005 Materiality, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Munn, N. 1996 ‘Excluded Spaces: the Figure in the Australian Aboriginal Landscape’, Critical Inquiry 22(3): 446–465.

Otto, T., R. Smith 2013 ‘Design Anthropology: A Distinct Style of Knowing’, in W. Gunn, T. Otto, R. Smith (Eds) Design Anthropology: Theory and Practice, London: Bloomsbury.

Schön, D. 1982 The Reflexive Practitioner, Farnham: Ashgate.

Sennett, R. 2009 The Craftsman, London: Penguin.

Shanks, M., C. Tilley 1992 ‘Style and Ideology’ in Re-Constructing Archaeology: Theory and Practice, London: Routledge.

Simmel, G. 2004 The Philosophy of Money, London: Routledge.

Simon, H. 1988 ‘The Science of Design: Creating the Artificial’, Design Issues 4(1&2): 67–82.

Strathern, M. 1988 The Gender of the Gift: Problems with Women and Problems with Society in Melanesia, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Tilley, C. 2000 ‘Materialism and an Archaeology of Dissonance’, in J. Thomas (Ed) Interpretive Archaeology: A Reader, London: Leicester University Press, pp. 71–80.

Tilley, C. 2006 ‘Objectification’, in C. Tilley, W. Keane, S. Küchler, M. Rowlands, P. Spyer (Eds) The Handbook of Material Culture, London: Sage, pp. 60–73.

Tilley, C. 2007 ‘Materials in Materiality’, Archaeological Dialogues 14(1): 16–20.

Tunstall, D. 2013 ‘Decolonizing Design Innovation: Design Anthropology, Critical Anthropology and Indigenous Knowledge’, in W. Gunn, T. Otto, R. Smith (Eds) Design Anthropology: Theory and Practice, London: Bloomsbury,

pp. 232–251.

Yaneva, A. 2013 ‘Actor-Network-Theory Approach to Archaeology of Contemporary Architecture’, in R. Graves-Brown, R. Harrison, A. Piccini (Eds) The Oxford Handbook of the Archaeology of the Contemporary World, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 121–135.

Verbeek, P.-P., P. Kockelkoren 1998 ‘The Things That Matter’, Design Issues 14(3): 28–42.

Witmore, C. 2014 ‘Archaeology and the New Materialisms’, Journal of Contemporary Archaeology 1(2): 203–246.