3

# INDIAN COTTONS AND EUROPEAN FASHION, 1400–1800

John Styles

## Introduction

For a global design history that seeks to understand transcontinental similarities and differences, networks and flows, attention to fashion is indispensible. Since the seventeenth century, Europeans have repeatedly identified an absence of fashion in Asia as one of the fundamental distinctions between East and West. ‘The Cloaths of the Eastern People are no wise subject to Mode; they are always made after the same Fashion’, observed the French Huguenot traveller Sir John Chardin, who visited Persia in the late seventeenth century.<sup>1</sup> Modern historians of material life in Europe before the nineteenth century have agreed. From Ferdinand Braudel to Neil McKendrick, they present fashion as a European peculiarity, an element in a broader pattern of European exceptionalism that accounts for the rise of the West.<sup>2</sup>

Recently, this view has been challenged. Fashion can, it is suggested, be observed not only in Europe, but in early-modern China, Japan and India, in some of its aspects at least.<sup>3</sup> Clothing practices in early modern Asia were not necessarily inert and unchanging. At the same time, it has been argued that Asian goods made a decisive contribution to the origin and development of fashion in the West before 1800, overturning the conventional assumption that fashion’s origins were indigenous to Europe. It is this second revisionist argument that is the subject of this essay.

The key external role in transforming early modern European fashion is accorded to Indian decorated cotton textiles. For Beverly Lemire, Indian cottons were ‘critical for new forms and formulations of fashion’.<sup>4</sup> She argues that although the arrival of Indian decorated cotton textiles did not single-handedly initiate Western fashion, it reorientated fashion at a crucial early stage in its development from a phenomenon confined to a narrow elite into a self-perpetuating, dynamic force across society. They did this principally, it is argued, by transforming textile design. While ‘prior to the appearance of Indian printed cottons decorative patterning in textiles was the preserve of Europe’s wealthiest alone’,<sup>5</sup> Indian cottons ‘were affordable, uniquely attractive, and made in the widest range of prices, unmatched by European manufactures’.<sup>6</sup>

This is a bold, ambitious argument, but it is a controversial one. It has, of course, long been acknowledged that cotton manufacture in the West was built on Indian foundations.<sup>7</sup> Equally, it has been recognized that Lancashire’s industrial revolution of the later eighteenth century was inconceivable without the existence of a broadbased domestic market for cotton textiles, especially a fashion-sensitive market for decorated cottons. Nevertheless, previous studies have tended to suggest that imported Indian cottons followed rather than initiated Western fashion. Audrey Douglas, for example, in a much-quoted article, emphasizes the way the English East India Company exploited pre-existing developments in fashion in England.<sup>8</sup>

To date, the English experience has been central to this controversy. This is partly because it was England that hosted the late eighteenth century Industrial Revolution in which cotton textiles figured so prominently. It is also because the archives of the English East India Company and the pamphlet debates its activities provoked have provided such accessible and fruitful sources for historical research.

To evaluate the different arguments, we therefore need to take some measure of the world of early modern English textiles in which Indian cottons intervened. To take that measure, this essay assesses the early modern English market for textiles, from 1500 to 1750, from two perspectives. First, it considers the contribution to fashion and innovation made by different kinds of textiles. Second, it considers fashion and innovation specifically in terms of applied decoration, whether realized by means of weaving, embroidery, painting, or printing.

## Textiles in early modern England: imports, fashion and innovation

Between the fourteenth and the nineteenth centuries England underwent a long drawn-out transformation that saw a peripheral and relatively unsophisticated European economy transformed into the manufacturing workshop for the world. A country that in the later Middle Ages exported mainly raw materials, especially wool, and subsequently semi-finished goods, especially unfinished woollen cloth, was transformed into one whose exports consisted principally of high-quality, finished manufactures. As the number and variety of English manufactured products grew, imports came to consist less and less of finished manufactured goods and more and more of the raw materials from which English products were made.

This transformation extended over several centuries. Much of it involved the more or less direct replacement of manufactures that had previously been imported by goods produced in England. Often, however, import substitution was associated with the development of new processes and new products appropriate to the native resource endowment and the native market. Thus, in the course of the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, a whole swathe of new metallurgical, glass and ceramic processes saw charcoal replaced with coal and coke as their principal heat source.<sup>9</sup> As far as products are concerned, sober English lead glass was substituted for light, decorated Venetian glass; new kinds of Staffordshire stoneware for German salt glaze; London-made silver teapots for Chinese teapots in porcelain or red Yixing stoneware.

Two aspects of this process of import substitution need particular emphasis. First, the imports concerned came predominantly from continental Europe, not Asia. Second, the trend was already well-established before the onset of direct trade between England and south and east Asia at the start of the seventeenth century.

English consumers’ receptivity to novelty in material things long predated the first arrival of Indian cottons. Historians of the later Middle Ages have taught us that the material culture of the bulk of the English population before the sixteenth century was far from immutable.<sup>10</sup> The later Middle Ages witnessed important changes in the character of, for example, clothing and ceramics that extended well beyond the social elite. In the sixteenth century, innovation in consumer goods was sometimes intense.<sup>11</sup> Novelty had intrinsic attractions for many consumers, even though they had to be balanced against other imperatives – in particular consumers’ attachment to established tastes and their rulers’ investment in notions of hierarchy, order and stability, which extended to the material world.

The successes and failures of the East India Company’s marketing of Indian cottons in England in the seventeenth century need to be understood against this background of widespread and broad-based innovation, often involving imports or import substitution, which engaged consumers far beyond the royal court, the nobility and the gentry. In textiles, what is most striking about the period from the start of the sixteenth century to the end of the seventeenth century is not the radical discontinuity represented by the introduction of Indian decorated cottons, but the extent to which that innovation was consistent with broader developments in the English textile market. The period witnessed a tide of novelty in decorated fabrics made from a range of materials, including wool, linen and silk, and employing a range of techniques, including weaving, embroidery and painting. This was underway well before the establishment of the East India Company in 1600.

In particular, a rapid expansion in the market for lighter, more colourful and more highly patterned cloths, both for clothing and for furnishing, can be observed in fabrics made from combed wool, from silk and from combinations of the two. As with Indian decorated cottons, these fabrics were often cheaper than those that preceded them and were subject to rapid fashion change, in a way that contemporaries perceived as novel. Like Indian cottons, many of these textiles, especially the silks, were imported. Others, like the light Norwich worsted stuffs made principally from combed wool, owed much to the arrival of immigrant craftspeople.

Much of this search for novelty in textile design was driven by fashion in clothing. Dress fashions in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries did not turn exclusively on the characteristics of the fabrics worn – tailoring and accessorizing were also crucial – but fabrics were important. In the early seventeenth century there are frequent references to ‘stuffs’ and ‘satins’ made from silk or worsted. It was around these fabrics that fashion in wealthy women’s clothing revolved, not Indian cottons.

Moreover, changing dress fashions were not confined to the rich; the patterned worsted stuffs produced at Norwich and elsewhere were worn by wider sections of the population. Decorative patterning in textiles was not the preserve of a tiny, exclusive elite.

The early modern fashion cycle in textiles like the stuffs and satins did not, of course, originate in England. Insofar as we can trace its genealogy, it leads back to the fine silks that began to be made in Italy in the later Middle Ages under the influence of imports from the Byzantine Empire and the Muslim Mediterranean. Italian-made silks came to be characterized by a cycle of ever-changing innovation in pattern and design. Lisa Monnas has usefully summarized these changes, observing how these changing fashions were driven by bitter rivalry over export markets between the different silk-manufacturing city-states – Lucca, Florence, Genoa, Venice. Each city-state sustained distinct specialities, yet each endlessly pirated the others’ designs and each endeavoured to secure a competitive advantage by generating fashionable novelty in design.<sup>12</sup> By the mid-fifteenth century, concludes Luca Molà, competitive import substitution was encouraged by city governments in order to free the state from dependence on foreign goods and provide export opportunities.<sup>13</sup>

Novelty was crucial. The Venetian ambassador to the French court explained in 1546 that the lighter silks made by the Tuscans and the Genoese were more successful in France than the heavy, costlier Venetian product, ‘because it bored them to wear the same clothing for too long’.<sup>14</sup> Here we have in prototype the kind of inter-state competition in fashion that would become a distinctive element of the Western European state system as a whole in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.<sup>15</sup> Its most dramatic refinement in the course of the seventeenth century arose not as a result of Asian imports, but from the French move to annual and seasonal shifts in the design of the woven silks made at Lyons for fashionable women’s outer garments, probably at the instigation of Louis XIV’s ministers in the 1670s.<sup>16</sup> The Directors of the English East India Company were quick to appreciate the significance of this innovation, but they neither initiated it nor applied it to their trade in decorated cottons. In 1681, they wrote to their Bengal factors requiring ‘that in all flowred Silkes, you Change y fashion and flower as much as you can every yeare, for English Ladies and they say ye french and other Europeans will give twice as much for a new thing not seen in Europe before though worse, than they will give for a better Silk of ye same fashion worn ye former yeare’.<sup>17</sup> These instructions arose from their attempt to develop a new trade in woven silks from Bengal to compete directly with European silks. Late seventeenth-century orders to Surat and Madras for painted and printed cottons did not ask for annual changes in design in this way.

Nevertheless, it is often argued that by the last three decades of the seventeenth century, painted Indian cottons were playing a crucial role in the system of interstate competition in textiles and fashion, with the East India companies acting as proxies on behalf of the various competing European states. Indeed this belief is central to the whole idea of a late seventeenth-century European ‘calico craze’, to which states felt obliged to respond with a variety of incentives, regulations and prohibitions. There is no doubt that in England, at least, huge quantities of Indian cotton textiles of many different kinds came to be imported by the East India Companies during the last three decades of the seventeenth century, although their significance needs to be qualified in two ways. First, we should remember that, throughout the seventeenth century, cloth with sophisticated painted or printed decoration comprised only a small minority element in a trade in cotton piece goods that included vast quantities of plain fabrics, dyed and undyed. Second, we should bear in mind that by no means all the Company’s imports of textiles were destined for English consumers. Vast quantities of cloth were re-exported to continental Europe, to Africa and increasingly to the Americas.<sup>18</sup>

It was asserted repeatedly by those paid to write in opposition to these imports on behalf of domestic woollen and silk manufacturers that Indian cottons were enthusiastically taken up as dress materials by rich and poor alike, threatening the livelihoods of those who made a living from the manufacture of other textiles in England.<sup>19</sup> However, a very different picture of the English market for Indian cottons emerges from the evidence of trials for theft at the Old Bailey, the principal criminal court for London. It challenges the notion that Indian cottons enjoyed a sudden, overwhelming popularity as fashionable dress fabrics in the late seventeenth century, elbowing aside other textiles.

In England, the gown was a key garment for women’s fashion at every social level, the largest and most expensive decorated item in most women’s wardrobes. Yet evidence for widespread ownership of gowns made from Indian painted and printed fabrics before 1700 is lacking. Out of 285 cases in the Old Bailey Proceedings from 1674 to 1699 involving stolen gowns, only two mentioned gowns made from cotton fabrics. By contrast, at least 62 cases involved gowns made from silk and 40 cases involved gowns made from various kinds of worsted stuff.<sup>20</sup> If the number of stolen gowns in Indian fabrics in the Old Bailey Proceedings was tiny, it was not because Indian cottons were absent. In the same decades there were 76 mentions of muslins, mainly plain white and used for various head-cloths and neck-cloths, although they always comprised only a minority of such items. Calicoes, a few painted or printed, also appeared, though less frequently. They were mentioned in 47 cases, used for a variety of items of clothing, including aprons, hoods, handkerchiefs, petticoats, shirts, and children’s frocks, but especially for furnishings, in particular curtains, quilts and pillow cases. Evidently Indian cottons made some inroads during the later decades of the seventeenth century in the English markets for furnishings (especially calicoes) and for small clothing accessories (especially muslins). Yet the trial records before 1700 show little evidence of English or European-made light textiles being eclipsed by Indian-made decorated cottons in these or other markets.

It would not be until the middle of the eighteenth century that fabrics patterned employing Indian-derived techniques would begin to outpace silks and worsteds in the market for women’s gowns. In the long run, the flexibility and cheapness of printing with these techniques won out, democratizing the naturalistic, botanical designs so fashionable in vastly more expensive woven silks. But by then it was linens and linen-cotton mixes woven and printed in England that did the outpacing, not cottons painted or printed in India.<sup>21</sup> Significantly, the Old Bailey trials indicate that, even in the era of the calico craze, calicoes enjoyed their greatest success in the market for furnishings, which were not at the cutting edge of annual and seasonal fashions.

Where Indian fabrics undoubtedly did make a dramatic impact was in igniting an explosion of economic pamphleteering, lavishly funded by rival mercantile interests. The calico craze emerges less as a transformation in consumers’ choices, engineered by a flood of cheap, colourful Asian imports, than as a political phenomenon generated by the mutual suspicion of a number of wealthy trading and manufacturing interests, each accustomed to support from the state and each struggling to secure it for its own advantage in a context of virulent competition between the major European states.

## Indian decorated cottons and English textile design

The evidence of the Old Bailey does not, therefore, support the argument that the arrival of large quantities of Indian decorated cottons in England suddenly, towards the end of the seventeenth century, unleashed an entirely new kind of popular fashion. Nevertheless, the possibility remains that Indian cottons fundamentally changed Western fashion by transforming its design idioms. To address this issue, two questions need to be answered. What did Indian decorated cottons look like? When did they become sufficiently familiar to influence textile design in the West?

New products do not automatically find a market. The first task for those who introduce a new product is to configure it for the consumer in a way that makes it comprehensible and attractive. From the 1610s, the East India Company’s London Directors began to develop a market in England for fine Indian decorated cottons for use as table and bed linens, wall hangings and other household furnishings, but the volume of such imports appears to have remained small before 1660. One of the key limitations here was design. Before the middle of the seventeenth century, the Company imported ready-made cottons which had been painted, printed, or embroidered according to the requirements of Indian and other Asian consumers. These designs had only a limited appeal in England, beyond their value as novel curiosities. The crucial change came in 1643, when the Directors began to require the factors in India to change the designs on the cloth to accord with English taste. ‘Those [quilts] which hereafter you shall send we desire may be with more white ground, and the flowers and branch to be in colours in the middle of the quilt as the painter pleases, whereas now most part of your quilts come with sad red grounds which are not so well accepted here.’<sup>22</sup> In 1662 the Directors went one step beyond verbal design instructions and began to send sample patterns for chintz, probably on paper, from London to India for the Indian workers to copy or adapt. In 1669 the procedure was extended to quilts and hangings.

This should not surprise us. The Portuguese, the first Europeans to sail directly to India and the dominant European presence in the subcontinent before 1600, were already commissioning Indian cotton textiles decorated according to European tastes in the sixteenth century.<sup>23</sup> From the 1660s it became a normal English East India Company practice to send patterns from London to determine the design of the quilts that had been the main form of Indian decorated textiles sold in England in the first half of the seventeenth century and the chintzes that enjoyed success in the second half of the century. This was a system of manufacture in which London remained the principal arbiter and source of design.

It is curious, then, that the design of English decorative textiles is often said to have been transformed in the seventeenth century by the impact of Indian design ideas, transmitted through the medium of the Indian textiles decorated with botanical designs imported by the East India Company.<sup>24</sup> The seventeenth century certainly saw a proliferation of English-made textiles, embroidered, woven, painted and eventually printed, that paralleled in their patterns the look of Indian decorated cottons. But the English attachment to applied botanical decoration on textiles was very long standing, dating back to the high Middle Ages. It was reflected in the wide range of textile designs an earlier generation of scholars referred to when they talked of the ‘English love of flowers’.<sup>25</sup> It was evident in the popularity in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries of textiles patterned with a wide range of botanical forms, from formal large pattern repeats to sinuous arabesques and isolated motifs.

It was with good reason, then, that in the course of the seventeenth century the East India Company brought to England Indian decorative textiles with elaborate botanical patterns. But if, as we have seen, those patterns were sent out from London, in what sense, if any, were they Indian? As John Irwin pointed out half a century ago, in furnishing fabrics at least, the two-dimensional forms and motifs employed on textiles imported from India that came to be perceived in England as Indian came, in fact, to India from England. Moreover, they derived principally not from Indian visual ideas, but rather from a combination of European and Chinese forms and motifs.<sup>26</sup> Indeed, Irwin argued that the tree of life design so often associated with Indian textiles is not obviously Indian in origin, owing more to the tree of life in the biblical Garden of Eden. Its use in English embroidery pre-dated the arrival of large numbers of Indian textiles.<sup>27</sup>

This should not surprise us. These visual ideas were already in circulation in England before Indian decorative textiles arrived in any quantities, not just as finished textiles but also in the form of Chinoiserie botanical motifs that circulated as design drawings on paper. The number of Indian textiles actually present in England before 1600 was so tiny that it is difficult to imagine they had much direct influence on textile design. As Beverly Lemire has shown, calicoes, almost certainly Indian, were present in Southampton on the south coast of England in the mid-sixteenth century.<sup>28</sup> However, their numbers were tiny. Moreover, calicoes do not appear to have spread much. In Mark Overton’s systematic compilation of goods from 17,000 probate inventories from Hertfordshire, Lincolnshire and Worcestershire covering the years 1550 to 1750, there are no sixteenth-century references whatsoever to calico. The

Indian fabric first appears in 1624, when a Worcestershire gentleman’s inventory included a blue calico tablecloth.<sup>29</sup>

John Irwin concluded that ‘Europe was attracted to Indian decorative textiles on account of their cheapness and technical excellence (especially their fast and brilliant dye-colours), not their qualities of design.’<sup>30</sup> The success of Indian decorative textiles in the English market illustrates a process of successful product innovation, but one that depended on a significant redefinition of the design of the product. Late seventeenth-century Indian chintzes with their elaborate botanical motifs in vivid colours may have retained the allure of the exotic for their English owners, but the range of patterns and motifs they employed often had more to do with European constructions of the exotic than with Indian visual culture.

## Conclusion

It is not the purpose of this paper to minimize the long-term impact, economic and cultural, of Indian cotton textiles in the West. It simply asks us to acknowledge that the successes enjoyed by the Company’s trade in decorated textiles resulted from its capacity to cater to trends towards a wider range of lighter and more colourful fabrics already well established in the growing English market for decorated textiles. Indian cottons did not create these trends, however much they re-enforced and benefited from them.

If we accept this to be the case, then the East India Company’s trade in cotton textiles can hardly be said to have had the key role in transforming fashion in the period before 1750. Insofar as we need to assign that role, it should probably be accorded to the political economy of the Western European state system. The reluctance of many early modern European states to see competitors gain a decisive advantage in manufacturing has often been noted, especially in historians’ debates over the concept of mercantilism, but the importance of this stance for design and fashion has received less attention.<sup>31</sup> It can be observed in action initially in the limited context of the late Medieval Italian city-states, but subsequently across early modern Western Europe as a whole.

To emphasize the importance of inter-state competition for the rise of fashion in early modern Europe is not to deny recent findings that the populations of some parts of early modern India, China, or Japan enjoyed roughly equivalent standards of living to those prevailing in the West. Nor is it to dispute the view that fashion (in some senses, at least) existed in the world beyond Europe. Nevertheless, the implication of this paper for debates on early modern globalization in design and fashion is that Western Europe was different in crucially important respects. In that sense, its findings have more in common with Philip T. Hoffman’s recent argument for the distinctiveness of the early modern European state system than with the case for broad equivalencies across parts of Eurasia made by Kenneth Pomeranz and John Darwin.<sup>32</sup>

## Notes

1 J. Chardin, Sir John Chardin’s Travels in Persia, London, 1720, vol. 2, p. 177.

2 F. Braudel, Civilization and Capitalism 15th–18th Century: the Structures of Everyday Life, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1992, pp. 312–13; N. McKendrick, J. Brewer and J.H. Plumb, The Birth of a Consumer Society: The Commercialization of Eighteenth-Century England, London, Europa, 1982, pp. 36–42.

3 For a recent overview, with numerous references, see C.M. Belfanti, ‘Was fashion a European invention?’ Journal of Global History, 3 (2008), pp. 419–43.

4 B. Lemire, ‘Revising the historical narrative: India, Europe and the cotton trade, c. 1300–1800’, in G. Riello and P. Parthasarathi (eds), The Spinning World: A Global History of Cotton Textiles, 1200–1850, Oxford, Oxford University Press and Pasold Research Fund, 2009, p. 222.

5 B. Lemire and G. Riello, ‘East and West: Textiles and fashion in early modern Europe’, Journal of Social History, 41 (2008), pp. 887 and 906.

6 Lemire, ‘Revising the historical narrative’, p. 222.

7 A.P. Wadsworth and J. de L. Mann, The Cotton Trade and Industrial Lancashire, Manchester, Manchester University Press, 1931, ch. 6.

8 A.W. Douglas, ‘Cotton textiles in England: The East India Company’s attempt to exploit developments in fashion 1660–1721’, The Journal of British Studies, 8 (1969), p. 43.

9 J. Harris, Essays in Industry and Technology in the Eighteenth Century: England and France, Aldershot, Ashgate, 1992.

10 See, for example, the essays in D. Gaimster and P. Stamper (eds), The Age of Transition: The Archaeology of English Culture 1400–1600, Oxford, Oxbow, 1997.

11 J. Thirsk, Economic Policy and Projects: The Development of a Consumer Society in Early Modern England, Oxford, Clarendon, 1978.

12 L. Monnas, Merchants, Princes and Painters: Silk Fabrics in Italian and Northern Paintings, 1300–1550, New Haven and London, Yale University Press, 2008, pp. 19–20, 17.

13 L. Molà, ‘States and crafts: relocating technical skills in Renaissance Italy’, in M. O’Malley and E. Welch (eds), The Material Renaissance, Manchester, Manchester University Press, 2008, pp. 133–53.

14 Quoted in Monnas, Merchants, Princes and Painters, p. 6.

15 C. Poni, ‘Fashion as flexible production: the strategies of the Lyon silk merchants in the eighteenth century’, in C. Sabel and J. Zeitlin (eds), World of Possibilities: Flexibility and Mass Production in Western Industrialization, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1997, pp. 37–74; M. Sonenscher, ‘Fashion’s empire: trade and power in early 18th century France’, in R. Fox and A. Turner (eds), Luxury Trades and Consumerism in Ancien Regime Paris: Studies in the History of the Skilled Workforce, Aldershot, Ashgate, 1998, pp. 231–54.

16 P. Thornton, Baroque and Rococo Silks, London, Faber and Faber, 1965, pp. 20–1; Poni, ‘Fashion as flexible production’, pp. 69–70.

17 H.H. Dodwell (ed.), Records of Fort St George: Despatches from England, 1680–1682, Madras, Government Press, 1914, p. 51 (London to Hughly, 20 May 1681).

18 K.N. Chaudhuri, The English East India Company: A Study of an Early Joint Stock Company, 1600–1640, London, Cape, 1965, p. 199; J. Styles, ‘Product innovation in early modern London,’ Past and Present, 168 (2000), p. 133.

19 See, for example, John Pollexfen, A Discourse of Trade and Coyn, London, 1700, p. 99.

20 Old Bailey Proceedings online: www.oldbaileyonline.org.

21 John Styles, The Dress of the People: Everyday Fashion in Eighteenth-Century England, London, Yale University Press, 2007, ch. 7.

22 Quoted J. Irwin, ‘Origins of the “Oriental Style” in English decorative art’, Burlington Magazine, 97 (1955), p. 109.

23 R. Crill (1999) Indian Embroidery, London, V&A Publications, p. 8.

24 B. Lemire, ‘Domesticating the exotic: floral culture and the East India calico trade with England, c. 1600–1900’, Textile: The Journal of Cloth and Culture, 1 (2003), pp. 65–85.

25 For examples from both sides of the Atlantic see G.F. Wingfield Digby, Elizabethan

Embroidery, London, Faber, 1963, p. 36; C. Bateman Faraday, European and American Carpets and Rugs, Grand Rapids, MI, The Dean-Hicks Company, 1929, p. 141.

26 Irwin, ‘Origins of the “Oriental Style”’, p. 109.

27 A. Morrall and M. Watt (eds), English Embroidery From the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1580–1700: ‘Twixt Art and Nature, New Haven and London, Yale University Press, 2009, p. 272.

28 Lemire, ‘Domesticating the exotic’, pp. 67–8.

29 My thanks to Mark Overton, University of Exeter, for providing access to his data.

30 J. Irwin, ‘Indian textile trade in the seventeenth century: iv. foreign influences’, Journal of Indian Textile History, 4 (1959), p. 57.

31 Michael Sonenscher’s ‘Fashion’s empire’ and Carlo Poni’s ‘Fashion as flexible production are important exceptions.

32 P.T. Hoffman, ‘Prices, the military revolution, and Western Europe’s comparative advantage in violence’, Economic History Review, 64, S1 (2011), pp. 39–59; K. Pomeranz, The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern World Economy, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2000; J. Darwin, After Tamerlane: The Global History of Empire since 1405, Oxford, Allen Lane, 2007.