5

# THE GLOBALIZATION OF THE FASHION CITY

Christopher Breward

The history of Western fashion is closely related to the history of urban life.<sup>1</sup> As cultural geographer David Gilbert has claimed, this complex relationship underpins contemporary understandings of global fashion as a system orchestrated around a shifting network of world cities, particularly Paris, New York, London, Milan and Tokyo, but also incorporating (at various times) Moscow, Vienna, Berlin, Sao Paulo, Kuwait City, Cape Town, Barcelona, Antwerp, Sydney, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Mumbai, Stockholm and many others. The hierarchy of these locations, Gilbert suggests, has to be understood through a history which places fashion at the intersection of key cultural and economic processes that shaped the urban order. These included the consumer revolution of the eighteenth century, the economic and symbolic workings of European imperialism, the growing American engagement with European fashion (specifically via the medium of Hollywood film) and the emergence of a distinctively fashion-focused promotional industry (advertising and magazines, fashion weeks and runway presentations) centred on a few key urban centres.<sup>2</sup> This chapter looks to one crucial moment in this development (the latter half of the nineteenth century) that witnessed the consolidation of the idea of the city as a pivotal location in the global organisation of both colonial and sartorial relationships with long-term consequences for the directions taken by a globalised fashion industry in subsequent eras.

## The pre-history of fashion cities

The first modern centres of fashion production, distribution and display prospered because of the concurrent existence of clusters of highly-skilled clothing producers; local and international markets for the trading and dissemination of raw materials, finished goods and printed representations of them; and the proximity of magnificent court cultures where the promotion of luxury was a social and moral necessity.

These three factors were often interdependent, echoing fashion’s generic character as an amalgamation of the forces of production, distribution and consumption. But the emphasis and effect differed from city to city, leading to local distinctions and wider competition. Thus the rising dominance of Burgundian, Venetian and Spanish sartorial styles in formations of early modern European taste reflected those moments during which their respective courts (and their host cities) enjoyed unchallenged political, economic and military influence. In fourteenth-, fifteenth- and sixteenthcentury Venice, Florence, Madrid, Paris, Bruges and London, fine textiles and clothes were as significant an indicator of civic power as the streets, squares, guildhalls and palaces that signified heightened metropolitan status in architectural terms. Furthermore, such sites offered spaces where crowds might congregate, classes of people intermingle, and individuals compete for attention through the modishness of their attire. To be fashionable was to be urban and vice versa.

By the late seventeenth century the dual systems of mercantile trade and courtly display had produced a convergence. Paris emerged as the prime centre of urban fashionability and the first of fashion’s world cities. The nearby court of the ‘Sun King’ Louis XIV utilised the power of fashion for dynastic and nationalistic propaganda. As Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Louis’ most powerful statesman, remarked, ‘fashion is to France what the gold mines of Peru are to Spain’. Royal sponsorship of French textile, ceramic, metal and furniture manufactures as substitutes for Spanish and Italian luxury imports, and the spectacular consolidation of the King’s household at Versailles as a carefully managed symbol of absolutism, strengthened the idea of French fashion as a vehicle for control and promotion. Ambitious courtiers and subjects were kept in check by a complex system of sartorial regulations, and foreign competitors were awed into submission by the staging of ostentatious fashionable consumption, both personal and ceremonial.<sup>3</sup>

The labour which lay behind this emphasis on the creation of fashionable personae, lifestyles and happenings was located in Paris and underpinned the transformation of France’s economy and international profile. Unsurprisingly, the thousands of weavers, embroiderers, tailors, dressmakers and milliners employed in the service of the court at Versailles were also able to establish themselves as an alternative source of fashion knowledge, materials and techniques to local clientele. The demi-monde of wealthy courtesans and actresses at home in the city, the rising Parisian bourgeoisie and increasing numbers of overseas and provincial visitors formed a new audience for their goods, and a new conduit for trends that operated independently of those trickling down from the monarchy. By the middle of the eighteenth century Parisian tastes, freed from the restrictions of official practice, were also attracting the attention of a younger aristocratic generation. After 1715, Louis XV’s circle chose to embrace the chic urbanity of metropolitan modes over fossilised court ceremony. It was in this context that the Paris-based purveyor of fashion gained a new role and prominence in the system of Paris fashion.<sup>4</sup>

The complicated guild regulations which governed the production of Paris fashion in the eighteenth century (preceding the equally severe edicts of the Chambre Syndicale de la Haute Couture in the twentieth century) threw up discrete categories of producer, most notably the maitresses couturieres (responsible for the cutting-out and construction of the basic garment) and the marchandes de modes (who supplied trimmings and had more influence over fashion directions). One of the latter, Rose Bertin of the rue Saint-Honoré, was dressmaker to Marie Antoinette; her reputation as a domineering dictator of ancien régime style arguably formed the prototype from which later constructions of the Parisian fashion designer developed. Like several of her successors, from Charles Worth in the 1870s to Coco Chanel in the 1930s and Yves Saint Laurent in the 1970s, her expertise lay in a masterful juxtaposing of existing elements sourced from the city’s rich supply of exquisitely crafted products, the ability to flatter and anticipate the tastes of her elite clients, and a driving selfpromotional force.

## Paris: capital of the nineteenth century?

The characterisation of Bertin and her successors as part artist, part impresario underlines the continuing importance of the personality of the couturier to enduring ideas of Paris as premier fashion city. But the gradual development of the physical city further contributed to the creation of a powerful myth of Parisian prestige, endorsed in countless tourist guidebooks and subsequent representations of what Walter Benjamin would come to call the ‘capital of the nineteenth century’. From the 1860s to 1914 Paris itself was transformed into the ‘City of Light’: a global object of desire and a cipher for high-end consumption.<sup>5</sup> Bertin’s world had been located in a rarefied domain of small gilded showrooms and prestigious made-to-measure workrooms which over the decades expanded to incorporate the rue Richelieu and the rue de la Paix. By the 1850s the neighbouring Palais Royal housed a less-refined, but no less opulent, collection of ready-made fashion goods for visiting tourists and wealthy locals hungry for the latest ‘look’. In contrast, the rue Saint-Denis, with its new and luxurious department stores, was associated with the respectable but stylish purchases of the middle classes; its pavements were equally crowded. Despite their different atmospheres, these districts held in common a blind belief in the global supremacy of Parisian fashion, and a scattering of tenants whose trading names had become synonymous with that same phenomenon.<sup>6</sup> Alongside Worth, couturiers including Doucet and Paquin produced products and ideas that signified elegance and modernity throughout Europe, its colonies and the Americas.

Yet, by the late nineteenth century the seemingly undisputed domination of Paris as first city of fashion was coming under threat from other versions in Europe and beyond. London, by this time enjoying economic and political world prominence, could also boast an established reputation as the ‘home’ of gentleman’s tailoring: the ‘man’s city’ whose Savile Row-inspired elegance stood in opposition to the French capital’s association with glamorous femininity.<sup>7</sup> In Berlin, Barcelona, Brussels and Vienna, café society and the promotion of artistic bohemianism offered alternative interpretations of fashionable urbanity, premised on aesthetic avant-gardism and social experimentation.<sup>8</sup> And in the United States the fashion retail and manufacturing innovations of Chicago and New York showed the potential for a more democratic understanding of fashion as a commercial endeavour, synonymous with America’s youthful metropolitan centres and their expanding populations.<sup>9</sup>

## Fashion cities in the Age of Empire

To some extent, all of these established and emergent cities of fashion were linked through the ties of international diplomacy, trade, and labour and reflected a broader colonial context. Their rise coincided with the circulation of widely-recognised symbolic codes for the luxurious, the ‘primitive’, and the ‘exotic’ which reflected fashion capitals’ function as nodal points of an imperialist geography of consumerist supply and demand, where the fashionable goods in production, on show, or in use, conformed to respected hierarchies of taste. Such values could be seen at play in the imaginative uses made of ‘orientalist’ displays in European and American department stores, or the manner in which the perfect craft and visual flair of elite metropolitan fashions were celebrated as ‘art’ in the new magazines. These distinctions were naturalised as part of the fabric of Western ‘civilisation’, demonstrating the merits of the ‘sophisticated’ beauty of urban fashion in the developed world in vivid contrast to the ‘savage’ simplicity of clothing in subordinated non-urban societies. Immigrant communities, whose presence was also an important contribution to the establishment of modern fashion cities, together with those who resided in the colonies of European empires, provided the labour necessary for the production and distribution of city-specific fashions, and often provided the sources of inspiration for the latest lucrative trends (this can be seen, for example, in the translation of the South Asian ‘boteh’ motif into the Paisley shawl craze that hit Europe from the 1840s).<sup>10</sup> Local and seasonal patterns of migration and exchange between cities and their rural hinterlands also ensured that fashion capitals in the Industrial Age maintained their reputation as magnetic centres, attracting manpower and wealth, and generating creativity.

By the fin de siècle, fashion had thus established itself as one of the currencies by which cities distinguished themselves and competed against each other. The production and consumption of particular genres and styles of fashionable goods sat alongside the promotion of state architecture, the cult of the international exhibition, the imposition of grand street plans and the rise of international tourism as a mechanism for engendering a higher profile in the Western consumer’s imagination. A more immediate motivation for those involved in such promotion was greater prosperity in the clothing and advertising trades. By the 1920s and 1930s the influence of an American engagement with European fashion (and vice versa) via the instruments of a new mass culture had also become a defining factor in the forging of a popular concept of the fashion city, though often through recourse to nostalgic tropes of metropolitan life created in the previous century. Hollywood film directors and Fifth Avenue magazine editors branded an enduring image of Paris as the eternally elegant city of fashionably-dressed eroticism on global consumer consciousness, while New York attained a screen identity as the dynamic and futuristic domain of slick and snappy acquisitiveness that it has subsequently found hard to shed.<sup>11</sup> In this dream-like vision of fashion’s complementary centres, London featured either as a bastion of tradition and conservatism, or as a gothic nightmare of fog-shrouded alleyways and hansom cabs. What is fascinating is the manner in which such stereotyping still endures in the language and imagery of late twentiethand twenty-first-century fashion industry rhetoric: the extravagance of a Dior couture collection still evokes the sensual overload of a Proustian courtesan’s boudoir; successful television and film franchises such as Sex and the City, with their obvious reliance on commodity-fetishism and materialist values, have been taken as an unproblematic representation of Manhattan mores; and the provocative sexuality of a Vivienne Westwood or the late Alexander McQueen show draw non-ironic comparisons with Victorian melodrama and the world of ‘Jack the Ripper’.<sup>12</sup>

## Nineteenth-century fashion cities and late modernity

Where the nineteenth-century conceptualisation of the world fashion city was focused on improving infrastructural foundations and establishing representational ideas as part of the broader promotion of cosmopolitan ideals, more recently the identity of the fashion city has been increasingly bound up with the evolution of modern fashion as a universal and aspirational cipher whose meanings extend far beyond the production of luxury clothing.<sup>13</sup> From the 1950s, a more finely graded ranking of fashion’s key centres has echoed the relative fortunes of national and increasingly international fashion-based industries, and caused the mantle ‘fashion city’ to be deployed more self-consciously as a form of protectionism, as a promotional tool, or a mechanism for re-branding and regeneration.<sup>14</sup>

Looking forward, the nature of the fashion city looks set to change again as the system of ‘fast fashion’, with its reliance on far-flung sites of production, disrupts the traditional relationship between time, place and fashion creativity. Similarly the rise of Internet fashion portals such as the Worth Global Style Network has made the seasonal display of collections in a few key ‘fashion weeks’ less relevant when journalists and retailers can identify emerging trends instantaneously online. The specific atmosphere and accrued traditions of established fashion centres appear to dissolve in the virtual world of the Web. Such developments have also opened up spaces in which other cities, notably Shanghai, Mumbai and Sao Paulo, have been able to challenge the hegemony of Paris, London, New York, Milan and Tokyo, cities whose claims for international fashion prominence were consolidated in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In a post-colonial twenty-first century it is precisely those places that formerly supplied aesthetic inspiration or manpower to the centres of an older fashion empire that are emerging as competitive sites for the production of new products and ideas. For contemporary Chinese, Indian or Brazilian designers, entrepreneurs and consumers, the idea of Paris, London or Milan as the sole generators and guardians of fashion innovation carries far less power than it might have done to previous generations.

What seems less likely though is the demise of the nineteenth-century idea of the fashion city as a crucial component of the concept and structural organisation of fashion more generally. Contemporary sartorial commodities by necessity operate in a globally-understood ‘realm of values’. The design and media creatives in the most successful and long-standing fashion cities have always understood this, seeking to project their particular sense of life and culture onto the rest of the world’s markets in a responsive and fluid manner. The differentiated and often stereotypical fashion imagery of Paris, London and New York is now not entirely fixed in its geographical specificity, even though its validity and meaning partly lie in a real industrial history, architectural landscape and cultural heritage inherited from at least a hundred years before. It is precisely the flexible nature of fashion city values rooted in a longer historical trajectory that endows the modern fashion order with the continuing capacity to create and challenge social, material and aesthetic realities across the globe.

## Notes

1 See C. Breward and D. Gilbert (eds), Fashion’s World Cities, Oxford: Berg, 2006.

2 D. Gilbert, ‘Urban Outfitting: The City and the Spaces of Fashion Culture’, in S. Bruzzi and P. Church-Gibson (eds), Fashion Cultures: Theories, Explorations and Analysis, London: Routledge, 2000, p. 15.

3 See V. Steele, Paris Fashion: A Cultural History, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988.

4 See D. Roche, The Culture of Clothing: Dress and Fashion in the Ancien Regime, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

5 See D. Harvey, Paris, Capital of Modernity, London: Routledge, 2003. And C. Jones, Paris, Biography of a City, London: Penguin, 2006.

6 P. Perrot, Fashioning the Bourgeoisie: A History of Clothing in the Nineteenth Century, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.

7 See C. Breward, The Hidden Consumer: Masculinities, Fashion and City Life 1860–1914, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1999. C. Breward, Fashioning London: Clothing and the Modern Metropolis, Oxford: Berg, 2004. C. Breward, E. Ehrman and C. Evans, The London Look, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004.

8 See R. Stern, Against Fashion: Clothing as Art 1850–1930, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2004.

9 See N. Green, Ready-to-Wear and Ready-to-Work: A Century of Industry and Immigrants in Paris and New York, Durham: Duke University Press, 1997. And M. Zakim, Ready-Made Democracy: A History of Men’s Dress in the American Republic, 1760–1860, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.

10 See E. Paulicelli and H. Clark (eds), The Fabric of Cultures: Fashion, Identity and Globalisation, London: Routledge, 2009. J. Potvin (ed.), The Places and Spaces of Fashion, London: Routledge, 2009. And R. Ross, Clothing: A Global History, London: Polity, 2008.

11 See R. Arnold, The American Look: Fashion, Sportswear and the Image of Women in 1930s and 1940s New York, London: I.B.Tauris, 2009.

12 See C. Evans, Fashion at the Edge: Spectacle, Modernity and Deathliness, London: Yale University Press, 2003.

13 See I. Loschek, When Clothes Become Fashion: Design and Innovation Systems, Oxford: Berg, 2009.

14 See D. Gilbert, ‘From Paris to Shanghai: The Changing Geographies of Fashion’s World Cities’, in Breward and Gilbert (eds), Fashion’s World Cities, pp. 3–32.

Simona Segre Reinach

The genesis of fashion cities is a fascinating story, as Christopher Breward shows. This is not only because from the historical point of view it is interesting to follow the development of the cities which have made their names in this way, identifying geographies and hierarchies, rises and (momentary) falls, power struggles and new aesthetics. This has undoubtedly happened, and still happens. In his introductory essay to Fashion’s World Cities, David Gilbert, for example, underlines that today Asia is the place where aesthetics are most seductive and forms most attractive, with that admixture of kawaii (cuteness) and cynicism which appears so irresistible to us in the West. But it is not only this. What Chris Breward points out to us is a transition from a situation in which culture and power made a “fashion city”, to a new situation in which fashion itself – with its specific culture – makes cities emerge. This is not an insignificant matter. On the contrary, it may modify the very relationship between fashion and urban life.

In the history of fashion cities, Breward writes, increasingly specialised producers may be identified. There were markets – local and international – in which products were traded and splendid courts where the search for luxury took on the urgency of a moral duty. In this period there were many cities, or rather, city courts, vying with each other and carrying out design competition. The travellers moving from one court to another contributed to spreading and making interesting and desirable the various styles characterising the courts of Burgundy, Venice and Spain. In the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, Venice, Florence, Madrid, Paris, Bruges and London displayed their strength and power in architecture and city planning, but also in the precious fabrics they were able to produce. We all know that from the late seventeenth century and with Louis XIV, Paris took its place as the first true fashion city. The relationship between Paris and fashion was so close that it has lasted till our times. The competition between Paris and London came later and was enacted on a different front, that of male elegance, that is, in a way almost a negation of fashion, because fashion and women remained for a long time, at least until the years following the Second World War, an inseparable couple, as strong as that of fashion and Paris.

With the success of Paris the rise of the urban bourgeoisie also began, with its demi-monde becoming the true addressee of fashion and its most skilful interpreter. In this context flourished the first great theories on fashion which stressed distinction and its practices. Paris became the ville lumière. The lights of the city constituted the stage for fashion and in this sense what was not fashion was considered as dark, habitual, reassuring, and at times even boring. While fashion signified light, fatal attraction, adventure and risk. Nothing illustrates better the relationship between fashion and urban spirit than Murnau’s celebrated film Aurora (1927). The protagonist, a good, rough, vital peasant married to a fine country lass with blond plaits, becomes involved with and sexually enslaved by a self-possessed city woman, dressed in the latest Paris fashion, a cigarette between her lips, who comes to the village on ‘holiday’.

The cities are fashion and signify fashion. The process has been a long one and has settled down over the years: Paris, London, New York, Milan and Tokyo continue to broadcast their styles, although often reduced to stereotypes. But, as Breward underlines, ‘what is fascinating, is the manner in which such stereotyping still endures in the language and imagery of late twentieth- and twenty-first-century fashion industry rhetoric: where the extravagance of a Dior couture collection still evokes the sensual overload of a Proustian courtesan’s boudoir’. The strength of these stereotypes is based on the growth of the cosmopolitan city – with its architecture, its food, streets and urban life – and at the same time of its fashion, made up of art, trade and industry. The materiality of fashion thus fits into the city culture, strengthening and enhancing it. Each city has its own fashion, which is characterised in terms of product and style.

The turnabout to which Chris Breward refers happened after the 1950s, when the identity of fashion cities became more closely entwined with that of the development of fashion itself. I would say that it was with the emergence of Milan, the prêt-à-porter city, in the 1980s, that this change underwent a further acceleration. The relationship between fashion and city also started to change from then on. Not only have other cities more and more swiftly been added to the ‘historical’ list – Paris, New York, London, Milan, Tokyo, Antwerp, Stockholm, Shanghai, etc. – but as Breward writes, the traditional relationship between time, place and creativity has also changed, due to the relocation and globalisation of markets. The dematerialisation which follows, that is, the separation between industry and creativity, has changed its traditional rhythms. Time and materiality, the historical origins of fashion cities, have been significantly affected by this change. The cities made use of fashion and in turn fashion has used the cities. Not just fast fashion, but also fast cities. Like pop-up stores, pop-up cities have come into the limelight, to then give way or flank, more or less at the same time, more or less virtually, others and others again. Alongside more traditional processes – and despite being increasingly less tied to an industry as they are characterised by varied types of manufactures, fashion schools and other servic activities – unprecedented forms of affirmation of the new cities of fashion may be identified. They are all still to be studied. By becoming the language of contemporaneousness, fashion is the simplest and most effective communication system, but it is also increasingly more articulate and institutional. And it is fashion today, in its turn determined by subtle but complex globalised trajectories, which identifies the cities to be illuminated, and not vice versa.