# FROM NATION-BOUND HISTORIES TO GLOBAL NARRATIVES OF ARCHITECTURE

Jilly Traganou

How can the “global” as a methodology, as suggested by the editors of the present book, help us understand architecture today? I will consider the “global” as a way of thinking about contemporary architecture, but also as a way of reconsidering architecture’s history. In what follows I will suggest the need to perform a shift from the orthodox focus on the nation-state as a conflated political and cultural unit within which architecture emerges, to considering conditions of internal otherness, as well as architectural networks that operate beyond national borders, crystallized in an array of localities across the globe. I will also suggest the need to look at contemporary global architectural networks with the eye of the ethnographer, in order to listen and understand not only the grand stories of global architectural production but the voices of the “multitude” of mobilities that are generated across the globe.

Layered places, plural identities

I recognize the place, I feel at home here, but I don’t belong. I am of, and not of, this place.

Caryl Phillips 2001

In the words of Caryl Phillips, more and more people today “feel of, and not of” the places where they spend their lives.<sup>1</sup> In his writings, Phillips, a black British author, shows an acute consciousness of this growing condition of plural belonging. As immigration alters ethnic demographics of most regions throughout the globe, and cases of multiple national affiliations are proliferating, the association of people’s identity with place and origin is becoming complicated. At the same time, new professional patterns create conditions that make people live in more than one location at the same time. Whether they are call-center employees of US companies physically residing in Mumbai, or architects in the world’s peripheries working for US architectural offices that “offshore” part of their digital design production overseas, increasing numbers of people live in what Arjun Appadurai has called “layered places.”<sup>2</sup> What does this tell us about the condition of belonging today, and how does this affect the way we perceive architecture as a symbolic enterprise?

The experience of “internal otherness” can have particular effects on practice in any discipline. In his book, A New World Order, Phillips discusses his experiences as a young black person raised in an environment as predominantly white as Northern England, being made to feel a stranger, one who does not belong. But this experience is far from unique, and does not relate only to race. Phillips soon discovered that he was not alone in his experience of not belonging. In fact he was one among many individuals who had similar dual or multiple attachments. As Phillips explains in his book Extravagant Strangers it has been precisely strangers, those who do not fit, who have played key roles in canonical British literature. Figures such as George Orwell, J. G. Ballard, Shiva Naipaul and Kazuo Ishiguro were not born in Britain, and have all been strangers in one way or another. Some writers who have marked British literature were colonized subjects being brought to the metropole where they had an experience of disenchantment; others were descendants of the colonizers who lived too long away from their motherland to maintain any vital ties with it. Phillips reminds us that it is often the experience of estrangement that gives rise to creativity, as “all these writers are trying to understand how they belong to ‘Britain’”<sup>3</sup> but also, and most importantly, that notions of selfhood and otherness are not as distinct as usually we are taught to believe.

It is the job of the intellectual to tease out these elements of internal otherness as they are entangled in national narratives of literature, architecture, design, or culture at large. In no way should these conditions be considered as only the effects of contemporary globalization. In fact, the whole world history of material production could be rewritten by taking into account encounters among different groups, rather than essences of cultures, as they occurred due to trading, colonization, missionary expeditions, and other processes that brought groups in contact with each other.

How can the notion of internal otherness affect the way we look at architecture today, contemporary or historical? In their eagerness to question the domination of postmodern architecture by corporate values as well as the Eurocentric narrative of architecture since modernity, scholars of architecture (especially those who worked within the framework of critical regionalism) have looked at the architecture of non-Western cultures as a resource of resistance that derived from the positions of the world’s peripheries. These newly articulated forms of resistance, however, bordered dangerously with essentialized views of identity. Tadao Ando became valorized as the Japanese architect par excellence; architects Dimitris Pikionis and Aris Konstantinidis as the paradigmatic representatives of Greekness, and so on. However, many of these architects may have not been as native to their respective lands as historians wished to believe; most importantly, neither did these lands have as singular traditions as these views implied.

In her article in an anthology on travel and architecture I recently co-edited with Miodrag Mitrasinovic, architectural historian Katharine Bartsch gives us the example of one such architect, Geoffrey Bawa, who has been misguidedly considered as a “native” of Sri Lankan culture. Throughout his life, Bawa was celebrated for creating architecture that was rooted in Sri Lanka, and recent scholarship has seen his work as a paradigmatic case of critical regionalism. It is perceived as a product of an assumed “local” architect who masterfully combined tradition with modernity. However, Bartsch reveals how both the “regional culture” of Sri Lanka and the “identity” of the architect are much more complex than the majority of Bawa’s historians chose to acknowledge. Bartsch questions the certainty about the architect’s “origin” from a pure Sri Lankan tradition, as well as the very existence of a “Sri Lankan tradition.” She suggests that Bawa’s diverse heritage (Anglican, German, Muslim, Scottish and Sinhalese) and personal trajectory (between Sri Lanka and the United Kingdom) resists his being classified as a local. Even more so, Sri Lanka’s diverse ethnic environment (Muslim, Sinhalese and Tamils) and multifaceted history (which is influenced by various types of encounters that ranged from Buddhist and Hindu settlers and Arab traders to Portuguese, Dutch and British colonizers) render the recognition of a singular or unified Sri Lankan “tradition” impossible. In doing so, Bartsch finds that contemporary architectural historiography, in its urge to reappreciate the regional as an alternative to a Euro-centered modernity fell into an understanding of culture (in this case Sri Lankan) as “homogeneous, distinct to a group, and rooted-to-place entity.” This view obscured internal local differences and hybridizations which had occurred through various encounters among others.<sup>4</sup>

## Architecture beyond the nation

Today, the conditions of internal otherness and multiple affiliation are more and more on the rise. National architectures are being produced equally by nationals and by non-nationals, whose culture has little to do with the cultures of the places where they practice. Whether they have an immigrant relation with the place of their practice or have been commissioned to build in locations with which they share no ties (as in the case of most global firms today) more and more architects practice in places with which they have a contested relation. The recent interest in David Adjaye’s architecture is symptomatic of an awareness of these conditions. David Adjaye, principal of Adjaye Associates, is a Ghanaian, Tanzanian-born, Londonbased architect, who, as the son of a diplomat, spent most of his childhood as an expatriate in various countries of Africa and the Middle East. After settling in London in 1979, and during his formative years in architecture, traveling became a means of expanding his architectural vocabulary, bringing him to different parts of the world (such as Portugal and Japan) that proved to be instrumental to his professional development. As his work has gained international recognition in the last ten years, traveling has come to dominate Adjaye’s daily routine, both as a practicing architect and an educator. One should not disregard the partial truth in curator Deyan Sudjic’s claim that Adjaye’s architecture sprang out of 1990s London,<sup>5</sup> where he lived most of his life, conducted his architectural studies and set up his practice. But neither should one disregard the architect’s itinerant life from early childhood to the present and his internal otherness within the United Kingdom, as well as the role that race, ethnicity, and the conditions of plural belonging that he experienced since his childhood have played in his approach to architecture. It is the last, in combination with a broader campaign that is branding blackness, that has triggered the architectural audience’s imagination which repeatedly and unfailingly focuses on Adjaye’s biography, beyond the unquestionable quality of his work. “Making Public Buildings,” an exhibition that focused on Adjaye’s travels exemplified the case of an architect whose “native” culture is not just fluctuating between Africa and Europe, but rather aspires to be cosmopolitan, and, thus, defies his simple classification as “other” to his Western counterparts.

What do such “of, and not of” conditions, to use again Phillips’ vocabulary, mean for the architectural histories that have been written in the name of nations, especially now, with the mistrust in the master-narratives of Euro-centered modernism that characterizes the contemporary world? Books and dedicated magazine issues on nation-bound architecture, such as those of Holland, Spain or Japan, have been attractive to students and consumers of architecture, who want to see national spirit as being crystallized in unique and differentiated architectural productions. It is true that architectural production is affected to a certain extent by the national economic climate, by the nation’s manufacturing capacities and traditions, by the national (or often regional) architects’ associations and educational establishments, and by the degree to which architecture is held in esteem in the local place. But for many thinkers, nations are becoming today more and more incapable of maintaining their autonomy in regards to all the above. According to Arjun Appadurai, “the nation state has become obsolete and other formations of allegiance and identity have taken place.”<sup>6</sup> Moreover, as geographer Donald McNeil has stated in his discussion on global architects, “the territorial boundaries that had kept most architects tied to a small set of national markets no longer make much sense for design firms capable of operating in the dynamic economies of [places like] the Gulf and China.”<sup>7</sup> Architects’ education takes place in global schools, manufacturing takes place often overseas, and economies on all scales are increasingly subject to transnational conditions rather than or in addition to national endeavors and policies.

It is true that unlike other design processes, architecture seems inescapably localized. However, today it operates as a multi-sited enterprise that involves networks of locations and actors. The realization of most major architectural projects today involves major managerial enterprises that have largely to do with coordinating works and teams of experts located remotely from each other. In a rather perverse realization of modern architecture’s dreams of industrialization, the manufacturing of architecture today often happens at remote locations from the actual building site. The manufacturing of major parts of Santiago Calatrava’s roof of the Athens 2004 Olympic Stadium, for instance, was realized in Italy and shipped to Greece; the special steel plate used for its construction was made in Germany. Even in the work of architects who declare their practice as committed to aspects of environmentalism, building materials are habitually being harvested and brought from areas far away from the building’s site despite attempts for sustainability. Lisa Findley informs us how Renzo Piano’s Centre Culturel Tjibaou (Cultural Center of Tjibaou) in the French territory of New Caledonia, a building that was built as a means of reflecting and preserving the indigenous culture of the Kanak people, used natural resources from far away locations. Mahogany, one of the main materials of the building, was harvested from forests in Africa, shipped to France for intensive shaping, gluing and forming, then arrived in New Caledonia for assemblage at the final location.<sup>8</sup> The architectural site is not more than a node within a broader system of spaces where architecture is being conceived, produced, reproduced, consumed, and imagined. It is ironic that despite these conditions, architecture is often used as the last resort of nations to prove their uniqueness or, even, their status.

As architectural production is less and less associated with the place where it is built, and as, with the flow of immigration and changing demographics, many citizens today do not anymore subscribe to nations as cultural units, our perception of national architecture cannot remain the same. The debate around the New Europe, echoing the contested condition within each of its nations, can provide a new way of thinking about architecture. As Ash Amin writes:

Slowly, Europe is becoming Chinese, Indian, Romany, Albanian, French and Italian, Christian, Islamic, Buddhist or New Age, American, Disneyfied, oneearth conscious, ascetic or locally communitarian. It is becoming a place of plural and strange belongings, drawing on varied geographies of cultural formation. And thus it is constantly on the move in cultural terms.<sup>9</sup>

“Are all these migrants and movers undermining a European identity or are they promoting a European consciousness?” Donald McNeil asks.<sup>10</sup> And how do national narratives function in light of supra-national frameworks such as those of Europe, the Middle East, or Islam?

## Global architectural networks

As scholars of sociology and architecture have shown, architects’ professional development has been strongly related to “networking” operations, which are conducted through combined physical, virtual, and communicative travels.<sup>11</sup> The architecture profession is not only “highly mobile,” as architects move to study and work, but also “rich in networking capital,” as architects will often “undertake long journeys for social networking.”<sup>12</sup> This condition has been pertinent since the modern era, starting with the architects of the CIAM (Congrès Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne – International Congress of Modern Architecture) and continuing with those in the circle of Constantinos Doxiadis in the 1960s, but has further accelerated nowadays.

Manuel Castells (1996) has argued that post-industrial networks differentiate between “spaces of flows”—nodes and hubs for the elites—and ordinary “spaces of places.” In the case of architecture, the “spaces of flows” include prestigious global schools of architecture, locations designated as major construction sites for the global building industry (Berlin after the reunification of Germany, or China today), cities mythologized as emblematic of the zeitgeist or even of the future (Tokyo in the 1980s and 1990s), or, more recently, areas of the developing world where transnational, non-governmental organizations seek architects’ and designers’ collaboration for improving impoverished environments and providing emergency shelter. The highly hierarchical international networks that modern architecture established across the world keep to a certain degree their influential role even today. Within the context of modern architecture, travel and connectivity secured prestige; to be an elite architect meant to be also a cosmopolitan architect. Established centers of architectural education such as the Architectural Association in the UK and the Harvard Graduate School of Design in the US are still the places where most renowned architects obtain their qualifications. These schools offer an education that has little to do with national or regional needs or standards. Students in global architectural schools are trained in strategic thinking that is subsequently applied in various locations across the world (thus travel is an essential part of their curriculum); in other words students in these schools are trained to function as global architects, not unlike students of other design disciplines, as in the project described by Barker and Hall in this volume. Most importantly these are the places where they also obtain their networks of support. As the architect Markus Schaefer described in an interview:

What is interesting about the current time is that architecture culture is in many ways thoroughly globalized. Of course, there are regional differences, and these regional differences are very important. But in the end, the agenda is set by a network of people who act very globally and who are interconnected through star culture and academia. This happens at the level of established architects who often are not only stars by virtue of being invited to the important competitions and winning them, but who also have a professorship at a prestigious university . . . Circles of the professional and academic worlds overlap. Architects who are very successful, like Rem Koolhaas or Jacques Herzog and Pierre De Meuron, are people who bridge this gap, obtaining legitimacy through their academic work while at the same time drawing commissions from the commercial world. In addition, they obtain visibility through professional and academic publications, for which you need to know the right journalists and the right magazines. In this model, constituted out of these three elements, successful careers play themselves out . . . Only rarely does an outsider rise to global awareness with respect to any of these three circles.<sup>13</sup>

In fact, it seems that architecture is still operating within a system that is similar to the one that was established by the early internationals. It consists of elite architecture firms whose principals meet at globally important nodes (cruise boats in the case of the CIAM and Doxiadis circle, MIPIM fair today<sup>14</sup>) and operate beyond national borders. To use Castells’ term, this system clearly operates through the “spaces of flows.” But at the same time, one should not underestimate the vast numbers of architecture students and professionals who also operate in network relations on a daily basis, that expand far beyond the well known “epicenters” of architectural education and publicity. Indeed in today’s world, architectural networks proliferate being often entangled with other networks of pervasive mobility that include a wide array of movers: economic immigrants, tourists, professional travelers, illegal immigrants and celebrities. Even schools that may not be considered as global do function within broader supra-national networks, while architecture students across the globe can easily be exposed to global networks of architectural education through blogs and audio feeds. According to McNeil, “one of the most innovative manifestations of European integration is the growing number of European exchange students following programmes in Universities in other European countries. Here the ERASMUS or SOCRATES initiatives were designed to create a common European experience among its youth, and stressed the potential integrative power of a Europeanization of education.”<sup>15</sup> Even though again this is not a new phenomenon (and plentiful examples of educational exchanges can be found since the Renaissance) the volume of these travels today and their overall expansion to social strata beyond the elites is unprecedented.

## Instead of conclusions

Beyond the global histories of architecture which unfold in highly prestigious architectural schools and at the financial centers of the world, numerous micronarratives remain to be heard and written. Here the historian needs to work more as an ethnographer, following such subjects as: architects in their hotel rooms being updated on the development of construction sites at remote locations; exchanges and misunderstandings during students’ pin-ups presented in languages other than their native ones; architecture educators’ routines in trains and airplanes in their weekly commute to their affiliated schools; groups of architecture students with their instructors visiting newly exotified locations around the globe; countless exchanges in blackberries, emails and wiki platforms; executives’ dinners with clients and strategic partners. Historians should also be attentive to the flows of immigrant workers in their search for jobs at construction capitals in the world; architectural offices and freelancers in the world’s peripheries rendering digital products for renowned European and US-based architects; as well as networks of politicians, realtors, cultural impresarios, and planners; and also tourists, the locals, and the public at large, those who are the consumers, users, critics and “stakeholders” of what may be called global architecture. It is by being mindful to all these constituencies together that one can grasp the meanings and makings of global architecture, which unfold beyond the cult of the starchitect or high visibility projects.

## Notes

1 C. Phillips (2001) A New World Order, London: Secker and Warburg, p. 1.

2 A. Appadurai (2002) “The Right to Participate in the Work of Imagination,” in L. Martz (ed.), (2002), Transurbanism, Rotterdam: NAi Publishers. Interview with Arjun Appadurai conducted by Arjen Mulder in January 2001.

3 C. Philips (1997) Extravagant Strangers, New York: Vintage Books, p. xiv.

4 K. Bartsch (2009) “Roots or Routes? Exploring a New Paradigm for Architectural Historiography through the Work of Geoffrey Bawa,” in J. Traganou and M. Mitrasinovic (eds) (2009), Travel, Space, Architecture, Aldershot, Hampshire, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.

5 D. Sudjic (2005) “Building in London,” in P. Allison, (ed.), David Adjaye: Houses; Recycling, Reconfiguring, Rebuilding, London and New York: Thames and Hudson, p. 186.

6 A. Appadurai (1996) Modernity at Large, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, p. 169.

7 D. McNeil (2009) The Global Architect: Firms, Fame and Urban Form, New York: Routledge, p. 1.

8 L. Findley (2005) Building Change: Architecture, Politics and Cultural Agency, London and New York: Routledge, p. 44.

9 A. Amin (2004) “Multi-Ethnicity and the Idea of Europe,” Theory, Culture & Society, 21:2, p. 2.

10 D. McNeil (2004) New Europe: Imagined Spaces, London: Hodder Education, p. 125.

11 J. Larsen, J. Urry, and K. Axhausen (2006), Mobilities, Networks, Geographies, Aldershot, Hampshire, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate, p. 4.

12 Larsen, Urry, Axhausen, Mobilities, pp. 64 and 74.

13 J. Traganou (2009) “Mobility and Immobility in the New Architecture Practice: A Conversation with Hiromi Hosoya and Markus Schaefer,” in Traganou and Mitrasinovic, Travel, pp. 261–62.

14 McNeil (2009) The Global Architect, p. 56.

15 McNeil (2004) New Europe, pp. 126–27.