# Notes / Notes

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\auto\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》.md

## Notes

1 Deniz Kandiyoti and Ays¸e Saktanber, eds, Fragments of Culture: The Everyday of Modern Turkey, New Brunswick, New Jersey, Rutgers University Press, 2002, especially Sencer Ayata, “The New Middle Class and the Joys of Suburbia,” pp. 24–42.

2 Afife Batur, Emin Onat: Kurucu ve Mimar, TMMOB Mimarlar Odası, Ankara, 2009.

3 Bülent Tanju, Ugˇur Tanyeli, Sedad Hakkı Eldem 2: Retrospektif, Osmanlı Bankası, Ars¸iv ve Arastırma Merkezi, Istanbul, 2009.

4 Eldem had published as early as 1931 studies of interiors of contemporary Turkish houses and furniture in the principal architectural magazine Mimar in two articles, Mimar Sedat Hakkı, “Evlerimizin Içi” (The Interiors of our Homes), Mimar, 7 July 1931, pp. 233–236 and Sedat Hakkı, “Mobilya” (Furniture), Mimar, 8 August 1931, pp. 273–274. In the 1940s after a number of propositions for a Milli Mimari (National Architecture) based on Turkish historical house types and urbanism he again turned to interior design with the article “17. ve 18. Asırda Türk Odası,” (The Turkish Room in the 17th and 18th Century), Güzel Sanatlar, 1944, pp. 1–2. Eldem’s attempts throughout the 20th century to create a new idiom for modern Turkish architecture culminated in his massive 3 volume Türk Evi/Turkish House, analyzing the classic Ottoman-era Turkish houses. Türk Evi/Turkish House, Türkiye Anıt, Çüevre, Turizm Degˇerlerini Koruma Vakfı, 1984.

5 In 1923, interior design education had appeared as a section labelled Tezniyat (Decoration) of the Ottoman state’s first art school, the Sanayi-i Nefise Mektebi in Istanbul founded by the French-trained orientalist painter, Osman Hamdi. This school was later turned into Istanbul State Fine Arts Academy which in 1929 set-up a Iç Mimari (Interior Architecture) division within the Tezniyat (Decoration) Department that also included ceramics, graphics and poster design. The creation of Industrial Design departments would have to wait until the late 1960s. See Alpay Er, “Does Design Policy Matter?—The Case of Turkey in a Conceptual Framework,” in Lee Soon-in, World Design Forum 2002: Design Policy and Global Network, Korean Institute of Design Promotion and ICSID, Seoul, 2002; and Alpay Er, Fatma Korkut and Özlem Er, “U.S. Involvement in the Development of Design in the Periphery: The Case History of Industrial Design Education in Turkey, 1950s–1970s,” Design Issues, Vol. 19. n2., 2003.

6 Of these applications of the art nouveau and art deco styles the most important was the work of Raimondo D’Aronco, Italian architect to the Ottoman Sultan Abdülhamid II from 1893–1909, Diana Barillari and Ezio Godoli, Istanbul 1900: Art-Nouveau Architecture and Interiors, New York, Rizzoli, 1996.

7 Selçuk Milar, Arkitekt, 03/1991, p. 46.

8 Atilla Yücel and Ugˇur Tanyeli, Turgut Cansever: Dü¸ünce Adamı ve Mimars , Osmanlı Bankası, Istanbul, 2007.

9 Nil Birol, Abdurrahman Hancı, “Yapılar/Projeler, 1945–2000,” Literatür, Istanbul, 2008.

10 Eyübogˇlu was an important figure in 20th century art in Turkey. He entered the Academy in 1929 to study painting but left in 1931 to tour Europe, working briefly in the studio of cubist painter André Lhote in Paris 1932. He returned to Turkey in 1934 but always maintained ties to Europe. His first one-man show was in Bucharest in 1935. His neo-primitive style was a synthesis of early modernist styles merged with primitive forms similar to examples of ancient Anatolian cultures. He was best known for the highly labor-intensive mosaics and prints. Sabahattin Rahmi Eyübogˇ lu and Ömer Faruk S¸erifogˇlu, Yas¸asın Renk 1911–1975, Istanbul, 2008.

Edward S. Cooke, Jr.

Gökhan Karakus¸ provides an important new case study that charts the establishment of a modern furniture culture in a region that, under Ottoman rule, relied on textiles and upholstery and thus had little real furniture history. In examining this development of “furniture as a designed product,” Karaku¸s pays attention to the overlap between the exploration of regional vernacular expression, attempts to forge national aesthetics, and a fascination with transnational modernism. His narrative charts the limits of ideologically motivated state-built architecture, which succeeds only in the public realm, and the rise of a new design culture drawn from local traditions, limited by economic policies, and adapted within the domestic realm. Karaku¸s identifies academically trained designers as the crucial link between a skilled artisanal class and the fashionable urban elite.

However, Karakus¸’ exciting new research needs to be considered within a broader comparative sense of both design history and craft history. As throughout much of the Euro-American world in the interwar years, Austrian, German, and Swiss architects provided designs in the latest International Style for Turkish state commissions, while Istanbul’s elite—merchants, professionals, and non-Muslims (Greeks, Armenians, and Jews)—sought art deco and modern furnishings. Certainly the move in the 1920s and 1930s towards a modern aesthetic based on European examples and introduced by immigrants is a story familiar in America since Karen Davies’s pioneering At Home in Manhattan.<sup>1</sup> But as Davies pointed out, modernism at this point had two sides: the rational new urban aesthetics of Donald Deskey and other industrial designers, and the more synthetic updated traditionalism of architects like Eliel Saarinen and Eugene Schoen. In Turkey this desire to blend contemporary abstraction and local convention can be seen in the efforts of Sedad Hakki Eldem, a seminal figure in Ankara who should be explored in greater depth in the future. Karakus¸’ essay suggests that during the 1930s Turkish modernisms seem to have geographic dimensions.

The tension between Istanbul and Ankara, between hard modern and soft modern, and between imports and local work grew in the post-war period and endows this story with depth and urgency. Istanbul became the most cosmopolitan market for new design in the 1950s. Architects like Turgut Cansever and Abudurrhanman Hanci had traveled or worked in the centers of European architecture, and were embraced by a clientele that read Domus and purchased locally made versions of archetypal modern furniture designed by Mies van der Rohe, le Corbusier, and Gio Ponti from shops such as Moderno and Interno. But increasingly the dominant influence seemed to be American commercial modernism, epitomized in SOM’s Hilton Hotel of 1955, and copied by Hanci and others for another decade. In Istanbul steel, chrome, and wooden furniture filled totally integrated gesmtkunstwerk interiors that also boasted block printed textiles and ceramic wall mosaics designed by other Istanbul State Fine Arts Academy (ISFAA) graduates. As in America, a certain educational institution rose up at this time to dominate the discourse and practice of modern interior design in the post-war period. In America it was Cranbrook, while in Turkey it was the ISFAA, whose graduates would comprise the leaders of the 1950s and 1960s. Even the metal furniture of Kare Metal seems to echo the sculptural metal wire work of Harry Bertoia and Charles and Ray Eames; it was hatched within the school’s sculpture department and then adapted into the high end retail market. That Knoll, the American shop run by a Cranbrook graduate and stocked with the work of Bertoia and Eero Saarinen, expressed interest in the line in 1958 simply underscores the parallel.<sup>2</sup>

In Ankara, Karakus¸ uncovers a different sort of trajectory. In the capital, Selcuk Milar rejected the cold rationalized work of central European modernism, most commonly linked to Bauhaus design, and instead gravitated towards a soft modernism more dependent upon the work of Scandinavian designer craftsmen. Initially local craftsmen such as Ali Ihsan Sark made close copies of the work of Finn Juhl and others, but then developed their own versions sold at shops such as MPD. Such preference for a warmer, more personal sort of modern expression produced in democratic northern European countries also characterized much of the work of designer craftsmen in America during the same period. Milar’s interest in blending Scandinavian principles and Turkish workmanship resembles the goals of the American Ben Thompson, a founding member of The Architects Collaborative in 1947 who established Design Research in 1953. Just as DR imported Scandinavian furniture, ceramics, glass, and textiles and sought out local craftspeople making similar products, the Ankaran shops offered an alternative modernism to that promulgated in Istanbul.<sup>3</sup>

Although he claims the introduction of modern furniture was “a bottom-up social transformation,” Karaku¸s focuses primarily upon the institutional history of modern design in Turkey—the ISFAA’s educational system for designers, the experimental shops established by ISFAA graduates, and the dominant retailers who promoted the work of people whose professional genealogy led back to ISFAA. This provides one part of the history of Turkish modern furniture, one that substitutes Turkish names and forms into an outmoded design history paradigm. Karakus¸ seeks to distinguish the Turkish “new design practice” from that of contemporary

European and American firms but bases this argument on the assumption that all non-Turkish work was the result of industrialized mass production and that only Turkish work was “modern furniture produced by hand, yet to the designs of individuals who had a very advanced understanding of abstract sculpture.” Using terms like “handmade modernity” or “handmade modernism” underscores the problematic nature of relying on handmade as a technical process rather than a cultural attitude.<sup>4</sup> Recent close analysis on modern furniture production, from Breuer to Aalto to Eames, reveals that all modern furniture up until injection molded plastic furniture or metal contract furniture relied upon some elements of artisanal skill and non-industrial tools and could be categorized as jigged batch production rather than mass production.<sup>5</sup> Such a revised perspective places the Turkish story firmly within a global story rather than singling it out as exceptional or unique.

In seeking to offer an alternative story to top-down state design dicta, Karakus¸ privileges the designer. But the focus upon architects, interior designers, and artists does not fully comprise a bottom-up movement. To explore a more grass-roots movement during this time, Karakus¸ might focus upon the craftsmen who actually made the work. He seems to suggest that the traditional cabinetmakers of Istanbul, who were Greek and Armenian, might not have been totally integrated into the social or production system and lost work to Turkish craftsmen who had connections to the ISFAA. A closer examination of the craftsmen, their training, and their type of work might yield insights into a more complex furniture trade that expands the strands of modernism to include Byzantian, Asian, and Islamic features. The craft structure of Ankara, where the cabinetmakers seemed to maintain their status, offers an alternative Turkish model. What allowed the native craftsman there to maintain their status? Might one chart the emergence of a craft economy in Ankara? Certainly the Milar gallery that opened in 1957 sounds more like an alternative to or critique of high design. Exploring the woodworking culture of Ankara more fully might complicate the narrative Karaku¸s has laid out in his essay.

I offer these critiques of Karaku¸’ underlying paradigm and his glossing over ofs the artisanal issues so that future work might investigate shop floor history and the makers’ worlds so that we may more fully contextualize, historicize, and theorize modern Turkish furniture. Karaku¸s’ work is a valuable first step in this process.

## Notes

1 Karen Davies, At Home in Manhattan: Modern Decorative Arts, 1925 to the Depression (New Haven: Yale University Art Gallery, 1982).

2 On Cranbrook, see Robert Judson Clark et al., Design in America: The Cranbrook Vision, 1925–1950 (New York: Abrams, 1983).

3 On the American response and the rise of designer craftsmen, see Edward Cooke, Jr. et al., The Maker’s Hand: American Studio Furniture, 1940–1990 (Boston: Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 2003), esp. pp. 18–37. On Design Research, see Industrial Design 4, no. 10 (October 1957), pp. 86–91.

4 On the importance of historicizing “handmade,” see Edward Cooke, Jr., “Arts and Crafts Furniture: Process or Product?” in Janet Kardon, ed., The Ideal Home: 1900–1920 (New York: American Craft Museum, 1993), pp. 64–76.

For example, see Clive Edwards, Twentieth-Century Furniture: Materials, Manufacture and Markets (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1994); Derek Ostergard, ed., Bent Wood and Metal Furniture: 1850–1946 (New York: American Federation of Arts, 1987); Sharon Darling, Chicago Furniture: Art, Craft, & Industry, 1833–1983 (NewYork: Norton, 1984), esp. pp. 269–341; Pat Kirkham, Charles and Ray Eames: Designers of the Twentieth Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995); and Don Wallance, Shaping America’s Products (New York: Reinhold, 1956). On the differences between batch and mass production, see Philip Scranton, “Diversity in Diversity: Flexible Production and American Industrialization, 1880–1930,” Business History Review 65, no. 1 (Spring 1991), pp. 27–90; and Scranton, “Manufacturing Diversity: Production Systems, Markets, and American Consumer Society, 1870–1930,” Technology & Culture (July 1994), pp. 476–505.

