# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\auto\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》.md

## Introduction

For a global design history that seeks to understand transcontinental similarities and differences, networks and flows, attention to fashion is indispensible. Since the seventeenth century, Europeans have repeatedly identified an absence of fashion in Asia as one of the fundamental distinctions between East and West. ‘The Cloaths of the Eastern People are no wise subject to Mode; they are always made after the same Fashion’, observed the French Huguenot traveller Sir John Chardin, who visited Persia in the late seventeenth century.<sup>1</sup> Modern historians of material life in Europe before the nineteenth century have agreed. From Ferdinand Braudel to Neil McKendrick, they present fashion as a European peculiarity, an element in a broader pattern of European exceptionalism that accounts for the rise of the West.<sup>2</sup>

Recently, this view has been challenged. Fashion can, it is suggested, be observed not only in Europe, but in early-modern China, Japan and India, in some of its aspects at least.<sup>3</sup> Clothing practices in early modern Asia were not necessarily inert and unchanging. At the same time, it has been argued that Asian goods made a decisive contribution to the origin and development of fashion in the West before 1800, overturning the conventional assumption that fashion’s origins were indigenous to Europe. It is this second revisionist argument that is the subject of this essay.

The key external role in transforming early modern European fashion is accorded to Indian decorated cotton textiles. For Beverly Lemire, Indian cottons were ‘critical for new forms and formulations of fashion’.<sup>4</sup> She argues that although the arrival of Indian decorated cotton textiles did not single-handedly initiate Western fashion, it reorientated fashion at a crucial early stage in its development from a phenomenon confined to a narrow elite into a self-perpetuating, dynamic force across society. They did this principally, it is argued, by transforming textile design. While ‘prior to the appearance of Indian printed cottons decorative patterning in textiles was the preserve of Europe’s wealthiest alone’,<sup>5</sup> Indian cottons ‘were affordable, uniquely attractive, and made in the widest range of prices, unmatched by European manufactures’.<sup>6</sup>

This is a bold, ambitious argument, but it is a controversial one. It has, of course, long been acknowledged that cotton manufacture in the West was built on Indian foundations.<sup>7</sup> Equally, it has been recognized that Lancashire’s industrial revolution of the later eighteenth century was inconceivable without the existence of a broadbased domestic market for cotton textiles, especially a fashion-sensitive market for decorated cottons. Nevertheless, previous studies have tended to suggest that imported Indian cottons followed rather than initiated Western fashion. Audrey Douglas, for example, in a much-quoted article, emphasizes the way the English East India Company exploited pre-existing developments in fashion in England.<sup>8</sup>

To date, the English experience has been central to this controversy. This is partly because it was England that hosted the late eighteenth century Industrial Revolution in which cotton textiles figured so prominently. It is also because the archives of the English East India Company and the pamphlet debates its activities provoked have provided such accessible and fruitful sources for historical research.

To evaluate the different arguments, we therefore need to take some measure of the world of early modern English textiles in which Indian cottons intervened. To take that measure, this essay assesses the early modern English market for textiles, from 1500 to 1750, from two perspectives. First, it considers the contribution to fashion and innovation made by different kinds of textiles. Second, it considers fashion and innovation specifically in terms of applied decoration, whether realized by means of weaving, embroidery, painting, or printing.

