# Notes / Notes

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\auto\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》.md

## Notes

1 Statistical Survey Report on Internet Development in China, p. 28, January 2009, Online. Available <http://www.cnnic.cn/index/0E/00/11/index.htm>, accessed September 4, 2009. The 24th Survey Report from July 2009, at the moment only available in Chinese, doesn’t provide an update of the number of web pages but indicates a growth of 6.4% for the overall number of websites in China between the end of 2008 and June 2009.

2 The concept is presented as Happy Network’s main strategy in several sources in Chinese (see for example Online. Available <http://baike.baidu.com/view/1629630. html?wtp=tt>, accessed July 9, 2009. Or in its competitors’ discourse: Louis Lau (ed.), Online. Available <http://tech.qq.com/a/2009 0413/000060.htm>, accessed April 14, 2009. It can also easily be observed by analyzing the site’s discourse, features, and main applications. The idea of going on the Web to have fun, rather than for work or to look for information, is often described as one of the main characteristics of Chinese net surfers.

3 It is difficult to get real figures for Happy Network at the moment, given the complexity of the Chinese web and the very competitive environment which doesn’t encourage site owners to let outsiders know too much about their business. There are also some problems in evaluating the figures given by statistics since users of Happy Network often open more than one account in order to get fast virtual money by playing with themselves. The information summarised here comes from various sources I compared, as well as my own observations on the site (discussed in the paper). In Chinese, synthesized and fairly reliable information about Happy Network is available on Baidu <http://baike.baidu.com/view/ 1629630.html?wtp=tt>, accessed July 9, 2009; Wikipedia in Chinese <http://zh. wikipedia.org/wiki/%E5%BC%80%E5%BF%83%E7%BD%91>, accessed July 11, 2009; as well as in the press, e.g. Online. Available <http://news.sohu.com/20090616/n264548342.shtml>, accessed July 11, 2009. Statistics are available on China Websites Ranking: <http://www.chinarank.org.cn/ top500/Rank. do?r=1247120937158>, accessed July 11, 2009, or from Alexa <http:// www.alexa.com/ topsites/countries/CN>, accessed July 11, 2009, as well as Google Insights for Search <http://www.google.com/insights/search/#>, accessed July 9, 2009. In October 2010, Happy Network merged with sister network RenRen.com, also owned by Oak Pacific Interactive Group.

4 Most writings of the American sociologist Howard S. Becker are written in autobiographical style and had a deep influence on the way I wrote this paper. For more information about Becker’s specific approach to scientific writing see H. Becker, Writing

for Social Scientists, Second Edition, Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 2007. On the use of the passive voice in scientific articles, see also B. Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers Through Society, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988, p. 54. One can note that autobiography is a classic way of writing for ethnographies. Since this report is based on participant observation on the social networking site Happy Network, it makes sense to describe the results in this way.

5 J. Corbin and A. Strauss, Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory, London: Sage Publications, 1998.

6 This information comes from a Swiss web designer who worked in Japan and China during the past few years. I also remember using a ‘footprints’ section myself on <www.globee.jp> in January 2007 (an SNS based in Japan which focused on cultural exchange, now closed).

7 In July 2009, it had 38 applications, 29 of which were designed by Happy Network, one in collaboration with another company, and eight by third parties.

8 I didn’t notice any other foreigner until February 2009, when some of my students registered after I presented them the website.

9 For a short article in English about this game at the moment of observation, see ‘Chinese “facebook” friends hooked on games’, China Daily. Online. Available <http://www. chinadaily.com.cn/life/2008-09/17/content\_7034975.htm>, accessed July 13, 2009.

10 <http://www.aetv.com/parking-wars/>, accessed July 13, 2009. I have been able to find posts on the discussion board of the application Parking Wars on Facebook which were dated from December 29, 2007 – which makes it clearly much older than the version on Happy Network. A short article on this game and its development for Facebook can be found here: Simon Carless, ‘AGDC: Area/Code’s Lantz On Creating Parking Wars For Facebook’. Online. Available <http://www.gamasutra.com/php-bin/news\_index.php? story=20275>, accessed July 13, 2009. Several games in Happy Network are described by Chinese net surfers as copies of existing applications on other SNS. The complete list with references can be found on Baidu or Wikipedia in Chinese (see links in previous notes).

11 A blog post, Tangos, ‘Kaixin001 Has Ads on Apps’, China Web 2.0 Review. Online. Available <http://www.cwrblog.net/1231/kaixin001-has-ads-on-apps.html>, accessed July 13, 2009, dated December 8, 2008 mentions the presence of ads for the car manufacturers on Happy Network.

12 There were seventeen possible answers, voters could pick up to eleven.

13 Facebook has a similar feature called ‘share’ but at the moment its use is limited to several kinds of data, whereas Happy Network’s transfer tool is more general.

14 B. Latour, ‘Technology is Society Made Durable’, in A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power, Technology, and Domination, edited by John Law, London: Routledge, 1991, p. 129.

15 B. Latour, Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005, pp. 136–7.

16 A short description of the apps on Happy Network in October 2008 is given in this blog post from Alan Rutledge, ‘Kaixin001: China’s Apple of Social Networks’, TechCrunch. Online. Available <http://www.techcrunch.com/2008/10/16/kaixin001-chinas-appleof-social-networks/>, accessed July 14, 2009.

17 See Juliet Ye, ‘Kaixin001 v. Kaixin: Social Networking Goes to Court’, China Journal. Online. Available <http://blogs.wsj.com/chinajournal/2009/05/21/kaixin001-vkaixin-social-networking-goes-to-court/>, accessed July 13, 2009.

18 The ‘Great Firewall of China’, so-called, and censorship issues are often discussed in the Western media in a very truncated way, usually much closer to a Hollywood movie script (the ‘bad’ Chinese government against the ‘good’ dissidents fighting for their freedom) than to what is really going on in the PRC, especially on the Internet. Z. Tai, The Internet in China: Cyberspace and Civil Society, New York: Routledge, 2006, provides a detailed discussion on this issue.

19 For example, in this article from February 2009, a user is reported selling his account – containing amazing virtual goods – for 80,000 RMB (about twelve thousand US\$)

Online. Available <http://tech.sina. com.cn/i/2009-07-02/10263229607.shtml>, accessed July 14, 2009.

20 Articles in the Chinese media on SNS have very similar concerns to those that I hear in Switzerland, e.g. on privacy or legal issues. See for example Online. Available <http://news.xinhuanet.com/internet /2009-05/11/content\_11350528.htm>, accessed July 13, 2009.

21 Many attempts are made in order to archive what is going inside computers today. The Internet Archive <http://www.archive.org/> stores the data available on the World Wide Web, and computer museums are trying to keep old machines able to run old software. However, pages such as those inside the SNS are most of the time password protected, and therefore cannot be archived automatically.

22 UUZone.com closed recently, see ‘Chinese SNS Website UUZone.com to Close in March 2009’, China Tech News. Online. Available <http://www.chinatechnews.com/ 2009/02/05/8663-chinese-sns-website-uuzonecom-to-close-in-march-2009/>, accessed July 13, 2009.

Ngai-Ling Sum

Basile Zimmermann examines a fascinating topic in the popular social networking site Happy Network, which can be seen as an equivalent in China to Facebook and its social networking practices. The author draws his methodological-theoretical insights from grounded theory and actor-network theory (ANT). Inspired by these more hermeneutic and ethnographic entry-points respectively, he argues in favour of (a) using a ‘first person’ writing style to provide more precise and grounded descriptions of the research process; and (b) ‘making comparisons’ and ‘asking questions’ to bring relevant elements into the description. Following these introductory methodological remarks, the author moves to a ‘first person’ description of the importance of taking ‘screenshots’ in order to compare Happy Network with Facebook, and to ask ‘how are advertisements provided on Happy Network?’ His answers are found in subsequent detailed descriptions of ‘the user page’, ‘games’ and ‘global design’.

Though this is an admirable attempt to generate ideas about social networking sites through one ‘research case-study’, I want to raise questions on four grounds.

First, the claim to uniqueness of grounded theory and ANT is to generate thick descriptions of their research objects via micro-sociological theory. One must note that these aims may be inconsistent. Whereas grounded theory (as described by Zimmermann) takes the first person as its entry-point, actor-network theory highlights the plurality of perspectives generated by actors located at different parts of a network. Whereas grounded theory privileges first-person observation as an entry-point, ANT emphasizes the need to understand social relations and processes in terms of plural standpoints with no actor (or, indeed, actant) being privileged above the network. This theoretical dilemma is not easily solved and is, indeed, an issue faced by social scientists more generally and designers more specifically. In the case of user-centred design, the challenges of adopting the first-person stance drawn from grounded theory and the needs to understand all plural standpoints of the user community require further reflection.

Second, grounded theory bases its research on all sorts of data (e.g., observations, personal stories, interviews, statistics, etc.) to generate codes, categories and possibly new theories. It is clear that Zimmermann seeks to gather data by collecting screenshots and making comparisons – important strengths of his article. But it is less clear what we do with these data. What about generating categories to understand social networking sites and their design, including the extent to which these reflect existing networks or, as ANT would suggest, actants in constructing new forms of network and interaction? It is also unclear why the author chose to focus on how advertisement are provided on Happy Network; one would have thought that if Happy Network is the research object, more attention would be devoted to examining the ‘idea of having fun’ and related practices. This would involve closer investigation of the construction of virtual friends, online games, etc.

Third, the author quotes from Latour to support his case for a thick description. ANT seeks to achieve that goal by paying attention to the semiotic-material dimension of networking. In this regard, it is interested in the ‘how’ of the networking social process – in this case, this would require attention to the specificities of the web-based social networking platform in China. A serious application of ANT, for historians and designers as well as sociologists, must involve the examination of some elements of the semiotic logic(s) (or mini discourses) in the constitution of the social and, in addition, the constructive role of materialities or affordances such as the Web itself (Latour 2005; Law 2007). In this case, the discourses of ‘having fun’ or the production of ‘happiness’ would be an interesting entry-point. From a narrower perspective, this would involve examining the constant (re-)making of this network via discursive practices, such as the construction of ‘friends’ via user pages, the rolling out of ‘games’, Happy Network’s engagement in legal battles with its clones, and the more recent entrance of traditional and official media (e.g., Xinhua newspaper) into the arena. On a broader level, this involves asking whether ‘having fun’ can be designed. This seems almost contradictory, insofar as ‘fun’ could be seen as necessarily spontaneous, rather than planned or designed. How interactive is that design, and who participates? What role does the Web, the site or material for networked happiness play in defining ‘fun’? And how does the global nature of the Internet affect local experiences of ‘having fun’ online in China?

Fourth, and relatedly, Zimmermann seems to overlook some important contextual issues related to Happy Network, which is targeting white-collar workers in a transitional China under one-party rule. Happy Network exists under the shadow of the famous Internet ‘Great Firewall’ and the call for the building of ‘Green Dam (i.e., Internet censorship software pre-installed on all computers). Such controls raise several issues concerning the place of networking sites in the broader scheme of Internet design in China, and possibly elsewhere. First, in information terms, what are Happy Network’s conditions of existence, its use of information, and privacy policy? Second, in Foucauldian-biopolitical terms, why does it appeal to the whitecollar population? How do they take part in the management of their own control, and what are the mechanisms that are involved in the micro-management of leisure time, risk and security of a society based on one-party rule that privileges consumption over democracy? Recently, Happy Network started charging users on some items (it costs 2 yuan to send a birthday cake to a ‘friend’).<sup>1</sup> Is this a sign of a passage from the socialization to the economization of games?<sup>2</sup> What are the responses of users towards the emergence of social networking platforms as a society of consumers and part of the cultural industries?

Finally, there are questions to raise about Happy Network’s problematic interface with the global Internet, the micro-managerial nature of these games, and their relation to the expansion of capitalism. Such issues pose critical political, ethical and commercial questions for designers. In particular, by contributing to the design of ‘fun’ sites that may dull the critical senses of consumers and/or citizens, is one complicit in reproducing a system of control? Or, given that many believe that the growth of market capitalism eventually requires greater political as well as economic freedom, does good design in this area contribute, indirectly, to a better future? The historical record on this is mixed and provides no easy answers.

## Notes

1 Detailed discussion is widely circulated on the Chinese language websites (e.g., <http:// www.shxb.net/html/20090821/20090821\_191670.shtml>, accessed on 29th August 2009.

2 On this discussion, see ‘New Commune Challenging the “Happy Network”’, <http:// media.ifeng.com/news/newmedia/web/200908/0822\_4266\_1314668.shtml>, accessed on 29th August 2009.

