# Notes

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\auto\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》.md

## Notes

1 The present chapter developed out of state-by-state analyses first explored in John V. Maciuika, Before the Bauhaus: Architecture, Politics, and the German State, 1890–1920 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005). See especially Chapters 1 and 7.

2 The Werkbund has been most trenchantly analyzed in the following: Joan Campbell, The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978); Frederic J. Schwartz, The Werkbund Design Theory and Mass Culture before the First World War (New Haven: Yale, 1996); on pre-World War I Bauhaus precedents see also Hans M. Wingler, Das Bauhaus 1919–1933: Weimar, Dessau, Berlin (Bramsche: Verlag Gebr. Rasch, 1962); Gillian Naylor, The Bauhaus Reassessed: Sources and Design Theory (New York: E.P. Dutton, 1985).

3 Muthesius began serving as a civil servant in the Prussian Ministry of Public Works in 1893, and began working for the Commerce Ministry in 1897. See Hermann Muthesius, “Mein Lebens- und Bildungsgang” (25 September, 1900), Muthesius Estate, Berlin Werkbund Archives; see also Eckhard Siepmann and Angelika Thiekötter, eds., Hermann Muthesius im Werkbund-Archiv, (Berlin: Werkbund-Archiv, 1990), pp. 105–28.

4 During late nineteenth-century industrialization an “old” Mittelstand of artisans, tradespeople, and shopkeepers was joined by a “new” Mittelstand of white-collar clerks, secretaries, and office workers in business and civil service. See Heinrich A. Winkler, Mittelstand, Demokratie, und Nationalsozialismus (Koeln: 1972); Herman Lebovics, Social Conservatism and the Middle Classes in Germany, 1914–1933 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), pp. 6–11; David Blackbourn, “The Mittelstand in German Society and Politics, 1871–1914,” Social History, 4 (1977), pp. 409–33.

5 “Denkschrift über die Begründung eines Landesgewerbeamts und eines Ständigen Beirats,” in Anlagen zum Staatshaushalts-Etat für das Etatsjahr 1905, II. Band [Nr.16, Beilage G, Handels- u. Gewerbeverwaltung], p. 92. The famous phrase “cheap and bad” issued from the pen of Franz Reauleaux, a government reporter writing his Letters from Philadelphia as a detailed review of German applied arts goods at the Centennial Exhibition of 1876 in Philadelphia. Unless otherwise noted, all translations are by the author.

6 For analyses of the debates in historical context see Maciuika, Before the Bauhaus, Chapter 7.

7 See Christopher Long, “The Origins and Context of Adolf Loos’s ‘Ornament and Crime’,” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 68, Nr. 2 (June 2009), pp. 200–23.

8 Deutscher Werkbund, Die Wiener 5. Jahresversammlung des Deutschen Werkbundes vom 6. bis 9. Juni 1912 (Berlin: Geschäftsstelle des Werkbundes, n.d. [1912]), pp. 10–11.

9 Thomas Nipperdey, Deutsche Geschichte, 1866–1918, Zweiter Band: Machtstaat vor der Demokratie (Munich: C.H. Beck, 1992), pp. 748–57.

10 Ibid., pp. 745–48; Carl Schorske, German Social Democracy, 1905–1917: The Development of the Great Schism (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1955), pp. 224–35. For a more recent analysis of electoral practices in Wilhelmine Germany see Margaret Lavinia Anderson, Practicing Democracy: Elections and Political Culture in Imperial Germany (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000).

11 Hans-Peter Ullmann, Der Bund der Industriellen, Kritische Studien zur Geschichtswissenschaft 21 (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1976), pp. 27–33; also Dirk Stegmann, Die Erben Bismarcks, Parteien und Verbände in der Spätphase Wilhelminischen Deutschlands: Sammlungspolitik 1897–1918 (Köln: Kiepenheuer & Witsch, 1970), p. 33.

12 German Federal Archives (Bundesarchiv-Berlin), BArch R901/18350, replies from German Consulates in Genoa, Jassy, Beirut, Singapore, Calcutta, and Batavia to Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg, 10 April 1913; 8 April 1913; 16 April 1913; 24 December 1913; 24 January 1914; and 7 February 1914 respectively; German Consulates in Beirut, Kristiania to Deutscher Werkbund Geschäftsstelle, 16 April 1913; 29 April 1913; pp. 53–142.

13 This is most clearly expressed in the title of Friedrich Naumann’s keynote address at the annual meeting of the Werkbund in Cologne in July of 1914, “Werkbund und Weltwirtschaft.”

14 Correspondence between Imperial Foreign Office and Freiherr von Stein, German Consul of Porto Alegre; between Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg (Im Auftrag gez. Johannes) and Freiherr von Stein; and between Bromberg & Cie.-Hamburg and Foreign Office, numerous letters all related to de Carvalho’s arrangements and dated between 4 May 1914 and 30 June 1914, Barch R901/18350, 147–151b.

15 Where the Werkbund would enter into a hopeful new phase by welcoming foreign dignitaries to an exhibition for the first time in 1914, Gustav Krupp, the “Cannon King” (Kanonenkönig), was adding to a long list of foreign customers: Krupp sold armor, artillery, shells, and other materials to fifty-two foreign governments before World War I, and sold 24,000 artillery pieces to the German military as well. See William Manchester’s exhaustive study, The Arms of Krupp: 1587–1968 (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1968), pp. 263–64.

16 Freiherr von Stein, German Consul in Porto Alegre to Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg, 8 April 1914, Barch R901/18350, p. 148b.

17 For a discussion of this competition see Wolfgang Pehnt, Expressionist Architecture, translated by J. A. Underwood and Edith Küstner (London: Thames and Hudson, 1973), pp. 71–2. See also primary sources such as Jäckh, Werkbund und Mitteleuropa (Weimar: Gustav Kiepenhauer, 1916), pp. 16–18; Der goldene Pflug: Lebensgeschichte eines Weltbürgers (Stuttgart: Klett Verlag, 1957), pp. 202, 322–34; and especially Deutscher Werkbund and Deutsch–Türkischen Vereinigung, eds., Das Haus der Freundschaft in Konstantinopel, ein Wettbewerb für Deutscher Architekten (Munich: F. Bruckmann, 1918).

18 Quotation from Fritz Fischer, War of Illusions: German Policies from 1911 to 1914, translated by Marian Jackson (Dusseldorf: Droste, 1975), p. 236. See also Campbell, The German Werkbund, pp. 93–8.

19 Fischer, War of Illusions, p. 237.

20 See Klaus Wernecke, Der Wille zur Weltgeltung: Außenpolitik und Öffentlichkeit im Kaiserreich am Vorabend des Ersten Weltkrieges (Dusseldorf: Droste, 1970), pp. 288–310.

21 In 1913 Jäckh wrote, for example: “Helgoland and the fleet can protect Germany and hold England at bay. Baghdad and the Railway can threaten England at its sorest spots –

at the Indian and Egyptian borders. This is what England has to fear.” Ernst Jäckh, Deutschland im Orient nach dem Balkankrieg (Strassburg: Verlag Singer, 1913), as quoted in Wernecke, Die Wille zur Weltgeltung, p. 292.

22 See Fritz Fischer’s discussion of “Groups and Associations aiming at Berlin–Baghdad as the ‘New German Objective’” in War of Illusions, pp. 446–58. The historian Karl Erich Born calls the Berlin–Baghdad railway project, which was first conceived by the Ottoman Sultan Abdul Hamid II in 1887, “the most spectacular enterprise undertaken abroad by German banks.” See Karl Erich Born, International Banking in the 19th and 20th Centuries, translated by Volker R. Berghahn (Warwickshire: Berg Publishers, 1983), pp. 138–46.

23 Ernst Jäckh, Deutschland im Orient nach dem Balkankrieg; Ernst Jäckh and Paul Rohrbach, Das Grössere Deutschland, as described by Paul Rohrbach in “Zum Weltvolk hindurch!”, in Preußische Jahrbücher (1914): p. 4, as cited in Fischer, War of Illusions, pp. 448–49, 449 n. 20; Ernst Jäckh, Der aufsteigende Halbmond: Auf dem Weg zum Deutsch–Türkischen Bündnis (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1915); Ernst Jäckh, Werkbund und Mitteleuropa.

25 Thomas A. Kohut, Wilhelm II and the Germans: A Study in Leadership (Oxford, New York, 1991), p. 159, as cited in James Retallack, Germany in the Age of Kaiser Wilhelm II (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996), p. 1.

24 Friedrich Naumann, Mitteleuropa, in Naumann, Werke, 4: pp. 485–835.

Paul Betts

John V. Maciuika’s article is a wide-ranging piece that revisits some of the key arguments advanced in his rich 2005 book, Beyond the Bauhaus: Architecture, Politics and the German State, 1890–1920 (University of California Press). It addresses the forgotten links between design, industry and the German Imperial government (most notably the Prussian Ministry of Commerce and Trade) that shaped the German design world both before and during the First World War, casting a long shadow over the German design world ever since. He is particularly persuasive in laying bare the Werkbund’s global imperial vision and how the pioneering association of architects, designers and industrialists was to play a key role in German commercial domination (e.g., Naumann’s famed Mitteleuropa dream) for the future. His section on the baldly expansionist wartime Werkbund is illuminating, especially his account of its close relationship to Krupp and the Foreign Office. Maciuika is certainly right that Werkbund historiography has traditionally concentrated on the internal politics within the organization or on its stylistic proclivities, thus ignoring its larger relationship to the political and economic concerns of the day.

There are however a few points that I’d like to make about his article. First, his analysis of the Werkbund raises the question of just how German these developments were. As he writes, the Werkbund (thanks in large measure to its co-founder Hermann Muthesius) “transmuted the values of the British Arts and Crafts movement into techniques of proto-industrial design at state schools” across Germany. But what about similar institutional arrangements in other countries? The twentieth century was of course the Golden Age of design councils across Europe and North America, and later Japan, as design was embraced as a key instance of “soft power” by regimes across the globe. How did the Werkbund campaign fit into this broader international story of institutionalized design? Was it all that different from what was practiced elsewhere, say the export of American design as an ideological instrument as detailed in Victoria De Grazia’s 2005 book Irresistible Empire? The Werkbund certainly had its own globalized vision of national culture and commerce; but to what extent was the Werkbund vision itself globalized in international economic and cultural life?

Maciuika also raises interesting questions about Germany. Viewed from a broader perspective, Maciuika’s Werkbund history was the rule, not the exception, in twentieth-century German design history. At first this may seem rather axiomatic, but this was hardly the case in the first half of the century. After all, the post-World War I era witnessed a strong reaction against the Werkbund’s wartime coalition of design, industry and government. The first Werkbund president during the Weimar Republic, Hans Poelzig, devoted his first speech in 1919 (“Werkbund Tasks”) to calling for modern architecture and design’s break from jingoism and commercial opportunism, arguing in favor of the moral integrity of artisan production and the independent designer. The early Bauhaus also had little interest in close relations with national government, as the Werkbund’s combative wartime nationalism was countered by an equally aggressive internationalism of the arts. Things did change later though. In the aftermath of the Depression and the Nazi takeover in 1933, the Werkbund began to seek more state patronage, and famously voted for a merger with Paul Schulze-Naumburg’s Kampfbund in 1933. The sad story of the Nazi era Werkbund and its various manifestations is by now well known; in any case, the fusion of state and design—first brokered in World War I—saw its revival in the Second World War, with many similarities, including a renewed Warenbuch of canonized design objects distributed to manufacturers and planners for mass production and export. While its bald imperial rhetoric may have been expunged after 1945, the Werkbund vision of national-level cultural organ survived the war. In 1951 the West German government founded a new design council in Frankfurt, the Rat für Formgebung, and the East German government followed a few years later with the Amt der industriellen Formgestaltung, both of which were charged with promoting German design abroad in their respective Cold War orbits. As a consequence, the Werkbund set in train a development that came to characterize much of German design culture over the whole century, apart from the interwar years.

This leads to a final point about perspective. Macuika attributes scholarly unawareness of these connections to “divergent disciplinary interests [that] have kept both historians of German architecture and design and historians of modern Germany from considering the interpenetration of political history, economic history, and architectural and design history examined briefly here.” He is right in saying this, but one could add that the reasons that these wartime connections were not known for so long was also because of postwar developments. As noted, the wartime mission of the original Werkbund fell out of favor, as those members once sympathetic to its cause—such as Gropius and Mies—began to move in very different directions. The broader Weimar effort to retag modernism as fundamentally international in orientation and spirit meant that earlier efforts to nationalize (or “imperialize”) design were dismissed, repressed or forgotten. Of course the intimate association of design, national government and imperialism was resuscitated in the Nazi years; yet it was the Third Reich’s own fusion of design and the state that made this imperial Werkbund legacy all the more unpalatable after 1945. For those German modernists emerging after World War II in search of a new moral mission of design in the wake of Nazism and the war, including post-1945 Werkbundler and exiled Bauhäusler, the First World War’s shotgun marriage of state and design was greeted with wariness and trepidation, especially in West Germany. Such political distancing, to be sure, required some nimble biographical rewriting to suit new political circumstances. But the point is that the changed political developments after military defeat in World War I (and again in World War II) were as decisive as parochial disciplinarity in accounting for this longstanding historiographical blindspot. Nonetheless, it is to our great benefit that John V. Maciuika has restored these connections to their proper place.

