# Notes

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》\auto\Glenn Adamson：《Global Design History》.md

## Notes

1 Substantial material on Indian industrialization can be found in a number of economic histories by Indian scholars including D. R. Gadgil, The Industrial Evolution of India in Recent Times, 1860–1939; (Bombay et al.: Oxford University Press, 1971); Rajat Kanta Ray, ed., Entrepreneurship and Industry in India, 1800–1947 (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1992), and Ray’s own Industrialization in India: Growth and Conflict in the Private Corporate Sector, 1914–47 (Delhi et al.: Oxford University Press, 1979); Sumit Sarkar, The Swadeshi Movement in Bengal, 1903–1908 ((New Dehli: People’s Publishing House, 1973); and Sunil Kumar Sen, Studies in Economic Policy and Development of India, 1848–1939 (Calcutta: Progressive Publishers, 1972). Vera Anstey’s The Economic Development of India (London, New York, Toronto: Longmans, Green & Co., 1952 [1929]) contains helpful information but looks at India’s economic history from a colonial point of view.

2 Amin Jaffer, Made for Maharajas: A Design Diary of Princely India (New York: The Vendome Press, 2006).

3 Judith Brown, Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1989). S. Balaram discusses Gandhi’s ability to endow the weaving of khadi cloth with political symbolism in “Product Symbolism of Gandhi and Its Connection with Indian Mythology,” Design Issues 5 no. 2 (Spring 1989): 68–85. See also Susan S. Bean, “Gandhi and Khadi, the Fabric of Indian Independence,” in Annette B. Weiner and Jane Schneider, eds, Cloth and Human Experience (Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989): 355–376.

4 Gadjil, The Industrial Evolution of India in Recent Times, 1860–1939: 34.

5 For a comprehensive discussion of the Bengali swadeshi movement, see Sarkar, The Swadeshi Movement in Bengal, 1903–1908.

6 Havell’s role in India as an art educator and proponent of Indian crafts is discussed in Partha Mitter, Art and Nationalism in Colonial India 1850–1922: Occidental Orientations (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994): 246–254; Tapati Guha-Thakurta, The Making of a New “Indian” Art: Artists, Aesthetics and Nationalism in Bengal, c. 1850–1920 (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992): 149–159; and Pushpa Sundar, Patrons and Philistines: Arts and the State in British India, 1773–1947 (Delhi et al.: Oxford University Press, 1995): 148–155, 157, 172. See also Debashish Banerji, “The Orientialism of EB Havell,” Third Text 16 no. 1 (2002): 41–56. Havell stated his positive views of Indian crafts and his critique of industrialization in his book, The Basis for Artistic and Industrial Revival in India (New Delhi: USHA, 1986 [1912]).

7 For an account of Coomaraswamy’s life in Chipping Camden near Ashbee’s Guild of Handicraft and his subsequent stay in India, see Roger Lipsey, Coomaraswamy: His Life and Work, vol. 3 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1977 [Bollingen Series LXXIX]): 41–54 and 75–93. See also Guha-Thakurta, The Making of a New “Indian” Art: Artists, Aesthetics and Nationalism in Bengal, c. 1850–1920: 159–167.

8 Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, The Indian Craftsman (London: Probsthain & Co., 1909).

9 C. R. Ashbee, “Foreword” in Coomaraswamy, The Indian Craftsman: ix.

10 On Chatterton, see Vera Anstey, The Economic Development of India: 210–212, and Sarkar, The Swadeshi Movement in Bengal, 1903–1908: 135.

11 Alfred Chatterton, Industrial Evolution in India (Madras: The “Hindu” Office, 1912): 340. He says, “A leaven of Englishmen will always be required to preserve the present high standard of service, and it is difficult to even imagine the time when the direction of affairs will pass out of our hands.”

12 Ibid.: 176–182.

13 Ibid.: 281.

14 On the development of Indian print culture in the 19th and 20th centuries, see Anindita Ghosh, Power in Print: Popular Publishing and the Politics of Language and Culture in a Colonial Society, 1778–1905 (Delhi et al.: Oxford University Press, 2006); Kajri Jain, Gods in the Bazaar: The Economies of Indian Calendar Art (Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2007); Mitter, Art and Nationalism in Colonial India, 1850–1922: Occidental Orientations; and Christopher Pinney, “Photos of the Gods”: The Printed Image and Political Struggle in India (London: Reaktion, 2004).

15 B. S. Kesavan, History of Printing and Publishing in India: A Story of Cultural Awakening, v. 1: South Indian Origins of Printing and Its Efflorescence in Bengal (India: National Book Trust, 1985): 233.

16 Mitter, Art and Nationalism in Colonial India, 1850–1922: Occidental Orientations: 120–122.

17 Jain, Gods in the Bazaar: The Economies of Indian Calendar Art: 147–149.

18 Ibid.: 121–134.

19 Images of Indian State Railway posters can be found on the websites of various poster dealers.

20 For a discussion of Indian film advertising between 1913 and the end of the 1930s, see Rachel Dwyer and Divia Patel, Cinema India: The Visual Culture of Hindi Film (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2002): 101–135.

Christopher Pinney

Victor Margolin does a good job of highlighting the diversity of approaches within India to the ‘industrial’ and ‘artisan’ question. Swadeshi, as he says, did not invoke a singular design or artifact-related strategy.

Some advocated artisanal self-reliance as an essentially moral strategy (M. K. Gandhi most famously, and Rabindranath Tagore to a lesser extent), others advocated mineral exploitation and heavy industrial development, such as the geologist Pramathanath Bose (briefly alluded to) who discovered petroleum in Assam and was instrumental in the establishment of the Jamshedpur TISCO steel works. Some, like the extremely wealthy industrialist G. D. Birla were industrial tycoons of a highly extractive variety, but he was also a main funder of Gandhi’s activities (he maintained a very extensive correspondence with Gandhi, and facilitated his travel and residence [Gandhi would be assassinated, recall, in the Birla House in Delhi]).

More critically, Margolin’s account seems to simplify the British/India divisions: British colonizers appear intent on ‘artisan-izing’ India so that it is forced to buy Manchester textiles; Indians, correspondingly, are involved in ‘resistance’ to this. For example, the 1851 and 1886 Exhibitions appear to unproblematically serve British interests. It may be that on balance they did, but when one looks in detail at the various figures involved, a more complicated story of intentions and outcome emerges. 1851 for instance had huge consequences for English design – not only through the impetus to preserve the exhibition collections in South Kensington, and subsequently the Victoria and Albert Museum, but also through Mathew Digby Wyatt’s (Secretary to the 1851 Exhibition, EIC Surveyor and assistant to Brunel) use of Paisley ornamentation of Brunel’s Paddington Station train shed (here motifs probably emanating from English herbals circulating in the Mughal period incorporated by ‘Kashmiri’ handloom weavers, subsequently inflected by Scottish machine production and looped back through Kashmir became a central feature of one of the new [as Ruskin put it] ‘cathedrals’ of the industrial age).

These complex flows can of course be given a much longer history. Chintz – the quintessential sign of Englishness – would here be emblematic. Derived from the north Indian term for spotted cloth (chint), the vibrancy of its colours was so attractive that Indian imports would largely destroy the European textile industry in the 17th century. Manchester’s role in the 19th century was a belated echo of a much earlier globalization and set of capital flows. I will return to the economic dimensions of design in my concluding thoughts later.

But let’s briefly expand on this longer history of aesthetic influence, not least because it has been the subject of an important – and in my view unjustly neglected – recent publication by Hermione de Almeida and George H. Gilpin, Indian Renaissance: British Romantic Art and the Prospect of India (2005). Firstly consider the impact of an Indian aesthetic on European Romanticism. Almeida and Gilpin have recently marshalled convincing evidence that India was the uroffenbarung (moment of revelatory insight) of Romanticism. Almeida and Gilpin propose that visual images from India opened – in the words of James Forbes ‘a new scene . . . to the intellectual view’. Images produced by the likes of Tilly Kettle, William Hodges and Edward Moor introduced Britain to a fantastical, sublime and enchanted India. Hodges was acknowledged by Joshua Reynolds in a presidential address to the Royal Academy to have provided ‘hints of composition and general effect, which could not otherwise have occurred.’ For the poet and artist William Blake, Reynolds’ neoclassicial aestheticism sustained the evil of empire. In his copy of Reynolds Works of 1798, Blake wrote that ‘The Arts and Sciences are the Destruction of Tyrannies and Bad Governments . . . Empire follows Art and Not Vice Versa as Englishmen suppose.’ In formulating an Art opposed to Empire, Blake drew heavily on Indian sources – Charles Wilkins’ 1785 translation of the Bhagavad-gita affected him greatly and an Indian aspiration seems to be at work in a number of his images: Almeida and Gilpin have provocatively suggested that Blake’s celebrated Nebuchadnezzer ‘resembles not so much King Lear as a sadhu or Hindu ascetic . . .’ and that his Spiritual Form of Pitt Guiding Behemoth from c.1805–1809, derives much of its structure and iconographic detail from Daniell’s depictions of monumental carvings of Buddha and Siva. Blake’s Jerusalem from c.1804–1820 is clearly iconographically indebted to Moor’s Hindu Pantheon (which was published by his friend Joseph Johnson in 1810), just as many of its ideas owe much to Wilkins’ translation of the Gita. More generally it seems plausible that Blake’s repeated creation of complex ‘friezes’ – surfaces covered with elaborate mythological forms – owes much to his engagement with depictions of Indian cave-temples

The key figure in the 1886 (and earlier) Exhibition(s), George Birdwood is now much vilified for his refusal to concede that India was capable of producing ‘fine art’. But to think of him as straightforwardly ‘orientalist’ deletes much of the complexity of his Romantic Morris-ian nostalgia for ‘those ideals he felt India had sacrificed through industrialization’ (to cite Victor’s observation about Ashbee and Havell). Havell, by the way, also needs to be situated closely (alongside Abanindranath Tagore) in relation to a pan-Asian anti-colonialism. Birdwood – largely through his influence on John Lockwood Kipling (father of Rudyard) – is part of a complex network which connects John Ruskin, William Morris, Kipling himself and the aesthetician Ananda K. Coomaraswamy to Gandhi. Lockwood Kipling and Coomaraswamy both articulated within the sphere of art pedagogy and aesthetic theory positions that prefigured Gandhi’s own essentialization of the village, of artisanal – as opposed to industrial – production, and of a political ethic rooted in a civilizational ‘craft’. But this flow of ideas – triangulating India, Britain, and Gandhi in South Africa – would form the basis of a much more significant aesthetic ‘intervention’ in the form of Gandhi’s somaticization of a political theology. His increasingly naked body became an aesthetic surface incarnating an ethics of anticolonial practice, and this body incarnated in turn next to the chakra (the spinning wheel which symbolized the self-production of swadeshi) made visible a political performativity that lay at the heart of his endeavour. Separating the economics from the aesthetic – as I think Margolin does in relation to Gandhi – tends to lose sight of the centrality of the moral somatics of khadi (see Bayly, Bean, Trivedi et al.).

Margolin usefully draws our attention to a range of industrialists, and industrial projects, that often get left out of accounts of design in India. Alongside the examples of the Indian Aluminium Company, Hindustan Motors and others that he cites he has also commented on phonography, cinema and lithographic presses as archetypal economic/design institutions which draw our attention to the infrastructure which makes possible the mechanical reproduction that cultural critics are usually so happy to consider without reference to mechanics.

The swadeshi currents that drove Tata and Birla also informed the arts of mechanical reproduction. H. Bose founded Swadeshi Records Ltd so that Indians would not be forced to rely on the Gramophone Company of India (i.e., EMI). D. G. Phalke, the father of Indian cinema, was prompted to make films because he thought Indians had the right to see their own gods on the screen, not just those of the Christian colonizers. In 1913, the year in which Phalke released his first feature, Raja Harishchandra, he gave a series of interviews to the Maharastrian nationalist B. G. Tilak’s newspaper, Kesari, and to Navyug in which he addressed the difficulties of capital formation in the nascent Indian film industry. He famously recalled his epiphany while watching The Life of Christ in the America-India Picture Palace in Bombay in 1910. ‘That day’ he commented ‘marked the foundation in India of an industry which occupies the fifth place in the myriads of big and small professions that exist. And [that] all this could have happened at the hands of a poor Brahmin!

In this same article he then documented how he initially raised Rs 25,000 which was used to lever the larger sum that he required to start making his first films. In so doing Phalke positioned this new technology for the animation of India’s gods and goddesses within a strengthening Bombay-centric indigenous capitalism. Phalke approached cinema as he would have approached any new business.

Gandhi’s message was powerfully nurtured – throughout the 1930s – by the impact of pictures mass produced by the publisher S. S. Brijbasi. The Brijbasi brothers ran a picture framing shop in Karachi for several years and were only awakened to the possibility of becoming picture publishers by the coincidence of a travelling sales representative from a German printing company, and a client

