goods. The department store was the flâneur’s final coup.

As flâneurs, the intelligentsia came into the market-place. As they thought, to observe it—but in reality it was already to find a buyer. In this intermediary stage, in which they still had Maecenases, but were already beginning to familiarize themselves with the market, they took the form of Bohemia. To the uncertainty of their economic position corresponded the uncertainty of their political function. The most spectacular expression of this was provided by the professional conspirators, who without exception belonged to Bohemia. Their first field of activity was the army, later on it became the petty bourgeoisie, and on occasion the proletariat. However, this group saw in the real leaders of the latter its adversary. The Communist Manifesto put an end to its political existence. Baudelaire’s poetry drew its force from the rebellious pathos of this group. He took the part of the asocial. He achieved his only sexual relationship with a whore.

## \* 兴 兴

Facilis descensus Averni. Virgil: Aeneid<sup>10</sup>

It is the unique quality of Baudelaire’s poetry that the images of the Woman and of Death intermingle in a third—that of Paris. The Paris of his poems is a sunken city, and more submarine than subterranean. The chthonic elements of the city—its topographical formation, the old abandoned bed of the Seine—have indeed found in him a mould. Yet with Baudelaire, in the ‘death-loving idyll’ of the city, there is decidedly a social, and modern, sub-stratum. The modern is a main stress in his poetry. As spleen he shatters the ideal (Spleen et Idéal). But it is precisely the modern which always conjures up prehistory. That happens here through the ambiguity which is peculiar to the social relations and events of this epoch. Ambiguity is the figurative appearance of the dialectic, the law of the dialectic at a standstill. This standstill is Utopia, and the dialectical image therefore a dream-image. The commodity clearly provides such an image: as fetish. The arcades, which are both house and stars, provide such an image. And such an image is provided by the whore, who is seller and commodity in one.

## 兴 兴 兴

Le voyage pour connaître ma géographie Record of a journey. (Paris 1907)<sup>11</sup>

The last poem of the Fleurs du mal: Le Voyage ‘O mort, vieux capitaine, il est temps, levons l’ancre.’<sup>12</sup> The flâneur’s last journey: death. Its goal: novelty. ‘Au fond de l’inconnu pour trouver du nouveau.’<sup>13</sup> Novelty is a quality which does not depend on the use value of the commodity. It is the source of the illusion which belongs inalienably to the images which the collective unconscious engenders. It is the quintessence of false consciousness, of which fashion is the tireless agent. This illusion of novelty is reflected, like one mirror in another, in the illusion of infinite similarity. The product of this reflection was the phantasmagoria of the ‘history of civilization’ in which the bourgeoisie drank its false consciousness to the dregs. Art, which began to have doubts about its function, and ceased to be ‘inséparable de l’utilité (Baudelaire), was forced to make novelty its highest value. Its arbiter novarum rerum became the snob. He was for art what the dandy was for fashion.

—Just as in the 17th century allegory became the canon of dialectical imagery, so in the 19th century did nouveauté. And the newspapers marched shoulder to shoulder with the magasins de nouveauté. The press organized the market of spiritual values, upon which at first a boom developed. The non-conformists rebelled against the surrender of art to the market. They rallied round the banner of L’art pour l’art. From this slogan there sprang the conception of the total work of art, which attempted to isolate art against the development of technology. The rites with which it was celebrated were the counterpart of the distractions which glorified the commodity. Both left out of consideration the social being of man. Baudelaire gave way to the delusion of Wagner.

## VI Haussmann or the Barricades

J’ai le culte du Beau, du Bien, des grandes choses, De la belle nature inspirant le grand art, Qu’il enchante l’oreille ou charme le regard; J’ai l’amour du printemps en fleurs: femmes et roses. Baron Haussmann: Confession d’un lion devenu vieux<sup>14</sup>

Das Blüthenreich der Dekorationen, Der Reiz der Landschaft, der Architektur Und aller Szenerie-Effekt beruhen Auf dem Gesetz der Perspektive nur. Franz Böhle: Theater-Katechismus<sup>15</sup>

Haussmann’s urbanistic ideal was one of views in perspective down long street-vistas. It corresponded to the tendency which was noticeable again and again during the 19th century, to ennoble technical exigencies with artistic aims. The institutions of the worldly and spiritual rule of the bourgeoisie, set in the frame of the boulevards, were to find their apotheosis. Before their completion, boulevards were covered over with tarpaulins, and unveiled like monuments.

—Haussmann’s efficiency fitted in well with the idealism of Louis Napoleon. The latter encouraged finance capital. Paris experienced a great speculative boom. Speculation on the stock-exchange pushed into the background the forms of gambling that had come down from feudal society. To the phantasmagoria of space, to which the flâneur was addicted, there corresponded the phantasmagoria of time, to which the gambler dedicated himself. Gambling transformed time into a narcotic. Lafargue defined gambling as a miniature reproduction of the mysteries of the market-situation. The expropriations caused by Haussmann engendered a wave of fraudulent speculation. The judgments of the Court of Cassation, which drew its inspiration from the bourgeois and Orleanist opposition, increased the financial risk of Haussmannization. Haussmann attempted to shore up his dictatorship and to place Paris under an emergency régime. In 1864 he expressed his hatred for the rootless population of the great city in a speech in the Assembly. This population kept increasing as a result of his works. The increase of rents drove the proletariat into the suburbs. The Paris quartiers thereby lost their characteristic physiognomy. The red belt appeared. Haussmann gave himself the name artiste démolisseur.<sup>16</sup> He felt a vocation for his work and stressed the fact in his memoirs. Meanwhile, as far as the Parisians were concerned, he alienated their city from them. They no longer felt at home in it. They began to become conscious of the inhuman character of the great city. Maxime du Camp’s monumental work Paris owed its origin to this consciousness. The Jérémiades d’un Haussmannisé gave it the form of a biblical lament.

The real aim of Haussmann’s works was the securing of the city against civil war. He wished to make the erection of barricades in Paris impossible for all time. With the same purpose, Louis Philippe had already introduced wooden paving. Nonetheless, the barricades played a role in the February Revolution. Engels gave some thought to the technique of barricade fighting. Haussmann intended to put a stop to it in two ways. The breadth of the streets was to make the erection of barricades impossible, and new streets were to provide the shortest route between the barracks and the working-class areas. Contemporaries christened the undertaking: ‘L’embellissement straté- gique.’<sup>17</sup>

## 兴 兴 兴

Fais voir, en déjouant la ruse,

O République, à ces pervers

Ta grande face de Méduse

Au milieu de rouges éclairs.

Chanson d’ouvriers vers 1850<sup>18</sup>

The barricade was resurrected anew during the Commune. It was stronger and safer than ever. It extended across the great boulevards, often reached first-storey level, and shielded the trenches situated behind it. As the Communist Manifesto ended the epoch of the professional conspirators, so did the Commune put an end to the phantasmagoria that held sway over the freedom of the proletariat. It shattered the illusion that the task of the proletarian revolution was, hand in hand with the bourgeoisie, to complete the work of 1789. This illusion dominated the period from 1831 to 1871, from the Lyons Uprising to the Commune. The bourgeoisie had never shared this misapprehension. Its struggle against the social rights of the proletariat began right from the great revolution, and coincided with the philanthropic movement, which masked it and which experienced its most significant development under Napoleon III. Under him, there appeared the movement’s monumental work: Le Play’s Ouvriers européens. Side by side with the concealed position of philanthropy, the bourgeoisie had at all times occupied the open one of the class struggle. As early as in 1831 it recognized in the Journal des Débats: ‘Every manufacturer lives in his factory like the plantation-owner among his slaves’. The failure of the old working-class insurrections was brought about by the fact that no theory of revolution showed them the way, but on the other hand this was also the condition of the immediate power and enthusiasm with which it set about the construction of a new society. This enthusiasm, which reached its peak in the Commune, at times won over to the working class the best elements of the bourgeoisie, but in the end led it to defeat at the hands of its worst elements. Rimbaud and Courbet declared themselves for the Commune. The burning of Paris was a fitting conclusion to Haussmann’s work of destruction.

## 兴 兴 兴

## My good father had been in Paris Karl Gutzkow: Letters from Paris (1842).

Balzac was the first to speak of the ruin of the bourgeoisie. But it was surrealism which first allowed its gaze to roam freely over it. The development of the forces of production had turned the wish-symbols of the previous century into rubble, even before the monuments which represented them had crumbled. This development during the 19th century liberated the forms of creation from art, just as in the 16th century the sciences freed themselves from philosophy. A start was made by architecture as engineering. There followed the reproduction of Nature as photography. The creation of fantasies was preparing to become practical as commercial art. In the feuilleton, creative writing bowed to the exigencies of layout. All these products were on the point of entering the market as commodities. But they still lingered on the threshold. From this epoch spring the arcades and the interiors, the exhibition-halls and the dioramas. They are residues of a dream-world. The utilization of dream-elements in waking is the textbook example of dialectical thought. Hence dialectical thought is the organ of historical awakening. Every epoch not only dreams the next, but while dreaming impels it towards wakefulness. It bears its end within itself, and reveals it—as Hegel already recognized—by a ruse. With the upheaval of the market economy, we begin to recognize the monuments of the bourgeoisie as ruins even before they have crumbled.