## Further Reading The problems discussed in the opening chapter of this book regarding the meaning of the word ‘design’ are amply evident in available works published under this rubric. There is a dearth of general introductions to design that give any kind of overview of the spectrum of activity it covers; instead, there is an abundance of works on the style of places, usually emphasizing interior furnishings and fittings for those with surplus income, with books on historical period styles following the pattern of art historical categories also providing rich fare. Such books have value in developing a visual vocabulary, but only rarely explore the nature of processes or design thinking. Perhaps the area with the greatest number of publications is design history, although here there tends to be a dominant focus on the nineteenth century onwards. However, Philip B. Meggs, A History of Graphic Design (New York: John Wiley & Sons, revised 3rd edition, 1998), is a useful reference text and an exception in tracing the origins of his subject from early societies.A good collection of essays exploring the social significance of graphic design is Steven Heller and Georgette Ballance (eds.), Graphic Design History (New York: Allworth Press, 2001). On environments, John Pile, A History of Interior Design (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000), is a sound introductory history, while Witold Rybczynski, Home: A Short History of an Idea (New York: Viking, 1986), is a very approachable and fascinating discussion of many aspects of home design and furnishing. For products, my own Industrial Design ## Further Reading (London: Thames & Hudson, 1980) surveys the evolution of this form of practice since the Industrial Revolution, although the later chapters are somewhat dated. There are several general historical texts. One of the best is Adrian Forty, Objects of Desire: Design and Society Since 1750 (London:Thames & Hudson, revised edition, 1992), with an emphasis on the emergence of modern consumer culture. Penny Sparke, A Century of Design: Design Pioneers of the 20th Century (London: Mitchell Beazley, 1998), is strong on furniture design; Jonathan M.Woodham, Twentieth Century Design (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), treats design as an expression of social structures; Peter Dormer, Design since 1945 (London:Thames & Hudson, 1993), is a general overview of post-war developments with an emphasis on craft design; and Catherine McDermott, Design Museum: 20th Century Design (London: Carlton Books, 1998), is based on the collection of the museum. Design practice is also not well served. Quite a few books on this aspect can be described as design hagiology, essentially uncritical forms of promotion for designers and design groups to establish their position in a pantheon of classic work. An account of work at one of the world’s leading consultancies, which generally avoids such pitfalls, is Tom Kelley, The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Creativity from Ideo,America’s Leading Design Firm (New York: Doubleday, 2001).The work of a design group in a global manufacturing company is presented in Paul Kunkel, Digital Dreams: The Work of the Sony Design Center (New York: Universe Publishers, 1999), a profusely illustrated examination of projects by Sony design groups from around the world. A volume published by the Industrial Designers Society of America, Design Secrets: Products: 50 Real-Life Projects Uncovered (Gloucester, Mass.: Rockport Publishers, 2001), stresses the processes of design, rather than the end products, and discusses and illustrates fifty examples of projects from start to finish. Peter Wildbur and Michael Burke, Information Graphics: Innovative Solutions in Contemporary Design (London: Thames & Hudson, 1999), uses numerous well-illustrated cases to make a good introduction to this specialist form of communication. Some interesting new ideas on design for working environments are explored in Paola Antonelli (ed.), Workspheres: Design and Contemporary Work Styles (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2001), a catalogue of an exhibition on this theme at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. A partner in a London consultancy, Wally Olins, presents his arguments that corporate identity is as much about creating a sense of unity within companies as affecting prospective purchasers in Corporate Identity: Making Business Strategy Visible through Design (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1992). As a sourcebook, some 200 examples of recent identity design at a range of levels and complexity are presented in David E. Carter (ed.), Big Book of Corporate Identity Design (New York: Hearst Book International, 2001). An interesting comparison with similar German practice can be made by reference to a series of yearbooks, Alex Buck and Frank G. Kurzhals (eds.), Brand Aesthetics (Frankfurt-am-Main: Verlag form), the first of which appeared in 1999. The roles objects play in people’s lives have not been explored in any great depth from a design standpoint, but there are useful texts treating this aspect from a variety of other disciplinary perspectives. Mary Douglas, a noted anthropologist, and an economist, Baron Isherwood, emphasized goods as instruments of contemporary culture in The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption (London: Routledge, revised edition, 1996). Sociological research was the basis of The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Eugene Rochberg-Halton (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), which demonstrated how people ## Further Reading construct personal patterns of meaning from the objects surrounding them. Donald A. Norman, The Design of Everyday Things (New York: Currency/Doubleday, revised edition, 1990), written from a psychological standpoint, is still an excellent introduction to basic issues of user-centred design in everyday objects, although some of the cases are dated. Some interesting ideas on the dependence of technological innovation to social context are found in Wiebe Bijker, Thomas P. Hughes, and Trevor Pinch, The Social Construction of Technological Systems (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1987). Jeremy Aynsley, Nationalism and Internationalism: Design in the 20th Century (London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 1993), is a short introduction to the broader interplay between the global and the local. In general, however, the role of government in promoting design is a theme awaiting substantial research and publication. My own essay on the development of Japanese government policy as part of its economic strategy to rebuild its economy after the Second World War can be found in John Zukowsky (ed.) with Naomi R. Pollock and Tetsuyuki Hirano, Japan 2000: Architecture and Design for the Japanese Public (New York: Prestel, 1998). A good example of how themes in design can be publicized by a national design promotion organization is the series of small books published by the Danish Design Council in Copenhagen. Its web site (www.design.dk/org/ddc/index\_en.htm) is also worth a visit, while that of the Design Council of the United Kingdom (www.design-council.org.uk/) contains much interesting material, including publications and reports that in some cases can be downloaded. The principles of business aspects of design were well described in Christopher Lorenz, The Design Dimension: The New Competitive Weapon for Product Strategy and Global Marketing (Oxford: Blackwell, 1990), although the case studies used are now dated. One of the best collections of examples of the role of design in corporate strategy can be found in John Thackara, Winners!: How Today’s Successful Companies Innovate by Design (Aldershot: Gower Press, 1997). Approaches to the management of design are well covered in Rachel Cooper and Mike Press, Design Management: Managing Design (Chichester: Wiley, 1995). Insights into the practical problems of managing design in large corporations, based on his experience at Hermann Miller & Philips, are provided by Robert Blaich with Janet Blaich, Product Design and Corporate Strategy: Managing the Connection for Competitive Advantage (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993). A heart-warming account of the struggles of designer-entrepreneur James Dyson to bring his new concept of a vacuum cleaner to market can be found in his Against the Odds: An Autobiography (London:Trafalgar Square, 1998). On the subject of how design needs to adapt in the future, and the purposes it should serve, there are some interesting views in a volume of short texts by Gui Bonsiepe, one of the most profound thinkers about the role of design in the changing circumstances of our age, collected under the title Interface: An Approach to Design (Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Akademie, 1999). One of the best books on the dilemmas presented by the profound changes in technology taking place is The Social Life of Information by John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2000). Technological solutions alone are inadequate, the authors argue, and, if designers are to make them comprehensible and useful, the human and social consequences need to be understood and incorporated into their work. This page intentionally left blank