## introduction in 1598 Philip ii of Spain was buried in the Escorial palace north of Madrid in a coffin made from the keel of the Cinco Chagas de Cristo, a vessel that had served as the flagship of five viceroys of Goa in india, the center of the Portuguese maritime empire in Asia. Sailing for the Portuguese crown for over a quarter of a century, the teak-built carrack had made about nine round-trip voyages between Goa and lisbon, twice as many as the usual transport. The two legs of the carreira da Índia, “roadway to india,” added up to 37,000 kilometers, a journey that took at least eighteen months and levied a frightful toll in men and vessels. Although Portuguese seamen piously declared that “God takes them out and God brings them back,” the number shipwrecked or lost on the return voyage, when captains invariably overloaded their vessels with Asian merchandise, was disproportionately great.<sup>1</sup> Perhaps Philip, who believed that Providence guided his realm, considered that the fortunate Cinco Chagas, named for the “Five Wounds” of the Crucifixion, had benefited from the same dispensation. The great carrack also evoked a global vista that appealed to the king, for mariners celebrated it as a remarkable link between East and West, connecting the far sides of the world just as the lordship of Philip himself had done in life. The monarch, who paid exacting attention to mortuary details, evidently regarded his carrack coffin in the claustrophobic, subterranean vault of the Escorial as an emblem of his wide-ranging dominion. The Cinco Chagas had been moored in lisbon harbor for some years before Philip ii died, serving a degrading retirement as a demasted storage hulk. The monarch could appropriate its keel for his tomb because twenty years earlier he had seized Portugal after King Sebastian i (r. 1557–78), the last of the Avis dynasty, and seven thousand of his nobles were slaughtered at the battle of Alcázar-Quibir in Morocco. Uniting Portuguese and Spanish territories in his own person, with possessions in Europe, the Americas, Africa, india, and Southeast Asia, Philip thus came to rule the first global empire. one of the triumphal arches lining his ceremonial entry into lisbon in 1581 carried a legend proclaiming him “lord of everything in the East and West.”<sup>2</sup> For contemporaries who shared his pious outlook, Philip’s power and wealth seemed to bring within reach the ancient Christian dream of universal imperium, mankind united under one crown and one faith; hope soared among them that heretics and infidels finally would be crushed. The king’s Mexican and Peruvian mines produced tons of silver that subsidized Spanish power throughout Europe, including war against Protestant rebels in the netherlands and ottoman Turks in the Mediterranean. Some of Philip’s military commanders urged that he follow up the conquest of Portugal by invading Elizabethan England. The commercial networks of the iberian kingdoms meant that Philip controlled the world’s most lucrative maritime trade, including that in pepper and spice from india to Europe, in silk and silver between China and Japan, and in slaves and gold between Africa and the new World. Walter raleigh (1552–1618) recognized the economic significance of maritime supremacy: “Hee that commaunds the sea, commaunds the trade, and hee that is lord of the trade of the worlde is lord of the wealth of the worlde.”<sup>3</sup> Philip ii’s American silver streamed around the globe, quickening economic activity in india, Southeast Asia, and China. To the despair of the dutch and the English, his ships dominated the indian ocean and Atlantic. They also held a monopoly on voyaging across the Pacific, though Francis drake (ca. 1540–96) made a lone incursion there in 1579 in the Golden Hind during his famous circumnavigation of the world. A raid he planned on Manila, the Spanish headquarters in the Philippine islands, never came off, but near Panama he captured the Spanish Cacafuego, which carried bales of silk, twenty-six tons of gold, and fifteen hundred porcelains. He traded much of the latter to Miwok indians, near what is now San Francisco bay, and later he presented several impressive items to Queen Elizabeth i (r. 1588–1603) after grandly sailing up the Thames, his rigging festooned with colorful Chinese silks.<sup>4</sup> His world-girdling triumph no doubt fortified drake, for he shared Philip ii’s providential perspective on human affairs. “our enemies are many,” he said, “but our Protector commandeth the world.”<sup>5</sup> in general, however, the deity seemed to be favoring Spain. in the Mediterranean in 1571, with the aid of venetian and papal galleys, Philip inflicted a sensational defeat on the ottoman navy at lepanto, off the coast of Greece. Some of the Muslim veterans of that encounter ended up in the Philippines a few years later, ready to fight the Spanish on the battlefield of Southeast Asia. ruler of the first global empire, Philip found himself engaged in the first world war.<sup>6</sup> For some of the king’s servants, the union of Spain and Portugal suggested a breathtaking project. in the decade after Sebastian fell in battle, administrators in Manila repeatedly urged Philip to launch the conquest of China from there, expanding his wealth and power to an incomparable extent. A memorial of 1586 from the governing council of Manila argued that as a consequence of holding the Philippines, “there is offered to his Majesty the greatest occasion and the grandest beginning that ever in the world was offered to a monarch.”<sup>7</sup> yet, though a medal with Philip’s portrait flaunted the legend Non Sufficit Orbis (The World is not Enough) after the takeover of Portugal, the monarch in fact decided that he had a sufficiency.<sup>8</sup> bedeviled by rebellion in the netherlands and cobbling together an armada to invade Protestant England in 1588, he did not think it prudent to march into China. in fact, he sided with the view that the Philippines provided a command center for spiritual rather than military conquest: Jesuit priests and mendicant friars working for the conversion of China and Japan would receive crucial support from the strategically located possession, a pendant of Christianity suspended off the Asian mainland. Philip also saw the Philippines as commercially valuable, even though the islands lacked profitable native products. A stronghold there, only two weeks’ sea journey from the Chinese coast, would circumvent the Portuguese monopoly on trade with China. Miguel lópez de legazpi (1502–72), the conqueror of the islands, predicted in 1569 that “we shall gain the commerce with China, whence come silks, porcelains, benzoin, musk, and other articles.”<sup>10</sup> Soon after, the first of many Spanish galleons carrying Chinese merchandise left Manila for Acapulco (Mexico), its cargo paid for by silver from the new World. As ruler of Portugal after 1580, however, Philip also could command agents in Macao, the Portuguese trading post near Canton (Guangzhou) in southern China. A modest advantage of this extension of power was that the king could order porcelains at their source for the first time. ## THE PilGriM FlASK oF PHiliP ii The greatest art patron of the century, with a collection of fifteen hundred paintings as well as numerous manuscripts, prints, tapestries, clocks, jewelry, and exotic natural specimens, Philip had long admired and purchased Chinese porcelain. in the 1570s he directed the earthenware potters of Talavera de la reina, a town ninetyfive kilometers southwest of Madrid, to turn out blue-and-white tiles for the Escorial in imitation of the dominant color scheme of Chinese ceramics. He believed that blue and white suited the sober architecture of his palace better than the flamboyant italo-Flemish style of polychrome decoration. in Portugal for his coronation in 1581, he stayed in the royal Santos Palace in lisbon, where blue-and-white porcelains sumptuously adorned the ceiling of a domed room. After the union with Portugal, a flood of blue-and-white lisbon earthenware entered Spanish cities, where buyers referred to it generically as mariposas (butterflies) because of a common decorative motif copied from Chinese porcelain. Philip fostered good relations with allies and clients in Europe by sending gifts, often of porcelain. His cousin Archduke Ferdinand ii of Austria (1529–96) also received some Aztec feather-work, looted by conquistadors decades earlier, which he put on display in a kunstkammer (art cabinet) with his porcelains. by the time of his death, Philip owned the largest collection of chinaware in Europe. According to an inventory of 1598, it amounted to three thousand porcelains, most of them tableware, including serving platters, carafes, sauceboats, and wide-mouthed jars.<sup>11</sup> Philip possessed a number of idiosyncratic pieces, including a jar with a crowned double-headed eagle clasping a heart pierced by arrows, a motif identified with the order of St. Augustine, a missionary society with many friars in the Philippines. but the most revealing porcelains were several known as “pilgrim flasks,” almost certainly commissioned after the union with Portugal. like the coffin in the Escorial, the blue-and-white flask has global referents. it was fired in the kilns of the city of Jingdezhen in southeastern China, the most important manufacturer of porcelain since the fourteenth century. Two hundred years later, Westerners began commissioning works there, though a Chinese broker in Canton probably relayed the order for the king’s flask to the potters. While obviously Chinese in its clay materials and craftsmanship, Philip’s flask otherwise reflects an extensive circuit of influence. in form, color, and decoration, it represents the end product of centuries of entwined traditions, industry, and artistry, the flowing together of wide-ranging cultural currents. (See figure 1.) Shaped much like a canteen, with a tall, tapering neck and flattened spherical body, the pilgrim flask is decorated on one side with a portrait of a seated scholar and a servant boy in a rocky landscape, a theme combining elements from ancient Persia and Tang China.<sup>12</sup> The arms of Spain, Castile and León quarterly, appear on the other side, most likely copied from a Spanish coin provided by Philip’s agents in Macao or Manila. The slender, sloping sides of the piece are adorned with lotusflower patterns deriving from early buddhist india; Chinese images of insects and rocks line the neck. The white of the flask’s body may be traced to Chinese ceramic imitations of Persian silverwork in the seventh century and, somewhat later, to simulations in pottery of the lustrous sheen of pale jade from Central Asia. The blue shades on the flask derive from cobalt pigment blended from ore mined in Persia and China, while the overall format of the ornament represents a convergence of Chinese and islamic approaches to design and spatial organization developed since the fourteenth century. in short, taken altogether, the pilgrim flask of Philip ii is a product of Eurasian cross-cultural contact, a representative climax to centuries of long-distance interaction and mingled traditions. European enthusiasm for Chinese porcelain represents a late episode in the millennium-long history of the ceramic. Peoples in the jungles of borneo and the Philippines had been employing it for many centuries; potters in Korea, Japan, vietnam, Egypt, and iraq had been emulating it for a thousand years. but few pieces reached the West before the sixteenth century, and when they did, their owners treated them as cherished possessions, mounting them in precious metal and inscribing them with heraldic crests. A land of drab earthenware during the Middle Ages, Europe regarded porcelain with wonder and envy. When vasco da Gama (ca. 1460–1524) sailed from Portugal in 1497 for his epoch-making voyage around Africa to india, he had instructions from King Manuel i (r. 1495–1521) to bring back the two things the West most desired—spices and porcelain. Two years later, having lost more than half of his 170 men to disease and starvation, da Gama presented the monarch with sacks of black pepper, cinnamon, and cloves, as well as a dozen pieces of chinaware, the first of 300 million to be shipped to Europe over the next three centuries. After Portuguese captains reached China in 1517, Manuel ordered a number of porcelains: the earliest known blue-and-white vessel with European decoration is a ewer of 1520 decorated with an armillary sphere, a symbol of discovery and the king’s personal emblem. King John iii (r. 1521–57) owned plates bearing the Portuguese royal arms and a circular medallion formed by a crown of thorns and the insignia of the Jesuits. Sebastian, Manuel’s ill-fated grandson, had a dish with his heraldic crest encircled by four buddhist-style lions chasing a ball.<sup>13</sup> in commissioning his pilgrim flasks, then, Philip ii acted as much like a conventional Portuguese sovereign as an avid art collector. Philip iii (r. 1598–1621), who shared his father’s enthusiasm for porcelain, went to Portugal in 1619 for his belated coronation as king of that nation—a visit with unhappy consequences since he died in a few years from an illness contracted there. Making his ceremonial entrance into lisbon, he paraded under the customary triumphal arches. The one erected by the guild of potters depicted Portuguese carracks unloading Chinese porcelain in the city’s harbor and other ships taking aboard Portuguese imitations of the Chinese ware for export to European countries. An inscription boasted that “ours also go to different regions of the world.” Holding up a blue-and-white earthenware vase labeled “porcelains” (porcelanas), an allegorical figure declared: Here most gracious Majesty We offer you the pilgrim art Made in the lusitanian Kingdom Which China sold us at such high prices!<sup>14</sup> ## CHinESE PorCElAin And CroSS-CUlTUrAl ExCHAnGE This book explores the cultural role of Chinese porcelain in world history. in replicating chinaware, the lisbon potters unwittingly trailed far behind craftsmen in many other cultures. For over a thousand years, porcelain was both the most universally admired and the most widely imitated product in the world. From the time of its creation in the seventh century, it played a central role in cultural exchange in Eurasia: it was a prime material vehicle for the assimilation and transmission of artistic symbols, themes, and designs across vast distances. Porcelain had a commanding impact by virtue of influencing all ceramic traditions it encountered, from Japan and Java to Egypt and England. in some cases, it displaced local traditions altogether, thereby reaching deeply into indigenous cultural life. Porcelain provides evidence for artistic, commercial, and technological interaction between China and other regions of the world from the origins of the pottery to the beginning of the modern age at the close of the eighteenth century. in the fourteenth century, porcelain inspired a commercial enterprise unprecedented in range and volume in the premodern world—raw material (cobalt ore) shipped from Persia to China to make huge quantities of blue-and-white chinaware for Muslims in india, Egypt, iraq, and Persia. From the sixteenth century, by way of the Philippines and Acapulco, Spanish galleons delivered blue-and-white to Mexico City and lima (Peru) while aristocrats in Europe took delivery of custom-made tableware from Canton. Given its volume and circulation by the eighteenth century, porcelain yields the earliest and most extensive physical evidence for sustained cultural encounter on a worldwide scale, perhaps even for emergence of the first genuinely global culture. Porcelain acted as a sensitive barometer of human affairs, more than any other commodity. it registered the impact of artistic conventions, international trade, industrial development, political turmoil, elite expenditure, ceremonial rites, and cultural contact. it therefore is central to a wide range of topics: commercial exchange, domestic economy, consumption patterns, interior design, architecture, ornamental motifs, fashion styles, dining etiquette, foodways, transportation networks, political propaganda, manufacturing technology, product innovation, scientific research, gender relations, religious beliefs, and social values. naturally, other articles of trade also touch on some of these topics. in recent years, aspects of world history have been examined from the point of view of salt, tea, chocolate, coffee, silver, tobacco, opium, sugar, flowers, wine, codfish, corn, rhubarb, coal, clay, potatoes, spices, firearms, glass, and silk. All the products examined in these works are shaped by human intervention, and indeed most are impossible without it. Contemporary anthropology teaches that none are culturally neutral; they all carry a valence, a certain meaning and context for everyone who uses the given item. Some things that people consume, however, carry a more powerful charge than others. As products of nature, even though processed and altered by humans, coal, corn, and cod can say only so much. As crafted objects, entirely stuff of human invention, silk fabric, glass, silverwares, and ceramics perform at higher levels of cultural abstraction and metaphor, closer to sculpture and painting than to salt and sugar. They function as acts of imagination, expressions of tradition, assertions of communal identity, demonstrations of social cohesion, vehicles of prestige management, objectifications of self, and embodiments of social value. nor is there a formal order to these various aspects, for the same object may represent a range of meanings as well as change those meanings over time. Human artifacts mediate between nature and culture, appetite and reflection, disorder and intentionality, exploitation and innovation, the ephemeral and the enduring, the raw and the cooked. With their iconographic message about the vanity of worldly possessions forgotten by all but art historians, seventeenth-century dutch still lifes continue to enthrall modern viewers in part because the works powerfully exemplify the same tensions, with natural things—lobsters, tulips, nautilus shells, peeled lemons, oysters, ruddy hams, a brace of game—displayed alongside manufactured objects, such as pewter plates, venetian crystal goblets, French silverware, crimson Turkish carpets, Japanese lacquerware, folds of damask, and blue-and-white porcelain bowls. (See figure 2.) Ceramic vessels, however, have an exceptional status even within the category of made things. Pots are shaped by the pressure of hands on wet clay, making ceramics the most physically intimate of the arts, virtually impossible to abstract as a form from the earthy matter employed and the functional artifact created. Although classed as a decorative art, pottery has attributes that make it distinct from jewelry, gems, carpets, wallpaper, fabric, marble, bookbinding, cloisonné, silverware, and furniture. Since the eighteenth century, pottery (usually porcelain) has been put on a pedestal to be admired, yet it resists that lofty isolation by virtue of its utility in cooking, eating, storing, and, until recently, excreting. bowls, jars, and vases in museums have a forlorn, derelict quality: vacant and untouchable, they are severed from the everyday uses for which potters fashioned them. Significantly, all cultures project an anthropomorphic image onto standing ceramics, seeing them symbolically as three-dimensional analogues for the human body. And since women use pottery as a receptacle within domestic settings, the bodily reflection generally is feminine, predictably with erotic overtones: shaped in curves, the pot is characterized as possessing a foot (or bottom), belly, arms, shoulders, neck, mouth, and lip.<sup>15</sup> Soon after reaching the Philippines, legazpi reported that he had captured two Chinese junks that carried “some fine porcelain jars, which they call sinoratas.”<sup>16</sup> This figurative dimension sets ceramics apart from all other commodities. indeed, some cultures, especially in eastern and southern Africa, where women are the chief potters, identify metaphorical links between pots, kilns, and females, because all are involved in irreversible, heat-mediated transformations: pots warming food, kilns firing pots, and the womb nurturing the embryo.<sup>17</sup> Porcelain even extends the sexual correspondence with the female inasmuch as its satiny surface has evoked comparison, in all cultures, with the complexion of a beautiful woman. ## THE CUlTUrAl SiGniFiCAnCE oF CHinESE PorCElAin As an examination of cross-cultural interaction in world history, this book considers how various societies integrated Chinese porcelain into their art, religion, politics, and economy. it also looks at how the commodity reflects important events in world history. but even though porcelain has its intrinsic fascinations, making it a source of endless appeal and affection to collectors and connoisseurs, it was not itself central to historical action. A couple of late-sixteenth-century invasions of Korea by Japan are called the Potters’ Wars, but no war was ever fought by potters or over pottery, and although King Frederick William i of Prussia (r. 1713–40) marshaled what contemporaries termed the Porcelain regiment, the ceramic never played a role in war except as incidental, if prized, plunder. Massive imports of chinaware to the West after 1500 resulted in development of a European version of porcelain by the early eighteenth century; but the Chinese vessels just hurried along an innovation that unquestionably would have taken place anyway within a few generations. Excluding the likely effect of porcelain on reducing death from disease and thereby stimulating population increase, little in history would have been different if the ceramic had never been created. China did without it until the seventh century, Europe until the sixteenth, and common earthenware serves most purposes in many countries today. Usually referring to porcelain generically (and eponymously) as china, people in industrial societies overwhelmingly prefer it for their tableware, and scientists annually turn out a mountain of highly technical publications on its nature and uses. Porcelain is employed in numerous important ways, including in guided missiles, space shuttles, jet turbines, internal combustion engines, laser technology, body armor, dental surgery, and the bathroom—it remains an unsurpassed material for the sink, tub, and toilet—but these considerations go beyond the chronological scope of this book.<sup>18</sup> in addition, while porcelain was a product in international commerce from the seventh century, it was by no means the most outstanding in quantity and influence. Merchants traded textiles, especially silk and cotton, in greater amounts, a consideration that made fabrics the chief material carrier of cultural messages in the form of designs, motifs, and colors. According to Matteo ricci (1552–1610), the great pioneer of the Jesuit mission to China, “There is no other staple of commerce with which the Portuguese prefer to lade their ships than Chinese silk, which they carry to Japan and india, where it finds a ready market.”<sup>19</sup> He also notes that Spanish merchants in the Philippines transshipped huge quantities of silk to the Americas and other parts of the world. At all times, chinaware trailed behind spices in trade between East and West, and in the eighteenth century, Chinese tea also exceeded it in importance. Porcelain, however, played an exceptional role in cultural exchange between China and the distant reaches of Eurasia, one that other commodities intrinsically could not perform. Spices not only came from various parts of Asia, they naturally were intended for immediate use and consumption, and although pepper, nutmeg, cloves, and cinnamon were seen as possessing pharmacological and cultural significance, these meanings were imposed by their consumers, not intrinsic to the merchandise. Silk was regarded as indispensable for elite apparel and for employment in religious ritual in roman and byzantine Christianity, but China lost its silk monopoly by the sixth century, when other countries obtained the technology of sericulture. Silk exported from China also was often plain and in the form of yarn, and while Chinese silks with embroidered designs conveyed cultural messages about China, craftsmen in Southwest Asia and Europe frequently unwove the fabric and recycled the thread. Moreover, like all textiles, silk deteriorated rapidly if not kept in tombs, shrines, or reliquaries. Glass vessels also had a short life span inasmuch as they were easily broken. And because glass is made from a mixture of sand (which provides silica), the vessels could be melted at a relatively low temperature and refashioned in other shapes and colors. Artisans made silverwares in all places the white metal could be acquired, and merchants traded them internationally; but the high value of silver meant the vessels regularly went into the melting pot to be recycled for ready cash or into more fashionable utensils.<sup>20</sup> Whereas precious plate and glass perishes, porcelain lives on. Easy to break yet hard to destroy, it retains its color and decoration with perfection, even after centuries at the bottom of the sea.<sup>21</sup> it invariably conveyed cultural meaning in its shapes and decoration, though often this was confusedly, if creatively, apprehended by foreign patrons. The exceptional longevity of porcelain (and pottery in general) results in the curious circumstance that much of the history of metalwork forms can be reconstructed only by looking at their relatively inexpensive ceramic replications. in contrast to other commodities, porcelain remained a Chinese monopoly until just three centuries ago. Koreans made it from the ninth century and Japanese from the early seventeenth; yet this was done under Chinese tutelage, wholly dependent on more than two millennia of Chinese craft expertise and technology. The Chinese (or Sino-centered) monopoly truly was broken only in the early eighteenth century when, stimulated by imports of Chinese and Japanese porcelain, researchers at Meissen in Germany created a version of the ceramic, an achievement soon duplicated by Sèvres in France and by many other European pottery manufactories. Another distinctive characteristic of Chinese porcelain was that it was exported in finished form and, unlike glass, could not be recycled, though the dutch sometimes added decoration to pieces in the seventeenth century. in the absence of recycling, artisans in Japan, iraq, Turkey, Holland, England, and France repaired broken porcelains with wire and metal clamps. An eighteenth-century Parisian manabout-town recorded that craftsmen from normandy made a living as sellers of rabbit skins and “menders of broken china-ware.”<sup>22</sup> A london advertising handbill from around 1770 broadcast the services of “Edmund Morris China-rivetter, at the China Jarr, in Grays inn. . . . Mends all sorts of China Wares with a Peculiar Art . . . so as a rivetted Piece of China will do as much Service as when new.”<sup>23</sup> various peoples found porcelain so compelling and even magical that fragments of shattered vessels were pulverized for medicine, framed for decorative hangings, handed out in religious ritual, used as auspicious gambling counters, and plastered into the walls of towers, shrines, churches, and mosques. now and again, it also had its uses in war. Chinese soldiers in the thirteenth century loaded bamboo flamethrowers with porcelain shards and metal chips. An enemy of William Kidd (ca. 1645– 1701), the british sea captain who turned to piracy, had his men stuff broken chinaware dishes into a cannon and fire them to shred the sails of his opponents.<sup>24</sup> in Annus Mirabilis, John dryden (1631–1700) makes sport with this notion in describing the English victory over the dutch in the 1665 battle of lowestoft off the Suffolk coast, an encounter in which the dutch lost seventeen ships, including a few that had been employed in trade with the Moluccas (the Spice islands) and China: Amidst whole heaps of spices lights a ball, And now their odours arm’d against them flie: Some preciously by shatter’d Porc’lain fall, And some by Aromatick splinters die.<sup>25</sup> Porcelain also stands out from other commodities inasmuch as it had a uniquely ecumenical impact. Spices and silk went on a one-way journey, from east to west, at the end of which people consumed the spices and the silk frayed, faded, and finally vanished. Porcelain, however, not only endured but also played a central role in reciprocal cultural influence. Chinese artistic motifs and designs taken from porcelain were embraced by distant societies, after which, reshuffled, reinterpreted, and frequently misconstrued, they were sent back from where they came as decoration on merchandise such as cotton cloth, carpets, and silverwares. in like fashion, Chinese potters often adapted alien designs for their products, which merchants then exported to the very foreign realms where the designs had originated generations before. Thus a Chinese-influenced version of exotic decoration would be imitated by craftsmen half a world away, not suspecting that they were heirs of the cultural tradition that had first inspired that which they currently were emulating. in connection with other media, chiefly textiles, metal vessels, and architectural adornment, porcelain had a central part in a sometimes dizzying loop of cultural association and amalgamation. The cultural impact of porcelain provides an illuminating but unexplored theme in the writing of world history. inasmuch as broken pottery usually ends up buried in stratified deposits in the ground, it has been an indispensable source of information for archaeologists since the late seventeenth century. Historical study of material culture, commodities, and consumption, however, began only in recent decades.<sup>26</sup> in particular, it is not surprising that historians have disregarded porcelain. Although there is an enormous literature on the subject, it appears in publications rarely consulted by them, such as exhibition catalogues, auction house magazines, antique monthlies, museum booklets, specialized monographs, art journals, pottery periodicals, and archaeology bulletins. in the study of history, porcelain has been given no more respect than museum visitors habitually accord it as they bustle past cabinets of platters and pots to contemplate well-known (and comparatively comprehensible) paintings and statues. despite the significance of porcelain in long-distance commerce for centuries, economic historians have shown scant interest in it. For their part, most writers on the subject, typically aficionados, connoisseurs, collectors, and museum curators, concentrate on the aesthetic qualities of the vessels rather than on their economic ramifications. Thus while there has been no attempt to quantify and chart the massive Chinese export trade in ceramics, there is a surfeit of antiquarian research devoted to identifying eighteenth-century british armorial bearings on chinaware. of course, experts on porcelain commonly approach their subject from more significant perspectives: design motifs, pottery forms, specific vessels, kiln complexes, archaeological finds, and notable collections. but though valuable and interesting in its own right, such work seldom addresses larger historical considerations, economic ones in particular. Exceptional and long-standing barriers segregate the study of art from that of economics. in the most basic ways—themes investigated, sources examined, training required, practices followed, questions asked—art historians and economic historians obviously work quite differently. Porcelain, however, is most revealing when treated as a cultural cynosure, a nexus where art and commerce converge, drawn together by an artifact that in some measure incarnates and articulates the beliefs, customs, and mentalities of those who make, purchase, and esteem it. Positioned at the intersection of everyday life, commerce, and art, porcelain vessels were often simultaneously functional wares, profitable merchandise, and treasured possessions. linked to social behavior, long-distance trade, and elite taste, porcelain affords a distinctive standpoint from which to view world history, casting light on many topics other than itself. Porcelain is employed here as a sort of organizing principle, a way to examine the tangled interactions that make up human history. This book adopts the perspective expressed by Wallace Stevens in Anecdote of a Jar, in which (as in a dutch still life) the crafted object imposes form and order on the unruly profusion of natural things: i placed a jar in Tennessee, And round it was, upon a hill. it made the slovenly wilderness Surround that hill. The wilderness rose up to it, And sprawled around, no longer wild. The jar was round upon the ground And tall and of a port in air. it took dominion everywhere. The jar was gray and bare. it did not give of bird or bush, like nothing else in Tennessee.<sup>27</sup> ## THE FAll oF CHinA And THE riSE oF THE WEST in a manner of speaking, this study is concerned more with the wilderness than with the jar: that is, it focuses on what porcelain reveals about cultures around the world, not on the commodity itself. it emphatically does not provide a history of Chinese porcelain, still less a history of ceramics. Accordingly, technical material regarding clays, glazes, and kilns is kept to a minimum. The presentation follows the admirable example set by Cipriano Piccolpasso (ca. 1523–79), who explains in The Three Books of the Potter’s Art, an introduction to italian pottery manufacture, that his work steers clear of much specialized detail “so as not to perplex other men’s thoughts with what is not needful.”<sup>28</sup> Although the subject matter spans more than a millennium of history, most attention in this book is devoted to the early modern period, 1500 to 1800. All chapters draw material from those years, which have been more thoroughly investigated by students of porcelain than have earlier centuries. Furthermore, a study of the cultural influence of Chinese porcelain in world history necessarily highlights developments in early modern times. From the origins of civilization around 4000 b.c.e. to the voyages of Christopher Columbus (1451–1506) and da Gama, the most wideranging, long-term cultural interaction took place across the super-continent formed by the isthmus linking Eurasia and Africa. That landmass effectively constituted an ecumene—from Greek oikoumenē, the “inhabited quarter” of the world—a series of civilizations or extensive regional societies in communication, however shaky and sporadic, between the Atlantic and Pacific.<sup>29</sup> Some travelers, most famously Marco Polo (1254–1324) and ibn battuta (1304– 69), crossed much of that expanse. Polo could make his journey from venice to China because Mongol conquerors provided security on the so-called Silk road, a network of trails and oases linking West and East Asia. ibn battuta journeyed from Morocco to Canton, wending his way along a trading network (or diaspora) of Muslim merchants on the sea lanes connecting Southwest Asia and the indian ocean to the coast of southern China. Counting his later trip to West Africa, he traveled some 120,000 kilometers in twenty-nine years, passing through much of the ecumene. discovery of the new World and the Cape route to india, however, gave rise to an ecumene on a global scale, with peoples everywhere caught up in everincreasing commercial, technological, and intellectual exchange. A result of that ecumenical transition was the availability of Asian products in Europe and the Americas. For the first time, porcelain became a truly worldwide commodity. What may be called the “globalization” of material culture began in the era of Columbus and da Gama, with chinaware motifs, colors, and shapes its earliest and most wideranging manifestation. The ewer of Manuel i and the pilgrim flask of Philip ii are fitting illustrations of this. reflecting the acknowledged superiority of Chinese manufactured goods, globalization of material culture initially came to pass under Chinese auspices. Columbus sailed the ocean Sea with a letter from the Spanish crown recommending him to the grand khan of China and the kings of india, and in his copy of The Travels of Marco Polo (1298), Columbus earmarked the passage in which the venetian promised that “an incalculable amount of trade” awaited Westerners in the land of Cathay.<sup>30</sup> When the second Portuguese fleet under Pedro Álvares Cabral (ca. 1467– 1520) returned from the indian ocean to lisbon in 1501, Manuel i reported to a fellow monarch that “porcelains, musk, amber, and aloes wood” could be acquired from a land to the east of india known as “Malchina” (from Sanskrit Mahacina, “Great China”).<sup>31</sup> China had the world’s most advanced economy throughout much of history, providing goods to an enormous domestic market, as well as to Korea, Japan, Southeast Asia, and countries on the indian ocean.<sup>32</sup> Europeans gained direct access to Asian markets after 1500, and along with indian cottons and Asian spices, it was Chinese merchandise—tea, silk fabric, lacquer furniture, hand-painted wall hangings, and porcelains—that Westerners most desired. From the seventeenth century, desperate to halt the flow of silver to Asia to pay for the goods, European rulers promoted efforts to replicate chinaware and other manufactured items. From 1800, however, globalization of material culture proceeded swiftly under Western rather than Chinese sponsorship. The industrial revolution had been gaining steam for several decades before the turn of the century, with pottery manufacturers among the most important pacesetters in devising new manufacturing techniques and sketching the outlines of factory organization. The first global consequence of the industrial revolution appeared with the precipitous collapse of Chinese porcelain in international markets in the late eighteenth century as a result of competition from british ceramics, mainly those produced by Josiah Wedgwood (1730–95), the famous pottery baron. yet while the fall of Chinese porcelain clearly is noteworthy in the contexts of the history of ceramics, an expansive chronicle of material culture, and the preliminary global impact of the industrial revolution, its greatest value for an examination of world history lies in it mirroring a transformation of the greatest magnitude. That change is clarified by placing it within a lengthy perspective. by around the year 1000, long-distance commercial exchange had integrated the ecumene into what contemporary historians call a world system, a series of interacting, overlapping economies. A complex trading network of silver and gold bullion, as well as spices, precious stones, metals, textiles, and pottery, connected much of Eurasia. More than any other region, China functioned as the fulcrum of the world system, the motor that made it run.<sup>33</sup> The overseas reach of the huge Chinese economy intensified ancient patterns of trade and cultivation throughout Southeast Asia and the countries of the indian ocean. The distant ripples of its effect could be felt even in Europe as the market for Asian products expanded in the Mediterranean and north of the Alps. because of its role as a powerhouse from the turn of the first millennium, China had some economic justification for its ancient self-designation in cultural terms as the “Middle Kingdom” (zhongguo), the axis of the world, with lesser states on its periphery and regrettably barbarian peoples, such as Africans and Europeans, remote beneficiaries of its blessings. China lost that dominance and self-assurance soon after 1800, however, as the center of gravity of the world system shifted toward the countries of northwestern Europe. in The Wealth of Nations (1776), Adam Smith (1723–90) famously stated a crucial precondition for that realignment: “The discovery of America, and that of a passage to the East indies by the Cape of Good Hope, are the two greatest and most important events recorded in the history of mankind.”<sup>34</sup> The widespread possessions of Philip ii represented the most remarkable early manifestation of Europe’s new, elevated position around the world. Warning of the menace Philip’s empire posed to England, William Camden (1551–1623) said it extended so far that the king “might truly say, Sol mihi semper lucet: the sunne always shineth upon me.”<sup>35</sup> but the threat receded as the Spanish-Portuguese empire fractured at the seams in the seventeenth century. Still, as baron de Montesquieu (1689–1755) suggested in The Spirit of the Laws (1748), the iberian collapse did not mark a retreat of the West from the global arena: “Europe carries on the commerce and navigation of the other three parts of the world, just as France, England, and Holland carry on nearly all the navigation and commerce of Europe.”<sup>36</sup> building on their economic dominance, those nations went on to establish their own overseas dominions, upon which the sun indeed did not set until the late twentieth century. From having been for centuries no more than a marginal participant among the associated territories of Eurasia, the West began seizing center stage in the early modern period, pioneering global maritime routes, setting up overseas trading posts, planting European-style societies in the Americas, colonizing most of Asia, fashioning new political and economic institutions, and ultimately emerging as the driving force of modernity.<sup>37</sup> This revolutionary shift of the world system from East to West was paralleled in the international career of Chinese porcelain, the fortunes of which moved in concert with those of China itself. European zeal for importing porcelain after da Gama’s voyage suggests the awe and envy with which Westerners regarded China from the time they read Marco Polo’s account of the Middle Kingdom. European dedication to replicating porcelain from the seventeenth century points to Western determination to escape economic dependence on China and mount a challenge to its industrial might. Finally, the commercial success Europeans achieved with their own pottery in ousting chinaware from international markets at the end of the eighteenth century foreshadowed Western international dominance in the modern world. in the widest perspective, then, the fall of Chinese porcelain by 1800 closely tracks the epochal decline of China in world affairs and the corresponding rise of the West to primacy within the global ecumene. of course, at least on some important counts, that supremacy is a thing of the past. Since the end of World War ii, Western nations have been forced to give up their colonial possessions, and they have lost the power to dictate military and political affairs across the board. There are also signs that China will contest the West for economic dominance in the modern-day, rapidly shifting world system, thereby perhaps resurrecting the standing it held through much of history. Whether East or West (or neither) emerges triumphant, however, porcelain will remain above the battle: if it no longer attracts the wonder and high regard bestowed on it for ages, that is a result of the ceramic having become irrevocably a possession of the world, manufactured and used virtually everywhere. yet while China has long since lost its monopoly, Jingdezhen, the town that once produced nearly all the world’s porcelain, continues to turn out more than 300 million pieces annually, most of it blandly interchangeable with that manufactured in italy, denmark, Chile, and Malaysia. Still, mindful of its spectacular past and its willing contemporary customers, Jingdezhen makes a handsome profit by reproducing exactly some of the dazzling porcelains that captivated the world for so many centuries. This page intentionally left blank