# The Secrets of Porcelain China and the West in the Eighteenth Century in 1685 Joachim bouvet and five fellow mathematicians constituted the first French Jesuit mission to China. bouvet received the prestigious assignment to tutor the Kangxi emperor in geometry and philosophy, a task he believed would further the cause of Christianity. For the Jesuits, the most learned of the clerical orders, conversion and the search for knowledge went hand in hand. The Constitution drawn up by ignatius of loyola (1491–1556), founder of the Jesuits, called for the systematic gathering, transmission, and publication of information of all kinds. in the first phase of its history, between its establishment in 1534 and its general suppression in 1782, the Society of Jesus published some 5,600 titles on science, including works on medicine, geography, agriculture, and natural history. From 1735 to 1795 Jesuits in beijing translated more than four hundred works from Chinese. dispatching voluminous reports to their superiors back home, ricci, bouvet, and dentrecolles formed part of the first global information network.<sup>1</sup> Their motives were not primarily altruistic or scientific, however: they trusted that spreading Western knowledge to China would clandestinely scatter the seeds of Christianity. As ricci explained, “Whoever may think that ethics, physics and mathematics are not important in the work of the Church, is unacquainted with the taste of the Chinese, who are slow to take a salutary spiritual potion, unless it is seasoned with an intellectual flavoring.”<sup>2</sup> At the same time, ricci and his companions believed that sending Chinese knowledge back home would help the West compete with the most productive economy in the world. Jesuits brought Euclidean geometry, Copernican astronomy, renaissance perspective drawing, and Western musical theory to China. Georg Joseph Kamel (1661– 1706), a Jesuit from Moravia who served in the Philippines, collected dried plants from China and sent them to Europe, where the Swedish botanist Carolus linnaeus (1707–78) used them in constructing his authoritative system of taxonomic classification and binomial nomenclature. Jesuits in China sent models of Chinese sugar milling technology to Peru, and they introduced rhubarb to Europe as a sovereign remedy for stomach disorders. in the 1630s Jesuits serving in Peru carried parcels of the dried bark of the cinchona tree, the source of quinine, to rome, where it worked wonders on fever victims. A london journal of 1658 referred to it as “the excellent powder known by the name of Jesuits Powder, which cureth all manner of Agues.”<sup>3</sup> by way of Spanish galleons sailing from Acapulco to Manila, Jesuits in Peru also sent cinchona bark to China, where in 1691 bouvet won the goodwill of the Kangxi emperor by treating him for malaria. The dramatic success of “Jesuits Powder” helped bouvet persuade Kangxi the next year to extend toleration to Christianity, making it legally possible to establish churches in the provinces. For the first time, all China was open to Christian missionaries, and at least in the eyes of bouvet and his colleagues, the Middle Kingdom itself seemed ripe for conversion. Soon after, bouvet journeyed to France to recruit Jesuit experts in science, mathematics, and technology for service in China, for the emperor aspired to establish an equivalent of louis xiv’s Académie Royale. As a result of bouvet’s lobbying efforts, dentrecolles and nine other Jesuits sailed on the Amphitrite from la rochelle in March 1698 and arrived in Canton in november. bouvet rushed the newcomers to an audience with Kangxi, after which they were assigned to their posts. in all likelihood, bouvet was instrumental in sending dentrecolles to Jingdezhen, for there was intense interest at the French court (and everywhere else in the West) in discovering how porcelain was made. like his Chinese counterpart, louis xiv sought to profit from knowledge possessed by the most powerful kingdom on the distant side of the world. ## “THE lAnd oF ProMiSE”: CHinA And THE WEST dentrecolles begins his letter of 1712 to louis-François orry, treasurer of the Jesuit mission in China and india, by declaring that curiosity alone never would have impelled his laborious research into porcelain. This is a hint that he, like his Jesuit confrères working in the enamel and painting workshops of Kangxi’s palace, resented being sidetracked from his pastoral obligations. “nevertheless, i believe,” he adds immediately, “that a detailed description of all that is concerned with this sort of work should be of some use in Europe.” His superiors in Paris told him that his letter was published in $^ { 1 7 1 7 }$ in the Jesuit compilation of letters from China, Lettres édifiantes. They sent him a copy of the volume, for detrecolles clearly had it before him when he wrote his second letter five years later. They informed dentrecolles, however, that his information had not been sufficient for French potters to learn how to make porcelain. He therefore returned to his task, though with diminished enthusiasm. Whereas his first report conveyed a fascination with porcelain and the particulars of life in Jingdezhen, his letter of 1722 (published in 1726) is dry and matter-of-fact, rarely venturing beyond an inventory of glaze components and coloring effects. He expresses the diffident hope that “the knowledge i am about to pass on to you will be of some help to the makers of earthenware [faience], if they are unable to attain the perfection of Chinese porcelain.” He puts forward many proposals toward that end: white Malta earth may substitute for a certain Chinese clay, crab-apple wood may be used for making glaze instead of Chinese fern, charcoal made from willow or elder might replace that from bamboo, European soapstone could be employed in place of a chalky substance known only in China. He assures his readers that “those works that are impossible to do in China may easily be done in Europe if one could find the same kind of materials there.” dentrecolles’s superiors plainly sent him to Jingdezhen on a mission of industrial espionage, no doubt with the pious hope he would save some souls along the way. His letters represent one of the earliest and most calculated cases of an effort to implement mercantilist economic strategies of technology transfer, import substitution, and product innovation. His work also inspired later generations to pursue the same aims. After reading dentrecolles’s reports in du Halde’s Description de l’Empire de la Chine, Sir Joseph banks (1743–1820), president of the royal Society of london for forty-two years, implored Josiah Wedgwood to send a skilled potter to Jingdezhen to discover the secrets of making porcelain. banks also suggested to a british envoy on his way to China that “a few learned men among their [porcelain and tea] workmen could acquire immense knowledge which would be worth untold wealth.”<sup>4</sup> The background of orry and bouvet gives further evidence of the nature and context of dentrecolles’s undertaking. orry belonged to a powerful dynasty that held high positions in French government as secretaries of the treasury (intendants des finances). in the late seventeenth century, orry noblemen also served as controllers of the French East india Company, the syndicate that purchased the Amphitrite. Eager to develop a formula for porcelain in France, orry instructed dentrecolles to send him samples of clay. A later member of the dynasty, Jean-Henrylouis orry, comte de Fulvy (1703–51), the younger brother of louis xiv’s minister of finance, had exceptionally close links to Chinese ceramics. He held office as an intendant, superintended trade with Asia, and collected Chinese porcelain, some pieces of which carried his coat of arms. in 1747 he helped found the vincennes porcelain manufactory, the predecessor of the royal enterprise of Sèvres. An aristocrat close to dentrecolles also may have been interested in collecting porcelain and learning about its manufacture: Marquis Jean-Claude de broissia gave financial support to the Jingdezhen church, apparently in memory of his Jesuit nephew, who went to China on the Amphitrite, stayed in raozhou around the same time as dentrecolles, and died in 1704.<sup>5</sup> during his stay in France in 1697–98, bouvet attended the court at versailles wearing the robes of a Chinese mandarin, a fashion familiar to French nobles, who on occasion masqueraded in the costume at balls and festivals. He consulted with officials of high rank, such as the orry, and he collaborated with louis-François orry, who helped negotiate the sale of the Amphitrite to the French East india Company. Since France was at war and the government lacked funds to finance trade ventures, bouvet convinced the indies company to extend its ambitions to China, and he raised capital for the venture. it proved profitable: shareholders in the voyages of the Amphitrite realized a dividend of 50 percent on their investment.<sup>6</sup> one of the most gifted and controversial of the China Jesuits, bouvet played a leading role in the rites Controversy. He had close associations with the group known as the Figurists, who maintained that ancient Chinese religion was linked to Christianity by virtue of the spread of the sons of noah around the world. As bouvet predicted to a correspondent, “one day we will arrive at an analysis which will reduce [Chinese ideographic script] to Egyptian hieroglyphs and demonstrate that both are the writing used among the learned before the Flood.”<sup>7</sup> He even believed that the diagrams in the classic Book of Changes (yijing), an ancient Chinese treatise on divination, could be decoded to reveal the truths of his faith. Such extraordinary notions, including the idea that France and China shared a cultural and religious identity, motivated his appeals for royal support for the Jesuit mission. As an envoy of Kangxi to louis xiv, bouvet aspired to bring the West and China closer together, ameliorating the differences between them under the benign auspices of commercial exchange, European science, and Christian evangelism. He received a cordial hearing from louis xiv, who, as sovereign of the most powerful realm in Europe, believed he must overshadow other monarchs in dealing with the greatest ruler in Asia. The king had sent the first French Jesuits to China just thirteen years earlier, and he considered that more were needed to counter the dominant presence of Portuguese clerics at the imperial court. bouvet presented louis xiv with gifts from Kangxi of forty-nine Chinese volumes and a set of engravings. one of the latter most likely provided the royal beauvais tapestry works with the design for The Audience of the Emperor, which depicts the Son of Heaven enthroned in the midst of exotic plants, pagodas, and blue-and-white porcelain bowls. bouvet, who regarded Kangxi as a potential Constantine for China, a ruler who would convert his empire to Christianity, wrote Portrait historique de empéreur de la Chine (1697), replete with fulsome comparisons between the Chinese and French monarchs, and dedicated it to louis xiv. bouvet unctuously informed the Sun King: The Jesuits . . . were not a little surprised to meet at the utmost corner of the Earth with what they had never seen before but in France, that is to say, a Prince, who, like yourself, has improved his sublime Genius by the Greatness of Soul, which alone renders him worthy of the greatest Empire of the Universe. . . . in short, a Prince . . . who would without question be accounted the most Glorious Monarch upon Earth, if his reign had not been coincident with that of your Majesty.<sup>8</sup> bouvet sent a copy of the biography to Gottfried Wilhelm leibniz (1646–1716), the renowned philosopher and court librarian of the Elector of Hanover. Already engaged in a stimulating correspondence with Jesuits in beijing, leibniz responded by translating the work into latin and publishing it in the second edition of his Novissima Sinica (latest news of China) in 1699. leibniz’s embrace of bouvet’s work stemmed from the breathtaking potential both men saw in the encounter between the West and China. in Novissima Sinica, leibniz declares that the location of the civilizations at the two extremes of the Eurasian ecumene is a providential sign that eventually they would join in a vital cultural fusion. identifying China as an “anti-Europe” or an “oriental Europe,” he believed that if such dissimilar cultures could come to understand and learn from each other, then the path toward universal peace and harmony surely would be open to all mankind.<sup>9</sup> in general, he thought that Western and Chinese civilizations met on equal terms, each with its respective strengths, “so that now they win, now we.”<sup>10</sup> Each had something to offer the other: the West had the lead in science, mathematics, and military technology; China excelled in “the precepts of civil life,” that is, in law, ethics, and natural religion. This evenhanded approach, however, turned out to have significant implications for future perspectives on China since it opened the door for a later focus on a supposed disparity in the respective cultural endowments. in his Siècle de Louis XIV (begun in the 1730s and published in 1751), voltaire suggested that China had achieved perfection in morals and law two millennia earlier but that this very triumph, with its concomitant “respect for the ancient masters,” had blocked progress in the sciences, “which is the work of time and boldness of genius.”<sup>11</sup> Educated by the Jesuits, voltaire had high regard for China—he kept a portrait of Confucius on his desk, probably taken from du Halde’s Description—but he had planted the seeds of an unchanging Asian monolith in European thought. For leibniz, the “anti-Europe” of China represented a model of virtue; by the later eighteenth century, it denoted a stagnant society that must be broken open by the dynamic, free-trading West. Echoing ricci, leibniz proclaims in Novissima Sinica that the Chinese effectively follow the teachings of Christ without the grace of knowing Christianity. He recommends that instead of Jesuits being sent to preach in the Middle Kingdom, Confucian missionaries should come to Europe to instruct its scandalous Christians in morality. (Echoing leibniz, voltaire praises China for not having the “rage to make proselytes,” a spiritual affliction peculiar to the Christian West.)<sup>12</sup> With all his veneration of China, however, leibniz remained practical and realistic. He thought that inasmuch as China’s several religions were incompatible with Christianity, imperial military force would be used to impose the Christian faith, an eventuality he deplored. He also worried that the balance of civilizations would be tipped toward China by virtue of the zealous activity of those whom robert burton (1577–1640), in The Anatomy of Melancholy (1621), called “land-leaping Jesuits,” the very individuals bringing China and the West so much closer together.<sup>13</sup> in rome in 1689, leibniz urged Claudio Filippo Grimaldi (1638–1712), a Jesuit with whom he had corresponded about Chinese manufacture of paper and porcelain, “not to worry so much about getting things European to the Chinese, but rather about getting remarkable Chinese inventions to us; otherwise little profit will be derived from the China mission.”<sup>14</sup> He wrote to a German noble in 1690 that he feared “we are carrying all the secrets of our sciences to [the Chinese] which someday will be employed against Christians.”<sup>15</sup> A year later, he warned an envoy of louis xiv that “when the Chinese will have learned our sciences through these [Jesuit] priests, Europe will no longer have an edge on them and that is where our superiority will end.”<sup>16</sup> leibniz feared that the Chinese would “close their doors” after they learned what they wanted from Westerners.<sup>17</sup> not only that, the Chinese might use their expertise in manufacturing to co-opt the European export trade. in his large collection of books on China, the German philosopher possessed the Tratados históricos (1676) of domingo navarette (1618–86), a Spanish dominican who lived in the Middle Kingdom from 1659 to 1664. navarrete encouraged leibniz’s exalted view of China, for he declared that it was the “land of Promise” mentioned in the bible and that the earthly Paradise probably was situated there. but leibniz also read the friar’s warning that “the Chinese are very ingenious at imitation, they have imitated to perfection whatsoever they have seen brought out of Europe. in the province of Canton, they have counterfeited several things so exactly, that they sell them inland for Goods brought out from Europe.”<sup>18</sup> bouvet sent leibniz a list of things being shipped from Canton on the return voyage of the Amphitrite, including ginseng, musical instruments, lacquer furniture, and “dragon porcelains” intended for the use of the emperor; “but,” he writes, “we hope seriously in the future to extract from the Chinese other things much more useful to Europe, so as not to become inferior to them by so freely placing our best knowledge at their disposal, thus benefiting from the excellent advice you have given us.”<sup>19</sup> of course, the Sino-Western balance tilted most conspicuously toward China in production of high-quality ceramics. As dentrecolles remarks, “The Chinese have not crossed the seas to seek for glass from Europe,” even though they admire it, but Westerners, driven by “cupidity and greed,” have an insatiable appetite for porcelain. ## “An AbySS For Gold And SilvEr”: ASiAn TrAdE And THE WEST recognizing that China was superior in manufacture of pottery, observers such as leibniz and Jean-baptiste Colbert (1618–83), louis xiv’s finance minister, believed that European states suffered economically from that dominance. in 1664 Colbert founded the French East india Company, and two years later he ordered construction of the port of lorient on the bay of biscay as a center for commerce with Asia. The minister intended the Compagnie and lorient to compete with the voC and Amsterdam, developing trade with the East that would reduce France’s loss of precious metal.<sup>20</sup> The astonishing commercial success of the dutch republic had taught European ministers that long-distance trade demanded a state that would promote economic and institutional policies aimed at benefiting the nation, including maintaining a merchant marine, establishing systems of patent law, and sponsoring research to develop new technologies. Above all, they must guard against the threat posed by foreign manufactures. Advocates of mercantilist policies gauged national wealth in terms of possession of bullion and a favorable balance of exchange. The reigning economic opinion was that a country faced injury if its specie went to pay for another country’s products. regrettably, Europeans discovered that China had no desire or need for its manufactured products. An agent in Canton wrote to the directors of the English East india Company in 1669, “We cannot tell what to advise your Honours to send to these parts, the natives being fond of nothing but silver and lead; and probably if the rest of your Goods were thrown over board at Sea, your Cargoes home would not be much less.”<sup>21</sup> European spending on foreign manufactures therefore spurred calls for halting the outflow of precious metal and for legislation against imports such as porcelain, indian cottons (especially muslins and printed calicoes), Chinese wallpaper, and lacquer furniture. The economic and legal tools of mercantilism were restrictive tariffs, state-approved monopolies, and government subsidies for manufactures. This outlook dominated economic thinking and official action through most of the eighteenth century. in the Wealth of Nations, though, Smith asserted that “the attention of government never was so unnecessarily employed, as when directed to watch over the preservation or increase of the quantity of money in any country.”<sup>22</sup> He argued that the annual produce of land and labor (or what is now termed gross domestic product) remains the same no matter how much capital flows abroad. He regarded a nation obsessed with retaining gold and silver as succumbing to a kind of magical thinking, just as if a country hoarded an “incredible augmentation of pots and pans” because the utensils are made of iron. He emphasized the beneficial circulation of gold and silver to distant trading countries and the use of precious metals to facilitate exchange among the numerous nations that together make up “the great mercantile republik” of the world.<sup>23</sup> Smith’s innovative perspective arose from his consideration of the enormous commercial growth that had expanded to encompass much of the globe by the late eighteenth century. Around two hundred years earlier, however, the terms of international exchange seemed more a menace than a benefit to Western observers. Thomas Mun (1571–1641), a director of the EiC and the author of A Discourse on Trade, from England unto the East Indies (1621), asserted that the shortage of silver bullion “has been, and is, a general disease of all nations[,] . . . but it seems that the malady is grown mortal here with us, and therefore cries out for remedy.”<sup>24</sup> Sir Thomas roe (1581–1644), English ambassador to the court of the Mughal empire (1526–1720) of india, lamented what he regarded as the drain of his kingdom’s lifeblood: “Seeing our state cannot beare the exportation of mony, except some new trade can be discouered from the East to serue this Kingdome, it must fall to ground by the weaknes of itts owne leggs.”<sup>25</sup> A late-seventeenth-century English writer complained that imports from Asia “hinder the consumption of our own Manufactures, and more especially when those imports are chiefly purchased of our own bullion or Treasure.”<sup>26</sup> The French physician François bernier (1620–88), who spent years at the Mughal court, described india as “an abyss for gold and silver,” a phrase mercantilist tracts of the eighteenth century wore to a cliché in bewailing the West’s handicap in commerce with all of Asia.<sup>27</sup> in his Essay on Tea (1756), Jonas Hanway (1712–86) complained that “india and China are such gainers on their trade with Europe, that they draw away, by sensible degrees, all the gold and silver which are not consumed, or retained in utensils, in this quarter of the globe.”<sup>28</sup> linnaeus, Smith’s senior by sixteen years, vehemently rejected free-trade arguments. like roe, bernier, and Hanway, he regarded Asia as a gigantic parasite sucking away European treasure. driven by utopian dreams of import substitution, he collected plants from around the world so that frigid lapland could be transformed eventually into a baltic East indies, producing its own sugar, opium, cotton, cinnamon, tea, and silk. He wrote that he “considered nothing more important than to close that gate [to China] through which all silver of Europe disappears,” especially since it was being shipped away for no more than “dry leaves of bushes and thin threads, spun by caterpillars.” He urged his correspondents in Asia to bring back from China “a Tea bush in a pot” and “an untilled piece of the original porcelain soil.” His scorn for China no doubt intensified after one porcelain dinner service he ordered shattered in transport and another arrived intact yet decorated in a disagreeable shade of red. in the view of many Western observers like linnaeus, it seemed shockingly profligate to hurl precious metal into the abyss for commodities such as porcelain, cotton, and spice. A mid-seventeenth-century English commentator groused about paying “good silver and gold for Chinese shards, rags, and herbs.”<sup>29</sup> Henry Fielding (1707–54), the English novelist, regarded spending on porcelain as indicative of the corruption of far-flung empire—“the gold of one indies run away with the mud of another.”<sup>30</sup> in a book on Parisian life, louis-Sébastian Mercier (1740–1814) noted the folly of paying high prices for the Chinese ceramic or its European imitations: “What a wretched luxury porcelains are! A cat, with one tap of its paw, can do more damage than the devastation of twenty arpents of land.”<sup>31</sup> in 1755 a French writer on lacquerware protested that “immense sums leave Europe each year, only to be absorbed by the vast regions of Asia . . . [with Westerners confronting countless dangers] in order to retrieve for their fellow citizens nothing but some glazed wood that the simplest use and smallest accident could destroy.”<sup>32</sup> French experts saw the hemorrhage of bullion as a special problem for their country: in the eighteenth century, all but a small percentage of France’s Asian imports, primarily from india and China, were paid for in American silver, cargoes of which French sea captains picked up in southern Spanish ports on their outbound voyages.<sup>33</sup> if economic harm suffered from the drain of specie actually was more theoretical than real (as Smith maintained), the threat posed by foreign imports seemed acute and immediate to businessmen and artisans. Protests against Asian merchandise multiplied when the East indies companies shifted their purchases to manufactured goods and cut back on importing spice. Having gained a monopoly in the spice trade by the late seventeenth century, the voC saw the value of its position go downhill rapidly. The decline presaged the eclipse of dutch commercial power in india and the rise there of the EiC, the foundation for british takeover of the subcontinent in the mid-nineteenth century. Spices made up 57 percent of voC revenue around 1670 but only 37 percent by 1700. The European market was glutted: the price of pepper tumbled, and the voC resorted to cutting down clove trees in the Moluccas to control supply and sustain high profits.<sup>34</sup> As a director of the company noted, “We find that yearly there are certainly produced twice as many cloves as are consumed in the whole world.”<sup>35</sup> in the late seventeenth century, the voC made dividend payments to its shareholders in packets of cloves rather than cash, a practice that caused disgruntlement while also proving insufficient to dispose of the steadily mounting surplus. in 1735 the voC resorted to the expedient of torching more than 500,000 kilograms of nutmeg stored in an Amsterdam warehouse, a measure that obscured the sun and cloaked the city in sweet-scented smoke. Smith regarded that particular act of destruction as evidence that state monopolies in trade were self-defeating in the long term, inevitably fruitless and unprofitable.<sup>36</sup> Ever since the entry of the Portuguese into the indian ocean in the early sixteenth century, imports of Asian spices had stimulated a burgeoning consumer market in the West. because spices were native to the tropics and could not be cultivated in temperate climates, Europeans felt pleased to gain access to them, however apprehensive some puritans were about the impact of the seductive plant products on contemporary morals. but the Western market for spices proved inelastic as households and cooks only needed so much pepper and cinnamon. Asian manufactured products were a different matter altogether, for they created rippling effects with profound consequences for the European economy and society. Exotic manufactures provoked resentment among businessmen and craftsmen, encouraged product innovation and new technologies, and little by little changed percep tions of class status, public behavior, and living standards. by no later than the end of the eighteenth century, a defining feature of Western modernity had become apparent: in their drive for profit, entrepreneurs and traders were constructing something new, a consuming society enthralled with novel products and pleasures, a moneyed public with a bottomless appetite for costly, stylish trappings as measures of social standing and self-esteem. Extravagant consumption customarily had distinguished the higher ranks of society from the hoi polloi; use of silver plate, sartorial finery, ceremonial feasts, palatial homes, and liveried servants signified the trappings of power and social preeminence. but with the rage for Asian merchandise, fueled by massive imports and steadily declining prices, consumption for the first time became conspicuous for lower social ranks as well. one of the most dramatic and enduring effects of trading silver for Asian manufactured commodities was to set the wheel of fashion spinning. An Englishman noted that “from the greatest gallants to the meanest cook maids, nothing was thought so fit to adorn their Persons as the fabrick from india! nor for the ornament of Chambers like india Skreens, Cabinets, beds, or Hangings, nor for Closets like China and lacquered ware.”<sup>37</sup> in the 1630s the EiC imported 150,000 indian cotton piece goods; fifty years later, it shipped in almost three million annually. The cottons proved a popular alternative to woolen fabrics, which were much less colorful and convenient; they prompted a turn toward lightweight fabrics for clothing as well as for home furnishings—painted curtains, counterpanes, upholstery, and wall hangings. As a matter of policy, the EiC imported Asian textiles to gratify the demands of fashion. This was spelled out in 1681 in instructions its directors sent to their agents in india: note this for a Constant and generall rule that in all flowred Silkes you Change ye fashion and flower as much as you can every yeare, for English ladies and they say ye french and other Europeans will give twice as much for a new thing not seen in Europe before though worse, than they will give for a better Silk of ye same fashion worn ye former yeare.<sup>38</sup> in fact, the EiC policy of catering to fashion opened a debate that addressed the foundations of mercantilism, industrial innovation, and social order. Those defending the Company were driven to justify consumption and fashion as ends in themselves, equally imperative for the individual, society, and economic prosperity. An anonymous East indies tract of 1728 even maintained that the ascendancy of fashion resulting from the introduction of Asian manufactures must be regarded as a natural force, a response to vital human needs: Men’s Tastes, like all other Parts of nature, require variety and Change; the very Air we live by would be fatal, without a fresh Succession, and a new Circulation. no part of the world can vie with the East-indies, in the variety and Goodness of its Product. . . . Fashion and Custom, and indeed the nature of Things, having fix’d and set a value on the East-india Goods, they are become necessary to all the nations of Europe; and Men can be no more restrain’d from them, than they can from their Food and raiment.<sup>39</sup> Such arguments struck Western manufacturers and craftsmen as merely hypothetical, if not transparently hypocritical. Faced with threats to their livelihood, they struck back. in 1680 london silk workers attacked the offices of the EiC in leadenhall Street because of the influx of indian cloth. Their alarm stemmed in part from the manifest superiority of the indian cottons to their own product, for the former had water-resistant colors, stemming from use of mordants and resist-dyeing, whereas European colored fabrics faded easily when washed. France banned calico imports in 1686, and England followed suit in 1701; an English law of 1678 stipulated that corpses must be interred wrapped in woolen cloth. legislation in 1720 even prohibited the use and wearing of calico, an interdiction that remained in place until 1774 and gave rise to sporadic episodes of “calico chasing.” Mobs shouting “Callicoe, Callicoe, Weavers, Weavers!” harrassed women wearing the forbidden fabric.<sup>40</sup> James Gilray (1757–1815) expressed a like sense of indignation in his painted engraving, The Advantages of Wearing Muslin Dresses! (1802): a portly matron’s indian-print gown is accidentally set on fire, leading to panic among her companions that sends Chinese porcelain teacups crashing to the floor. As soon as the first Chinese hand-painted wallpaper went on sale in london in the late seventeenth century, English “paperstainers” produced their own copies and pastiches of “paperhangings with fine india figures” (as a journal advertisement of 1693 boasted) and then immediately protested imports of the Chinese product.<sup>41</sup> Shipping lacquer furniture from East Asia provoked even more antagonism from European artisans. A natural polymer, lacquer is a sap obtained by tapping a tree (Rhus verniciflua) native to China and Japan. both countries prized lacquer as a deep black, impermeable coating for materials such as silk, wood, and bamboo; works executed in lacquer often were incised, tinted, or inset with silver and mother-of-pearl. ricci may have been the first Westerner to suggest the advantages of obtaining lacquer technology: “The export of the product of this particular tree might well be the beginning of a profitable enterprise, but up to the present it seems that no one has given any thought to such a possibility.”<sup>42</sup> inasmuch as lacquer sap could not be transported to Europe and the lacquer tree itself could not be transplanted there, French and italian Jesuits published accounts of Chinese methods of lacquer manufacture, just a few years before dentrecolles departed for China. They recommended that European craftsmen employ shellac and varnish for veneer and lampblack for coloring.<sup>43</sup> More optimistic than the dominican naverette, the Jesuits believed that Westerners could imitate to perfection whatsoever they had seen brought out of China. by the late seventeenth century, artisans in london and Paris were turning out facsimiles of lacquer furniture, as well as lobbying against competition from East Asian imports. in 1700 the Joyners’ Company of london, whose members produced imitations of lacquer furniture, complained that “several merchants and others have procured to be made in london of late years and sent over to the East indies patterns and models of all forms of cabinet goods and have yearly returned from thence . . . quantities of cabinet wares manufactured after the English fashion.”<sup>44</sup> Soon after, the Joyners called for crippling duties on lacquerware since “the large quantities of Japan’d goods expected shortly to be brought from the indies will not only tend to the ruine of the Japan-trade here in England, but also obstruct the Transportation of our English lacquer to all Europe, which is a considerable Advancement to His Majesties Customes, whereas the indian lacquer being Exported from hence, draws back the Custom.”<sup>45</sup> The vessel Amphitrite carried 180 cases of porcelain to France in 1700, and it held so much lacquerware, mainly screens, boxes, and miniature cabinets, that Parisians took to calling the product “Amphitrite.” French furniture makers persuaded government ministers to impose a ban on further imports of the commodity. The prohibition was not very successful, however, and smuggling was widespread. Still, some high-ranking individuals encouraged the French imitations. louis-Henri de bourbon (1692–1740), prince of Condè and cousin to louis xv, financed a workshop for making japanned furniture. He also supported the porcelain manufactory of Cicaire Cirou (1700–1760), which experimented with applying lacquer decoration to pottery. Marie Antoinette (1755–93), the Austrian wife of louis xvi (r. 1774– 92), ordered japanned furniture and porcelains embellished with pseudo-lacquer. The royal Sèvres manufactory produced a pair of bravura vases for her with a black surface imitating lacquer and with Chinese-style dragons in gilt bronze rearing up on the handles.<sup>46</sup> daniel defoe (1660–1731), the author of Robinson Crusoe (1719), was as well informed as any of his contemporaries about global trade. His description of a truebred merchant as “a universal scholar” who “understands languages without books, geography without maps[,] . . . [and whose] journals and trading voyages delineate the world,” anticipates Smith’s high regard for “the great mercantile republik.” but, although he believed britain thrived on overseas commerce, he worried about its effects on domestic industry and denounced purchase of foreign luxury goods. in a 1713 tract for a popular journal, he describes london’s streets as deformed by foreign exchange, swamped with “trade in baubles and trifles.” The dismal transformation called to mind an apocalyptic passage from Ezra (3:12): “the ancient men who had seen the old temple wept when they saw the weak foundations of the new.”<sup>47</sup> long-established drapers and woolen wholesalers fled to back alleys, hounded out by peddlers of gilded lacquer boxes, teapots, tea-table utensils, and chinaware. in defoe’s view, the whirligig of fashion gyrated faster and faster every year, destroying solid industry, enthroning the ephemeral, and sapping the moral fiber of the nation. defoe stood out among his contemporaries in his denigration of China, even singling out its famed porcelain for derision. in The Farther Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, published a mere four months after the best-seller, the adventurer goes to China, where he belittles the natives as “a contemptible herd or crowd of ignorant, sordid slaves, subjected to a government qualified only to rule such a people.” So degenerate a society cannot be expected to make better pottery than do Westerners, hence Crusoe’s prejudices are confirmed when he is taken to see a palace reputedly made entirely of porcelain: “and when i came to it, it was nothing but . . . a timber house, or a house built, as we call it in England, with lath and plaster, but all the plastering was really China ware, that is to say, it was plastered with the earth that makes China ware.” The legendary Chinese reputation for “performance in crockery-ware,” he concludes, is no more than a fraud perpetrated on gullible foreigners.<sup>48</sup> defoe’s vilification of China and porcelain testifies to the depth of his conviction that native manufactures should be preferred to imports for both moral and commercial reasons. The resourceful castaway of Robinson Crusoe was an exemplary figure inasmuch as he made all he required in his tropical island kingdom, including several porcelain-like pots “as hard burnt as could be desir’d; and one of them perfectly glaz’d with the running of the sand.”<sup>49</sup> (As a sometime owner of a tile-making business, defoe knew a lot about ceramics.) in a pamphlet on woolen production, defoe maintained that honest English broadcloth is “better than even silk itself,” so there is no need for his countrymen to “run to india and China for all the slightest and foolishist trash in the world.”<sup>50</sup> His implausible boast represented a denunciation of what he saw every day on london streets. A visiting Frenchman observed in 1725 that the costumes of English gentlewomen are “made according to the season either of rich silk or of cotton from the indies. very few women wear woolen gowns.”<sup>51</sup> in terms of import substitution and product innovation, porcelain was unique. As defoe realized, it indeed was necessary to run to india and China for cotton and silk since the plants needed for those textiles could not be grown in England— though in the late eighteenth century, it began importing unfinished cotton and weaving its own cloth. lacquer and tea necessarily also were foreign commodities. England remained dependent on China for tea into the nineteenth century, when Assam plantations in northeastern india began producing it, and European artisans found only second-rate substitutes for lacquer. Porcelain, then, represented the only significant Chinese product that Westerners could aspire to contest on their own grounds, not only producing imitations of it, but even making a near-equivalent with native materials. That consideration helps explain both defoe’s exasperation with the high status of porcelain in Europe and persistent attempts to create a European version of the ceramic. ## THE PorCElAin KinG: AUGUST ii oF SAxony Paying silver for exotic textiles and porcelain attracted the most attention from critics of Asian manufactures because these goods were more extensively imported and publicly displayed than wallpaper and lacquerware. With millions of porcelains pouring into Europe, Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus (1651–1708), a German man of letters and scientist, declared that “the purchase abroad of so great a quantity of goods as the Chinese porcelain represented was a national loss to be averted.”<sup>52</sup> He condemned the Chinese as “Saxony’s porcelain bloodsuckers” (porzellanene Schröpfköpfe) because of the riches, mostly silver from Spanish America, that went off to China.<sup>53</sup> He was familiar with the problem, for he served August ii (“the Strong”) (1670–1733), Elector of Saxony and King of Poland, a ruler passionate about amassing porcelains and discovering how to manufacture the ceramic. The Polish king was the most illustrious victim of what critics of Asian luxuries termed “porcelain disease” (la maladie de porcelaine or Porzellankrankheit), a feverish desire to possess the ware. His aristocratic agent in Holland purchased huge amounts of Chinese and Japanese porcelain at voC auctions and sent it by cart and river barge to dresden. August dreamed up projects well beyond the capacities of porcelain, such as a palace built entirely of the ceramic, including walls, bed, throne, and a chapel with a porcelain pulpit, organ, and altar; he also posed for sketches for a life-sized porcelain equestrian statue of himself. He commissioned life-sized statues of the Twelve Apostles, a task that required using extensive internal and external supports for the pieces in the kiln so they would not collapse.<sup>54</sup> August’s potters made four hundred life-sized porcelain figures of animals, based on those in the royal menagerie. in 1753, during the reign of August iii (1733–63), who inherited his father’s passion for porcelain, an English visitor to dresden described the ceramic beasts: The next curiosity is the Chinese palace, so called from the taste of the building, and the intention of furnishing it with porcelain. . . . Here are a great number of porcelain figures of dogs, squirrels, monkeys, wolves, bears, leopards, etc. some of them as big as the life; also elephants and rhinoceros’s of the size of a large dog; a prodigious variety of birds, as cocks, hens, turkeys, peacocks, pheasants, hawks, eagles, besides parrots and other foreign birds. . . . The long gallery in the second story had already two marble chimney-pieces, each adorned with near 40 very large pieces of porcelain, of birds, beasts, and vases, ranged to the height above 20 feet in a most superb taste, the figures being all made so natural, that i could conceive no idea superior in this kind.<sup>55</sup> A handful of Fantasievögel sprang up amid the flock of birds, including one that combined the features of a golden pheasant and a Chinese phoenix. reflecting on this zoomorphic wonderland, Postelthwayt noted in his Universal Dictionary that “His Majesty of Prussia [Frederick ii, “the Great,” r. 1740–86] sometimes calls his brother of Poland the Porcelain King.”<sup>56</sup> in one of the best-known episodes in the European career of Chinese porcelain, August ii in 1715 traded 600 Saxon dragoons (or mounted infantry) to King Frederick William i (r. 1701–40) of Prussia for 151 blue-and-white vases of the Kangxi period. lidded and almost a meter high, such pieces henceforth were known as “dragoon vases.” in the Prussian (and later German) army, the soldiers pawned off for chinaware formed the Saxon 94th infantry division, though it informally styled itself the “Porcelain regiment.” The unit saw its last significant action at the battle of Stalingrad in 1942–43, still bearing the emblem of crossed swords that denoted August ii’s rank as a marshal in the Holy roman Empire and that was the hallmark inscribed on Meissen porcelain.<sup>57</sup> (See figure 5.) by the time he died, August ii possessed no less than 35,798 pieces of porcelain, roughly half from his Meissen manufactory, half from China and Japan (lumped together in a royal inventory as “East indian Porcelain”). He housed the collection in dresden in his Japanese Palace, a building with a porcelain bell in its belfrey. originally known as the dutch Palace (Holländisches Palais), it had been purchased from Count Jacob Heinrich von Flemming (1667–1728), a leading minister of Saxony. When von Flemming in 1726 offered to sell August the orangerie of his Übigau Castle as well, the king replied with a well-nigh clinical description of psychological obsession: “do you not know that it is the same with oranges as with porcelain? namely, that those who have one sickness or the other never believe that they have enough but always feel that they need to have more?”<sup>58</sup> Happily for the Elector, he managed to indulge his two addictions simultaneously when he planted orange trees in Chinese porcelain tubs in the garden of his dresden palace. August ii’s passion for porcelain matched the scientific interests of Tschirnhaus. A man of formidable intelligence and broad interests, Tschirnhaus seems to have known all the intellectual lights of Europe. He began his advanced education by studying natural science and medicine at leiden in the dutch republic. in the 1670s he corresponded with the dutch philosopher (and lens grinder) baruch Spinoza (1632–77), who lived in Amsterdam, and he told leibniz about the radical religious views set forth in Spinoza’s Ethics. Tschirnhaus conducted scientific experiments in london with members of the royal Society, and in Paris soon after, finance minister Colbert hired the budding savant to tutor his son in mathematics. Colbert helped direct Tschirnhaus to the question of applying scientific learning to the development of new technology. Christiaan Huygens (1619–95), the dutch physicist who discovered Saturn’s rings and pioneered the use of the pendulum in clocks, instructed Tschirnhaus in the grinding and polishing of glass lenses, one of the most exacting craft skills in science. He turned that knowledge to good account by heating potter’s clay using large focused mirrors, an accomplishment that led to his enrollment as the first German member of the French Academy. in 1682, building on his growing reputation, he joined leibniz in putting out the journal Acta Eruditorum (learned deeds). The question of the secret formula for porcelain, known as the arcanum, first gripped Tschirnhaus during his studies in leiden, situated in the middle of the United Provinces, the Western country most inundated with chinaware. Working for August ii from the early 1690s, he experimented with optic lenses to achieve the temperatures needed for creating porcelain. He then devoted years to investigating the nature of the ceramic itself, experimenting with various minerals and clays to come up with the right formula.<sup>59</sup> in 1694 leibniz’s secretary visited the dresden laboratory of Tschirnhaus and admired a waxy, porcelain-like material he had concocted. A few years later, the scientist spied out the techniques used in the delft potteries of Holland and those in the Saint-Cloud pottery manufactory, located to the west of Paris on the road to versailles. like many other well-connected gentlemen, Tschirnhaus no doubt took the opportunity to tour the nearby country estate of Monsieur (the Grand dauphin, duc de bourgogne), louis de France (1661–1711), the son of louis xiv. The heir to the throne owned some porcelains that a celebrated legation from Siam (Thailand) had presented to the king in 1686. His collection included about four hundred pieces of blue-and-white and some porcelain figurines (known as “Siam Pagods”), as well as agate vessels, rock crystal, and Japanese lacquer furniture. Monsieur had the blue-and-white porcelains set out amid chairs and couches covered in fabric of blue and silver.<sup>60</sup> on top of huge purchases of porcelain by August ii, Tschirnhaus’s travel and research naturally cost a fortune. The Elector’s finance minister, distraught at his master’s uninhibited spending, moaned that “China is the bleeding bowl of Saxony.”<sup>61</sup> Significantly, alchemists hired by August to discover the Chinese secret referred to porcelain as the new “white gold” (weissener Gold).<sup>62</sup> but despite the king being as extravagant and feckless as any monarch in Christendom, he nonetheless proved more forward-thinking than all his more enlightened contemporaries in financing systematic research on porcelain. A few years after Johann Friedrich böttger (1682– 1719), an alchemist and Tschirnhaus’s associate, told August in March 1709 that he had succeeded in creating porcelain—he could claim sole credit for the achievement because Tschirnhaus had died five and a half months earlier—the king had himself portrayed on a vase viewing his Meissen manufactory in the guise of a Chinese emperor.<sup>63</sup> August ordered that Asian porcelains be used to decorate the walls of his Japanese palace, set against “a background of wall coverings of Eastern splendor, great indian figures painted onto silk or golden dragons embroidered on silk, or indian gilded paper onto which various Chinese pagodas would be painted, clearly and neatly.”<sup>64</sup> He also commissioned a ceiling painting for his gallery of porcelain beasts that, in effect, trumpeted the virtues of product innovation and import substitution by asserting the superiority of Meissen porcelain over that from Japan, a principal source of his early purchases. As he envisaged it, the first scene of the painting “will depict Saxony and Japan who quarrel over the perfection of their porcelain manufactories. . . . The goddess [Minerva] will graciously bestow the award of the struggle into Saxony’s hands. Jealousy and dismay will prompt Japan to load their porcelain wares back onto the ships that once brought them here.”<sup>65</sup> only in the realm of fantasy could August the Strong let a single piece of porcelain escape his grasp. Still, he intended his painting to convey basically the same message that the lisbon guild of potters had addressed to Philip iii in 1619 when they boasted about their “pilgrim art”: by fabricating a facsimile of porcelain, Westerners had created pottery that supplanted the finest wares hitherto imported at crushing expense from Asia. Headstrong, compulsive, and fabulously rich, August ii anticipated the modern recognition that science and industry necessarily are linked and, furthermore, that their coordination calls for strong state support. He followed the same course of action advocated later by Postelthwayt. The English writer lamented the hemorrhage of new World silver to Asia and extolled manufactures from there, notably bengal linen, Japanese lacquer, and Chinese porcelain. He believed that the most effective means to improve Western commerce was “the patronage of princes,” that is, cash rewards for new discoveries. His counsel to monarchs and entrepreneurs regarding pottery was based on his reading of du Halde’s Lettres édifiantes and on his understanding of the excellent use already made in his own country of dentrecolles’s reports: Upon the whole, in whatever mechanical or manufactural arts other nations may excel Great-britain, our artists should be upon the watch, not only to imitate, but surpass, if possible. Throughout this work, those particulars appear wherein other nations do excel us . . . and [which] may well deserve the attention of our artists. but those which are imported, and which they can see, handle, and minutely examine, they are the most likely to imitate or excel. As we have arrived at a great perfection in the China ware, why may we not in divers other eastern arts and manufactures?<sup>66</sup> An anonymous pamphlet of 1697–98, The Advantage of the East India Trade to England, reconsidered, advanced the same general argument: “The East India Trade, by putting Persons upon invention, may be the Cause of doing Things with less labour. . . . [i]t is therefore very likely to be the Cause of the invention of Arts and Engines, to save the labour of Hands in other Manufactures; these are the Effects of necessity and Emulation.”<sup>67</sup> Along with other Western rulers committed to economic self-sufficiency, louis xiv believed that appropriating the manufacturing techniques of China would result in effective competition with its imports. He therefore heeded arguments by bouvet and others that one of the advantages of sending Jesuits to China might be disclosure of the secrets of porcelain. in addition, the years around 1700 witnessed the high tide of mercantilist thinking in French royal circles, a forceful concern with the role of bullion, commodity production, and trade balances in the welfare of kingdom. With the creation of the Council of Commerce in 1700, the chief officials of the French state for the first time began directing economic policy in consultation with merchants and manufacturers.<sup>68</sup> beyond official strategy, however, ruling by example remained important in an age of personal monarchy. in the nine years’ War (1688–97), in which France fought almost the whole of Europe to a standstill, louis xiv tried to make up for finan cial shortfalls by having his silver table service and silver furniture melted down and coined at the mint, a patriotic gesture that failed to inspire the French elite to follow suit. The king also started using a porcelain-handled walking stick in place of one with silver, a relic “carefully preserved and shown to the curious” in the private royal apartments until the outbreak of the French revolution in 1789.<sup>69</sup> The last great war of the reign broke out in 1702 when the grandson of louis became heir to the Spanish crown as Philip v (r. 1700–46). The Spanish succession raised the same sort of alarm throughout Europe that Philip ii’s union of the Spanish and Portuguese crowns had in 1580: it radically upset the balance of power, especially since, as a political observer remarked, control of American silver would provide the bourbon dynasty “an inexhaustible resource for . . . the conquest of the world.”<sup>70</sup> yet rather than win louis control of Spanish silver, the ruinous War of the Spanish Succession (1701–14) instead compelled him to order his nobles to turn over their silver plate to defray army costs, a measure that netted the treasury the huge sum of ten million livres. According to the duc de Saint-Simon (1675–1755), a high aristocrat and memoir writer, the courtiers of le Roi-Soleil rushed from the palace of versailles to boutiques in Paris for faience imitations of their table settings. indeed, Saint-Simon numbered among them, for he ordered a serving dish from rouen decorated with his coat of arms.<sup>71</sup> Coming about the same time that August ii made his breakthrough in producing porcelain, the wholesale destruction of silver plate in France meant there was more urgency than ever in the French search for the secrets of porcelain. not only did France want its own recipe for porcelain, but an unintended consequence of the melting down of silver plate was that more of the white metal than ever ultimately went off to China to pay for porcelain. Moreover, tin-glazed earthenware could not satisfy privileged circles accustomed to tableware of precious metal and newly acquainted with gleaming chinaware. A French comedy portrayed a woman smashing dutch delftware (termed ces porcelaines d’Hollande) and proclaiming she henceforth would use only Chinese porcelain.<sup>72</sup> Seeking to staunch the torrent of silver to Asia, French ministers aspired to “make porcelain like the Chinese,” as the royal letters patent for a pottery in rouen declared around 1700, and thereby safeguard the economic health of the kingdom.<sup>73</sup> ## “ To TEll oF THE PorCElAin MAdE THErE”: THE SECrETS oF JinGdEZHEn dentrecolles wrote his letters from Jingdezhen with these ambitions in mind. one of the obstacles he faced, however, was that his mission to reveal the secrets of porcelain took place against a background of confusion and disagreement regarding the nature of the ceramic. introducing dentrecolles’s first letter, du Halde remarks that most explanations of porcelain are “mere inventions of such Writers, who have boldly palm’d their own silly Conjectures on the World.”<sup>74</sup> no doubt he was thinking of authorities such as duarte barbosa (d. 1545), a Portuguese writer, who informed his readers that the ceramic was made from “fish ground fine, from eggshells and the whites of eggs and other materials.”<sup>75</sup> Around the same time, one of barbosa’s compatriots told an ottoman naval commander that porcelain actually was a stone “just like lapis lazuli,” closely resembling rock crystal and passed down like an heirloom from father to son.<sup>76</sup> basing themselves on barbosa’s account, Girolamo Cardano (1501–76), a mathematician and astrologer, and Justus Caesar Scaliger (1484–1558), a philologist and physician, debated the nature of porcelain in the mid-sixteenth century. Cardano argued that the ceramic was the same as an ancient, glasslike pottery, “for it is certain that porcelain is likewise made of a certain juice which coalesces underground.” For his part, Scaliger maintained that “eggshells and the shells of umbilical shellfish (named porcelains, whence the name) are pounded into dust, which is then mingled with water and shaped into vases. These are then hidden underground. A hundred years later they are dug up, being considered finished, and are put up for sale. . . . The best are brought from the region of China.”<sup>77</sup> Gaspar da Cruz (d. 1570), a dominican friar, scorned those who believed porcelain was made from oyster shells or from “dung rotten for a long time.” in his Tractado (1569–70), the first European book devoted to China since The Travels of Marco Polo, he reported that “porcelain is a white and soft stone, and some is red which is not so fine; or in better speaking, it is a hard clay, the which after well beating and grinding it, and laying in cisterns of water . . . of the cream that remaineth on the top they make the very fine porcelain.”<sup>78</sup> Although this was accurate enough, erudite speculation continued to link porcelain to agate, seashells, lobster shell, gyp sum, mother-of-pearl, and precious minerals long into the seventeenth century. A 1617 publication retailed a cluster of popular notions: A large mass of material composed of plaster, egg- and oyster shell, of sea-locusts and similar creatures, is well mixed until it is of one consistency. it is then buried by the head of the family, who reveals the hiding place to one of his sons. it must remain in the ground for eighty years without seeing the light of day. After this time is elapsed, the heirs must take it from the ground, and use it to make the beautiful translucent vases of such perfect form and colour that no critic could find fault with them.<sup>79</sup> Sir Francis bacon (1561–1626) voiced a similar opinion in his Novum Organum (1620): discussing the transformation of natural substances by burying them in the earth, he cited the practice of the Chinese “with their china, masses of which, made for that purpose, are said to remain in the ground for forty or fifty years, and to be transmitted to their heirs as a sort of artificial mine.” in his Pseudodoxia Epidemica (1646), a work debunking vulgar myths and folklore, Sir Thomas browne (1605– 82) devoted pages to the claims of scholars such as bacon, barbosa, and Scaliger, “which when the Author had seen he could hardly contain from laughter at the common opinion[s] . . . rejected by us.”<sup>80</sup> More than sixty years later, dentrecolles recorded that the silly conjecture still persisted in Europe that porcelains had to be buried underground for many years to attain perfection. like browne, most informed investigators sensibly concluded by the late seventeenth century that porcelain was made from clay, though many continued to believe that it must be of a recondite sort, closer to such marvels as exotic gems, the chambered nautilus, rhinoceros horn, and ostrich eggs than to common earth. before the letters of dentrecolles, the most thorough account of porcelain appeared in the Itinerario (1595–96) of Jan Huyghen van linschoten (1563–1611), a popular dutch report on China: To tell of the porcelain made there, is not to be believed, and those that are exported yearly to india, Portugal and nova Hispania and elsewhere! but the finest are not allowed outside the country on penalty of capital punishment, but serve solely for the lords and governors of the country and are so exquisite that no crystalline glass is to be compared with them. These porcelains are made inland of a certain earth which is very hard, which is pounded to pieces or ground, and they leave it to soak in troughs cut out of stone, and when it is well soaked and frequently stirred as milk is churned to make butter, they make of that which floats on top the finest work, and after that somewhat lower the coarser, and so on, and they paint them and make on them those figures and likenesses they want, and then they are dried and baked in the kiln.<sup>81</sup> regrettably, linschoten’s prosaic description did not reveal the formula for porcelain. desired almost as much as the philosopher’s stone, the fabulous magical substance that transformed base metals into gold, the arcanum seemed every bit as elusive and enigmatic. Measured against the goal of plumbing the secrets of porcelain, European suppositions seemed feeble and faltering, scarcely more than confessions of ignorance. Alvarez Semedo, a Portuguese missionary monk who wrote a book on China, was typically unhelpful: “in this work there are not those mysteries that other people have written about, neither in the matter, the form, nor the manner of working. They are made absolutely of earth, but of neat and excellent quality. They are made in the same time, and in the same manner, as our earthen vessels; only they make them with more diligence and accurateness.”<sup>82</sup> in the late 1690s a French expert on glass and pottery could do no better than to suggest that porcelain was “a prepared clay that is glazed with a white glaze.”<sup>83</sup> in addition to lacking useful information from his contemporaries, dentrecolles faced daunting obstacles in his espionage. Potters everywhere maintained intense vigilance regarding their techniques. italian artisans were typical. in his Three Books of the Potter’s Art (1557), the first major European work on ceramics, “wherein is treated not only of the practice thereof but in brief of all its secrets,” Cipriano Piccolpasso observes that among his fellow craftsmen are “many who till the last day of their lives keep [a trade secret] hidden from their own sons and then, knowing themselves to be on the point of death, among the other goods they leave behind, summon their oldest and wisest son, and reveal to him this secret.” browne noted that Chinese potters are “so reserved concerning that Artifice [of porcelain], that ’tis only revealed from Father unto Son.”<sup>84</sup> At times, of course, that was a risky practice: the patriarch of the Wei family in Jingdezhen died just as he was about to pass on to his son the secret of the molasses-like mortar that had made his lineage the principal kiln repairers in the city.<sup>85</sup> beyond the secrecy of potters, dentrecolles had to deal with Chinese bureaucrats, who regarded foreigners with grave suspicion; hence their policy of keeping Western merchants penned in Canton and visitors to Jingdezhen sequestered on riverboats at night. Moreover, he had to learn potters’ colloquial expressions for their techniques and materials, slang and abbreviations so baffling that “even the natives have to make inquiries before they get the meaning.”<sup>86</sup> not surprisingly, he often met with concealment, as when he asked about the proportion of ingredients in a certain red glaze but only could report that alum, unspecified oils, and “the urine of a young boy” made up the bulk of the formula. Still, dectrecolles learned a remarkable amount about porcelain production “by wandering through the workshops and instructing myself with my own eyes or by asking questions of the Christians who are involved in this work.” He apparently won cooperation from some non-Christians as well, including shopkeepers, merchants, and even a couple of magistrates, most notably Tang ying. He checked the responses of his informants against ancient chronicles and the official annals of Fuliang, the county magistrate’s headquarters, five kilometers north of Jingdezhen. but he was disappointed in the latter since they said nothing about the origins and history of porcelain. instead, they recounted incredible local sensations, such as the sow that supposedly gave birth to a tiny elephant with a perfectly formed trunk, though “there has never been an elephant in the country.” (right about the sow, he was wrong about elephants.) Furthermore, since one could purchase the honor of being cited in the annals, local luminaries filled the volumes with self-serving comments. dentrecolles correctly concluded that the Chinese simply had no concern for the sort of information about porcelain desired by Europeans. From the perspective of dentrecolles, this problem was compounded by others. He inferred that crucial information about porcelain had been lost inasmuch as China had experienced “all sorts of revolutions” in the past. not only that, he believed that loss of knowledge went hand in hand with decline in manufacturing expertise. He regarded Jingdezhen as waning from its golden age, although the potters still could fashion marvelous things. He attributed the deterioration to the porcelain city’s mushrooming production: as kilns and workers multiplied, standards plummeted and quantity substituted for quality. in the past, he argued, the potters “had less regard for the expense [of production] than for the perfection of the work.” Since kilns used to be much smaller in Jingdezhen, more individual attention was given to select wares. He cited an old chronicle as claiming that sometimes an entire furnace would be dedicated to producing a single urn worth the extraordinary sum of fifty-nine taels. He asserted that broken saggars tied with reeds are used to save on materials, an economy never practiced in bygone times. in addition, wares used to be removed from the kiln only after it had slowly cooled so they would not crack with a sudden change of temperature; but in contemporary Jingdezhen, to save on wood for a subsequent firing, vessels are taken out while the furnace is still smoking. nowadays, dentrecolles concluded, kiln owners are much greedier for profits, workers are impoverished, the court requisitions burdensome quantities of wares, raw materials are more expensive, and potters lack the technical skills of their forebears. in short, Jingdezhen’s very success had led to prolonged decline in the excellence of its products. Since Jingdezhen had experienced rapid change and expansion in the previous two centuries, dentrecolles’s pessimistic analysis held some truth, especially regarding the increased cost of wood and clay. yet he was too quick to assume that the porcelain city had gone substantially downhill and that inarticulate or evasive responses to his queries confirmed a decline in functional proficiency. As a Jesuit, he perhaps placed too high a premium on lucidity and coherent exposition. His gloomy perspective also smacks of hackneyed laments voiced by elderly potters and shopkeepers about the falling away of the younger generation from the exalted standards of the good old days. in addition, dentrecolles identified the history of porcelain with the career of Jingdezhen itself, seemingly unaware that the ceramic had been produced elsewhere in China for many centuries before the city on the Chang became the dominant production center. dentrecolles applied the same blinkered perspective to the prosperity of the porcelain city: “According to the History of Jingdezhen [at Fuliang], the profits that were once made were greater than those produced now; but that is difficult to believe, since porcelains for Europe were not made at that time on so large a scale.” long before the arrival of Portuguese ships off the Chinese coast in the early sixteenth century, however, the profits of Jingdezhen and other pottery centers from commerce with the Asian region of the ecumene were at least as great as those made later from trading with Europe. As a Frenchman, dentrecolles focused on Western commissions for chinaware, some of which he evidently facilitated, without recognizing that most of Jingdezhen’s production went to areas other than his own homeland. This was true for Chinese commerce in general. only 10 percent of customs duties collected in Guangdong ports in 1735 came from European ships, which were vastly outnumbered by Chinese vessels. indeed, Western trade with China would not reach the level of Chinese trade with continental and maritime Southeast Asia (the Archipelago) until the end of the eighteenth century.<sup>87</sup> ## “ THE WHiTE PorCElAin SHEll”: FroM MArCo Polo To ro Co Co Questions about the origins of porcelain baffled dentrecolles. “one cannot say,” he writes, “who the inventor was nor to what endeavor or accident one owes this invention.” Since European artisans, alchemists, and scientists at the time were trying to devise a formula for porcelain, dentrecolles naturally thought in terms of “invention” of the substance in China rather than of long-term, incremental discovery. This assumption combined with puzzlement regarding the origin of the term porcelain. He points out that its source is mysterious, “for the name of the material . . . is so little a Chinese word, that none of the syllables of which it is composed can even be pronounced or written in Chinese.” The same thing troubled ricci, who acknowledged, “it is not quite clear to me why it is called porcelain in the West.”<sup>88</sup> As dentrecolles explains, the Chinese phrase for the ceramic is tseki, apparently his rendering of the characters for ci (high-fired pottery, i.e., stoneware and porcelain) and shi (stone). He speculates that porcelain may derive from the Portuguese language, though he confesses his suggestion is at odds with the contemporary Portuguese custom of using the term porcellana to signify a cup or bowl while referring to chinaware simply as louça (pottery). The latter usage actually originated in the early sixteenth century, for porcelain was known as louça da India (pottery from india) ever since vasco da Gama brought chinaware to lisbon on returning in 1499 from his great voyage around Africa to india. After the Portuguese conquered the key port of Melaka in Southeast Asia in 1511, they commissioned Chinese traders there to purchase porcelains and other merchandise for them. Portuguese ships departing india for home generally carried as much as a third of their cargo in porcelain.<sup>89</sup> Within a short time, the rua nova dos Mercadores in lisbon had seventeen shops selling a louça da India. An italian in Portugal declared, with considerable hyperbole, that porcelain there was “esteemed more highly than gold and silver.”<sup>90</sup> in 1563, during a dinner in the vatican, a Portuguese cleric commended blue-and-white chinaware to Pope Pius iv (r. 1559–65): in Portugal we have a kind of tableware which, being made of clay, may be compared advantageously to silver both in its elegance and its cleanliness, and i would counsel all princes to use it in preference to any other service and to banish silver from their tables. in Portugal we call it porcelain. it comes from india and is made in China. The clay is so fine and transparent that the whites outshine crystal and alabaster, and the pieces which are decorated in blue dumbfound the eyes, seeming a combination of alabaster and sapphires.<sup>91</sup> With comparable enthusiasm, the poet Paul Scarron (1610–60) lauded the principal attractions in the shops at Saint-Germain in Paris: bring me to the Portuguese, There we shall see something new, The merchandise from China. There we shall see gray amber, beautiful works of varnish, And of fine porcelain From this majestic country or, rather, from this paradise.<sup>92</sup> Although dentrecolles could not have known it, he went to Jingdezhen seeking the secrets of a material whose name derived from Europe itself, not from China. The designation goes back two centuries before da Gama, for it first was applied to Chinese pottery by an even more famous European traveler to the East, Marco Polo.<sup>93</sup> Porcelaine is the rendering of porcellane in the italian-French dialect of languedoc, the tongue in which rustichello of Pisa, Polo’s scribe, recorded the venetian’s adventures in 1298 when they both languished as prisoners of war in Genoa. in The Travels, Polo refers to cowry shells (Cypraea moneta) as porcellani, and he employs the same word to identify white pottery he saw near the city of Quanzhou in Fujian province. italians had long called cowries porcellani, supposedly because they perceived a resemblance between the humped back of the shell and a piglet (porcellus, diminutive of porco). Scaliger evidently had an intimation of this connection inasmuch as he claimed that shellfish, “named porcelain, whence the name,” constitute a principal ingredient of the ceramic. Harvested in the Maldive islands, southwest of Sri lanka (Ceylon) in the indian ocean, cowries were employed as currency in small-scale transactions throughout East Asia, india, and Africa. They served as the foremost means of payment in China in the Shang and early Zhou period, when people deposited large quantities of the shells in tombs. They remained in circulation long after the emperor Qin Shihuang (r. 221–210 b.c.e.), founder of the Qin, China’s first empire, prohibited their use. People employed them far and wide by Polo’s time, even in the mountain valleys of Tibet and the jungle hinterlands of borneo. inasmuch as no government would consider it financially worthwhile to mint a coin with so paltry a value, the shells served as a handy economic lubricant in everyday dealings, above all, in peasant communities.<sup>94</sup> large-scale merchants in Asia relied on coins and ingots of tin, lead, and silver, as well as on swatches of silk, for legal tender in international trade; common people used Chinese copper-cash or cowries, often supplemented by packets of rice. ibn battuta, who traveled widely and wrote an account of his adventures, noted that one gold dinar (the premier Arab coin, 4.25 grams in weight) could be exchanged for 400,000 cowries in the Maldives, the cost of a beautiful slave girl in bengal. in his day, a small bengalese silver coin purchased 10,520 of the shells. A century later, according to Tomé Pires (ca. 1468–1540?), the Portuguese author of the Suma Oriental (ca. 1513), the burmese paid 500 cowries for a chicken while the Javanese used copper-cash and cowries for “small money” and nuggets of native gold for substantial purchases. in the late eighteenth century, the Chinese even made porcelain replicas of the shell to export to Southeast Asia, where they took their place alongside the sea-bred kind.<sup>95</sup> Polo knew about cowries before his journey to China because of the Mediterranean trade carried on in his city. venetian merchants acquired them in Cairo as ballast for their galleys and then sold them in Portugal and Morocco. According to João de barros (ca. 1496–1570) in Décadas da Ásia: With these shells for ballast, many ships are laden [in lisbon] for bengal and Siam, where they are used for money, just as we use small copper coin for buying things of little value. And even to this Kingdom of Portugal, in some years as much as two or three thousand quintals [i.e., over 100 million cowries] are brought by way of ballast; they are then exported to Guinea, and the kingdoms of benin and the Congo, where they are also used for money.<sup>96</sup> Portuguese captains traded the cowry shells to coastal peoples in West Africa for ivory and slaves. When ibn battuta visited the Mali kingdom of Mansa Sulayman (r. 1341–60) in 1352, he noted that the “buying and selling of its inhabitants is done with cowry-shells.”<sup>97</sup> in fact, it was the same throughout the continent, for the shells made an arduous journey inland from the west coast, eventually meeting up in central Africa with other Maldive cowries that had passed through the hands of traders on the Swahili coast. in China and maritime Southeast Asia, Polo often saw “the white porcelain shell” (porcellane bianche) being used for payment in markets.<sup>98</sup> He applied porcellane to Chinese pottery evidently because the latter had a milky quality, glossy sheen, and fracturing characteristic that reminded him of the shells. Polo was not original in identifying seashells and pottery; many cultures also saw similarities between the two.<sup>99</sup> The flowing shapes, ridged patterns, and stippled colors of mollusks seemed to call out for replication in baked clay. Some Japanese ceramics from the late Jomon period (1500–1000 b.c.e.) are shaped like shells, and Minoan pottery of the bronze Age (3000–1000 b.c.e.) is decorated with images of shells, along with those of seaweed, dolphins, and octopus tentacles. in ancient China and the Khmer region of continental Southeast Asia, potters simulated conch shells in clay and decorated pottery with depictions of them. Khmer potters even copied the interior chambers of the large shell that produced its booming tone. indian craftsmen also replicated the conch in clay: they associated it with the lotus, the seat of deities, and they regarded the sound of the shell, blown like a trumpet, as the voice of Shiva, destroyer and renewer of worlds. in ceremonies of the Hopi of the Western Pueblo in the American Southwest, the Plumed Serpent (Paalö- löqangw), a monstrous deity associated with the underworld and earthquakes, emerges from a ceramic vessel with the blowing of a conch to ravage cornfields, represented by corn sprouts set in clay containers. Above all, there was a powerful association between the chambered nautilus (Nautilus pompilius) and porcelain, since the nacreous inner layer of the spiral shell of the cephalopod, from which comes mother-of-pearl, bore a striking likeness to the lustrous ceramic. Chinese aristocrats in the Tang period used vermilion nautilus shells, known as “Parrot Snails,” as sumptuous wine goblets. A few nautiluses reached the West as early as the thirteenth century, where they fetched high prices and, like porcelains, usually were set in mounts of silver or gold. in the sixteenth century, the Portuguese imported large quantities of the shells to Europe. The dutch also traded in them, especially after 1605 when the voC seized control of the island of Amboina in the East indies, whose warm, shallow waters abounded in the shells. in 1603 the governors of the dutch republic presented Henry iv of France (r. 1589–1610) with porcelain tableware and a valuable collection of shells, all looted from the Santa Catarina, a Portuguese carrack. in his Still Life with Shells (1659), Abraham Susenier (ca. 1620–ca. 1667) depicted a nautilus looming over a score of other exotic shells, and a dutch compatriot of the painter owned a collection of shells valued at almost 100,000 guilders (about \$128,000 in present-day terms).<sup>100</sup> Amsterdam merchants treasured nautiluses and had themselves depicted holding them in paintings. They also commissioned still lifes featuring the shell alongside porcelain, as in Flowers in a Wanli Vase with a Blue-Tit, by Johannes Goednert (1617–68). Willem Kalf (1619–93) painted several such works, including Still Life with a Porcelain Ewer, Dish, and Bowl and Wine Glass on a Gilded Silver Foot and a Bowl of Fruit. An anonymous dutch painting in the dazzling, jeweled technique of Kalf, Still Life with Chinese Sugar Bowl, Nautilus Cup, Glasses, and Fruit, presents a Wanli bowl, decorated with the Eight immortals (ba xian) of daoism, next to a nautilus supported by a gold statue of neptune, with the mouth of the shell refashioned into the cavernous jaw of a gilded marine monster. in A Richly Laid Table with Parrot and Macaw, by Jan davidsz de Heem (1606–83), the silver and amber tones of nautilus shells are in vivid contrast to the reds of a lobster and tropical birds. Christoffel van den berge’s Bouquet of Flowers in Glass (1617) includes seashells from the western Pacific, as well as porcelain wine cups. in Still Life with Gold Goblets and Collectibles, Clara Peeters (1589–ca. 1657) portrays a delicate Chinese bowl next to an assortment of shells from East Asia and the Caribbean, a juxtaposition that highlights the correspondence between crafted and natural objects.<sup>101</sup> bernard Palissy (ca. 1510–89), royal potter to Catherine de’ Medici (1519–89), the Florentine mother of three French kings, was fascinated by the nautilus. Having won fame for works skillfully imitating natural things, especially for his creation of elaborate grottoes populated by clay replicas of frogs, lizards, and salamanders, he suggested that the nautilus shell poses a powerful, perhaps insuperable challenge to human creativity: “Why do [craftsmen] not observe from what the fish has formed such a beautiful house, and take similar materials to make a beautiful vase? The fish that made the said shell is not as glorious as man—it is an animal which has little form—and yet it is able to do what man is unable to achieve.”<sup>102</sup> João de Mascarenhas (1632–81), the first marquis of Fronteira, decorated the walls of a grotto in the gardens of the Fronteira Palace near lisbon with blue-and-white porcelain, shells, and colorful pebbles. When the future Pedro ii (1648–1706), regent for his insane brother, Afonso vi (r. 1656–67), attended a banquet at the palace, the marquis ceremonially smashed the grotto’s chinaware in tribute to the princely visit. Many notable European purchasers of porcelain also collected exotic shells, and some regarded both commodities as possessing magical properties. of course, others believed that the essential secret of porcelain consisted of some rarified blend of seashells and clay. A patron of alchemists, as well as a zealous collector of Chinese pottery, Francesco i de’ Medici, Grand duke of Tuscany (r. 1574–87), owned a magnificent double-nautilus cup, mounted in silver and engraved with Chinese motifs of plants and animals.<sup>103</sup> August ii displayed his large assortment of Asian shells, hanging from imitation pine branches made from new World silver, alongside his porcelains, and his Meissen porcelain manufactory produced dinner services with elaborate shell molding. The potters who produced one of the most famous Meissen dinner ensembles, the Swan Service (Schwanengeschirr), a set of more than three thousand pieces commissioned by Count Heinrich von brühl (1700– 1763), a Saxon minister under August iii, based their designs on shells from the royal collection. Shell-shaped tureens boasted mermaids for handles, and cruets took the form of cherubs astride swans. Potters also bedecked the service with motifs of snails, dolphins, the sea nymph Galatea, venus rising from the waves, and neptune flourishing his trident. Pottery manufacturers at Capodimonte (near naples) and Plymouth (in England) decorated dishes and vases with designs taken from shells. The vessels often had scallop-shaped edges or were painted with feathered rims suggesting shells. louis xiii of France (r. 1610–43) added to the collection of shells begun under Henry iv, and louis xv, the reigning sponsor of Sèvres porcelain, owned the largest assembly of shells in Europe, some of which he sent as models to his potters. Tsar Peter the Great (r. 1682–1725), who began the russian royal practice of purchasing porcelains in western Europe, also bought shells in Holland, as did the monarchs of denmark and Sweden. like other amateur scientists and learned entrepreneurs, Wedgwood collected shells, and his Etruria manufactory produced shell-shaped desert services christened “nautilus wares.” (See figure 7.) in the early eighteenth century, pottery ensembles like Wedgwood’s catered to the vogue for rococo style (perhaps from the French rocaille, “shellwork”), which emphasized elegant and charming effects, such as elaborate ornament, coiling outlines, and asymmetrical curves, the serpentine lines characteristic of grottoes, plants, and shells. Meissen turned out a splendid porcelain clock, with a statuette of venus sitting atop gilded shellwork and vignettes of gallant men and modish women in chinoiserie settings. indeed, porcelain played a key role in stimulating enthusiasm for rococo fashion, especially in the decorative arts; chinoiserie designs on the wares emphasized the natural world as exemplified in meandering motifs. Westerners tacitly agreed with the Chinese that shells, whether the nautilus or the cowry, had a special affiliation with porcelain.<sup>104</sup> (See figure 8.) To be sure, there is a world of difference between the regal nautilus and the plebeian cowry, the one traveling first class, the other in steerage. Still, Polo’s use of porcellane bianche for the Chinese ceramic as well as the shell is an instance of the long-standing association between the two materials. Piglets aside, porcelain was well named. ## nEPTUnE And vUlCAn: EArly ModErn SCiEnCE And THE SECrETS oF PorCElAin According to venetians, a Chinese bowl in the treasury of the basilica of San Marco had been brought to the city by its most renowned citizen.<sup>105</sup> Although the traveler almost certainly had nothing to do with it, the “Marco Polo bowl” was a rarity in the fourteenth century, perhaps the earliest authenticated porcelain in the West. it is, however, a nondescript vessel, the sort of ware turned out by Fujian kilns for sale in the unsophisticated markets of Southeast Asia. Polo records that he traveled in Fujian province, but he apparently did not visit Jingdezhen in neighboring Jiangxi, a pottery center that became prominent in the late Song, a generation before he reached China. The city had begun producing porcelains seven centuries earlier. in the opening years of the Tang, local officials even sent gifts of pottery to the imperial court at Chang’an in northern China. At that time, the leading pottery centers were in the north, and Jingdezhen prospered only to the extent that it imitated them. dentrecolles remained ignorant of this background, and even if he had extended his investigation beyond Jingdezhen, he would have faced an impossible task collecting information from documentary sources. The history of porcelain attracted virtually no attention from the literati, and it would not be studied in systematic fashion in China until the twentieth century. Jingdezhen bears some responsibility for this inasmuch as its eventual, sweeping triumph led to the decline of older, dominant pottery centers whose very existence was lost to memory long before dentrecolles arrived in China. dentrecolles surely learned a great deal about porcelain manufacture from Tang ying, “the mandarin who . . . honored [him] with his friendship.” Tang’s interest in the details of pottery production was exceptional for a scholar-official. He served in the porcelain city for over twenty years in connection with the imperial kilns and became a master potter in his own right, even creating vessels known at the time as “Tang ware” (Tangyao). remarkably, Tang carried out the first excavations at Jingdezhen in the 1740s, almost two hundred years before serious archaeological fieldwork of any sort began in China. The early Ming kilns of Jingdezhen were not discovered until the 1980s, when gas and water pipes were laid in the garden of the old imperial workshops.<sup>106</sup> Having worked and lived with the potters, Tang erected stone tablets next to the imperial kilns with inscriptions of things he had learned. in 1743, at the command of the Qianlong emperor, he wrote his commentary on Jingdezhen’s industry, Description of the Twenty Illustrations of the Manufacture of Porcelain. With pictures on silk in ink and color, it is an invaluable document in the history of porcelain, though it depicts a charmingly pastoral version of the grimy toil. A similar album sent to the Sèvres manufactory from beijing by Joseph-Marie Amiot (1718–93), a Jesuit, may have been modeled on the illustrations commissioned by Tang. Zheng Tinggui, the early-nineteenth-century editor of lan Pu’s Potteries of Jingdezhen, singled out Tang’s writings on porcelain for praise; but he also complained that there has never been any book devoted exclusively to an account of pottery. What one finds in the books are either references to particular vessels introduced to give point to an incident or incidents introduced to give point to some vessel; or a name or two extracted from a verse of poetry. . . . in the present compilation, most of my knowledge of pottery affairs and local products has been obtained by making personal inquiries.<sup>107</sup> A century earlier dentrecolles likewise had no choice but to rely on interrogating the potters and shopkeepers of Jingdezhen. Although he did not discover the secrets of porcelain that would enable his countrymen to replicate it, that failure stemmed from no fault of his own: he and his superiors had no comprehension of how intractable a task they faced. Among the crucial obstacles confronting Westerners was the conceptual and technical inability of early modern scientists to grapple effectively with the question of the nature of porcelain. dentrecolles sent a sample of clay to louis-François orry, who passed it along to rené-Antoine de Ferchault réaumur (1683–1757), an innovator in the study of heat and the nature of rock. once renowned in intellectual circles, his name would be known to everyone today if his novel system for measuring temperature, which he developed from researching porcelain, had not lost out to the scales devised by Gabriel Fahrenheit (1686–1736) and Anders Celsius (1701–44), inventor of the centigrade thermometer. réaumur also pioneered new ways to look at the history of the planet: his examination in southern France of sedimentary rock with substantial concentrations of seashells was an important step toward considering the Earth on a time scale dwarfing that prescribed by the bible. deeply involved in what his contemporaries called the “furor for porcelainmaking” and inspired by his analysis of dentrecolles’s sample, réaumur in 1715 helped direct a search for suitable clay materials in all the provinces of France. According to the savant, “Europe envied what China had too much not to attempt to create something similar.”<sup>108</sup> réaumur successfully identified the principal components of the clay sent by dentrecolles, and his experiments in sedimentary petrology (known at the time as mechanical mineralogy) suggested that transformation of the material in the kiln could be explained by the growth of crystals. but a correct analysis of porcelain eluded him because he shared the contemporary assumption that crystals could develop only from an aqueous solution. The Genesis story of noah’s Flood lay at the bedrock of that hypothesis, influencing Western notions of how the surface of the Earth took form. The biblical fable also served to account for seashells and fossilized fish being embedded in rock on the summit of mountains. That bewildering discovery had attracted the attention of ancient Greeks, most notably Aristotle (384– 322 b.c.e.), and, bracketing réaumur’s life, nicolaus Steno (1638–86) and James Hutton (1726–97) made it central to their geological speculation.<sup>109</sup> A great admirer of Steno, leibniz put forward the dominant educated view, known as neptunism, when he asserted that floodwaters came from an abyss deep inside the Earth, with the result that “enormous bubbles . . . have burst here and there, so that certain portions [of rock layers] subsided to form the trough of the valleys, whereas others, more solid, have remained upright like columns and, for that reason, constituted mountains.”<sup>110</sup> Since réaumur also assumed that water was the most significant force shaping the planet as well as the basis of solid matter, he concluded that at the molecular level (as it is now called), some kind of “lapidifying juice” melted stony substance, thereby giving rise to crystalline extensions.<sup>111</sup> later in the century, such views became obsolete. Hutton and James Hall (1761– 1815) experimented with volcanic emissions and determined that crystallization takes place in basalt, a fine-grained, black igneous rock. As geologists determined in the late twentieth century, the continents, largely made of granite, float on a sea of hot basalt five kilometers deep, and a similar volume of basalt also underlies the slim blanket of sediment that constitutes the ocean floor.<sup>112</sup> When the basalt undergoes certain chemical changes over millennia, liquid magma (molten lava) is created. The magma sometimes acts likes it is escaping from a pressure cooker, thrusting to the surface through fractures in the Earth’s mantle, resulting in a spectacular pyroclastic event—that is, volcanic eruption. Since basalt is abundant on all continents, the conclusions about crystallization by Hutton and Hall placed volcanoes at the center of a momentous debate on the natural history of the planet. Hutton’s research was influenced by Observations on Mount Vesuvius (1772) by Sir William Hamilton (1730–1803), the british plenipotentiary at naples for thirtysix years (1764–1800) and an ardent collector of so-called Etruscan classical pottery, many pieces of which he illicitly dug up in the foothills of the volcano.<sup>113</sup> (Although most experts regarded the vessels as Etruscan, that is, from central italy, Hamilton himself correctly argued for their Greek origin.) The most famous eruption by vesuvius took place in 79 c.e., wiping out Pompeii and Herculaneum. Except for a few outbursts, it remained silent until the late seventeenth century. it became especially active once again during the years Hamilton lived in naples, giving rise to much speculative literature, most notably his Observations. Hamilton’s book inspired Hall to travel to italy in 1785 to witness the eruption of vesuvius and collect lava samples. vulcan, the god of fire, who gave the italian form of his name to volcanoes in the late seventeenth century, thus vanquished neptune: the emerging science of geology established that the world’s surface derives from the fiery depths of the Earth, not from giant crystals precipitated from a primordial ocean or as a result of torrents of water from a subterranean chasm. one of Hamilton’s correspondents speculated that recognition of volcanoes as a geological force would call for reevaluation of all earthly life since they are “part of the great system of dissolution & renovation which seems the Universal law of nature, by which a sparrow, a city, a region or a world . . . have their beginning & end.”<sup>114</sup> ## volCAnoES And vASES: CHArlES dArWin And JoSiAH WEd GWo od The most far-reaching reevaluation of earthly life began when Charles darwin (1809–82) set off in 1831 on his five-year journey around the world in the HMS Beagle. After experiencing a volcanic eruption and an earthquake off the coast of Chile in 1835, darwin pointed to the events as definitive, contemporary proof that a geology based on Scripture, as in the story of the Flood, must be abandoned. discovering the Chilean shoreline had risen by several feet, he recalled the frontispiece of The Principles of Geology (1830) by Charles lyell (1797–1875), which displays an engraving of the so-called Temple of Serapis at Pozzuoli on the bay of naples. lyell’s examination of black discoloration on the columns of the temple had persuaded him that they had been underwater for centuries and that eruption by vesuvius, followed by earthquake, had raised them to the surface once again. in Voyage of the Beagle (1839), darwin declared that taking into account the role played by volcanoes in elevating the Andes Mountains, “we can scarcely avoid the conclusion, however fearful it may be, that a vast lake of melted matter, of an area nearly doubling in extent that of the black Sea, is spread out beneath a mere crust of solid land.”<sup>115</sup> Accordingly, darwin recognized that massive segments of the planet had emerged over eons, that volcanoes represented part of a piecemeal process of destruction and creation happening in geological time—indeed, in time enough for evolution to take place in what he later called nature’s “manufactory of species.”<sup>116</sup> in On the Origin of Species (1859), he represents the natural world as a self-improving “workshop” characterized by pitiless competition, teeming productivity, and a “division of labor” founded on specialization. darwin’s family heritage and the early stages of the industrial revolution formed the backdrop for the development and expression of these ideas. His voyage on the Beagle had been underwritten by the Wedgwood family fortune inasmuch as he was Josiah’s grandson and his wife, Emma (1808–96), was a Wedgwood first cousin with a handsome trust fund. darwin hung Josiah’s portrait in his study, which was well stocked with books on the economy and industrial production, and he remained close to his Wedgwood cousins who managed the Etruria pottery. Wedgwood dedication to cutthroat competition in the commercial world, the astonishing productivity of industrial workshops, and the specialized division of labor in the Wedgwood manufactory helped direct darwin toward his revolutionary theory of natural selection.<sup>117</sup> English entrepreneurial culture in general, and the Wedgwood pottery in particular, provided darwin with instinctive confirmation for his theory of evolution. Wedgwood’s enterprise also played a clearly identifiable role in the development of earlier innovative ideas in chemistry and geology. For almost a century after réaumur’s analysis of the clay sent by dentrecolles, progress in the new sciences was coupled to investigation into porcelain and furnace transformation.<sup>118</sup> Pottery kilns served as handy laboratories for the study of volcanic action, and Wedgwood’s invention of a pyrometer for measuring temperatures above 1,000°C proved useful not only for baking clay but also for researching volcanic flare-ups. According to a contemporary observer, lazaro Spallanzani (1729–99), a celebrated scientist who measured the heat radiating from vesuvius in degrees Fahrenheit, “very happily applied [Wedgwood’s pyrometer] to determine the degree of fire necessary to fuse the lavas of volcanos.”<sup>119</sup> Wedgwood discussed volcanoes and antique pottery with Hamilton, corresponded with Hutton about the latter’s pioneering theory on the formation of the Earth’s crust from lava flows, and gave advice about kilns and ceramics to Hall for his experiments in melting basalt. Wedgwood and Erasmus darwin (1731–1802), the scientist’s grandfather, naturally knew that the Peak district of derbyshire, lying between the Trent and Mersey rivers and immediately to the north of their homes in the West Midlands, held outcroppings of basalt. both men enjoyed “fossilling” there for trilobites and bivalve shells, and Erasmus (an outspoken atheist) had the motto E conchis omnia (Everything from Shells) added to his family crest of three scallop shells.<sup>120</sup> in 1767 Wedgwood wrote to his partner, Thomas bentley (1731–80), that digging the Trent and Mersey canal in the vicinity of his pottery had disclosed an extraordinary fossil: “Sometime last month was found under a bed of Clay, at a depth of five yards from the surface, a prodigious rib, with the vertebre of a monstrous sized Fish.”<sup>121</sup> With such learned geologic preoccupations shared by many in an increasingly educated and secular public, Wedgwood and other Staffordshire potters catered to the interest by producing teapots decorated with patterns of fossils and shells. in more ways than one, volcanoes and vases went together. As Wedgwood wrote, “i apprehend the Etruscan body owes its lightness to a mixture, either natural or artificial, of volcanic ashes.”<sup>122</sup> When he opened his new manufactory in 1769— named Etruria after the classical wares made famous by Hamilton—he sat at a pottery wheel and ceremonially threw six stoneware vases made from an original ceramic formula he christened black basalt. He chose that name because of the connection he saw between the black rock forged by volcanoes and the new black ware fired by the Etruria kilns. in a fashion, as Wedgwood saw it, his manufactory replicated the actions of both vesuvius and the potters of antiquity. He had the blackbasalt vases inscribed with the legend Artes Etruriae renascuntur (The Arts of Etruria Are reborn) and decorated with classical motifs from engravings in a book on Hamilton’s pottery collection. When he later produced a ceramic portrait plaque of Hamilton, with the background painted to give it the look of an ancient Greek (“Etruscan”) vase, he naturally had the figure done in black basalt.<sup>123</sup> it seemed to Wedgwood that the world spun like a pot on a wheel while the bowels of the Earth poured forth new raw material for molding by natural forces. He received advance copies of Hutton’s Theory of the Earth (1785), one of which he sent to James Watt (1736–1819), a fellow amateur scientist who experimented with liquefying igneous rocks and porcelain constituents.<sup>124</sup> Friends and business colleagues, Wedgwood and Watt both owned potteries, and their common interest in steam power, furnace transformation, mineral crystallization, and volcanoes made them receptive to the idea that the interior of the planet functioned like a titanic kiln, a heat-generating engine disgorging molten lava that threw up mountains and reshaped continents. yet it was not until a century later, with the invention of x-ray diffraction around 1900, that crystallography finally would reveal the internal structure of the clay minerals that made porcelain such a unique substance. And it was not until the mid-1960s that chemistry and physics would unite in the groundbreaking theory of plate tectonics, explaining the actual role of volcanoes in the inexorable deformation and reconstruction of the planet’s surface. The same theory also would illuminate the substantive link between the lava expelled by volcanic eruption and the clays fired to make porcelain. in effect, in his letters from Jingdezhen, dentrecolles focused on details of porcelain production because questions regarding the fundamental nature of the ceramic remained well beyond the scientific understanding of his time. As it turned out, however, those details proved highly instructive. Fascinated by dentrecolles’s description of how one piece of pottery passed through the hands of more than seventy workers during production, Wedgwood copied the passage into his Commonplace book in 1743, and a quarter of a century later he made it the basis for the organization of his Etruria pottery, the first industrial establishment founded entirely on the division of labor and the first directly to apply the steam engine to manufacturing.<sup>125</sup> Since Etruria provided the model for the modern factory system, the triumphs of the industrial revolution thus owed something to the potters of Jingdezhen. in his mission to make the West competitive with the most renowned works of China, dentrecolles ultimately proved more successful than he ever could have dreamed. both his painstaking investigation and the accomplishments of the porcelain city won recognition from Wedgwood. incorrigibly given to grandiloquent verse, Erasmus darwin praised Wedgwood’s manufactory—“A new Etruria decks britannia’s isle”—and declared that ancient Etruria rivaled China itself in the antiquity and excellence of its pottery.<sup>126</sup> Wedgwood, however, responded by suggesting that darwin read dentrecolles’s letters in du Halde’s Description. He would learn from the French Jesuit that “the Chinese employ their art in the formation of works of great magnificence such as the building, ornamenting & covering of entire pagodas, & other superb edifices.” Justice should be done, the pottery baron told his old friend, to “my distant brethren in the plastic art.”<sup>127</sup>