# The Creation of Porcelain China and Eurasia, 2000 b.c.e.–1000 c.e. While a modern-day dentrecolles certainly would find it substantially easier to learn about the history and nature of porcelain, problems of definition and interpretation still puzzle a newcomer to the subject. A central difficulty is that China and the West categorize porcelain differently in relation to earthenware and stoneware. based on a Western taxonomy, the contemporary view regards pottery as encompassing the three types, ranked according to the ware’s material composition and the temperature at which the clay is fired. The Chinese, however, have traditionally recognized only two groupings, tao, or earthenware, and ci, which includes both stoneware and porcelain. The Western classification of stoneware and porcelain makes sense in terms of chemical and physical analysis inasmuch as there are genuine differences in mineral ingredients and material formation between the two ceramics; but when the categories are employed in historical narrative, they lead to considerable confusion. depending on which modern account one consults, a material comparable to porcelain emerged in any of the periods of Chinese history from the Zhou to the yuan, a span of more than two thousand years. ## EArTHEnWArE, STonEWArE, And PorCElAin Clay generally is associated with substances such as silt and sand, but it actually is decayed or “rotten” rock. A fine-grained, earthy material that is plastic when wet and hardens when heated, clay is formed from the breakdown of granite, a coarsegrained igneous rock found mainly in the continental crust. it is a relatively soft, sedimentary composition, a complex, varied substance, not an inert material. Many of its microscopic particles carry a negative electric charge and join in chemical reactions, a feature that makes it a likely source for the origins of life on Earth, a template or prototype for proteins and nucleic acids.<sup>1</sup> Earthenware, made from many types of clay, forms at between $6 0 0 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ and ${ \mathrm { 1 , 0 0 0 ^ { \circ } C ; } }$ if the temperature is higher than ${ } ^ { 1 , 0 0 0 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C } , }$ the vessel will bloat and collapse in a liquid melt. The fired clay, which is red, brown, or buff, is soft and not wholly fused; because it is porous, it must be covered in a second firing with a glaze, essentially a thin layer of glass, to become relatively impermeable. Stoneware is produced at ${ \bf 1 , 1 0 0 } ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ to $1 , 2 5 0 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C } ,$ , resulting in a product whose hardness lies between that of earthenware and porcelain; it is vitreous, almost nonporous, resonant when struck, and varies in color from light gray to black, depending on the amount of iron in the clay. Whiteness and translucency are the chief distinctions between porcelain and stoneware. The porcelain produced in northern China from the early seventh century was made from kaolin (china clay), whereas that made at Jingdezhen at the same time was made from china stone (or porcelain stone, cishi).<sup>2</sup> The term kaolin derives from Kaoling (High ridge), a modest hill northeast of Jingdezhen where miners worked china clay from ancient times. Kaolin not adulterated with impurities, such as that found near Jingdezhen, is scarce. Europeans employed it for pottery from the early eighteenth century, but before that time they used it chiefly for cosmetics and wig powder. Petuntse (or baitunzi, “little white bricks”), which stems from Chinese potters’ slang, appears in most descriptions of porcelain as the commercial term for the processed china stone used in the manufacture of porcelain. According to dentrecolles, potters always had to purify the china stone shipped to Jingdezhen because “from a people who roll little grains of paste in pepper powder to cover them and then sell them with real peppercorns, there is no safeguard from the sale of petunse without it being diluted with some dregs.” From the late thirteenth century, Jingdezhen potters mixed kaolin with china stone: fusing under heat into a kind of natural glass, china stone gives translucency and hardness to the porcelain paste but is difficult to work with by itself; kaolin softens the paste, providing plasticity, smoothness, and whiteness. As recognized by réaumur in the early eighteenth century, the two components combine to form a single mass when heated to about $1 , 3 5 0 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C } ,$ undergoing a process of vitrification that renders the finished product resonant, wholly impermeable, very white, and translucent when thin. China stone also provides the glaze of Jingdezhen porcelain; mixed with a bit of lime and wood ash to aid in fusing, it makes for a glassy, rock-solid bond with the clay body. Song yingxing describes the liquid glaze as having “the appearance of a clear rice broth.”<sup>3</sup> in the early twentieth century, x-ray crystallography revealed that both kaolin and china stone contain alumina, a mineral oxide that produces microscopically fine crystals of mullite at high temperature. referring to “little silvery particles that are sprinkled in the kaolin,” dentrecolles unknowingly identified grains of mica that pointed to the presence of the mineral oxide. Chinese potters similarly described the clays as “sprinkled with spots like stars of silver.”<sup>4</sup> After William Cookworthy (1705–80), an apothecary and potter, read dentrecolles’s reports in du Halde’s Lettres édifiantes in the 1740s, he noted specks glinting in the granite walls of the church of St. Columb in Cornwall, a clue that contributed to his discovery of deposits of china clay and china stone in that southwestern English county. To the present day Cornish clay mines are bordered by small white mounds made up of the residue left behind when the two materials were processed.<sup>5</sup> in kaolin and china stone, crystals of mullite are piled up in stacks set at right angles to other stacks. When heated in a kiln, the crystals glide over one another, extending like shafts into the matrix of the clay, forming a glassy, latticelike structure that fuses the substance. in terms of composition and temperature, kaolin and china stone fired below 1,000°C make earthenware; fired above 1,000°C but below 1,300°C, they produce stoneware. because porcelain is impermeable, glazing merely improves its appearance or protects pigments added between initial firing and final return to the kiln. The terms proto-porcelain, quasi-porcelain, and porcellaneous stoneware are used in many modern accounts to identify pottery made with some of the ingredients of porcelain and sharing some of its physical characteristics centuries before the emergence of northern porcelain in the Tang dynasty or of Jingdezhen porcelain in the Song period. The long-established Chinese category of ci for high-fired pottery (stoneware and porcelain) has the virtue of avoiding such perplexing terminology, albeit at the price of ignoring real distinctions between stoneware and porcelain. The two classifications of porcelain point toward significant differences between the ceramic experiences of China and the West. Stoneware defined the ceramic history of China for centuries before Tang or Jingdezhen porcelain appeared. Whether in the early seventh or late thirteenth century, the Chinese grouped porcelain with stoneware inasmuch as the new material resulted from incremental change within an established tradition, mainly a matter of adjusting the proportion of known ingredients. And since porcelain vessels, in their solidity, resonance, and impermeability, seemed virtually indistinguishable from stonewares, potters and connoisseurs had good reason to regard the new product as just another, slightly improved variety of ci. Earthenware defined the ceramic history of the West until the arrival of Chinese porcelain in the sixteenth century. northern German stoneware developed late in the history of European pottery, though it was highly valued, especially in England and Holland. At least ten million pieces of the rhenish pottery entered the port of london between 1600 and 1640, just before the deluge of Chinese porcelain began. The stonewares gained popularity as drinking vessels, pharmacy jars (albarelli), and chamber pots and as nearly impermeable containers for transporting beer, wine, mineral water, mercury, and dutch gin. Attractive and pleasingly decorated, rhenish stoneware figured in altarpieces by Hans Memling (ca. 1433–94) and in paintings of peasant festivities by Pieter bruegel the Elder (1529–69) and david Teniers the younger (1610–90). Artists of the netherlands often featured stoneware jugs in Marian devotional paintings, showing them filled with flowers or embellished with the sacred trigram of the Holy name of Jesus (De nomine Jhsesu). dutch taverns served beer in the jugs, and the vessels also found their way into wealthy dutch households. Floris van Schooten (1590–1655) painted A Kitchen Scene (ca. 1625), which depicts shelves of pewter dishes, blue-and-white porcelain bowls, and potbellied stoneware jugs topped with pewter lids. in Young Woman at Her Toilet (1667), by Gerrit dou (1613–75), an ermine-draped lady is surrounded by expensive furnishings, including a Persian carpet, upholstered chairs, a silver-gilded metal pitcher, and a stoneware wine jug resting in a massive cooler of black marble. Still, the spread of stoneware in northern Europe from the fourteenth century did not inspire attempts to replicate or analyze the product because good, well-glazed earthenware was close to the rhenish commodity in price and distinction. Chinese porcelain was a different matter altogether, for Europeans regarded it as superior to their ubiquitous earthenware in all respects.<sup>6</sup> Eager to compete with China, Westerners from the late seventeenth century— soon after porcelains began to arrive in massive quantities—investigated the composition of the ceramic and experimented with formulas that approximated it. dentrecolles shared the scientific mentality on which this enterprise was founded. observing that the manufacturers of Jingdezhen were ignorant of chemical analysis, such as the use of nitric and hydrochloric acids to dissolve solid materials, he declares that “their inventions [are] all . . . of extreme simplicity.” He seems to share leibniz’s notion that the Chinese were oblivious to the mental abstraction and critical method that are the essence of Western experimental science. He suggests that “by taking the necessary risks and expense of various tests, it might be possible to discover the art of making with certainty what had once been the consequence of chance.” This presages a major thrust of early-twentieth-century research in traditional industries such as cotton mills, breweries, tanneries, and potteries: that is, investigating the scientific grounds for practices until then inarticulately embedded in traditional handicraft procedures.<sup>7</sup> dentrecolles recommends that just as Europeans might employ experimental techniques to recover the lost secret of making stained glass, so too “perhaps someone in Europe can invent what the Chinese now do not know” about porcelain. in the service of August ii, who financed what is arguably the first research-anddevelopment project in history, that is precisely what Tschirnhaus and his associates did in the very years dentrecolles carried out his investigation in the workshops of Jingdezhen. Early-nineteenth-century European analysis of the mineral and chemical composition of ceramics resulted in the contemporary classification earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain. The category of stoneware emerged by a kind of back-formation: having identified the physical characteristics of porcelain, Western scientists inescapably recognized those of stoneware as well. This taxonomic achievement stemmed from European admiration and craving for chinaware, though lack of that achievement in China reveals little about mental abstraction and critical method there. dentrecolles believed that the potters of Jingdezhen used only rudimentary techniques, yet he actually witnessed them employing some that have a distinctly experimental air, such as producing a component of copper-oxide glaze by sprinkling water on molten copper and then removing the oxide scale for examination.<sup>8</sup> dentrecolles describes this procedure in his letter of 1722, just before he left Jingdezhen for his new post in beijing. As it happens, pottery experts in the two cities embarked on experimental and systematic studies of ceramics in the 1720s, leading to innovative techniques that transformed porcelain aesthetics by the introduction of brilliant enamel colors and unusual effects. The Chinese, however, did not focus on the composition of porcelain itself simply because they regarded the material as a natural extension of their ancient craft of high-fired pottery. For their part, Westerners investigated the nature of the ceramic because of the novelty, excellence, and expense of the exotic commodity. ## TECToniC PlATES, volCAnoES, And yElloW EArTH The most striking contrast between China and the West in the history of ceramics is that the former was more than three thousand years ahead of the latter in the manufacture of high-fired wares. The foundation for this precocious achievement lies in the unfathomable past, as far back as the geologic formation of what is now called China.<sup>9</sup> The supercontinent of Pangaea, “All Earth,” began forming 600 million years ago during the Precambrian, assembled from landmasses riding on tectonic plates averaging one hundred kilometers in thickness. When plates meet at subduction zones, one is pushed beneath the other, with the heat of the collision melting the rock to magma. Made relatively fluid as a result of being mixed with gases and water, the magma rises from the base of the upper mantle, or lithosphere, of the Earth, where the temperature is ${ \mathrm { 1 , 4 0 0 ^ { \circ } C } } ,$ about the firing range of porcelain— a conformity that would not have surprised Hutton or Wedgwood. When magma surfaces explosively, volcanoes are born. More commonly and less dramatically, as the magma cools and crystallizes, it forms granite that thrusts through cracks in the mantle, thereby propelling tectonic plates at an average speed of two centimeters a year, roughly the rate at which fingernails grow. north China (technically, the Sino-Korean craton) and South China (the yangzi craton) collided with Siberia 250 million years ago, completing the consolidation of the continents and heaving up the Altai and Tian Shan mountain ranges of Central Asia.<sup>10</sup> As a consequence of their different tectonic heritages, the northern and southern parts of China have contrasting topographies and natural resources, a fault line also accentuated by climatic divergence. The region of northern China—that is, the territory along the yellow river and north of the Qinling mountains (or the provinces of Shaanxi, Henan, Shanxi, and Hebei)—with an average winter temperature below freezing, became a land of millet, wheat, and sorghum, a central plain of relative physical simplicity. Southern China—encompassing the east-central provinces near the yangzi river (Hunan, Hubei, Jiangxi, Anhui, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang)— evolved as a jumbled, subtropical region of countless lakes, river-dissected hills, and highly indented coastline; having an average winter temperature above freezing, it became a land of rice, sugar, oranges, and cotton. boundless fields and carts in the north, forested slopes and boats in the south. Much of the history of China may be regarded as a successful human endeavor to extend what tectonic collision set in motion—to wield together the disparate areas by deploying a universal written script, a common textual canon, an overarching civil service, and a man-made waterway (the Grand Canal) linking the two great tributaries that flow from the Himalaya mountains to the Pacific ocean. About 140 million years ago, during the dinosaur-dominated periods of the middle Mesozoic, huge volcanic eruptions took place in southern China, perhaps associated with westward movement of the Philippine tectonic plate as it slid over the Eurasian plate. For millions of years, massive clouds of volcanic dust and cinder specks periodically shrouded the region, settling out eventually as a sedimentary deposit identical in chemical composition to igneous rock. Compacted over eons, the pale-colored volcanic debris turned into the china stone that became the basis for the earliest porcelain of southern China. Pulverized by trip-hammers and leached through tanks of water, the stone experiences a simulated weathering that telescopes epochs into hours. Fired in a kiln, it fleetingly reaches toward its primordial origins as molten lava. A phenomenon of furnace transformation, the white porcelain of Jingdezhen is essentially igneous material that has been melted once again and then solidified into artificial rock, a substance re-created in human fire and shaped to human purposes.<sup>11</sup> long after the volcanoes of southern China stopped belching volcanic ash, northern China received its own accretion of new soil. Some 45 million years ago, 20 million years after extinction of the dinosaurs by an asteroid, the last great convulsion of the Earth’s crust began. The bulk of what is now the indian subcontinent split away from Antarctica and headed north, propelled by movement of the indian-Australian tectonic plate. Thirty-seven million years later, a slow-motion smashup took place as india plowed into southern Eurasia, raising the Tibetan Plateau and Himalaya mountains, a range of peaks more than three thousand kilometers long. These constitute the youngest and largest uplands on the planet, called “the roof of the world” since Marco Polo made them known to Europeans in his travel narrative. india still drives north today, raising the mountains an average of ten centimeters every year, making the region the most dangerous earthquake zone in the world. Erosion whittles down the uplift just as inexorably, thereby maintaining the peaks at a general elevation of five kilometers above sea level, apparently the maximum height that mountains can reach on the planet. The indo-Eurasian cataclysm had manifold consequences, even proving decisive for the evolution of human life. The tectonic collision displaced southern China eastward, farther into the Pacific, and it thrust out what became the great peninsula of Southeast Asia. The Tibetan Plateau cut off the flow of rain from the south, the influx of which had nurtured Central Asian grasslands and replenished the Tethys Sea, a body of water extending from Europe to East Asia. As the inland sea dried up, vast deserts expanded in the rain shadow of the mountains; the region lost its mild climate and fertile soil, turning into the desolate wasteland that later afflicted travelers on the Silk road. The Tibetan upheaval led to creation of the monsoon systems of South and East Asia, the colossal natural engines that were unfailingly to speed the passage of ships between india and China. The drainage pattern of East Asia’s great rivers also emerged, with the yellow, yangzi, Hong, Mekong, and Salween all flowing from the ice and snows of the gigantic uplands, separated in their headwaters by fewer than seventy kilometers and in their ultimate destinations in the engulfing sea by thousands. Formation of the Himalaya mountains and the Tibetan Plateau resulted in cooling of the Earth, since exposure of such a huge expanse of bare igneous rock—the size of Texas, California, Montana, and new Mexico combined (or 1,817,400 square kilometers)—led to removal of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas that traps solar heat, from the atmosphere. Monsoon rains that drench the rock particles produced by tectonic collision and erosion also flush out more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, thereby accelerating global cooling. in central Africa, lower planetary temperatures led to shrinking of the rain forest and expansion of savannah grasslands. Faced with a new and more difficult environment, tree-dwelling primates explored the advantages of walking upright on the plains in search of food, launching the evolution that would culminate millions of years later in their most successful descendant, modern Homo sapiens. Cooling of the Earth spawned glaciers up to 3.2 kilometers thick that ground up the continental bedrock in a succession of ice ages. Glacial pulverizing and both mechanical and chemical weathering of the granite peaks of Central Asia produced immeasurable amounts of loess (from German löss, “loose”) a yellow rock dust as fine as flour, composed mainly of quartz, a crystalline mix of silicon and oxygen. Some 2.4 million years ago, loess began blowing into China from the Central Asian desert belt, including the Gobi, blanketing the highlands of the north during long periods of desiccation, finally burying the luxuriant forest of the broad continental plain and its clay-rich surface. Carried southeast on winter winds from Mongolia, the quartz powder forms a layer as much as three hundred meters deep in places, the thickest topsoil on the planet. loess, known in China as huangtu (yellow earth), is the sediment that gives the yellow river (Huang He) its name and turns it into the muddiest waterway in the world: at times as much as a third of its mass is silt, and a tributary once was recorded as reaching almost twice that.<sup>12</sup> This is reflected in the Chinese adage that “the waters of the yellow river become clear only once in a thousand years.” The river, ricci remarks, has “no respect for Chinese law and order,” frequently ravaging whole districts when it breaks its loess banks, seemingly changing its course at will.<sup>13</sup> Unlike the yangzi, the yellow river is navigable for only a short distance from its mouth, making it a dismal channel for trade and communication. Pouring out over a billion tons of silt every year, the river saturates the yellow Sea with its ocher deposit. An exceptionally fertile soil by virtue of its capacity to fix atmospheric nitrogen and bring up mineral nutrients by capillary action, loess provided the agricultural basis for the emergence of civilization in northern China, despite the sparse vegetation of the central plain. Millet agriculture supported a population of four hundred per square kilometer, and the high productivity of cereal farming gave rise to a host of independent, small-scale cultivators, the tax base of all future centraliz ing bureaucracies. To some extent, China owed its lack of feudal magnates and its perennial imperial integration to the rich topsoil swept in from Central Asia. Fittingly, as early as the Zhou period, the Middle Kingdom itself came to be symbolized by a yellow dragon, and writers described the yellow river as flowing with the supple motion of a mighty dragon. Potters in ancient China placed their workshops in loess deposits, and tens of millions of Chinese to the present day, notwithstanding calamitous earthquakes, live in roomy caves carved out of cliffs of yellow earth. loess comprises the bulk of the raw material used in making the seven thousand life-sized, unglazed terra-cotta (earthenware) statues of warriors and horses buried in the famed mausoleum of Qin Shihuang, the first emperor of China. Around the same time, laborers constructed the first sections of what came to be known as the Great Wall from a rammed-loess foundation faced with bricks of fired loess. Centuries later, in the reign of the Ming, loess gave its tint to the yellow tiles on the roofs of the imperial Forbidden City in beijing, and officials used yellow pottery for rituals at the Altar of the Earth. by itself, because it is difficult to shape, loess has limited use as a pottery material; but after being washed by water over millennia, it becomes more malleable as a result of increments of clay. Kaolin, sedimentary clay washed out from granite rock and often found in association with loess, proved most useful for making pottery. As early as the neolithic, artisans mined suitable clays, establishing their kilns where the loess layer was thinnest so they could gain ready access to the underlying kaolin. That clay became the material basis for the white vessels of the Shang, and for more than a thousand years, northern potters shaped it into highfired wares.<sup>14</sup> ## PoT TEry And METAllUrGy in CHinA Employment of loess determined the development of Chinese pottery in the bronze Age (1700–500 b.c.e.).<sup>15</sup> Since it consists mainly of quartz, loess has a high melting point, making it excellent material for constructing high-temperature kilns. in addition, the low clay content of loess means that it does not shrink during drying and firing, thereby proving ideal for making ceramic piece molds for casting bronze ritual vessels, the artistic masterworks of the Shang era. The shapes of the vessels usually came from pottery, though the designs they bore—animal heads, imaginary beasts, a pattern of whorls—generally appeared in low relief or incised rather than as painted decoration. A common motif was the taotie, a mystifying, masklike face of a creature with horns, bulging eyes, and gnarly mouth.<sup>16</sup> Potters carved the ornament on clay molds, sometimes on as many as eleven separate pieces for cauldrons (ding), large round vessels standing on three legs. Artisans assembled the pieces around a clay core and poured in molten copper and tin to form the metal vessel; after they pried off the clay sections, they polished the bronze. The excellent consistency and minimal shrinkage of the loess molds ensured that the final product preserved its meticulous embellishment. retaining their shape under intense heat, the molds made possible the creation of bronze pieces of superb quality, characterized by detailed ornament, dense patterns, and complex interlocking forms. Used as ceremonial, feasting and burial utensils, the bronze containers were objects of desire and distinction. As items central to status assertion as well as ritual order, royal courts controlled their manufacture, and their possession signified high rank and political authority. The Shang tomb of Fu Hao, a consort of King Wu ding (ca. 1200 b.c.e.), held a treasure of more than 400 bronze objects, including 53 wine goblets, along with pottery, carved ivory, jade jewelry, a lacquered coffin, and 7,000 cowry shells.<sup>17</sup> improvements in smelting in the Spring and Autumn period of the Eastern Zhou led to large-scale production of bronzes; archaeological excavation of a single foundry has unearthed tens of thousands of molds. The ritual vessels had a substantial influence on the history of Chinese art and culture, a heritage of the bronze Age that remained vigorous until the fall of the Qing dynasty in the early twentieth century. in 113 b.c.e. workers digging a pit discovered a bronze cauldron, reportedly enveloped in a supernatural, shimmering mist as it came to light. When scholar-officials presented the vessel to the emperor, they explained that in antiquity there existed only “one divine Ding-cauldron,” which became the model for the actual bronzes employed in imperial ceremonies honoring Heaven, Earth, and sacred spirits.<sup>18</sup> in some measure, then, all ancient ding shared in the auspicious nature of this elemental cauldron, endowing them with awesome prestige. From the Han through the Qing, emperors collected ding and other ancient bronzes since they regarded the vessels as embodying the legendary past, spiritual power, and political legitimacy. in turn, potters traded on the reputation of the bronzes, for as early as the Shang they copied the metal pieces in their own medium. As a consequence of innovations in metallurgy, ceramics, which had enjoyed the highest status for ritual and funerary purposes during the neolithic, lost first place to bronze objects during the Shang.<sup>19</sup> And when wares in gold and silver came into wider use in the Han, pottery took second place to them as well. Still, its capacity for skeuomorphic reproduction rescued pottery from being relegated to the category of mere utilitarian crockery. by simulating costly metal wares in clay, potters brought preferred shapes, hues, and ornament within reach of prosperous social groups outside the royal courts. during the Shang, artisans replicated bronze containers in earthenware and stoneware, with glazes that mimicked the patina on bronzes and with spiral patterns that roughly imitated the dragon designs on them. in the Warring States period, ceramic surrogates of ritual bronzes gained widespread acceptance among the upper stratum as mingqi (radiant artifacts), tomb furnishings for the spirits of the dead. inasmuch as a bronze vessel cost the equivalent of a worker’s income for two years, a clay substitute had obvious attractions, in particular when the economy went downhill. That was the case in the period of disunity following the fall of the Han empire in 220 c.e.: bronze production plummeted, and glazed vessels took on a broader role in privileged households.<sup>20</sup> Employment of loess for ceramic molds meant that pottery and metallurgy developed together in China. The same individuals certainly labored as both bronze casters and potters since each craft depended on the other. Until the molten copper and tin actually flowed into a mold, potters controlled almost all stages of production of the bronzes. As a result, effective kilns, clay molds, and ceramic artistry stimulated high-temperature smelting, bronze casting, and imitation of pottery forms in bronze. in western Eurasia and elsewhere, workers first made metal objects with a hammer and anvil as part of a smithy tradition. Hammering metal, however, was not a traditional Chinese technique. rather, China stood out among cultures in that its earliest metal artifacts emerged from a ceramic context, with bronze vessels modeled on pottery and with ceramic molds determining the shape and embellishment of bronze implements. This established a significant technological pattern: the reciprocal relationship of ceramics and metallurgy continued long past the bronze Age. increasingly powerful smelting ovens encouraged the development of kilns for making high-fired pottery in northern China by the late Shang. by 500 b.c.e. greatly improved furnaces led to the use of iron, which melts at 1 $, 5 3 5 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C } ,$ , higher than copper $\left( 1 , 0 8 3 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C } \right)$ or tin $\left( 2 3 1 . 8 9 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C } \right)$ . Most significantly, Chinese craftsmen relied on their long experience with mold technology to produce iron: they made cast iron—heating and pouring the metal into molds, as with bronze—rather than wrought iron, as in the smithy tradition everywhere else. While casting techniques are more wasteful of the ore than hammering, China possessed plentiful iron. it also had reserves of coal to fuel furnaces when northern China became largely deforested during the Tang. Cast-iron manufacture had enormous rippling effects in many parts of the Chinese economy, especially in forest clearance, farming, engineering, mining, and salt production. Using ceramic molds, ironmasters forged thin pans (for evaporating brine), axes, plowshares, chains, hoes, saws, pots, and armaments generations before the beginning of the common era. in the early Tang, the notorious sovereignempress Wu (r. 691–705), an enthusiastic sponsor of buddhism, ordered construction of a three-story pagoda of cast iron, topped by a towering cast-iron phoenix (her symbol) sheathed in gold plate. during the northern Song (960–1126), builders erected an iron pagoda in Kaifeng, thirteen stories (fifty-four meters) high and clad in glazed tiles. in the eleventh century, coke, a solid residue obtained from coal, fueled blast furnaces in northern China, raising output of cast iron to over 113,000 metric tons a year. The state armaments industry of the Song equipped an army of one million men with iron weapons, including spears, arrowheads, swords, and body armor. Europe did not use such large amounts of cast iron until five centuries later.<sup>21</sup> A mutually reinforcing relationship between potters and metal-smiths, coupled with natural resources of first-rate ceramic materials, coal, and iron ore, gave China a key advantage over other regions of the ecumene. Civilization—as defined by the appearance of cultivated plants, domestic livestock, village settlements, formal religious cults, written script, and territorial polities—first came into existence around 4000 b.c.e. in Sumerian temple communities on the lower Tigris and Euphrates rivers in Mesopotamia (present-day iraq). Within a few centuries, Sumerian-Akka dian villagers had 350 names for ceramic vessels, and guilds of potters used massproduction techniques.<sup>22</sup> in contrast, China came relatively late to civilization, for the same set of defining breakthroughs did not appear on the yellow river until more than two thousand years after the Mesopotamian achievements. Since some communication took place across the breadth of Central Asia long before the advent of recorded history, it is unclear which of those breakthroughs to civilization in China resulted from Mesopotamian influence and which were indigenous developments. in any event, China swiftly surged past the accomplishments of Southwest Asia in ceramics and metallurgy as a consequence of the remarkable fashion in which the two technologies reinforced and stimulated each other. Although several considerations, including relative geographical isolation and early imperial unification, set China on a unique trajectory among Eurasian civilizations, the millennia-long symbiosis of clay and metal contributed substantially to the triumphs of China so much admired and coveted by leibniz and his contemporaries. ## THE CrEATion oF TAnG PorCElAin: PoT TEry FroM THE bronZE AGE To THE TAnG over the course of centuries, a proficient kiln technology emerged from the combination of loess soil, the early predominance of ceramics in metallurgy, and considerable experience developing furnaces for making pottery, bronze, and iron.<sup>23</sup> no matter what sort of clay goes into making a vessel, if the kiln does not reach a sufficiently high temperature it merely will turn out earthenware. According to Piccolpasso, italian potters “look on the manner of making the kiln as an important secret and say that in this consists the whole $\operatorname { a r t } ^ { \dag }$ of creating superior wares.<sup>24</sup> of course, Chinese potters shared the same perspective. They had the advantage, however, of more efficient and durable kilns than those of Southwest Asia. The clays of that region have poor refractory properties, firing adequately in the ${ \mathrm { 1 , 0 0 0 } } ^ { \circ }$ to ${ \bf 1 , 1 0 0 } ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ range but melting above $1 , 1 7 0 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ . This limitation contributed to early Mesopotamian and Egyptian potters modeling their kilns on smelting furnaces, in which the smithy strives to keep metal and fuel in close contact with each other. They built furnaces of brick from the ground up, squat bottlelike structures with fireboxes directly beneath the pots, a technology that produced a uniform but modest temperature. Potters achieve the best results, however, by separating vessels from the source of heat in the kiln. in China, they had long experience with refractory clays in building furnaces, and their downdraft kiln served as the model for the reverberatory furnace used for making cast iron, in which flames are deflected downward from the roof on the metal. Artisans employed loess soil to build such furnaces: they simply excavated a chamber in rising ground, tamped the walls, and dug a vent to the surface; an effective chimney gave a good draft and strong flame. Chinese potters had the additional benefit that their heat-resistant kilns could handle at least sixty firings before needing repairs, whereas those of Southwest Asia could not withstand much more than a dozen because of their construction from clays readily damaged by high temperature. From early times, Chinese kiln builders put their structures partly underground, using the quartz-rich soil to provide efficient insulation. The small, boxy kilns of the neolithic period reached ${ 8 0 0 } ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C } ,$ about the temperature obtained by putting raw wares in a bonfire, the earliest means of baking clay; at that heat only porous earthenware can be produced.<sup>25</sup> As early as the Shang, however, kilns achieved temperatures of $1 , 2 0 0 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C } ,$ , well within the range at which stoneware forms. in the Warring States period, northern kilns partially built into hillsides of loess soil took on a horseshoe shape, with two chimneys side by side, and fired as high as $1 , 3 5 0 ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C } ,$ the temperature at which porcelain ingredients fuse. in the lower yangzi region during the Zhou era, “dragon kilns” (longyao) used the slope of hills to produce a natural draft that raised the firing temperature higher than European furnaces could obtain before the nineteenth century. resembling a radically inclined chimney, the multichamber tube relied on the use of downdraft circulation, with fire at the mouth of the kiln preheating the air rising in the structure. Zhou potters fired stoneware at temperatures of 1,200° to 1,300°C and exported them as luxury items from the yangzi valley to the region of the yellow river. by the Song period, the largest dragon kilns of southern China stretched up slopes as much as 140 meters, at a 20-degree angle, and could fire tens of thousands of porcelains simultaneously. At Jingdezhen toward the end of the Ming dynasty, the egg-shaped kiln (zhenyao) came into extensive use. Potters called it that because they thought it resembled half an egg lying on its side, though Tang ying saw the oven as evocative of a tippedover water jar. The switch from the dragon kiln stemmed from thinning timber supplies in the vicinity: since the egg-shaped furnace heats up rapidly and is exceptionally well insulated, it requires less fuel than the dragon kiln, making it cheaper to use. described by dentrecolles as typically thirty-six meters high and seventythree meters long, the egg-shaped kiln fired various types of wares and glazes at different temperatures in a single operation. Perhaps bringing to mind his own experience, dentrecolles tells his readers that the arch of the kiln is “thick enough that one can walk on it without being troubled by the fire inside.” Many pages of dentecolles’s letters concentrate on glazes, an aspect of pottery technology that depended on employment of sophisticated kilns. His report of 1722 is devoted almost entirely to recipes for glazes, surely because he grasped that French potters could more easily replicate the surface coatings of porcelain than they could its clay fabric. High-fired glazes first appeared in China in the yangzi basin during the bronze Age, fully three thousand years before Europeans started applying them.<sup>26</sup> Wood-fueled kilns develop a coating of ash glaze when fired to temperatures needed to make stoneware; some of it falls on the vessels being fired, producing a blotchy, uneven veneer. Glaze crystals also form on the wares themselves, an effect augmented as kilns grow larger and cooling takes longer. in all likelihood, potters as early as the Shang noticed these phenomena and thereafter deliberately sought to replicate and manipulate glazes during kiln operations. in the Han period (206 b.c.e.–220 c.e.), potters added lead to glazes as a flux, that is, to lower the temperature at which the glaze is fired. This was a turning point in technology, for when iron-oxide pigments were covered by the lead glaze, colors appeared bright and clear on the smooth, reflective surface of the fired vessel. lead glazes thus encouraged increased recourse to painted decoration, a hallmark of Tang ceramics. Excellent glazes on Chinese porcelain help account for the extraordinary success and prestige of the commodity; they enabled the potter skillfully to imitate metalwork and gemstone surfaces, to create a variety of shades reminiscent of other substances, such as jade, bronze, and tinted lacquer, and to paint vessels with precisely delineated, polychrome adornment. Such artistry depended on comprehensive knowledge and control of firing techniques, especially regulating the amount of oxygen in the kiln. in reducing conditions (i.e., with restriction of oxygen during firing), grayish bodies and cool (or bluish green) tones dominate in the fired clay; in oxidizing conditions (with ample oxygen), brownish bodies and warm (or yellowish) shades dominate.<sup>27</sup> Tang potters accidentally discovered the effect of various kiln atmospheres, and Song artisans later developed techniques to control the process more surely. it all called for remarkable ingenuity and proficiency, however. Without precise measuring tools, potters had to learn by trial and error how to gauge oxygen levels in the kiln to produce desired hues on the fired vessel while simultaneously taking account of how the temperature affects glaze viscosities, assorted pigments, and the clay itself. As dentrecolles emphasized, making porcelain was an exceptionally volatile, costly business as substantial wastage invariably occurred when potters aimed for subtle and complex effects employing large kilns and high temperatures. Given the natural resources Chinese potters had available, from loess soil to kaolin clay to china stone, creation of porcelain by the Tang period would have been impossible without prolonged experimenting with raw materials, improving furnace design, developing glazing techniques, and learning how to manage the kiln environment. The achievement also owes much to the existence of the large number of pottery centers that sprang up as China slowly recovered from the fall of the Han empire in 220 c.e. From then to the rise of the Sui dynasty in 581, imperial China fractured into several petty kingdoms, the north fell into the hands of nomadic invaders, and multiple disasters—drought, floods, and epidemics—resulted in population decline. Scores of refugees fled the north, including potters, some of whom rebuilt their workshops just south of the yangzi river. With recovery of the economy and centralized political control under the Sui and Tang dynasties, pottery manufacturers flourished as never before, contending for business within a growing domestic market, producing wares for new export clients, and struggling to win the all-important patronage of the imperial court. in the Tang, kiln complexes cropped up in at least fourteen provinces (and fifty counties), five times the number of centers that existed in the Sui period, with most manufacturers producing an assortment of wares.<sup>28</sup> intense competition placed a premium on the purest clay, the silkiest glaze, the stylish shape, the gleaming color, the innovative embellishment. As was always the case, potters quickly adopted— that is, spied out and copied—the best practices of their rivals, thereby impelling overall ceramic standards to higher levels. it is not surprising that porcelain, prepared for by two thousand years of craftsmanship, first appeared during the reign of the Tang. A transformation in China’s relationship to Eurasian culture also spurred the ul timate transition to porcelain in the early seventh century. during the Sui period, merchants began importing Southwest Asian commodities to China in unprecedented amounts. Silver vessels from the eastern Mediterranean and Persia ranked among the most prized merchandise, eagerly embraced at the imperial court and reproduced by Chinese artisans in bronze and lacquerware. novel and appealing, the silver objects and their Chinese counterparts became models for the ceramic industry within a generation. northern Tang potters copied the pale shades, slender bodies, and lobed shapes of silver ewers, bowls, and dishes.<sup>29</sup> of course, they employed kaolin as their primary clay, a mineral substance that satisfied all the requirements for such replication since it fired a striking white, shaped to fine tolerances, and withstood the hottest portion of the kiln without melting. Tang potters thus created the first true porcelain, a new material that nevertheless emerged naturally, all but invisibly, from the long evolution of high-fired pottery, inspired at the last moment by new cultural forces linking China to the rest of the ecumene. ## yElloW CHinA And blUE CHinA: lAnd And SEA in EAST And WEST Extensive cultural contact with western Eurasia represented only one aspect of widespread change in early Tang China (618–755). based on Sui precedents, the Tang modestly extended the system of staffing government posts by examinations based mainly on Confucian texts, one of the Chinese practices most admired by European philosophes a thousand years later. Another Sui achievement, building the Grand Canal to connect the basins of the yellow and yangzi rivers, became equally important in time. At its greatest extent in the fourteenth century, the Grand Canal attained a length of 1,794 kilometers (or roughly the driving distance from new york City to Memphis, Tennessee). in contrast, the largest such undertaking in Europe was the Canal de languedoc, a waterway of 240 kilometers, completed in 1681 to connect the Mediterranean to the Atlantic by slicing through southwestern France. in England, the canal linking the Trent and Mersey rivers, built in the decade after 1766—and running past the front gates of Etruria Hall, Wedgwood’s Georgian-style country house—was acclaimed by patriots as the “Eighth Wonder of the World.”<sup>30</sup> Making possible a barge journey from Hull on the north Sea to liverpool on the irish Sea, with a canal connection running down the Severn river to the bristol Channel, it stretched for 150 kilometers, only 8 percent the length of the Grand Canal. China’s new man-made river functioned as the vital artery by which the surplus rice of the south reached the center of power in Chang’an (xi’an), the capital of the Tang dynasty in the northwest. The grain fed Chang’an’s population of one million, as well as armies guarding the frontier against nomadic attack. by the eighth century, the lower yangzi region had emerged as the indispensable granary of the empire: the riches and resourcefulness of the south secured the bureaucrats and bulwarks of the north. ricci records that “the southern provinces provide the King with everything needed or wanted to live well in the unfertile province of Pekin [beijing]: fruit, fish, rice, silk cloth for garments, and six hundred other things, all of which must arrive on a fixed day.”<sup>31</sup> Using a simile already commonplace for centuries, a Ming official declared that the Grand Canal “may be likened to a man’s throat. if food cannot be swallowed for a single day, death ensues at once.”<sup>32</sup> At the same time, the waterway also benefited southern China: it lowered transport costs by 80 percent for agricultural and manufactured products. Porcelain from Jiangxi featured among the earliest merchandise carried north on barges on the Grand Canal. in general, the Middle Kingdom experienced chronic tension between the forces of what has been called “yellow China” and “blue China.”<sup>33</sup> in simplified terms, the former stood for the yellow river, the Great Wall, agrarian predominance, continental priorities, a command economy, Confucian bureaucracy, and disregard for the maritime world; the latter signified the lower yangzi, a market economy, local self-sufficiency, cultural interaction, long-distance trade, and orientation to the sea. Fear of marauding pastoral nomads in the north made for a static frontier, swept by loess winds and crisscrossed by camel caravans. The south contended with a fluid frontier, with Tang administrators and merchants moving into the hot lands of Guangdong, Guangxi, and northern vietnam. As a northern writer observed after the fall of the Han dynasty, the south is “a distant place with different customs, and the climate is not the same.”<sup>34</sup> in the late thirteenth century, Marco Polo looked on northern and southern China as virtually separate kingdoms, the latter called Manzi and the former Cathay. if construction of the Grand Canal had never taken place, an enduring blue China might have emerged in the south, an independent state that could have reached out to encompass coastal vietnam and parts of insular Southeast Asia, areas bound together by a common maritime orientation and commitment to long-distance exchange. The Chinese elite, however, remained focused on command from the north and on a continental point of view.<sup>35</sup> For them, the sea signified the merchant’s realm, dominated by men given over to profit rather than to principle or position; it stood for the alien and the ungovernable, viewed with apprehension and to be shunned whenever possible. The voC and the EiC had limited cultural influence in Asia before the late eighteenth century because of unbreakable ties to their metropolitan countries and the unrelenting focus of the merchants on realizing earnings for their companies and shareholders. Seagoing Chinese merchants had limited cultural influence abroad because Chinese officialdom regarded them as loosening ties to their metropolitan country in the service of an unseemly focus on garnering profit. As a consequence, the “Asian Mediterranean,” encompassing the expanse from the South China Sea to the Gulf of Siam, played a limited role in the Chinese worldview.<sup>36</sup> in contrast, western Asia always had a pronounced maritime outlook. For Mesopotamian empires, control of the Persian Gulf and access to the sea lanes of the indian ocean were crucial for commercial prosperity and state security. For ancient Egypt, Phoenicia, and Greece, the eastern Mediterranean represented a highway of trade and a cockpit of war, considerations that impelled kingdoms and coastal city-states to maintain harbors and finance fleets. For rome, the whole of the Mediterranean bound the empire together: it provided for the movement of troops, as well as for indispensable, never-ending relays of grain-filled galleys from the nile to italy. More than anything else, control of the Mediterranean accounts for imperial rome’s exceptional stability and resilience, making it the greatest of all iron Age empires of the West. The countries of northwestern Europe—Portugal, Spain, France, Holland, and England—succeeded to this maritime legacy inasmuch as they looked out on the Atlantic and traded by water with the Mediterranean. in the West, then, commerce, war, and the sea were entwined from birth. Columbus brought the traditions of the Mediterranean and the Atlantic together inasmuch as he was a native of the port of Genoa, spent many years in Portugal, appealed for financial backing from European monarchs, and made his great discovery by voyaging across the ocean Sea. As warrior-merchants serving trading empires, the men of the voC and EiC hearkened back to institutions and perspectives forged in Genoa and venice, most conspicuously a lethal joining of warfare to trade, power to profit.<sup>37</sup> The voC followed a policy of coophandel met force (trade by force of arms).<sup>38</sup> in 1718 an English governor of bombay counseled the directors of the EiC of the need for sea power to prevent indian monarchs from controlling commerce: “if no naval force, no trade, if no fear, no friendship.”<sup>39</sup> According to ricci, when Portuguese ships reached the ports of southern China in the early sixteenth century, Chinese customs officials expressed alarm at the cannon they carried and at the swift recourse to violence of Portuguese commanders determined to win access to trade.<sup>40</sup> The officials at first opposed allowing the foreigners entrance to the kingdom, though they soon gave way before the lure of illicit profit. in this encounter, Confucian bureaucrats and Western mariners represented their respective traditions, the former oriented toward continental, land-based centers of power, the latter toward maritime enterprise backed by armed force. ricci believed that a difference in character distinguished the two great regions of China: “The northern Chinese are more warlike and courageous than those from the south but less alert mentally.” The claim made its way into Montesquieu’s Spirit of Laws, which drew heavily on du Halde’s compilation of Jesuit reports: “The peoples of northern China are more courageous than those of the south.”<sup>41</sup> indeed, even the Chinese recognized an age-old contrast between northern martial valor and southern commercial acumen (or avarice). Still, tensions between yellow and blue China relaxed in the early phase of the Tang dynasty, with administrators in the north and merchants in the south finding common ground. For the first and last time, blue China came to clear dominance during the Southern Song period (1127–1279), when nomadic conquest of the north resulted in the capital and court being relocated to the city of Hangzhou, just south of the yangzi. building the Grand Canal extended both imperial control and Chinese culture to the south, a vast region that began to be incorporated into what is now called China only from the time of the Han. From the Tang period to the eleventh century, the population soared, increasing by over 500 percent.<sup>42</sup> Migration from the north during the post-Han troubles, coupled with expansion of crop cultivation thereafter, especially of more productive strains of rice, explains the demographic explosion, while the latter sheds light on the increasing importance of maritime dealings in the southern provinces from the Tang through the Song. The hilly coastal provinces of Fujian and Guangdong are hemmed in by mountains, resulting in a congested environment that effectively oriented the population to the sea. xie li, a Quanzhou official and poet of the thirteenth century, described the problems and opportunities of the area: The Quanzhou population is dense. The mountains and valleys are barren. The people want to till, but there is no land to open up. To the south lies the ocean, vast and limitless. Every year they build ships and go to foreign lands.<sup>43</sup> inhabitants of the coast turned to the sea in one capacity or another: they cultivated foodstuffs for export (sugar, wine, salt, wheat flour), made export merchandise (pottery, paper, silk, iron wares), imported foreign goods (pearls, sapanwood, sulfur, coral, kingfisher feathers, indian cotton cloth), and even migrated to Chinese settlements in Taiwan, Korea, vietnam, and maritime Southeast Asia. Mer chants in China shipped pickled plums and lychee nuts to maritime Southeast Asia, metal utensils and sides of cured pork to india, silk fabric and porcelains to Japan and Persia. A Song scholar observed that “the entire province of Fujian makes its living by the practice of seaborne commerce.”<sup>44</sup> Merchant shipping and overseas trade increased considerably during the early Tang; Canton and Quanzhou emerged as important ports for the first time. A visitor to Canton recorded seeing “unknown numbers of indian, Persian, South Sea and other boats, laden with incense, drugs, and precious things piled up like mountains.”<sup>45</sup> The rise of buddhism in China from the first centuries c.e. fostered trade in aromatic woods and other forest products of Southeast Asia needed for religious ceremonies.<sup>46</sup> during the Tang, however, trade shifted to spices from the Moluccas and pepper from india. As luxury products, the buddhist commodities made for handsome proceeds when transported on ships of slight tonnage; but pepper had a low value-to-volume ratio, which meant carrying it in bulk on larger ships resulted in higher profits. As a consequence of the advantages obtained from economy of scale, sizable Chinese junks came to dominate trade to india after the ninth century, displacing smaller vessels from the indian ocean. This would be especially lucrative for the pottery industry. Chinese seaborne enterprise during the Tang met with a similar impulse from Southwest Asia.<sup>47</sup> The rulers of Sassanian Persia (226–651) promoted trade in the indian ocean and farther east, as far as Sri lanka for the collection of silk, spices, and sandalwood. The Arab ruling class that conquered and replaced the Sassanians in the seventh century pursued a similar commercial policy. Proclaimed in 618, the outward-looking Tang dynasty coincided with the foundation of Muslim power in Arabia in the time of the Prophet Muhammad (ca. 570–632). Arab-Muslim conquest of iraq (637), the levant (640), Mesopotamia (641), Egypt (642), and Persia (651) reconfigured the Southwest Asian trading zone, uniting a region previously divided by language, religion, and warring empires. Ships from Southwest Asia began arriving in Canton in the eighth century, and large numbers of Arabs and Persians settled in the city. during the early period of the Abbasid dynasty (750–1258), Persian vessels made high profits taking goods on the 16,000-kilometer round-trip to China. A diaspora of Muslim merchants from Southwest Asia in the entrepôts of the indian ocean, Southeast Asia, and China later would prove crucial for the development of Jingdezhen blue-and-white porcelain. The Tang dynasty, however, traced its descent from Turkic-Mongol peoples of Central Asia, so the imperial court in Chang’an showed more interest in northern caravans than in southern argosies. indeed, the early Tang period witnessed the most extensive cultural and political contacts between Southwest Asia and China before establishment of the Mongol empire some five hundred years later. The Eastern Market of Chang’an displayed merchandise from all provinces of the Middle Kingdom; the Western Market featured goods from Central Asia and Southwest Asia, as well as six Zoroastrian and Manichaean temples.<sup>48</sup> Central Asian artisans fashioned vessels in silver and carved figurines from jade. Southwest Asian entrepreneurs imported purple-dyed woolen cloth from Syria, deep-pile carpets from Persia, rock crystal from Samarqand, and lapis lazuli from the mountains of northern Afghanistan. A thousand precious items buried near Chang’an in 732 suggest the scale and variety of the caravan trade: the hoard included coral, gold dust, fabrics, Sassanian coins, silverwork, baltic amber, and blocks of jade.<sup>49</sup> The goods may have been carried to Chang’an by Sogdians, perhaps the most numerous Southwest Asian residents of the city. Many came from Samarqand, a city in the region the romans called Transoxiana (now mainly Uzbekistan and Tajikistan). A Tang chronicler noted that Sogdians “excel at commerce and love profit [and] . . . they go wherever there is profit.”<sup>50</sup> Sogdian merchants calculated prices in silver ingots and copper-cash, quantities of which they carried to Transoxiana. Significantly, sabao, the name of the Tang office appointed to supervise foreigners, derives, by way of the Sogdian language, from a Sanskrit term meaning “caravan leader.” ## THE SilK roAd: CHinA And SoUTHWEST ASiA in THE TAnG Pottery statues of two-humped bactrian camels figure among the paraphernalia deposited in Tang tombs, along with ceramic models of dogs, horses, houses, and granaries. The pieces commonly are painted yellow, green, and brown. depicted with lively realism and dramatic movement, the camels bear sacks of merchandise and cooking equipment. Pilgrim flasks and haunches of meat dangle from the saddles, provisions for the dead on their ultimate journey. Some of the camels improbably carry eight-man orchestras playing stringed instruments and woodwinds; dwarfs and jugglers cavort on others. Familiar animals in northern China for hundreds of years, camels are represented in mortuary sculptures as far back as the fourth century b.c.e. in Central Asia, a winged camel symbolized good fortune, and by the time of the Han, the Chinese regarded the beasts in the same way because of the rich cargoes they brought from distant lands.<sup>51</sup> but whatever their original spiritual function, the Tang pottery camels inescapably evoke the caravan trade of the Silk road. Camels travel no faster than four kilometers an hour, so journeying on the Silk road meant a long, grueling trek through the desiccated heart of Asia.<sup>52</sup> Caravans of camels and carts departed from Chang’an, passed through the long corridor of Gansu province, and trudged west to skirt the southern edge of the Gobi desert, where a line of modest Chinese towns serviced travelers. At dunhuang, the route split into northern and southern passages around the Taklimakan desert of the Tarim basin, a stony badlands between the Tian Shan to the north and the Kunlan range of the Tibetan Plateau to the south. bleak and cruel, the terrain took many lives; travelers stacked up the bleached bones of animals as landmarks. Most caravans took the northern route, which passed by fewer sand dunes and salt crusts, relics of the primeval inland sea. on the southern route, steep mountain trails led by way of Tibet and nepal into the Ganges valley of northeastern india. Here and there along the Silk road, the greenery of crops and pastureland, the legacy of glacial runoff and loess soil, relieved the desolation of rock and sand. A series of polyglot oasis communities—including Turfan, Kucha, Aksu, Khotan, and Cherchen—lived off the passing caravans. They were not merely neutral waystations for travelers, however, for their residents acted as cultural brokers, adapting material objects and religious ideas, as well as ornamental designs and symbols, which filtered in from the great centers of agrarian civilization. on his sixteen-year, roundtrip journey to india, xuanzang (ca. 596–664), a famous and influential buddhist monk, received hospitality in Silk road settlements from Uighur (Turkic) khans and warlords. of course, his fellow monks welcomed him as well. in the Kucha area alone, some one hundred buddhist monasteries with five thousand monks offered lodging to travelers while also serving them as banks, storehouses, and caravanserais.<sup>53</sup> The two tracks of the Silk road joined again at Kashgar, the point at which pilgrims such as xuanzang headed south through the towering peaks of the Pamirs and the Hindu Kush to the buddhist shrines and reliquaries (stupas) of india. The main route, however, continued west through Transoxiana to the prosperous metropolis of Samarqand, from which paths ran southwest to Persia and west to Mesopotamia. After crossing the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, a relatively short journey brought the camel-weary traveler to the levant or Egypt. The trek from westernmost China to ports on the eastern Mediterranean traversed some 7,000 kilometers, a distance covered at no more than 32 kilometers a day. Polo may have counted himself fortunate to have journeyed to China in only one year since his father and uncle previously had spent three years on their return because of political turbulence along the route. Although regular travel on the Silk road went back centuries, probably as far as the early bronze Age, the Chinese still perceived western Asia before the Tang as a treasure-house of legends and fantasies, a land of monstrous and marvelous animals, the realm of the daoist Queen Mother of the West (xiwangmu), the setting of a fabulous mountain of jade, the most magical and sacred of substances. The Tibetan Plateau seemed to be the edge of the world: daoists believed the paradise of the immortals lay beyond the wasteland of deserts and mountains; Chinese folktales imagined the distant west as a region of quicksand, killing frosts, and everlasting night, plagued by elephant-sized red ants and wasps big as bottle gourds.<sup>54</sup> This cloud of unknowing began to lift in the early Tang as China for the first time since the Han period looked far beyond its familiar northern periphery. in the mid-seventh century, Tang military forces even seized control of the oasis communities around the Tarim basin, extending Chinese sway almost to Persia. To maintain its armies and alliances, the Tang regime sent a million bolts of silk every year to the Sogdians of Transoxiana in exchange for 100,000 warhorses, imports needed to keep the army’s stock at the required number. After 180,000 horses reportedly perished from disease, a Tang chronicler stated, “Horses are the military preparedness of the state; if Heaven takes this preparedness away, the state will totter to a fall.”<sup>55</sup> Purchasing Transoxianian horses represented one of the heaviest drains on the treasury inasmuch as a million bolts of silk amounted to 84 million square meters of cloth. Export of such fabulous quantities resulted in pieces of silk being used as common currency throughout Central Asia. Traders in Persia and Mesopotamia paid twice the price the fabric cost in China and carried it on to the levant to sell at high profit. According to reports by travelers, Chinese silk overflowed the market stalls of Southwest Asia. Under the early Tang regime, buddhist pilgrims, Syrian merchants, Persian priests (Manichaeans, Zoroastrians, and nestorian Christians), Sogdian craftsmen, Jewish physicians, Arabian gem merchants, Tibetan mercenaries, and Uighur horse dealers traveled the Silk road. The flourishing Tang economy, especially the teeming metropolis of Chang’an, acted like a magnet, drawing acrobats, painters, dancers, magicians, and musicians along the camel trails. Fleeing from Muslim conquerors, some of the elite of Sassanian Persia, including the imperial family, sought refuge in China. Within a generation, Persian traders recently converted to islam crowded the streets of Chang’an. diplomats, missionaries, and merchants moved along the corridors of Central Asia, their collective activity drawing distant regions closer together than ever before. The Tang court sent four embassies to india in the mid-seventh century, and northern indian states dispatched envoys to Chang’an to plead for military help against Tibetan warlords. The western focus of the early Tang meant that the seventh century was a great age for the expansion of buddhism in East Asia. Chinese merchants imported indian commodities needed for buddhist ceremonies, including coral, pearls, incense, lapis lazuli, cotton cloth, and glass vessels. Chinese monks, who sometimes acted as diplomatic emissaries, exchanged large amounts of silk fabric for precious indian relics, such as the supposed parietal bone of the buddha (Siddartha Gautama, d. ca. 483 b.c.e.). With a train of twenty horses, xuanzang brought back 650 manuscripts of buddhist lore, statues of the buddha, and enshrined bits and pieces of the buddha’s flesh. regrettably, his only elephant plunged into a river gorge in the Pamirs when bandits attacked his caravan.<sup>56</sup> At the request of the emperor Taizong (r. 626–49), xuanzang wrote an account of his travels, and in subsequent generations his exploits became incorporated into Chinese popular culture, including oral tradition, folktales, poems, and short stories. Most notably, Wu Cheng’en (ca. 1500–1582) made them the basis for his influential comic fantasy, The Journey to the West, in which the trickster character Monkey takes center stage rather than the pious pilgrim. As a consequence of the novel’s popularity, the supernatural adventures of Monkey and xuanzang (called by the buddhist name Tripitaka) became common themes for porcelain decoration in the seventeenth century. xuanzang’s pilgrimage took him to numerous shrines of buddhist bodhisattvas, enlightened beings who forgo nirvana to help others. near the Ganges in northern india, he prayed before a sandalwood statue of the bodhisattva Avalokitesvara (Perceiver of the World’s Sounds). With the buddha himself having attained nirvana and thus having transcended human affairs, believers regarded bodhisattvas (or buddhas-in-the-making), as accessible and altruistic beings who aided mortals in daily troubles and in reaching buddhahood. by the early centuries of the common era, Avalokitesvara had emerged as the most significant personification of compassion in buddhism, a model of perfection in a hallowed pantheon. in due course, buddhist communities throughout Asia paid worship to him. He became a revered figure to wayfarers on the Silk road because of his response to cries of pain and suffering. According to the lotus Sutra, the most popular buddhist scripture in the Tang and Song periods, “This bodhisattva can grant fearlessness to living beings. if you call upon his name, you will be delivered from these evil-hearted bandits [who rob traveling merchants].”<sup>57</sup> xuanzang promoted the holy man’s cult when he returned home, a cause later taken up by the empress Wu. The career of Avalokitesvara subsequently took a curious turn, however: by the tenth century, under the impact of Chinese folk religion, he became transformed into Guanyin, the spirit of compassion and fecundity, who herself later would take on the guise of the mother of the Christian god. At all stages of the bodhisattva’s cultural pilgrimage, porcelain figurines represented the principal means by which the sacred personage became tangible and proximate to most believers, whether as Avalokitesvara reclining on a lotus blossom, Guanyin cuddling a baby boy, or the virgin Mary fingering a rosary. (See figure 13.) ## EUrASiAn CUlTUrAl ExCHAnGE in THE TAnG Porcelain and other Chinese arts responded to the Tang opening to the west.<sup>58</sup> oasis communities on the Silk road played the role of middlemen, conveying their versions of indian and Persian pictorial methods to China, such as rhythmic patterns, rotating arabesques, stylized flowers, geometric shapes, molded relief, interlaced designs, and exuberant colors. A number of plant patterns, including the acanthus, palmette, and peony-like blossoms, entered the mainstream of Chinese art after monks and artisans copied them from hundreds of buddhist cave temples and monumental tombs at dunhuang, near the eastern terminus of the Silk road. The quintessential buddhist motif of the lotus, journeying from South Asia to the Middle Kingdom by way of Persia and the caravan track, embarked on its triumphal progress in Chinese art and architecture. Foreign influence led to one of the most enduring Chinese decorative devices on porcelain plates and bowls, a swirling band of flowers surrounding a central medallion, such as a sketch of a carp, duck, or blossom—a format whose remote descendant is the conventional pattern still frequently painted on modern dinner plates. Auspicious buddhist objects, such as the bodhi tree, parasol, wheel, and shell, became fixtures in Chinese ornament. Figures of peacocks, stags, wild sheep, and eagles entered the Chinese ornamental repertoire by way of decoration on Southwest Asian silverwares. Transmitted by designs on imported textiles, so too did winged horses, griffins, and chimera, fanciful counterparts of the actual novelties— peacocks, cheetahs, date palm, fig tree, jasmine flower, almond tree, lettuce, polo, and chess—that arrived in China from Southwest Asia around the same time. in return for these bequests, China sent the apricot tree, the rhubarb plant, and silkworm cocoons in the opposite direction. Southwest Asian glass and metal vessels also reached China, where in due course potters replicated them. Silver bird-headed ewers came from Persia (or possibly the eastern Mediterranean) to China, where elite consumers called them huping, “barbarian bottles,” and placed them in their tombs. Potters copied the ewer, helping to make it a fashionable item. in a centuries-long roundabout typical of ceramics, merchants exported Tang bird-headed porcelain ewers to Southwest Asia, where both earthenware potters and metalworkers duplicated them in the eleventh century. Traded across Central Asia, the Southwest Asian pilgrim flask became conflated with the leather canteens of pastoral nomads, and Chinese potters then translated the flask, known as a bianhu (flattened vase) in China, into porcelain. often depicted on the funerary camels of the Tang, the pilgrim flask, sometimes with simulated leather stitching on its sides, carried decorative motifs deriving from the Hellenistic kingdoms (323–30 b.c.e.) of the eastern Mediterranean, including reliefs of dancing girls, winged lions, and mounted archers. Porcelain pilgrim flasks became high-status relics in Tang tombs, and merchants exported the flasks to Southwest Asia along with other vessels.<sup>59</sup> (See figure 13.) Archaeologists have excavated shards of Tang ceramics from many locations in Southwest Asia, although some black-glazed, fifth-century pottery fragments discovered beneath the floor of a mosque at Siraf, on the northern coast of the Persian Gulf, represent the earliest dated evidence for Chinese artifacts in the region. The pottery almost certainly came to Persia in ships, always the preferred mode of transport for that merchandise. The first archaeological confirmation of direct maritime trade between China and Southwest Asia came as recently as 1989 from investigation of an early-ninth-century Arabian or indian shipwreck off the island of belitung, between Sumatra and borneo. Chinese ceramics made up all but a small fraction of the cargo and included fine northern whitewares, polychrome bowls, and large storage jars made in Guangdong province. The whitewares are the first porcelains known to have been exported from China.<sup>60</sup> Just as commerce on the Silk road depended on knowledge of oases and mountain passes between dunhuang and Samarqand, maritime trade between Canton and the ports of the Persian Gulf depended on understanding the monsoon winds of the southern seas. Known to the Chinese as “ocean ship-driving winds” (bozhao feng), they constituted the climatic regimen that determined when ships could set sail.<sup>61</sup> Since at least the first century c.e., roman, Southwest Asian, and Hindu merchants had a practical grasp of the schedule of monsoon winds in the indian ocean. Around that time, an anonymous writer, perhaps a Greek businessman in Egypt, produced a small handbook on the subject, the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, which spelled out when vessels could safely voyage between Arabia and the western coast of india.<sup>62</sup> during the Tang and Song, merchants from various countries and trading groups also gathered information on the operation of East Asian winds. Seagoing traders in the Tang period based their enterprise on this accumulation of knowledge. relying on steady, predictable ship-driving winds from China to the indian ocean, they established the first substantial and enduring maritime connection between the Middle Kingdom and Southwest Asia. Chinese merchants in particular benefited from that achievement when seaborne commerce expanded during the Song. Still, the Silk road, rather than the maritime porcelain route, remained most important in the early Tang, the leading indicator of the dynamism and affluence of the period. Around the mid-eighth century, though, the dynasty ran into momentous problems, disrupting its homeland as well as interactions with the rest of Asia. The An lushan rebellion $\left( 7 5 5 – 6 3 \right)$ ), led by a Tang general of Turko-Sogdian descent, plunged the empire into disorder, stymied the flourishing economy, and provoked violent xenophobia. With tens of thousands of persons killed, parts of Chang’an became a wasteland. All but a handful of the city’s numerous buddhist monasteries and convents disappeared; so too did foreign dress and entertainments. buddhism lost its cultural cachet among the aristocracy and gentry; vandals destroyed buddhist wall paintings and statues throughout the empire in the $8 4 0 { \mathsf { s } } .$ . The regime turned against alien religions, even proscribing them in $^ { 8 4 5 }$ , a legacy the Jesuits still struggled with centuries later. Fighting, rebellion, and disease devastated the richest provinces, including the lower yangzi region. Mobs in Canton massacred thousands of Muslim merchants in $7 5 5$ , and when trade revived decades later, subsequent pillages of the port by pirates and rebels dealt additional blows to overseas connections. Many seaborne merchants, both Chinese and Southwest Asian, took refuge in northern vietnam and carried on their business from there. losing control of Korea and the frontier region between Sichuan and burma, the Tang regime found itself besieged on all fronts.<sup>63</sup> An event far from China foreshadowed the disasters that would strike the empire with the An lushan rebellion. At the battle of Talas in $7 5 1$ , somewhere to the east of Samarqand and south of lake balkhash, an Abbasid army defeated Tang forces. The victors took several thousand Chinese men into captivity in baghdad, the Abbasid capital on the Tigris-Euphrates, where they may have passed on knowledge of paper making, silk weaving, and pottery glazing. An obscure clash at the outermost limit of two great empires, Talas nonetheless represented a turning point in the fortunes of Eurasia. As a consequence of the An lushan rebellion a few years later, the Tang treasury fell bankrupt just when the cost of warhorses from Transoxiana soared to the prohibitive price of forty bolts of silk each. Facing overwhelming force as well as financial crisis, the Chinese military pulled back from their strongholds on the Silk road, leaving islam to expand and buddhism to face a long decline.<sup>64</sup> The ceramic horses modeled by Tang potters, lean racehorses and muscled warhorses, ceased to be produced, replaced in the Song by smaller, less magnificent animals characterized with round noses and stubby legs. The battle of Talas marked the end of an era of Chinese dominance in Central Asia; the empire would not reassert its power there until the nineteenth century. The Tang, however, sought good relations with the Abbasids, welcoming several of their embassies to Chang’an and gaining Arab military help in fighting the An lushan rebels. Although diminished, trade continued on the Silk road, and Abbasid envoys to China returned home with gifts of porcelain. A Persian governor presented Caliph Harun al-rashid (r. 786–809) with twenty pieces of imperial porcelain, “the like of which had never been seen before,” along with two thousand more commonplace vessels.<sup>65</sup> When Abbasid caliphs constructed immense palaces on the Tigris-Euphrates in the ninth century, they also stimulated demand for porcelain and other Chinese products. no matter how unstable and dangerous conditions became on the Silk road, some merchants always found it profitable to make the trek. but the battle of Talas, the An lushan rebellion, Tibetan seizure of the Gansu corridor, and the rise of powerful nomadic confederations to the north of China transformed political relations between the Middle Kingdom and Central Asia during the Song dynasty. As a consequence, China looked toward the Silk road solely with apprehension, no longer beguiled by the myths and fantasies of earlier days. beyond the tracks of camel caravans lay the steppe lands of tented nomads, the horse warriors who would redraw the map of imperial China. For its own security, the northern Song necessarily maintained diplomatic contact with powers in Central Asia until the liao state of the Qidan (907–1125) conquered northern China, bringing the first phase of the dynasty to an end. Subsequently, the Jin state of the Jurchen (1115–1234) defeated the liao, cutting off imperial China from almost all contact with Central Asia.<sup>66</sup> The Jurchen even extracted an annual tribute from the Southern Song of 250,000 taels of silver and as many bolts of silk. From 1126 to 1279 (and conquest by the Mongols) the monarchs of the Middle Kingdom governed their rump empire, encompassing two-thirds of the Chinese lands, from a provisional capital at Hangzhou in Zhejiang province, south of the yangzi. blocked from the Silk road by powers to the north, the Southern Song turned decisively toward the sea.