# The Culture of Porcelain in China Commerce, Confucians, and Connoisseurs, 1000–1400 during the Song period, a Chinese writer exulted, “The ships which sail the Southern Sea and south of it are like houses. When their sails are spread, they are great clouds in the sky.”<sup>1</sup> Government officials and private entrepreneurs had reason to look upon the huge junks with satisfaction, for their voyages contributed substantially to a flourishing economy. despite costly, relentless threats from nomadic confederations, Song China experienced growth and riches surpassing that of the early Tang. ## CoMMErCE Most regions of China, down to the village level, were drawn into a commercialized, monetary network.<sup>2</sup> Silver ingots in circulation rose from less than one million around the year 1000 to ten million by 1300. Copper coins issued by the government—200 million strings (or 200 billion coins) under the northern Song— streamed out of China to become the international hard currency of East Asia. A government magistrate complained in 1074 that junks ventured abroad loaded with nothing but copper-cash, as if mariners were pouring all the currency of the Middle Kingdom down a hole in the South China Sea. The next year, another official wrote, “There are none among the ship captains who do not take cash away with them. Cash was once a treasured commodity in China, but today it is commonly used among the barbarians.”<sup>3</sup> A customs official complained that to trade for pepper with Java, merchants “are in the habit of smuggling copper-cash [out of China] for bartering purposes.”<sup>4</sup> To increase the amount of cash in circulation, the Gaozong emperor (r. 1127– 62) of the Southern Song prohibited making domestic utensils from the metal, and trying to set an example for privileged ranks, he took the dramatic step of melting down fifteen hundred bronze vessels in the imperial collection. Government declarations of the early thirteenth century specifically called for export of ceramics to halt the flow overseas of cash and costly metals. As a government document of 1219 stated, “it is lamentable that officials often use gold and silver for trading abroad, thus losing valuable hard currency. Trading with silk textiles, porcelain, lacquer and other commodities is urged as an alternative.”<sup>5</sup> A few years later, an official noted that pottery went to a quarter of all the foreign places with which China had contact. Trying to staunch the hemorrhage of precious metal, the Southern Song put out the equivalent of 400 million strings of copper-cash in the form of paper money, an expedient that contributed to galloping inflation that persisted ino the early Ming period. Accompanying this, an economic revolution in credit mechanisms, agriculture, water transport, and metallurgy made China the richest, most economically dynamic region on Earth. With a population of perhaps 140 million in 1100, China had 6 million people living in cities, more urban residents than the rest of the world put together. Seaborne trade became a mainstay of the government, accounting for 20 percent of its revenue. The court rewarded port officials who collected substantial taxes on imports, and with such incentives, custom duties, which the government set at 10 percent, soared from 500,000 strings of cash in the late tenth century to 63 million a century later.<sup>6</sup> For the first time, China began treating the sea as a commercial zone, and the term haishang (maritime merchant) was coined to identify those who made a living from seaborne exchange.<sup>7</sup> China emerged as a sea power, with a navy for coastal defense and a transportation fleet for carrying grain and tribute from south to north. Seagoing craft entering the yangzi river numbered in the tens of thousands, and nine major shipyards built over six hundred vessels a year. Timber for ship construction called for fifty thousand trees a year, a harvest that contributed to deforestation along the coast. duanhong, a buddhist monk, bemoaned the destruction in 1282: grief spread through the mountains, he wrote, when “tens of thousand trees were chopped down.”<sup>8</sup> Advances in maritime technology, such as the magnetic compass, large lighthouses, and sailing charts, reduced the perils of the ocean; pigeons carried messages between ship and shore about prices and purchases. The merchant fleet grew in numbers and capacity; some junks accommodated a thousand passengers and boasted six masts, four decks, and watertight compartments. The largest vessels the world had ever seen, they linked the flourishing economy of the Grand Canal and lower yangzi with the markets of Southwest Asia. Muslim traders of the Song period described the Chinese as “the only people in the world with two eyes”; Arabs supposedly had only one, Europeans none.<sup>9</sup> A Chinese poet described a coxswain singing as he steered his ship out to sea: “i have limitless power in my hands, [so] who is afraid of the towering waves!”<sup>10</sup> Having lost all revenue from the northern provinces of his realm, the Gaozong emperor encouraged overseas trade to reduce the tax burden of the population in the south. He declared that “the profit of maritime trade contributes much to the national income. Therefore, pursuing the former custom, the people of far-away countries should be encouraged to come to sell an abundant supply of foreign goods.”<sup>11</sup> From government shipyards in Fujian and Guangdong, officials provided vessels to private entrepreneurs, with 70 percent of trading profits going to the court and the rest to merchants. Members of the imperial clan took refuge in Quanzhou, where they became involved in shipping as investors and traders, despite laws excluding them from such activities. incorporated into the Agency for the Southern branch of the imperial Clan, affiliates of the clan rapidly increased from 300 to 2,300 individuals, making them a formidable trading presence in a city with a population of 200,000.<sup>12</sup> Zheng xie (1044–1119), a Song official, described Quanzhou: “Maritime merchants crowd the place. Mixing together are Chinese and foreigners. Many find rich and powerful neighbors.”<sup>13</sup> Above all, population growth and foreign trade stimulated the ceramics industry. The Song period accounts for 75 percent of all pottery kilns ever established in China’s history; porcelain was produced in 130 counties in nineteen provinces.<sup>14</sup> in Hebei province, a major producer under the northern Song, one excavated site revealed pottery debris fifteen meters deep over an area twice as wide. in longquan county in Zhejiang province, whose potteries dominated production under the Southern Song, more than five hundred furnace complexes, many using the great dragon kilns, have been identified by archaeologists. in Guangdong province, where output mainly served overseas markets, 100 kilns turned out wares. in southern Fujian, 10 percent of a population of slightly over three million owed their livelihood to the manufacture and export of ceramics. With some 150 kilns in the region, the pottery industry generated one million strings of cash annually. Quanzhou displaced Canton as China’s busiest port, in part as a result of the enormous growth of the ceramics export industry.<sup>15</sup> Coastal deforestation probably owed more to consumption of wood by porcelain kilns than to construction of ships. Expansion of seaborne commerce during the Southern Song especially benefited the pottery industry. Commodities high in value and low in bulk (such as jade, emeralds, amber, and jasmine oil), as well as those high in both value and bulk yet relatively straightforward to transport (silk, cotton fabric, and carpets), were always the principal merchandise on the Silk road. in exceptional cases, taking just a single piece of pottery from China could bring a fortune: during the Tang, an Arab merchant carried from China a black-glazed porcelain with a gold lid encasing “a golden fish with ruby eyes, garnished with musk of the finest quality.”<sup>16</sup> of course, most chinaware was considerably more mundane. it traveled in caravans as large as eight hundred camels and carts, such as the one seen in Samarqand by ruy Gonzalez de Clavijo in 1405. The Castilian observed that goods from China comprised “the richest and most precious of all those brought thither from foreign parts, for the craftsmen of Cathay are reputed to be the most skillful by far beyond those of any other nation.”<sup>17</sup> Silk made up the largest and most valuable part of the caravan’s cargo, which also included sacks of diamonds, pearls, spice, and dried rhubarb. The caravan carried pottery, but a report by a functionary of the Ming dynasty points to the difficulty of taking that commodity on the Silk road: in the capital of the Ming Empire, Peking, carts from Mongolia, Manchuria, Persia and Arabic countries were fully packed with Chinese goods to carry back to the countries from which the tributaries had come. Goods were stacked as high as thirty feet, including great quantities of porcelain loaded on dozens of carts. Each piece of porcelain for the long journey was filled with soil and beans. Then the pieces of porcelain were tied together with string. They were carefully placed in damp conditions and sprayed with water, until the beans grew and their roots spread around the porcelain to maintain the tight packing. Porcelain sent in this way to inner Asia was sold at ten times its original price.<sup>18</sup> Although the high profits realized by selling chinaware in Southwest Asia plainly justified such meticulous, labor-intensive handling, the quantities transported necessarily had to be limited. decorative influences from india and Persia moved more easily across the Silk road to China than did porcelains in the opposite direction. but with inauguration of a maritime porcelain route from China, a seafaring equivalent of the ancient caravan trail, chinaware became a preferred, convenient bulk cargo of high value. Writing about ships leaving Canton, a Song merchant reported, “Among the goods exported, porcelain remained the main item. The big porcelain pieces enveloped the small ones, and there was hardly any space left between them.”<sup>19</sup> Even undersized pieces contained profitable items, such as iron needles, carved rhinoceros horn, and tortoiseshell combs. As the Spanish in the Philippines discovered when they had their Chinese stevedores stock the Manila galleon for its annual Pacific voyage to Acapulco, the Chinese had a deserved reputation for exceedingly skillful packing. A sea chest packed in Manila typically held double the amount of merchandise as a similar one readied in Seville. Maritime traders had a particular liking for porcelain as a cargo: since the ceramic is both heavy and impermeable to fluids, it proved practical as ballast, weighty material packed deep in the ship’s sodden hold to enhance stability in rough seas. ballast cargoes otherwise were low-profit commodities: cowries, rock salt, lead and tin ingots, black pepper, stone, sand, timber. Porcelain, though, provided a hefty ballast of high value, thereby increasing shippers’ proceeds.<sup>20</sup> Transporting porcelain as ballast was so lucrative that Western merchants speedily adopted the practice when they entered Asian trade networks. Agents of the EiC in vietnam reported to london in 1672 that “coarse porselon here for ballast [is] very reasonable,” a convenient freight to ship to the Philippines and Thailand.<sup>21</sup> voC carracks sailing home from batavia in Java sometimes carried large Chinese jars filled with ginger preserved in sugar syrup, five hundred of which nicely trimmed a ship. Spanish galleons going from Seville to the new World habitually used tiles and olive jars (tinajas) for ballast, with the jars being sold and recycled as roof vaulting for churches on arrival. Captains of the voC packed 160 chests of porcelain, each eighteen meters square, into a moderate-sized frigate. in 1702 a director of the EiC instructed a supercargo: it must be your first care to provide Kintlage commoditye [i.e., ballast as heavy as pig iron] to stiffen your ship and make her sail worthy, and which will be first wanting to lade on board her . . . [above all] china ware of the usefull sorts, especially plates and dishes which stow close. buy us some large, some middling, some smaller punch bowls, some great china flower potts, fitt to sett orange Trees in and other lesser dimensions fitt for smaller Trees and flowers. . . . What hollow chinaware you buy fill up with sago [palm starch] or other more profitable commodity. <sup>22</sup> both the voC and the EiC packed tea in lead-lined chests to keep it fresh and placed the chests on top of crates of porcelain: the pottery kept the tea dry; the latter provided a shock-absorbing layer that curtailed damage to the chinaware. in voC ships, an average of only 5 percent of the porcelain was broken on its journey to Amsterdam, though even the shards could be sold as masonry material. An additional virtue of the ceramic was that it lacked odor and therefore would not affect the flavor of the tea. Transporting porcelain by the maritime route, rather than by the Silk road, meant that greater quantities of the ceramic reached Southwest Asia than ever before, resulting in lowered costs to consumers there. in China, increase in pottery production had a similar effect on prices. Potters responded to government promotion and domestic demand with technological innovations that swelled output to unprecedented levels. They began to use carved molds in great quantities: by pressing a mold engraved with ornament over clay, they substituted mechanical techniques for laborious decoration by hand. in addition, by employing stacked saggars in the kiln, potters could fire four times as many wares simultaneously than with the old method of using a single saggar for every item on the furnace floor. Along with reduced prices, however, there was a certain decline in the quality of wares. Enormous numbers of pots, plates, and jars were turned out, much of it coarse and run of the mill, for unrefined foreign and domestic customers. The use of carved molds meant that wares often were dully uniform, and, for technical reasons, the use of stacked saggars meant that the rims of vessels went unglazed. nonetheless, superlative porcelains also were produced in quantity and attracted the attention of the imperial court. The latter was especially important, for official patronage proved crucial for conferring enhanced cultural stature on the ceramic. imperial catalogues and workshops set standards for the elite—for sophisticated study by antiquarians, for appreciation by connoisseurs, and for acquisitions by the trendy wealthy. Ever since the early common era, kiln owners had sent modest shipments of pottery to the court, but the quantities escalated so much after 1000, amounting to fifty thousand pieces at a time, that the government established a ceramic storehouse in Kaifeng, the northern Song capital in Henan province. An early-eleventh-century emperor so valued his porcelains that he ordered their unglazed rims to be adorned with ten thousand ounces of gold and silver.<sup>23</sup> Given imperial patronage and widespread use, pottery for the first time became a focus of connoisseurship. Since Song porcelains were at the root of this erudition, they remained highly prized by collectors thereafter, ranking just below venerable works in bronze and jade. later generations adhered to the perceptions of the Song elite so comprehensively that well into the twentieth century Song antiquarian notions determined how archaeologists in China classified and interpreted the ceramic objects they unearthed.<sup>24</sup> ## ConFUCiAnS While the pottery statues of bactrian camels represent the ecumenical perspective and imperial reach of the early Tang regime, the vases of the Song exemplify the spirit esteemed and promoted by that dynasty—elegant, subtle, classical, and selfcontained. The porcelains still convey those qualities to modern sensibilities, as shown by T. S. Eliot’s Four Quartets (1944), which epitomizes artistic transcendence as a Chinese jar that “still moves perpetually in its stillness,” a triumph of pure form over inexorable, annihilating time.<sup>25</sup> indeed, elite styles changed dramatically in all respects from the Tang to the Song. in particular, the spread of buddhism in the Tang had made the exotic bodhisattva a kind of fashion model for privileged ranks, sparking a rage for elaborate hair ornaments, silver jewelry decorated with buddhist lotuses, and belts set with jade and lapis lazuli. in the Song, however, restrained styles asserted themselves, with an emphasis on modest dress and unassuming motifs of vines and leaves on jewelry and silks. So too with pottery. Whereas the hallmarks of Tang ceramics are exotic motifs, vigorous naturalism, robust profile, and painted adornment, Song porcelains are characterized by reserved decoration, balanced proportions, fluid shapes, and cooltoned, monochromatic shades. Embodying consummate integration of contour, glaze, and ornament, they rank among the finest achievements in the history of ceramics. during the Song, porcelain came to be a fixture in dining, domestic decoration, and the scholar’s studio. Contemplated, commissioned, and collected by connoisseurs, it became incorporated into the social rituals, cultural outlook, and selfperception of the upper stratum. in the eyes of professional scholars and educated gentry, it came to embody urbanity and refinement, epitomizing the abstemious life of reclusive daoists as well as the unpretentious reserve of Confucian gentlemen. Song yingxing wrote in the late Ming that porcelain vessels “sparkle in quiet retreats or at festive boards, a concrete sign of civilized life.”<sup>26</sup> For those of middling social status, who lacked the wherewithal to acquire expensive replicas of ancient bronze vessels, owning porcelains functioned as an affirmation of social respectability and upward mobility, not unlike the English blue-and-white bone china that still graces the armoires of many middle-class American homes. For common villagers and city dwellers, porcelain also very slowly became part of daily life, as is clear from an anonymous poem of the Song period: by the side of the road, three or four families run a rural inn. it is clean and bright, but there is no broth let alone tea. These are laborers and farmers, no connoisseurs. yet there is a porcelain vase with a sprig of purple bindweed.<sup>27</sup> Porcelain entered the life of the privileged in significant ways just as the class of Confucian scholar-officials emerged as the dominant status group of government. The Song regime greatly extended Tang precedents by formally establishing that all administrative offices must be staffed through examinations based on Confucian texts. This system, which formed the basis of the civil bureaucracy until its abolition in 1904, ensured that varieties of Song moral philosophy would prevail in intellectual life until the end of imperial rule.<sup>28</sup> Even more important, the system led to creation of a clerical-governmental class with a corporate identity that in time became independent of the turnover of dynasties and court patronage. yuan, Ming, and Qing—all those who ruled the empire after the Song found themselves compelled to rely on a self-perpetuating Confucian bureaucracy, the elite men who rep resented sanctioned values, revered tradition, and managerial know-how. There was a pragmatic dimension to this, captured in the Chinese stock scene in which the alien conqueror acknowledges that though he has seized the empire by the sword, he necessarily must rule it by the pen. The ideological dimension was equally significant, however, for the Confucian literati came to see themselves as representing doctrinal unity over time, even exercising moral authority that was grounded in the cosmic order itself and therefore, ideally, independent of transient political authority. by promoting the examination system as a tool for bureaucratic recruitment, the early Song emperors successfully undercut the power of the landed military aristocracy that had dominated politics and government in the Tang period. Under the new dispensation, men of the book and culture took precedence over men of the sword and lofty pedigree. This attracted talented individuals from a broad social base as, in principle and significantly in practice, the examination system was based on merit. Competition was fierce. in 1090, at the initial, prefectural stage of examination, 4,000 candidates in Fuzhou prefecture in Fujian province competed for just forty positions as “selected men” (juren), those moving forward to the provincial level of tests. More than 14,000 men took the final exam in 1002 at the capital level in Kaifeng, each candidate hoping to win one of the fifteen hundred advanced scholar (jinshi) degrees on offer, possession of which guaranteed an official post, usually in county administration. by the early twelfth century, 400,000 men sat for examination at the prefectural level, though there were no more than 25,000 officeholders in the empire—a modest number for governing 140 million people spread over some five million square kilometers. Feeling in need of supernatural help, candidates appealed to Wenchang and Kuixing, daoist deities regarded as instrumental in winning a degree. not surprisingly, the idols became popular motifs on blueand-white porcelains in the Ming period. Producing more educated men than the government bureaucracy could absorb, the examination system effectively directed failed place-seekers into alternative careers in scholarship, private academies, tutoring, lineage organizations, local tax collection, charitable institutions, manufacturing, literature, and the arts. by the late Song, those who possessed status as scholar-officials were complemented by an extensive penumbra of educated and semieducated men who had aspired to join the Confucian administrative elite. For scholar-officials, a sense of corporate identity arose from shared values and a sinecure in the bureaucracy. For those who failed to win entry to office, self-esteem and corporate identity could be achieved by participation in the urbane, learned activities ideally characteristic of officeholders. like victorian gentlewomen learning to play the piano as a voucher of middle-class refinement, members of the Chinese intelligentsia excluded from bureaucratic circles arrogated to themselves the right to be part of the cultural realm of the specialist and professional. Shaped by a humanistic Confucian education, scholar-officials and educated gentry developed a cult of self-expression that manifested in a variety of cultural pursuits, most notably the “Three Perfections”: calligraphy, poetry, and painting. The three went together inasmuch as poetry took form in written words, and painting employed calligraphic techniques.<sup>29</sup> When porcelain bowls and silk scrolls embodied all Three Perfections, they held special appeal for the educated. The Three Perfections went hand in hand with the Four Gentleman’s Attainments: expertise on the lute (qin) and in chess, painting, and calligraphy. Subtlety in these pursuits corresponded with the somber ink painting that came to dominate Song landscape art and with the muted tones of Song porcelains that displaced polychrome embellishment. To be accomplished in the Perfections and Attainments identified one as a refined individual and (at least for men) provided cultural credentials for advancement within the Confucian establishment. For those unsuccessful in administrative careers, the expressive pastimes gave solace in retirement retreats, certifying that failure in the examination round did not rule out partaking of the finer things in life. ## “CoPyinG THE AnCiEnT ” in their contrast with earlier ceramics, Song porcelains suggest the reorientation of elite perspectives in the period. A sweeping change of style took place with the advent of the new dynasty, a thoroughgoing abandonment of Tang approaches to shape, ornament, and foreign subject matter.<sup>30</sup> The rejection stemmed from the xenophobia and turmoil that shook China from the mid-eighth century. Threatened by nomadic powers and anxious to bolster imperial legitimacy, the Song dynasty lacked the poise and self-sufficiency that admirers perceive in the renowned porcelains of the era. After building the most powerful military force in history, the Song failed to hold back their enemies to the north, and paying them huge sums to purchase peace contributed to imperial bankruptcy and ultimate disaster. The most splendid achievements of the period served to mask harsh realities; a deeply conservative culture arose from lack of confidence, the result of failure to resist alien incursions and maintain imperial unity.<sup>31</sup> Emperors and literati sought revitalization and legitimacy in ancient tradition. renewed interest in Confucian philosophy, leading to the first complete printed edition of the Confucian classics in the mid-tenth century, helped direct attention to the material legacy of the past. in 1143 the Song revived the Han custom of building the Jiaotan, a temple on a raised-earth platform to hold the imperial ceremony of worshiping Heaven. in another conservative reflex, the Song increasingly focused on indigenous buddhist traditions. Since arrival of the new faith centuries earlier, Chinese buddhism had defined itself and become intellectually self-sufficient; hence, though Chinese monks still made pilgrimages to india and brought back valuable items, they no longer looked to the subcontinent as an obligatory (and superior) source for texts, rituals, and relics. Emphasizing the Confucian classics and immemorial tradition, Song monarchs asserted equivalence between their own governance and that of fabled rulers of past times. The lizong emperor (r. 1225–64) had himself portrayed in paintings as a legendary cultural hero, and he identified himself as “the ancestor to the Hundred Kings” of mythic ages.<sup>32</sup> in like fashion, other emperors and their courtiers promoted a coherent style in the arts that had its roots in antiquity. Song artists produced silk-scroll paintings of the Eighteen Scholars of the Tang to show that the dynasty revered ancient values, sponsored elite culture, and provided exemplary leadership.<sup>33</sup> The Huizong emperor (r. 1101–25), an accomplished painter and authority on antique objects, ordered that “ancient vessels should be sought for throughout the empire,” since their use in ritual sacrifice manifested and certified the virtue of his rule.<sup>34</sup> He brought together a collection of 1,257 paintings by old masters from the Han to the end of the Tang, works regarded as conveying “the spirit of lofty antiquity.”<sup>35</sup> He also launched a series of major cataloguing projects that used the new technology of woodblock printing to present visual proof that his dynasty incarnated the values of the honored past. drawing on the vast imperial art collection, scholars produced Illustrations of Antiquities of the Xuanhe Era (i.e., the reign of Huizong), annotations to images of eight hundred objects in twenty categories, with Shang ritual bronze vessels given pride of place. After the collapse of the northern Song (and consequent loss of part of the imperial collection), the Gaozong emperor even more forcefully accentuated his regime’s fidelity to antiquity. The son and brother, respectively, of the last two northern Song emperors, he had fled south to the yangzi to declare himself ruler of what is now identified as the Southern Song. As such, he bore heavy responsibility for abandoning not only the heartland of the empire but also the sacred tombs of his imperial predecessors. He bolstered his claim to legitimacy by presenting himself as an unrivaled champion of Confucian scholarship. After personally copying out classic Confucian texts used for the civil examinations, he had his transcriptions engraved on stone tablets and rubbings made of them sent to government schools and learned academies throughout the realm. He ordered stone tablets engraved with portraits of Confucius and his supposed seventy-two disciples, and he commissioned the court workshop to produce silk scrolls illustrating the 305 verses of The Book of Odes (ca. 1000–600 b.c.e.), a volume believed to have been compiled by Confucius. Gaozong paid a posthumous price for his fulsome public reverence for Confucius, however: commentators in the Ming period criticized the emperor for manipulating the image of the sage for his own political ends.<sup>36</sup> imperial commissions such as those ordered by Huizong and Gaozong had an immense formative influence on the course of Chinese culture, sustaining a continuity of inspiration, pious and programmatic, unique in world history. Put in a Western context, it was as if kings of the Capetian dynasty (987–1328) of France supplied published models for successive cultural renaissances down to the French revolution (1789–99) based on objects created by the megalith builders of brittany, part of a neolithic culture whose most famous relic is Stonehenge, a monument whose construction began around 2600 b.c.e. Even this analogy fails to capture the extraordinary cultural continuity of China, much of which depended on the language employed for literary purposes by the Confucian elite of the empire. The prehistoric people who built the stone circles flourished some four millennia before the language of Montesquieu and voltaire existed in any form, and the French tongue of the Capetian period—when the literary medium for those of high status was latin—was quite different from that spoken in the Enlightenment. The elite of Qing China, however, expressed themselves in a language that effectively became ossified in the last century before the common era. Classical Chinese took shape between 500 and 100 b.c.e., and what is called literary Chinese, which took the former as its model, became stabilized in later generations, especially during the Tang and Song, as the Confucian canon emerged as the basis of learned discourse, authorized ideology, and the civil examinations.<sup>37</sup> ricci observed that “from time immemorial, [the Chinese] have devoted most of their attention to the development of the written language and did not concern themselves overmuch with the spoken tongue”; hence, like the ancient Greeks, all their eloquence is found in literature and not in public speaking.<sup>38</sup> increasingly isolated from the linguistic forms assumed by colloquial Chinese, both verbal and written, literary Chinese remained the language of the educated and propertied, giving them direct access to the writings of the remote past. in contrast, by the eighteenth century Western vernacular tongues largely ousted latin as the educated lingua franca, except for the writing of scientific papers—a convention that led linnaeus to employ it for the specialized function of botanic nomenclature. Confucian officials and intelligentsia of the Qing employed a stylized, almost autonomous language that had been cut off from common, everyday life for well over a millennium. it was as if Montesquieu’s Spirit of the Laws comprised annotations in classical latin on concepts of government found in Gallo-roman manuscripts written around the time Julius Caesar (100–44 b.c.e.) campaigned in Gaul—and with those manuscripts regarded as having a linguistic and cultural lineage stretching back more than a thousand years into the Celtic mists. yet it was a Chinese reality that ideographic inscriptions on Zhou bronzes about dynastic honor and governance shaped later Chinese concepts of ancestor veneration and imperial legitimacy as a consequence of the texts being first transcribed in the Han era. At that time, emperors effectively created the first classical renaissance by casting themselves in the role of ancient sage-kings, and writers grounded political authority in an imagined antiquity, thereby periodically reconsidering the past in the service of the ruling state.<sup>39</sup> Written in classical Chinese, the Annals of the Zhou and the Book of Changes could be read easily by Confucius, and his Analects set forth venerable notions of ritual and ethical conduct that generations of scholars discussed and debated in literary Chinese until the end of imperial China in the early twentieth century. despite later Western perceptions of an “unchanging China,” however, substantial continuity of tradition did not amount to millennia of monolithic inertia. in reality, Chinese intellectuals recast their culture by turning to perceived high points in their past at least as often as did the Western elite. Although educated ranks committed to cultural restoration generally claim they are revitalizing an authentic past, they in fact always are involved in an act of creative imagination. Whether Confucian literati in twelfth-century Suzhou or renaissance humanists in fifteenth-century Florence, they select from a largely imaginary, constructed tradition that seems most useful or most appealing in the present. More often than not, when they claim to be transmitting mores and values from antiquity, they are reinterpreting their meanings, doing something novel while claiming to be entirely conservative. Chinese tradition persisted as a dynamic, variable force, renewed and reinvented across eras. The great historian Sima Qian (ca. 145–ca. 87 b.c.e.) said that noble men who had failed to accomplish what they wished “wrote of past affairs in order to pass on their thoughts to future generations.”<sup>40</sup> The past to be revived varied according to contemporary preoccupations and political contingencies; nomadic conquerors and alienated literati looked to different traditions to validate, respectively, their mandate to rule and their obligation of passive resistance. Writers on art and literature perceived tradition in terms of interaction and mutation, marked at periodic intervals by “copying the ancient” ( fang gu), a return to exemplars.<sup>41</sup> it became commonplace to say that just as a tree or stream had its starting point in the soil or on mountain peaks, so too tradition remained vital by sympathetic, creative interpretation of ancient models by later generations. Zhao Mengfu (1254–1322), a yuan official and an artist famous for his depiction of horses, looked to Tang and northern Song painters for inspiration. He declared that “the lack of the spirit of antiquity will create so many faults that the result will not be worth looking at.”<sup>42</sup> but since all things in the world were seen to exist within the dynamics of a specific configuration (shi), the educated ranks assumed that the very disposition to revive antiquity must be modified in response to shifting circumstances. in Literary Minds and the Carving of Dragons (Wenxin diaolong), liu xie (ca. 465–ca. 522), a founder of Chinese literary criticism, stressed the value of employing canonical traditions in the service of originality: “When a writer casts and moulds his works after the pattern of the Classics . . . he will be able to conceive new ideas and carve original expressions.”<sup>43</sup> in practical matters, this flexible perspective on tradition facilitated cultural change. during the Song, the focus in the arts was on antiquarian reconstruction by the imperial court for the purpose of renewing ancient values. While this emphasis was never wholly abandoned, the growth of a market economy by the Ming period resulted in artists and craftsmen, in response to an elite consuming public, using archaic forms in diverse media for expressive and decorative purposes. Propelled in the first instance by imperial and political dictates, the focus on archaic tradition took on a vitality of its own, with objects in metal and clay valued as much for their aesthetic qualities as for what they were seen to represent of the remote Chinese past. Confucianism displayed the same sort of adaptability, thereby helping to sanction changes in the arts. during the Song period, Confucius came to be viewed as a model of creativity for his supposed editing and compilation of earlier texts, such as The Book of Odes: he was seen as actively refashioning past thought as he transmitted it to the future. Zhu xi (1130–1200) was the most influential exponent of what became known as neo-Confucianism, for his commentaries and those of his epigones on the canon formed the substance of the examination system. (like Confucius and Confucian, Neo-Confucianism is of Jesuit coinage; in the Song, the thought of Kongzi, or “Master Kong,” was known simply as “learning of the Way,” Daoxue, or as “learning of Principle,” Lixue.) Zhu himself believed that a rupture with tradition had taken place, making it impossible for antiquity to serve as an ideal model for the present. rejecting inflexible adherence to tradition, he committed himself to creative revision of archaic texts, believing that “great doubts lead to great progress.”<sup>44</sup> He reformulated the relationship between revered predecessors and contemporaries when he declared that “at bottom, descendants are the force of ancestors.” This shifted emphasis from conciliation of awesome forebears through ritual and sacrifice to ancestors being grateful to the current generation for their enduring spiritual authority. As in the change from antiquarian reconstruction to aesthetic appreciation, the effect was to sustain links with ancient traditions while at the same time crucially renewing them. The mental reflex of justifying innovation by looking to the past proved invaluable, for it meant that alien influences could be absorbed and accommodated without a sense of cultural shock. Thus Chinese pottery painters in the yuan and Ming periods readily adapted to the very different islamic design tradition of Southwest Asia by circumscribing it within their own long-established modes of decoration. So too Chinese artists responded to the pictorial realism of European engravings, introduced by Jesuits in the late sixteenth century, by copying the ancient, in this case, by reviving Song painting techniques regarded as similar to the Western ones.<sup>45</sup> Far from a monolithic burden, the past was a living presence for artists, antiquarians, and connoisseurs, a source of strength and inspiration, perpetually reworked and reevaluated. Tradition also could be exploited by the cognoscenti for contemporary political ends. Tao Qian (d. 420) retired from office in the period of the Six dynasties (265– 589) to write poetry and preserve his integrity. landscape scenes from his “Peach blossom Spring,” a poem about a utopian land free from dynastic upheaval and poverty, were commissioned by literati for yuan and early Qing pottery because they carried a subtle message about the need to preserve one’s virtue under alien dynasts. literati of the mid-seventeenth century charged potters to paint vessels with motifs taken from the Water Margin, a novel by Shi nai’an (ca. 1290–ca. 1365) and luo Guanzhong (ca. 1330–ca. 1400) about Song heroes battling illicit authority. in the light of late Ming political corruption, the old swashbuckling tale had a contemporary relevance for estranged Confucians. recognizing the censure, the Chongzhen emperor (r. 1628–45), the last Ming ruler, banned printing of the novel. Similarly, soon after the Qing came to power, estranged members of the literati class commissioned potters to decorate wares with motifs showing Shang officials choosing death over serving the triumphant Zhou dynasty—obvious stand-ins for the despised Manchu rulers.<sup>46</sup> The past, then, represented a treasure-house of praiseworthy actions and resources. Song potters produced tripod incense burners modeled on archaic bronze food containers and decorated with symbols from the Book of Changes. The same antiquarian impulse became more intense and widespread in the yuan period after the northern Song imperial collection of antiquities was dispersed among literati in southern China; it seemed more important than ever to maintain cultural traditions, especially since many Confucians refused to take office under the Mongol dynasty. in the early Ming, Song archaic-style porcelains served as models for numerous bronzes cast to furnish the palace of the xuande emperor. in Essential Criteria of Antiquities, Cao Zhao (fl. 1388) declared that “a wide knowledge of antiquities is the first requisite of a gentleman.”<sup>47</sup> Potters of the xuande period put reign marks on the bottom of porcelains in imitation of signatures on ancient bronzes. Copying illustrations from the Huizong catalogues, Ming artisans turned out Song-style porcelains, as well as their own variations on Song ceramic imitations of Shang and Zhou bronzes. They produced porcelains with panels depicting archaic bronze vessels adorned with flower sprays, as well as porcelain incense burners modeled after archaic bronzes and decorated with the taotie, the monster-face motif of the Shang era. Ming dynasts adopted porcelains for ceremonies at the Altar of Heaven in beijing, with the pieces modeled on Zhou bronze cooking utensils for grain and meat as “in the Worship of Heaven and Earth, simplicity is valued beyond everything, and pottery is used in imitation of ancient methods of manufacture.”<sup>48</sup> Qing potters created vessels with bronze Age ornament, Tang shapes, and Songtype glazes; gilt paint and turquoise glaze replicated the appearance of ancient bronze. in Jingdezhen, imitating works by Song artisans, Tang ying fashioned greenglazed porcelains embellished with dragons and script in archaic styles. Potters in the Qing imperial workshops in beijing modeled vases on ancient bronze vessels, adding a touch of modernity by decorating them with bright enamel colors (rose, peach, and lemon yellow) introduced to China by Jesuit missionary-craftsmen. Some Qing connoisseurs claimed that as a result of magical transmutation in the kiln, Song ceramics exhaled a “strange fragrance after long years,” even changing their scent with the turnover of the imperial ruling house.<sup>49</sup> As scions of the conquering Manchu from north of the Chinese frontier, the Qing emperor yongzheng (r. 1723–35) and his successor, Qianlong, established their legitimacy on lines laid down by the Song rulers. Sponsoring the practice of copying the ancient, as had Huizong and Gaozong, they published illustrated catalogues of antiquities as guides to contemporary forms and images in porcelain and other arts. The most famous tome comprised a record from the mid-eighteenth century of 1,400 imperial possessions, including many Shang bronzes featured in catalogues published six hundred years earlier. other compilations included representations of 6,000 paintings, calligraphic art, inkstones, jades, and coins. one scholar produced the Illustrated Catalogue of Bronzes in the Qing Imperial Collection, a study of 1,500 objects.<sup>50</sup> Published to memorialize the past and ensure cultural continuity, the catalogues sometimes instead resulted in novelty. Engravers of the woodblock illustrations mistakenly depicted some bronze altarpieces with an elongated shape foreign to the originals; hence when Qing metalworkers and potters used the illustrations as models, a new form, supposedly sanctioned by antiquity, entered the Chinese repertoire. (See figures 14 and 15.) Qianlong studied the edition of The Book of Odes published during the reign of Gaozong, and he composed poems to accompany illustrations he specially ordered for the text. He commissioned white porcelains in the form of a bronze tripod cup known as a jue, examples of which had been found at sites of the Shang period. He also paid reverence to famed paintings by Guanxiu (832–912) of the buddha’s sixteen luohan (venerable disciples) by commissioning jade carvings of the figures.<sup>51</sup> The emperor treasured Song ceramics, and his collection included hundreds of green-glazed porcelains made for his imperial predecessors, as well as many contemporary copies of them. He had his poems praising the vessels carved on the underside of some. one such poem, composed in 1786, read: on its bare [unglazed rims] alone, ding ware is not liked. but the secret ware of the [Southern Song] official kilns is highly treasured. it stands alone in the world, rarely seen, and although blemished, The connoisseur’s desire is still very keen.<sup>52</sup> Anxious to show they warranted allegiance as a “glorious dynasty transmitting antiquity,” Qing emperors ordered porcelains produced for the court to be decorated with calligraphy and landscape scenes taken from art of the Han and Tang reigns.<sup>53</sup> Porcelain brush pots for the scholar’s studio were inscribed with texts from the Han, such as “How the Supreme ruler begets virtuous officials.” This had the shrewd effect of focusing attention on past glories while also elevating Qing achievements. in 1742 Qianlong commanded Tang ying to make a type of hanging vase suitable for a sedan chair, with the emperor’s poem inscribed on it: “Guan wares and those of ruzhou are famous classes [of ceramics], / yet the shapes of the new vases are even more admirable.”<sup>54</sup> Court-promoted archaism from the Song to the Qing spread veneration for the remotest traditions among the educated and affluent of society. ricci noted that high esteem is “always accorded to those who display any knowledge of antiquity.”<sup>55</sup> The painter Qui ying (ca. 1502–51) captured the sophisticated preoccupations of connoisseurs in his Ranking Ancient Works in a Bamboo Court, in which three men of letters examine bronzes, fan paintings, and porcelains on an elegant terrace framed by decorated lacquer screens.<sup>56</sup> Garden scenes of literati engaged in examining antiquities also featured as a common motif on pottery in the early Qing period, around the time dentrecolles arrived in China. He observes that though modern porcelains attract many admirers, “there is no doubt that China has its antiquarians, those who revere old things.” dentrecolles’s judgment is nicely illustrated by The Story of the Stone (better known as The Dream of the Red Chamber), the great Qing novel by Cao xueqin (ca. 1715–63) about an illustrious family in nanjing. They lived in a mansion whose reception hall boasted an imperial inscription in “archaic seal-script” on the wall, beneath which stood a long, high table of carved red sandalwood, ornamented with dragons. . . . in the centre of this was a huge antique bronze ding [cauldron], fully a yard high, covered with a green patina. on the wall above the ding hung a long vertical scroll with an ink painting of a dragon emerging from clouds and waves, of the kind often presented to high court officials in token of their office. The ding was flanked on one side by a smaller antique bronze vessel with a pattern of gold inlay and on the other by a crystal bowl.<sup>57</sup> An inner apartment presented a less showy display, a small, four-legged ding and a rare Song ceramic, “a narrow-waisted ru-ware imitation gu [antique bronze goblet] with a spray of freshly cut flowers in it.” Zhu yan remarks that “a genuine old piece [of porcelain] is beyond price.”<sup>58</sup> during the Song period and after, individuals who could not afford to purchase treasured objets d’art commissioned bronze casters and potters to replicate them, a practice that resulted in a thriving market for counterfeiters. indeed, bogus antiquities represented the tribute fraud paid to time-honored cultural values. Complaining of the difficulty of evaluating Song porcelains, a Ming connoisseur said that “the genuine and the false remain intermingled”; a Qing expert cautioned buyers that “crowds of fakes jostle the genuine.”<sup>59</sup> And ricci wrote, “Counterfeiters of antiques are numerous, and they are clever at cheating the unwary by selling them utterly worthless things, taking advantage of the fact that they are poorly posted in value.” Sometimes it sufficed if an object simply looked old, as ricci discovered when a statue of the virgin Mary fell to the floor and smashed: “That would have ruined its value in Europe, but served only to increase it in China. When the pieces were put together again, the statue took on an appearance of antiquity, which made it more valuable here than when it was whole.”<sup>60</sup> Zhou danquan, a well-known Jingdezhen potter of the late sixteenth century, specialized in reproducing historic pieces and selling them to collectors. in Potteries of Jingdezhen, lan Pu observes, “in making vessels, [Zhou] was a famous hand of the times. . . . Every time a famous vessel-type was produced, everyone wrangled to buy them.”<sup>61</sup> Zhou’s creations were regarded as far from worthless: he secretly replicated a Song ceramic censer owned by a connoisseur, and even after revealing it was a copy, he received forty ounces of gold for it because the man longed to match it with his authentic piece. A generation later, a top government official, presumably unaware of the provenance of the reproduction, reportedly persuaded a descendant of the connoisseur to sell it for one thousand ounces of gold. ## ConnoiSSEUrS And THE CUlTUrE oF TEA With great wealth in their hands, the burgeoning upper classes of the Song era stimulated demand for luxury ceramics, both antique and contemporary. Production of silver vessels could not keep pace with demand, thereby widening the market for sales of fine replicas in clay.<sup>62</sup> Although silver and lacquer utensils dominated the tables of the privileged early in the Song, porcelain came into increasing use, with wealthy consumers motivated in part by the novel notion that eating from gold and silver plate harmed one’s health. new standards of decorum also came into play. “Set a high value on porcelain and a low one on gold and silver,” one writer advocated. “Esteem elegance!” As ricci observed, porcelain vessels became “highly prized by those who appreciate elegance at their banquets rather than pompous display.”<sup>63</sup> not everyone shared this view, however, for some members of the upper class remained faithful to their vessels of precious metal and regarded endorsement of pottery as a display of smug puritanism. “A gentleman of true taste, talents, and sentiment,” a Ming critic sniffed, “thus takes vows not to mention ‘elegance.’ ”<sup>64</sup> Porcelain gained wider acceptance during the Southern Song, just as Chinese cuisine took on its distinctive characteristics. rice became the chief grain— conquerors controlled the millet of the north—and soy sauce, bean curd, steamed buns, sesame oil, vinegar, and stir-fried vegetables became standard fare. Taverns, tea shops, and stew kitchens sprang up in the empire’s twelve hundred walled cities, providing a more relaxed and diverse environment than existed in the Tang period. in the latter, cities were predominantly bureaucratic outposts and gathering spots for the landed aristocracy; in the Song, they became centers of leisure pursuits and social interaction for the scholar-gentry class and well-to-do entrepreneurs.<sup>65</sup> in the early twelfth century, Zhang Zeduan painted a scroll five meters long, Peace Reigns over the River, an immensely detailed panorama of what is probably Kaifeng, including a merchant’s shop advertising porcelain wares alongside noodle stalls and cafés. Fancy restaurants emerged, with porcelain and lacquer vessels the customary tableware. A journal writer in Kaifeng in the Song period retailed information about food and dining, emphasizing the many regional cuisines available in over seventy named restaurants. He explained that eateries provide “first-class ceramic bowls with shallow rims. . . . in the old days we used only spoons, but nowadays they use chopsticks.”<sup>66</sup> one multistory restaurant, built with a cast-iron frame, served a thousand persons at a time and provided entertainment in the form of skits, bawdy songs, and dramatic verse. Conferring prestige on the new establishments, the Huizong emperor sometimes ordered take-out from his favorite eatery. rather than sit on mats or cushions, diners used chairs, a form of furniture in troduced from india to Chinese buddhist monasteries by the fifth century.<sup>67</sup> The buddha and associated bodhisattvas often are depicted seated on lotuses or on lotusshaped stools and couches. The court eventually took to raised seating, and in the early twelfth century emperors ordered chairs and tables of imported sandalwood for their palaces. Chairs replaced mats in well-to-do households, impelling a move from large eating utensils to smaller cups, bowls, and plates. in turn, small wares set on a table surrounded by chairs prompted a decline in communal consumption, in which diners shared large bowls and goblets, and a move toward place settings for each person. The same evolution toward individualized dining would not take place in Europe until the late seventeenth century and then largely due to the introduction of Chinese table services. Europeans had used chairs for centuries, and ricci in fact thought it remarkable that in certain everyday customs the Chinese “alone of all nations outside of Europe are in accord with the West. Their use of tables, chairs, and beds is wholly unknown to any of the peoples of the states that border on China, all of whom place straw mats on the ground or floor and use them in place of chair, bed, or table.”<sup>68</sup> in Song China, caterers served the rich in their mansions, setting up banquets complete with porcelain tableware, napkins, drapery, and furniture. Most important for the enhanced reputation of porcelain and potters, the ceramic also graced the imperial table. The Huizong emperor painted Literary Gathering, a hanging silk scroll portraying eight gentlemen (perhaps including the artist himself) seated on chairs around a black-lacquered table set with an array of floral bouquets. Each diner has a place setting consisting of a porcelain cup, a stand, a dish, and chopsticks. Attendants stand nearby with wine carafes, and a portable cupboard holds additional tableware. in the foreground, servants prepare tea.<sup>69</sup> by the reign of the Song, polished soirées such as that depicted by Huizong customarily featured tea (cha) served in porcelain cups or bowls.<sup>70</sup> An enthusiast for tea, as well as porcelain, the emperor wrote a treatise praising the virtues of the drink. Tea is derived from Camellia sinensis, an evergreen shrub of southwestern China, named by linnaeus in honor of Georg Joseph Kamel, the Jesuit who sent dried specimens of the plant from the Philippines to Europe. Tea was used first for making a medicinal drink in the early Han period, often boiled with ginger, orange peel, or peppermint. by the early common era, drinkers abandoned those ingredients, and tea started to be regarded as more than a health aid or flavoring agent. Around the same time, drinking tea played a role in the replacement of the traditional “ear-cup”—an oval vessel with two winglike projections, generally used for sipping wine—with a round, relatively high-sided cup, a shape much better suited to hold hot liquid safely.<sup>71</sup> of course, porcelain proved especially practical for drinking tea as it has minimal thermal conductivity, unlike vessels made from metal and glass. dentrecolles made that point in discussing the advantages of Jingdezhen’s pottery: “They find their porcelain is more useful [than glass]: it bears hot liquids, and one can hold a cup of boiling tea without being burned . . . which one cannot do with a cup of silver of the same thickness and shape.” Wandering adepts of Chan buddhism (later known as Zen in Japan), whose only permitted sustenance during their long, sleepless nights of meditation was tea, spread its use in the Tang period. According to legend, bodhidharma, an indian monk who came to China in the early sixth century, stayed awake until his eyelids fell onto the ground and sprouted into the first tea plants in the Middle Kingdom. The buddhist poet Gao Shi (d. 765) wrote that “reading books cannot compare to reading scripture, and drinking wine is no match for drinking tea.”<sup>72</sup> A popular subject in Tang paintings was that of monks studying religious texts while sipping tea from white porcelain bowls, white being considered auspicious by buddhists. The theme entered into Chinese high culture, as shown in Qui ying’s hand-scroll Zhao Mengfu Writing the Heart Sutra in Exchange for Tea, a mid-Ming work that reflects the lasting association between buddhist monks and the culture of tea.<sup>73</sup> Tea won over the imperial court in the Tang period. Feng yan’s ninth-century Record of Things Heard and Seen states that “the way of tea is in great fashion, and among the imperial court and nobles, there is not one who does not drink it.”<sup>74</sup> As early as 821, a court official claimed, “Tea is no different from rice and salt. People far and near alike depend on it.”<sup>75</sup> The state established a monopoly on tea in 793, by which time taxes on the tea trade amounted to 400,000 strings of cash (40 million coins). The drink became common refreshment throughout China only in the Song, however. Preparation advanced from grinding and then boiling slices of prepared tea bricks in the late Han to the practice of pouring boiling water over dried tea leaves in the Southern Song (and still today). This entailed a change of implements. in the earlier method, powdered tea simply was tossed into a heated cauldron of water and the liquid scooped out and poured into a bowl; use of dried leaves demanded creation of a pot for stewing the tea. Taste also evolved: consumers favored red tea in the Tang and white tea in the northern Song; green tea, sometimes scented with floral essences and musk, became most popular in the Southern Song and remained so thereafter. during the Song, tea and sociability forged an enduring association, eclipsing the drink’s origins in monkish meditation. As Gaspar da Cruz later described it, “Whatsoever person or persons come to any man of quality’s house, it is customary to offer him on a fair tray in a porcelain cup . . . a kind of warm water which they call cha . . . made from a concoction of somewhat bitter herbs.”<sup>76</sup> The Jesuit rodrigues reports that some well-heeled tea votaries in the late Ming took the edge off the bitterness by dropping morsels of apricot and almond into tea; when the drink was consumed, the fruit was eaten with silver or bronze spoons. According to another Jesuit, sometimes the Chinese prepared a hasty meal by beating two egg yolks with heaps of powdered sugar, then pouring the concoction into infused tea. Many tea drinkers, however, frowned on making the beverage into a kind of sweet or spicy soup. A Ming writer pronounced that “adding fruit, seeds, salt, pepper, ginger, bitter orange, and so on to tea is a calamity.”<sup>77</sup> Whatever the preparation, color, or tidbit, everyone agreed that tea must be accompanied by porcelain. in fact, it is no coincidence that the camellia leaf entered the diet of the moneyed classes on a wide scale at the same time porcelain came into wide use. Zhu yan remarks that during the Tang, various kinds of cups were used for drinking liquids, especially wine—including “ruddy gold, white jade, engraved silver, rock-crystal, and glass, beautifully carved and designed”—but in the Song, cups typically were made of porcelain, “the material most esteemed at the tea-tasting parties of the period.”<sup>78</sup> A comparable transition took place in eighteenthcentury britain, when tea challenged ale, beer, and gin in popularity, with pottery teacups and teapots jostling aside mugs, tankards, and beakers on the table. in becoming a defining aspect of Chinese culture, tea gathered a cluster of associations in which porcelain played a central role, especially among the elite. The Tang poet lu yu (ca. 730–804) wrote The Classic of Tea, a work so influential that it led to his memorialization as the god of tea. He taught generations of tea drinkers to cultivate an urbane sensitivity to the natural world. He informed his readers that when boiling water is poured into a pot, the frothy patches that bubble up from the tea leaves should bring to mind “eddying pools, twisting islets or floating duckweed at the time of the world’s creation. They should be like scudding clouds in a clear blue sky and should occasionally overlap like scales on fish. They should be like copper cash, green with age, churned by the rapids of a river, or dispose themselves as chrysanthemum petals would, promiscuously cast on a goblet’s stand.”<sup>79</sup> lu obviously would have thought that dumping egg yolk and powdered sugar into his cherished beverage spelled calamity. He laid down the dictum that “moderation is the very essence of tea,” and he specified what he called “the Twenty-Four implements,” from water filters to bamboo pincers to porcelain bowls, all of which he considered indispensable for preparing a superb drink.<sup>80</sup> He also was the first to express a true interest in ceramics, classifying and ranking tea bowls by regions, just as he did for certain teas. by the Song era, according to Zhu, “detailed rules [for tea drinking] were laid down for every step, from the gathering, the preparation, and the storing of the crop up to the boiling of the water for the infusion. . . . The utensils employed were also carefully selected, and only adopted after repeated trials, nothing being taken at random.”<sup>81</sup> As a consequence of lu’s influence, the culture of tea also complemented upper-class devotion to antiquity as potters modeled the biggest pieces of tea equipment, such as water jars and cauldrons, on bronze vessels from the Shang and Zhou periods. Competitive tea-tasting parties placed special demands on the proper utensil. As Zhu explains, “The rule was that he whose tea trace disappeared first lost, and that the one whose trace lasted longest won.” inasmuch as detecting the trace was the point of the competition, it was essential that the tea bowl have an impermeable surface to prevent staining by tea tannin and to ensure the clarity of the liquid. Many experts followed lu in regarding green-glazed porcelains as superior for enhancing the color of tea, bringing to light a green akin to “the bright tint of distant well-wooded mountains.”<sup>82</sup> others preferred thick, black bowls with curious effects on the glaze, such as “partridge feathers” (white pearly spots) and “hare’s fur” (orange-brown streaks), decoration characteristic of Zhejiang and Fujian kilns. in his treatise on tea, Huizong argued that green tea looked best set off against dark porcelain: “The black-hued tea bowls are to be preferred. Those with distinctive hare’s fur glaze are the best.” in the early Ming, many drinkers preferred teacups “pure white in colour, like jade, so that one can observe the colour of the tea.”<sup>83</sup> Teapots became indispensable accessories when consumers turned to brewing tea leaves during the Southern Song. Zhu states that the cognoscenti considered porcelain pots obligatory “so that the fragrance may not escape and the aroma not be lost.”<sup>84</sup> by the Ming period, those most admired by connoisseurs came from yixing, a town on the shores of lake Tai in Jiangsu province, immediately to the east of Anhui.<sup>85</sup> in the twelfth century, yixing craftsmen, perhaps under buddhist influence, adapted the shape of wine ewers to create a pot for infusing tea. Employing a stoneware clay that fired a soft rose-brown, the potters molded elegant vessels with a pear-shaped form, curved spout, ring-shaped handle, burnished (and unglazed) surface, spare decoration, and simple, clean lines—in other words, what eventually came to be regarded everywhere as the classic teapot. Singling out another leading feature, the Portuguese introduced the ware to Europe in the sixteenth century under the name boccarro (big mouth). The Japanese, who had little use for a teapot since they did not stew tea, nevertheless admired the yixing product, which they called “vermilion ware.” buddhists may have been responsible for development of the yixing vessels, but, like the camellia leaf centuries earlier, the teapots soon transcended a monastic or religious context. Tea enthusiasts avidly sought them out, paying as much as six taels of silver for one and commissioning customized pieces with calligraphic inscriptions. Some owners even ordered their teapots placed in their tombs. Su dongpo (1037–1101), a magistrate, poet, and connoisseur, designed one of the most enduring pot shapes in the yixing repertory, and an eminent yixing potter received the dubious honor of having his signed teapots counterfeited in his lifetime. An enthusiast for yixing ware claimed that furnace transformation magically affected his pot so that when hot water spilled into it, “the stored tea turns to rosy clouds like shimmering silk.”<sup>86</sup> Porcelain and tea made for a potent brew. reading omens in tea leaves (tasseomancy) goes back a long way, perhaps as far the Tang dynasty, and the practice was transmitted to (or independently conceived in) Europe, as illustrated by the English poet Charles Churchill (1731–64), who describes “matrons, who toss the cup, and see / The grounds of fate in the grounds of tea.”<sup>87</sup> When a prominent Song general gave a teacup to a poor man, his charity received supernatural acknowledgment, for when tea splashed into the vessel “there immediately appeared a pair of cranes, which flew out of the cup and circled round it, and only disappeared when the tea was drunk.” When Su dongpo ceremonially offered tea to images of the buddha’s venerable disciples, the liquid became “transformed into white milk, or solidified into flowering trees, among which the peach, plum, and peony were in turn clearly identified by him.”<sup>88</sup> ## PorCElAin And d o CTor Go od TEA Jingdezhen was closely connected to Qimen in Anhui province, a major tea-growing area, so the porcelain city naturally turned to manufacturing tea vessels from early in the Tang. it also created imitations of the yixing ware in blue-and-white in the Ming, but they could not compete with the real thing. When the yixing teapots reached Europe in the mid-seventeenth century, at the same time the voC began importing tea, they proved as popular as in China.<sup>89</sup> rising to the challenge, Western silversmiths soon copied the novelty and produced variations on it: the wellknown Queen Anne silver teapot derives from a pear-shaped yixing vessel. one dutch potter who made facsimiles of the yixing pots boasted in a 1678 newspaper advertisement that “he has achieved such perfection in the manufacturing of red teapots that they are in no way inferior in colour, purity, and durability to the indian teapots.”<sup>90</sup> yixing pots were celebrated in China for their naturalism, with pieces often shaped like lotuses, melons, pomegranates, gourds, and bamboo. Western potters copied such exotic items because the organic forms charmed their customers, though of course they remained unaware that in China the plants conveyed symbolic significance rooted in buddhism and daoism. (See figure 11.) August ii purchased many yixing pots at voC auctions in Amsterdam, and Tschirnhaus believed the red stoneware held the key to a formula for porcelain. He investigated the work of Ary de Milde (d. 1708), a potter in delft, a town fortyeight kilometers southwest of Amsterdam, who styled himself “Mr. Teapot Maker” because of his outstanding imitations of yixing pots. His workshop, the Crowned Teapot, obtained a fifteen-year patent for his version of the ware in 1680. dutch painters also memorialized the Chinese teapots.<sup>91</sup> Pieter Gerritz van roestraeten (ca. 1630–1700), a Haarlem painter, produced Still Life with Tea Things, which depicts a black-lacquered table on which stands a yixing teapot, an imposing tea caddy, blue-and-white porcelain cups, and a chunk of rock crystal. His Still Life with Silver and Ebony Casket features a silver-mounted nautilus shell next to a yixing teapot with a gold cupid fastened to the lid, evidently a reference to the supposed aphrodisiac effect of the popular Chinese drink.<sup>92</sup> While not everyone agreed on the efficacy of tea as a sexual stimulant, there was a consensus wherever the drink became widely consumed that it improved one’s health. lu yu wrote that “its liquor is like the sweetest dew of Heaven,” and if taken five times a day, it alleviated arthritis, eye strain, constipation, and melancholia.<sup>93</sup> in an essay on herbs in 1578, li Shizhen claimed that drinking tea would “promote digestion, dissolve fats, neutralize poisons in the digestive system, cure dysentery, fight lung disease, lower fevers, and treat epilepsy.”<sup>94</sup> Perhaps inspired by payments from the voC, dr. Cornelius decker (1648–86) of Holland, the so-called doctor bontekoe (doctor Good Tea) who wrote the Treatise of the Excellent Herb Tea (1679), assured his readers that the drink cured an astonishing range of ailments, including scurvy, sore throat, colic, gout, bad breath, and inflamed eyes. He recommended that “all men and women drink it every day and at all hours, beginning with ten cups a day and increasing the dose as much as the stomach can stand and the kidneys can expel.”<sup>95</sup> Mockers, however, claimed that “his joints rattled like castanets” from the two hundred cups he sometimes drained in a single day. Some tea drinkers nearly fulfilled decker’s prescription: an acquaintance told Montesquieu that housewives in Holland drank some thirty cups every morning.<sup>96</sup> A popular verse of the 1670s also endorsed the drink: Tea that helps our head and heart Tea medicates most every part Tea rejuvenates the very old Tea warms the piss of those who’re cold.<sup>97</sup> According to Postelthwayt, tea strengthens the brain and stomach, promotes digestion and perspiration, and provides a “remedy against chronic [ills], from its admirable quality of sweetening and diluting the blood.”<sup>98</sup> The Japanese shared European and Chinese estimations of tea as a panacea. yosai (1141–1215, also known as Eisai), a buddhist monk and pilgrim to China, brought tea seedlings back home to Kyushu, the southernmost island of Japan. in 1211 he wrote Record of Curing Disease with Tea (Kissa yojoki), in which he asserts that tea wonderfully fortifies the body against illness: Whereas the Chinese drink tea to provide the heart with the taste it likes, in Japan we do not drink tea. Therefore, the Chinese have healthy hearts and live long. . . . The heart is the chief of the Five organs and the [bitter] taste of tea is the most important. in other words, bitter is the chief among the [Five] Tastes. This is why the heart likes bitter tastes. it is healthy, thanks to the bitter foods it partakes, and secures the health of the other subordinate organs.<sup>99</sup> ricci and rodrigues, however, came closest to proposing the most significant health benefit from drinking tea. in China, as ricci points out, their drinks, which may be wine or water or the drink called Cia, are always served warm, and this is so even in the hot summer. The idea behind this custom seems to be that it is more beneficial for the stomach and, generally speaking, the Chinese are longer-lived than Europeans and preserve their physical powers up to seventy or even eighty years of age. The custom might also account for the fact that they never suffer from gallstones, so common among the people of the West who are fond of cold drinks.<sup>100</sup> After declaring that tea relieves hangovers, reduces fever, and safeguards chastity (by purging the kidneys of hot blood), rodrigues observes: it has various other advantageous properties. Thus both China and Japan are densely populated and the people, especially in China, are greatly crowded together. yet there is usually no plague in these two kingdoms as in Europe and other places, and pestilence is very rare. Many people maintain that this results from cha, which evacuates all superfluous matter that causes evil humours. They drink cha continuously both day and night, and never touch cold water for hot cha is their ordinary drink summer and winter, and normally they always drink it at the end of a meal.<sup>101</sup> in fact, the principal health benefit conferred by tea was that it required consumers to boil their water, thereby reducing the incidence of diseases arising from contamination of wells and streams—a cause of some three million deaths annually even today.<sup>102</sup> Though tea was not a cure-all, then, its preparation certainly acted as a prophylactic. At least in Song China, the popularity of tea also may have promoted broader concern for untainted water. Zhuang Chuo, an early-twelfth-century physician, commented that “when the common people are traveling they take care to drink only boiled water.”<sup>103</sup> because brewed tea cost very little, it came within reach of the lower classes, thereby ensuring that much of the urban population had greater protection from lethal infection in congested, disease-rich environments. beyond its association with tea, porcelain itself also contributed directly to reducing disease: its impermeable surface led to a decrease in bacterial infections stemming from particles of decayed food being retained in the pores and scratches on plates and bowls made of wood, earthenware, pewter, and precious metal. Traveling in italy in 1581, Michel de Montaigne (1533–92) admired faience dishes, “which are so white and neat that they seem like porcelain,” but he recoiled from the grimy, scratched pewter vessels placed before him in hostelries.<sup>104</sup> A mid-seventeenthcentury italian manual on household management pointed out that the rich considered high-quality pottery “safer than tin [i.e., pewter], not picking up bad odors, and cleaner, just as one sees princes use crystal for drinking although they have cups, glasses and other dishes in gilded silver.”<sup>105</sup> Moreover, after the Tang period Chinese glazes contained no lead, whereas lowfired, lead-glazed pottery used everywhere else released minute amounts of the metal into cooked and stored food, exposing consumers to significant health risk, even death. in particular, acetic acid in wine leaches the mineral from lead-glazed ceramics. in 1760 the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce in birmingham heard a report warning against use of common pottery: For the delfware is clumsy and rotten, and its Glaze dangerous to Health, on account of the Quantity of calcin’d lead and Tin employed in it. Matters that, even after vitrification, submit to the milder Acids. The same bad Consequences attend the other Common Potteries that are glaz’d with lead.<sup>106</sup> An anonymous engraving of 1799 shows skeletal death seizing an Englishman who is spooning soup from an earthenware bowl, and in The Lady’s Assistant for Regulating and Supplying the Table (1773), Charlotte Mason counseled that only Chinese porcelain should be used to hold acidic foods.<sup>107</sup> Song China, early modern Japan, and eighteenth-century Europe all experienced striking population growth. Though obviously impossible to measure or prove, it is likely that widespread use of tea in the three regions and increasing use of porcelain vessels in food preparation, consumption, and storage contributed to improving the health of the general population. ## ConnoiSSEUrS And THE CUlTUrE oF PorCElAin Along with imperial patronage, restaurant dining, and private banquets, the culture of tea guaranteed that porcelain would come to occupy a prominent niche in the mental universe of the Confucian intelligentsia. The ceramic offered agreeable occasions for demonstrating that the taste of a refined gentleman matched the delicacy of his finest vessels. Aficionados claimed that the simplicity of porcelain elevated it above vulgar gold, the substance of choice of parvenu merchants and military commanders. often articulated with intimidating hauteur, restraint and modesty were keynotes of Song connoisseurs. Still, as one writer made clear, the supposedly straightforward virtues did not rule out exquisitely nuanced feelings when a treasured vessel came to grief: When a good piece of porcelain is broken, you know there is no hope of repairing it. i then hand it to the cook, asking him to use it as any old vessel, and give orders that he shall never let that broken porcelain bowl come within my sight again. Ah, is this not happiness?<sup>108</sup> A Song connoisseur maintained that pottery should be preferred to opulent containers and that “pouring from silver vessels into cups of jade only dazzles the eyes.” verses by Su dongpo indicate that porcelain cups held a place of honor on the table equal to that of vessels of precious metal: “From the silver vase flows out in oily stream the ant-wing wine: / on the brown bowls float up the grains of coiling-dragon tea.”<sup>109</sup> Scholars and gentry regarded porcelain boxes as de rigueur for preserving the odor of incense and for keeping their vermilion seal colors bright, far better than traditional jade receptacles. They reclined their heads on porcelain pillows because those are “most efficacious in keeping the eyes clear and preserving the sight, so that even in old age fine writing can be read.”<sup>110</sup> The Song art of flower arranging, later elaborated by Zan Qiande (1577–1643) in the Treatise on Vase Flowers (Pinghua Pu), called for an assortment of porcelains and other accessories, such as vases to display each flower type and furniture to match the vessels. Experts agreed that porcelain vases superbly exhibited the hearty blossoms of summer and autumn, while those of winter and spring flourished best in bronze containers.<sup>111</sup> (See figure 12.) Calligraphers preferred porcelain inkstones, and they judged that their porcelain brush holders, unlike those of copper, did not make brushes brittle by poisoning the water. Porcelain incense burners, modeled after ancient bronze vessels, only needed to be “submitted to thorough friction to remove the new gloss of the fire from their surface,” though pieces with “tortoise-shell markings scattered all over the surface . . . are too elaborately ornamented to be fit for a simple scholar.” likeminded gentlemen believed that vases for the library or study should be modest and restrained, as well as shaped into natural forms, fashioned “like aubergine fruit, like flower-jars, or flower-bags, or in the form of divining-stalks, or bulrush heads.”<sup>112</sup> According to one authority, porcelains lacking elegance and sophistication are “only fit for use on the ladies’ dressing table. They are not the refined garniture of the scholar’s study.”<sup>113</sup> From the Song to the end of the Qing, decoration of vases made for the scholar’s study commonly included representations of accessories, such as flowerpots, stands, hanging scrolls, brush holders, and bronze antiquities, that customarily adorned the study of the scholar. natural forms in porcelain dominated paraphernalia on the scholar’s desk: an inkstone in the appearance of a peach, a pomegranate-shaped water dropper, a peach-shaped censer, brush holders of bamboo design, a brush rest fashioned as a pea pod, a seal-paste box in the guise of a scroll, and a scroll weight wrought as a dragon cresting waves. during the Song, connoisseurs favored porcelains from certain kilns. They identified “the Five Great Wares” of ru, ding, Jun, Guan, and Ge, labels derived from the county locations of kilns patronized by the court. despite its limited utility, this taxonomy still dominates discussion of Song ceramics. in China, however, five is a number with which to conjure. Confucian and daoist scholars of the early common era elaborated a system of mutual correspondences to classify and understand reality. They originally identified five elements (earth, fire, water, wood, and metal) and later extended the symbolically weighty number to identify five of everything significant in nature and society, including, inter alia, organs, tastes, planets, spices, colors, classical texts, virtues, and human aspirations. in short, rather than provide a literal inventory, allusion to five of anything represents rhetorical shorthand for a complete amount.<sup>114</sup> The yuan court mandated that the imperial dragon depicted on porcelains and other objects must have five claws, and porcelain brush rests for scholars were molded to stand for the five Sacred Peaks, epitomized as the spines of five subterranean dragons. The Qianlong emperor relished “the exquisite state of repose produced by tea, that precious drink, which drives away the five causes of sorrow,” those aspects of life inimical to “fivefold happiness.”<sup>115</sup> The five-petaled flowering plum (mei hua), a symbol of good luck, was chosen in 1930 as the official emblem of China, whose national flag displays five stars. The notion of “the Five Great Wares,” then, says less about the principal kilns of the period, many of which still await archaeological investigation, than it indicates that by the Song porcelain had achieved a stature sufficiently elevated in the eyes of the literati to assign it a canonical fivefold listing. besides enjoying imperial patronage, the Five Great Wares displayed luminous glazes and a range of colors, including blue-green, dark green, sea green, olive green, amber, duck-egg blue, blue-white, ivory, and pale silver. in the late Tang, potters summed up the most important distinction in ceramics with the phrase “green in the south, white in the north.”<sup>116</sup> in the Song, the most prestigious kilns producing whitewares were located in Hebei province in northern China, and those manufacturing the best-known greenwares (qingci) were at longquan in Zhejiang province. in modern nomenclature, greenware usually is called celadon, a term derived from the name of a character that an anonymous writer attached to a shepherd in L’Astrée, a French pastoral drama based on a novel by Honoré d’Urfé (1568–1625). The character Celadon always appeared clad or decked out in ribbons of grayish green, a shade that became identified with shepherds in masques at the court of louis xiv. The shepherd and his bucolic comrades often appeared on eighteenthcentury French pottery, and in the nineteenth century French collectors applied celadon to the dominant hues of monochromatic Song porcelains. of course, no one in Song China employed the term; “the color of natural things” sufficed to describe porcelains whose tints ran the spectrum from blue-green to amber.<sup>117</sup> (See figure 10.) ## ConnoiSSEUrS And THE CUlTUrE oF JAdE Jade (yu, or nephrite) came in the same range of colors as the Five Great Wares, the shades varying according to the iron content of the semiprecious mineral.<sup>118</sup> Potters pleased their patrons by consciously playing on the likeness of porcelains to jade. indeed, a driving force behind ceramic development in the Song was the ambition to replicate the feel, look, and timbre of jade, a substance of great ceremonial, symbolic, and artistic significance. Whereas gold was believed to derive from the power of the sun, jade was regarded as “the shining essence of moonlight,” a supernatural treasure that formed and revealed itself in the nighttime glow. Scarce in China, jade was imported from Central Asia, especially from mines and riverbeds at Khotan on the Silk road. Merchants termed good-sized pieces without pits or fractures “the jade worth the value of cities.”<sup>119</sup> Costly even in its crude state, jade became costlier when carved by an artisan: because it is harder than any metal, shaping and engraving the mineral with abrasives and cords is a labor-intensive, time-consuming task. in 1735, soon after Asian jade arrived in Europe, John barrow, in Dictionarium Polygraphicum, a lexicon of the arts, wrote that jade is “much esteemed for its hardness . . . and is only to be cut with the powder of diamond.”<sup>120</sup> This makes a specific achievement of Qianlong’s craftsmen more extraordinary. in 1780 they carved a jade boulder 200 centimeters in height and weighing more than 5,000 kilograms: depicting scores of laborers and engineering tasks in minute detail, Da Yu Controlling the Floods was inscribed with a poem by the emperor suggesting that jade artworks have value equal to painting since they last virtually for eternity.<sup>121</sup> in the realm of the decorative arts, the achievement of the palace craftsmen was as monumental as the hydraulic projects memorialized by their jade masterpiece. As a consequence of its seemingly imperishable nature, jade became identified with the quest for immortality as early as the neolithic, an era when perforated jade axes were buried with the honored dead, whose bodily orifices were sealed with jade plugs. Jade seemed endowed with Heaven’s creative and preservative powers, making it the most appropriate material for cult objects in rites for the deceased. by the Shang period, specialists in sculpting and polishing jade had emerged in the lower yangzi region.<sup>122</sup> The tomb of Fu Hao of the Shang held seven hundred pieces of jade, including some neolithic ones that probably already were regarded as precious heirlooms. Kings of the bronze Age ritually presented ring-shaped jade objects at altars to pay homage to Heaven and Earth. incised animal masks of jade covered the faces of royalty in tombs. Jade scepters, with shapes based on bronze weapons, signified hallowed authority, and jade ornaments, such as pendants, buckles, and jewelry, denoted high rank. by the Warring States period, the authority of Confucius buttressed the spiritual prestige of the gemstone, for one of the texts attributed to him states that “the noble man will never appear without jade ornament, and his virtue is like his jade ornament.”<sup>123</sup> The sage’s judgment became the warrant for elaboration later in the period: Anciently superior men found the likeness of all excellent qualities in jade. Soft, smooth and glassy, it appeared to them like benevolence; fine, compact and strong, like intelligence[,] . . . its flaw not concealing its beauty, nor its beauty its flaw, like loyalty; with internal radiance issuing from every side, like good faith.<sup>124</sup> The association of Confucius and jade appeared in the earliest Western portrait of him, included in the first latin translation of his supposed writings: in the Confucius Sinarum Philosophus, published in Paris in 1687 with a subvention from louis xiv, Confucius prayerfully holds a jade tablet (gui), a symbol of political investiture.<sup>125</sup> Princes of the Han dynasty were buried in full suits of jade plaques stitched with wire because it was believed that the soul could return to the body only so long as it remained preserved. Jade cicadas, symbols of reincarnation, were placed in the mouth of the deceased, jade pillows cushioned their heads, and jade pigs, symbols of wealth, were clutched in their hands. Jade discs placed in tombs were decorated with dense, interlaced motifs of zoomorphic masks that resemble the taotie, the ogre face engraved on bronzes in the Shang and Zhou periods. The meaning and function of the discs remain uncertain, however. Chinese medical manuals recommended swallowing powdered white jade for internal disorders and using jade needles (also replicated in porcelain) in acupuncture. in daoism, the Jade Emperor, the link between the heavenly realm and the gods of the empire, is the counterpart of the worldly ruler, and the Jade Gate (yumen) marked the Chinese entrance to the Silk road. The Tang emperor xuanzong (r. 712–56) so desperately wanted some renowned “five-colored” jade from Khotan that he supposedly dispatched an army of forty thousand men to seize it. The most momentous political ritual of the Tang dynasty involved the Son of Heaven climbing Mount Tai in Shandong province to sacrifice to Heaven and Earth, a ceremony affirming his mandate to rule and climaxing with him burying a stone coffer containing jade tablets wrapped in gold cord. Jade thus represented perpetuity, nobility, supremacy, and the sacred. in addition, as a consequence of their exceptional molecular density, jade and high-fired pottery are resonant when struck. From ancient times, the chiming of the materials conveyed spiritual significance. Pottery bells were used for ritual occasions in the early third millennium b.c.e., to be replaced by bronze bells several centuries later. Musicians in the Shang cajoled ancestral spirits to communal feasts by playing melodies on bronze and pottery bells. Music also mollified the spirits of the privileged dead: in the fifth century b.c.e., an aristocrat from Hubei province went to his tomb with a magnificent array of sixty bronze bells.<sup>126</sup> Musicians playing on pottery and bronze bells sometimes were accompanied by others performing on jade chime stones. Some wealthy Tang monasteries possessed jade bells, as indicated by one poet’s tribute to a temple in Zhejiang: “The mountain sings—with bells of Khotan.”<sup>127</sup> Zhao xigu (fl. 1220), a Song connoisseur, wrote that the tinkling of jade pendants is akin to being transported to “the bright Garden’s Jade Pool” in the land of the immortals.<sup>128</sup> lute players attributed the exquisite “jadelike” sound of their instruments to the powder of the stone that was used to mend cracks in them. The art of playing on celadon cups from longquan, “the tones of which surpassed those of the hanging musical stones of jade,” became a stylish diversion among the upper stratum in the Tang and Song.<sup>129</sup> literati of the Ming delighted in the melodious chime given forth when one porcelain chess piece struck another, an effect otherwise possible only with exorbitantly costly jade. dentrecolles describes an instrument called a yunlo: a set of nine small, slightly concave porcelain plates suspended in a frame on which one plays with mallets like a dulcimer. Soon after porcelains started to reach Europe in large numbers, Westerners discovered a like amusement. John Evelyn (1620– 1706), a member of the royal Society and a connoisseur of the arts, reports in his diary that in an Amsterdam tavern in 1641 he saw displayed as a rarity “a chime of Purselan dishes, which fitted to clock-worke, sung many changes and tunes without breaking.”<sup>130</sup> Porcelain was the only material that could replicate the sound, shades, sheen, and unctuous appearance of jade. Pouring, dipping, and brushing, Song potters applied numerous glaze layers to their wares, creating a shell as much as ten times thicker than was customary in the Tang. remarkably, sometimes they made the glaze thicker than the body of the porcelain vessel itself. Milled coarsely, the burnt-lime glaze imparted a translucent, jadelike texture to the piece; milled finely, it created a more transparent effect, deepening the color of the fired clay. in either case, the glaze layers, which enfolded countless quartz particles and tiny gas bubbles, gave a luminous glow to the porcelain as a consequence of the scattering and bending of light.<sup>131</sup> Song connoisseurs likened such effects to that created by shimmering ice, snow, or silver; they extolled the vessels for having “deep pure colour like beautiful jade.”<sup>132</sup> They called jade of the finest quality “mutton fat,” so they naturally described porcelain glazes as having the glossiness of pig or chicken fat, “like lard dissolving but not flowing.”<sup>133</sup> in his poem The Secret-Colored Bowl Remaining from the Gifts to the Emperor, xu yin (fl. 890) struck a loftier tone in paying tribute to an outstanding celadon vessel: newly glazed in auspicious jade-like colors, The finished bowl was first offered to my lord. Skillfully molded like a full moon dyed with spring water, deftly turned like a swirl of thin ice holding green clouds, like a moss-covered ancient bronze mirror present at this occasion, A tender, dew-soaked lotus leaf parted from the river’s edge.<sup>134</sup> ## THE CrEATion oF JinGdEZHEn PorCElAin As early as establishment of the Tang dynasty, kiln owners in Jiangxi sent gifts of what they called “imitation jade” (jiayu) to the imperial court.<sup>135</sup> According to a Song writer, artisans there excelled at making porcelains with shades that could “be likened to those of icy jade.”<sup>136</sup> The ceramics also were called “jade from rao” because wares shipped down the Chang river reached lake boyang at that town. during the Tang, Jingdezhen was known as xinping, and it thrived as a market center rather than as a maker of pottery. it received its permanent designation under the Song emperor Zhenzong (r. 998–1022), who renamed it Jingde (his reign title for several years) and officially declared it a trading town (zhen). The river port acted as a staging post for pottery produced in more than a dozen outlying villages, some as far away as sixty kilometers. during the Song, a visitor to the district recorded seeing “kilns connecting one village to another, kilns firing everywhere.”<sup>137</sup> Production at the time involved seasonal labor, with men farming half the year, tilling land belonging to the kiln owners, and devoting themselves to potting and firing from April to november. Porcelain from northeastern Jiangxi attracted the attention of the imperial court during the northern Song, leading to establishment of an official ceramic repository in Jingdezhen.<sup>138</sup> The area specialized in white ceramics that were glassy and sugary in texture, jadelike wares so fashionable that competing kiln centers on the southern coast copied them. The commodity received more substantial backing from the court during the Southern Song, when potters also began to focus on overseas markets. With the court calling for an increase in exports, artisans began to make some wares exclusively for foreign customers. Small jars in the form of a starshaped fruit (balimbing) were made for the Philippines, and kendi, bulbous jars originally based on an indian vessel, became popular items throughout maritime Southeast Asia, where shamans incorporated them into divination rituals.<sup>139</sup> imperial patronage and maritime trade boosted Jingdezhen’s importance as a marketplace and carrier at the same time the city started to lay the foundations for its transformation into an industrial center. in the Southern Song, brokers set up shop there, taking advantage of an improved canal network to supply distant clients. in the yuan and Ming periods, kiln owners began to shut down in outlying villages and relocate to Jingdezhen. The increased volume of output made river carriage essential, while hundreds of years of mining and forest removal made it difficult for local resources to sustain high production levels. Clay and timber increasingly had to be floated downriver from Anhui province to the porcelain city. demands for large amounts of pottery by early Ming emperors led to establishment of an imperial depot in Jingdezhen for supervising the manufacture and shipping of wares to the court. With the rise of the city as a porcelain producer from the Southern Song to the Ming, villagers migrated there looking for employment, potters devoted themselves to their craft on a full-time basis, government supervisors organized employees into guilds, kilns began to specialize in certain vessels, and workshops adopted mass-production techniques across the board. in the course of this long industrial transformation, the basic ware associated with Jingdezhen also changed. From the late tenth century, the main line of production in Jiangxi was known as qingbai (blue-white). According to a Tang scholar, qingbai originally referred to “the colour of white jades with delicate undercurrents of pale blue.” in the Song period, the term exclusively identified Jingdezhen ceramics with a white body and blue-tinted glaze. A Qing connoisseur praised antique qingbai for being “blue as the sky, bright as a mirror, thin as paper, and tinkling like a chime.”<sup>140</sup> by the last years of the Song dynasty, however, the pottery was losing those distinctive traits. Miners had reached deep deposits of china stone that lacked alumina, the mineral oxide that permitted the ceramic to withstand high firing. To maintain the quality of their product, potters began adding kaolin (or china clay) to the china stone, thereby restoring the percentage of the mineral required.<sup>141</sup> (See figure 12.) it was a turning point in the history of pottery, for the compound recipe proved vastly superior to anything before. The fusion of china stone and kaolin generally is still regarded as the defining characteristic of “true” porcelain, compared to which other formulas are considered mere imitations. by the end of the Southern Song, this also became the Chinese perspective, especially as other pottery centers, such as the Guangdong and longquan kilns, took second place to Jingdezhen or closed altogether. A seventeenth-century Chinese treatise declared that porcelain is made from both “glutinous rice” (china stone) and “non-glutinous rice” (china clay), the former bestowing a fair complexion and the latter delicate bones.<sup>142</sup> dentrecolles relates that a Chinese porcelain vendor told him that a dutch trader once obtained a sample of china stone to send to Amsterdam for analysis, but since he did not include china clay as well, his countrymen naturally failed to make porcelain: “The Chinese merchant said to me with a laugh, ‘They wanted to have a body without bones to support its flesh!’ ” Adding kaolin to china stone permitted potters to raise the kiln temperature to above 1,300°C. This led to fusion of the china stone and kaolin, greatly augmenting the translucency and solidity of the ware. Around the same time, potters enhanced the whiteness of the final product by creating a new, colorless glaze that eliminated the bluish tinge typical of qingbai. The brilliant white surface of the porcelain thus presented new potential for decoration, and the superior strength of the clay body meant that larger, more elaborate vessels now could be produced. The workers of Jingdezhen had created a material that would transform ceramic traditions around the world. Those changes began, however, only after they had adopted a significant innovation from the potters of Southwest Asia.