# The Creation of blue-and-White Porcelain Muslims, Mongols, and Eurasian Cultural Exchange, 1000–1400 From the perspective of dentrecolles, the most celebrated wares of Jingdezhen presented something of a mystery. learning from local annals that “people here in times past made only white porcelain,” he wondered how it came about that in his day “one hardly sees any in Europe except those which have a vivid blue on a white background.” When he questioned his parishioners about the origins of the coloring, they related a tale about a porcelain merchant who was shipwrecked on a remote island, where he discovered that “rock fit for making the most beautiful blue was quite common; he carried away with him a big load, and they say that Jingdezhen never had seen so lovely a blue. He later searched in vain for the coast where luck once had sent him.” dentrecolles did not subscribe to this fable, and the source of Jingdezhen’s “beautiful and celestial blue” (as local annals described it) remained as obscure to him as other aspects of the history of porcelain. The answer to this mystery is suggested by xiang yuanpian, a calligrapher and artist of the late Ming, who described a fifteenth-century porcelain cup modeled on a jade vessel of the Han dynasty: “The glaze is of a uniform translucent white, like mutton-fat or fine jade, rising in minute millet-like tubercles, and the blue so pure and brilliant as to dazzle the eyes, being painted with Muslim blue.”<sup>1</sup> The pigment, then, had associations with the world of islam. The Chinese term for the religion is Huijiao (the Hui sect) and Muslims are known as Huihui or Huizu. The words came into Chinese usage in the Song period, perhaps deriving from the Chinese name for the Uighurs of Central Asia, a people who converted to islam in the years after the Tang lost control of the Silk road. “Muslim blue” is huihui qing, sometimes called sumali or suponi qing, variations on the Chinese transliteration of the Arabic samawi, “sky-colored” or “azure.”<sup>2</sup> “Muslim blue” points to the cultural and economic interdependence of the ecumene from the time of the Song. blue-and-white porcelain developed over time as a consequence of the impact of Song ceramics on Southwest Asia, and Muslim merchants from that islamic heartland shipped cobalt pigment to Jingdezhen, where, during the last generation of the yuan dynasty, potters began using it to decorate wares for domestic and international markets. This stimulated a far-reaching development in art: during the late yuan and early Ming, the design traditions of China and Southwest Asia came into greater contact than ever before, with the freeflowing spatial organization of the Chinese tradition and the geometric precepts of the Southwest Asian tradition meeting and learning from each other. blue-andwhite porcelain achieved its full artistic development in the Ming period, during which it comprised the bulk of the export trade in ceramics. it went on to triumph far and wide, reshaping (and sometimes destroying) pottery traditions in virtually every society it touched, from the Philippines to Portugal. The creation and success of the new porcelain style demonstrate that longdistance exchange around the turn of the first millennium integrated the ecumene into a world system, a network of overlapping economies. The most significant part of that system was China, while islam provided the cultural foundation for the principal trading diaspora that circulated the products of the system. After making his extraordinary journey from Morocco to the Middle Kingdom, moving chiefly from one Muslim community or kingdom to another, ibn battuta concluded that “there is no people in the world wealthier than the Chinese.”<sup>3</sup> Given its population of 140 million in the Song, as well as the attractions of its manufactured products, China exerted enormous leverage when it turned to the wider world, having an effect on markets as far away as the commercial fairs of northern France and burgundy. ## CHinESE TrAdE And SoUTHWEST ASiA during the Song, Chinese overseas trade and islamic communities in Chinese ports recovered from the sharp decline triggered by the An lushan rebellion in 755. Song emperors encouraged overseas exchange, and their counterparts on the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, the Abbasid caliphs, launched gigantic construction projects that spurred the economy and attracted long-distance commerce. Al-Mutasim (r. 833– 42) moved the court to Samarra, 130 kilometers upstream from baghdad, where he built a palace complex many times larger than louis xiv’s versailles. Within a few decades, the new capital sprawled along the Tigris river for thirty-five kilometers.<sup>4</sup> international maritime traffic revived, conducted mainly by Chinese merchants, who supplanted Arabs as the dominant businessmen trading between the Middle Kingdom and the indian ocean. yet the future of the reconstituted cosmopolitan order depended principally on Muslim merchants from diverse ethnic groups—Egyptian, Arabian, Persian, East African, indian, and Southeast Asian. Muslim and Chinese merchants did not constitute entirely separate categories, however, for Chinese converts to islam and Muslim families resident in China for generations also took an active role in seaborne trade. Although Muslim communities in the ports of China organized under their own religious law, in their overseas exchange they fell under imperial regulations enforced by maritime trade commissioners (tiju shipo), an office created under the Tang. The commissioners collected customs duties, directed tribute collection, managed state monopolies (on imports such as coral and ivory), and superintended merchant vessels. in Canton, Muslims built a grand mosque with a minaret from which flags and fire beacons guided the arrival and departure of oceangoing junks. in Quanzhou, they had six substantial mosques, including one financed by a merchant from Siraf. A shrine known as “the Holy Tomb” supposedly contained several of Muhammad’s disciples, believed to have arrived in the city a few years after the death of the Prophet.<sup>5</sup> According to a Quanzhou magistrate of the eleventh century, “this prefecture has developed overland communication routes leading to every corner of the empire. Maritime merchants crowd the place. Mixing together are Chinese and foreigners.”<sup>6</sup> Muslims made up most of the latter, and the size of their community in the Song era has been disclosed by excavations of a large cemetery outside the city, where Arabic phrases in Kufic script are inscribed on tombstones. Muslim merchants, most notably the Pu family, controlled fleets of ships and dominated the office of maritime trade commissioner. Chinese copper-cash found by archaeologists in the ports of the Persian Gulf probably often reached there in vessels owned by Muslims living in Chinese coastal cities.<sup>7</sup> A Song geographer described the Gulf as “the Sea of China,” testimony to the enterprise of Chinese and Muslim merchants who brought commodities to Siraf and nearby harbors, transfer points for goods taken inland through the Zagros Mountains to towns in the Persian provinces of Fars and Kirman. Ships also went 355 kilometers farther north to basra, located on the delta of the Tigris-Euphrates, the route to the great cities of the caliphate. The historian Al-Tabari quotes a caliph boasting, “This is the Tigris; there is no obstacle between us and China; everything on the sea comes to us on it.”<sup>8</sup> Shards of Song porcelain, mainly from tableware and perfume bottles, have been excavated in the ruins of palaces and harems at Samarra, and earthenware fragments of local wares reveal that Mesopotamian potters copied the shapes and glaze tints of the Chinese imports.<sup>9</sup> Great fortunes could be earned shipping Chinese products to Southwest Asia. According to a contemporary islamic account, ramisht of Siraf (d. 1140), a wealthy merchant based in Aden (in southwestern Arabia), “removed the silver water-spout of the Ka’aba and replaced it with a golden one, and also covered the Ka’aba with Chinese [silk] cloth, the value of which cannot be estimated.”<sup>10</sup> Entrepreneurs such as ramisht typically had several ships at sea, and their profits depended on painstaking attention to the fortunes of dozens of ports and polities from China to the Persian Gulf. but few merchants actually traveled the entire distance, a voyage of some one hundred days with favorable winds. rather, short-range passages and local markets were woven into a trading network connecting the littorals of maritime Asia. in the decades around 1000, long-distance merchants shifted their resources from the Persian Gulf to the red Sea. destroyed by an earthquake in 977, Siraf never regained its former eminence because flagging commercial revenue made reconstruction impossible. Economic crisis and bankruptcy plagued basra, baghdad, and Samarra; caliphal weakness and political turmoil made the passage of caravans uncertain and hazardous. Muslim Turkish warriors from Central Asia invaded Mesopotamia and established their own regimes, the most outstanding of which was that of the Seljuqs (1038–1194). Ports on the Persian Gulf fell victim to the inland disorder, losing their key role of importing goods destined for the Mediterranean, the Tigris-Euphrates, and Transoxiana. Government revenue from import fees declined, and no regime in the Gulf area minted silver coins for two centuries after 1060. A crushing blow came from invading Mongols, who finally toppled the Abbasid Caliphate in 1258.<sup>11</sup> The dynasty of the Mongol ilkhanids of Persia (1258–1353) eventually restored stability and a measure of prosperity, attracting seaborne trade back to the region; but an immediate result of Mongol devastation was to reinforce the advantages of the red Sea over the Persian Gulf. With the sacking of baghdad, some merchants and artisans migrated to Cairo. Establishment of the Fatimids (969–1171) and Ayyubids (1171–1250) in Egypt further impelled a shift in trade from the Gulf to the red Sea. As much as Egypt benefited economically from instability in iraq and Persia, however, its own swelling population and its government’s need for revenue would have attracted the commerce of the indian ocean in any event. Far more than the Abbasid caliphs, the Egyptian sultans relied on income from customs duties; hence they promoted the expansion of commerce, a policy the successor regime of the Mamluks (1250–1517) pursued even more energetically. Egypt also profited from an upsurge of activity in the merchant republics of italy, such as venice, Genoa, and Pisa. rising to prosperity and power on trade in Asian spices purchased in Egypt, they were pacesetters in the commercial revolution of the European Middle Ages.<sup>12</sup> They led the way in the revival of sophisticated urban life and long-distance exchange, restoring the Mediterranean to its ancient role as a major commercial highway, a position it had lost with collapse of the western roman Empire in the fifth century. by the eleventh century, then, as a consequence of economic activity booming at both ends of Eurasia, Egypt became the great intermediary for exchange in the ecumene, the pivot of trade between the Mediterranean and East Asia. ## THE ExPAnSion oF iSlAM in MAriTiME ASiA Creation of a world system after 1000 was a consequence of Chinese commercial expansion to the indian ocean and the spread of islam into india and maritime Asia. in terms of world history, the latter development was more important and enduring. Chinese junks did not sail beyond Melaka after the early fifteenth century because that port, whose emergence at the time owed everything to Chinese patronage and protection, came to function as a site where traders from the indian ocean and the Middle Kingdom exchanged merchandise. Melaka derives from the Arabic word for “rendezvous” or “meeting place,” terms that fittingly apply to the gathering of either merchants or monsoons. located in the straits formed by the Malay Peninsula and the long, narrow island of Sumatra, the port is protected from the brunt of storms from the southwest and northwest; it also enjoys a lengthy period of equatorial calm between monsoon seasons. Ships from the indian ocean arrived there in April, around the time the Chinese departed; when the latter returned six months later, the indians and Arabs set off for home. For Chinese merchants, Melaka served as a convenient emporium, sparing them the need to make the long, costly voyage to india. in contrast to the retreat of Chinese vessels from the indian ocean after 1433, adherents of islam pushed on to the east and south from the homeland of their religion, making the five centuries after 1000 the greatest period in the geographic extension of the faith. The Ghaznavids (1001–1186), Muslim Turks from Afghanistan, conquered northern india, and their successors established the delhi Sultanate (1206–1526), which ruled the indo-Gangetic plain by the early thirteenth century.<sup>13</sup> islamic expansion elsewhere proceeded with considerably less belligerence. From around 1000, communities of Muslim merchants established themselves in ports along the Swahili coast of East Africa and on both the western (Malabar) and eastern (Coromandel) coasts of india, creating a diaspora of trading communities. Their expansion represented a search for more secure sources of profit inasmuch as the Abbasid caliphate and northern india were experiencing severe political upheavals that disrupted long-distance commerce. by the fourteenth century, Muslims dominated overseas trade in indian harbors, especially as prohibitions against sea travel, with its attendant caste pollution, gained greater force among Hindu merchants involved in maritime affairs.<sup>14</sup> in Calicut on the coast of Malabar, the principal center of trade in black pepper, the Hindu ruler styled himself “lord of the Sea” (Zamorin) and worshiped Kapalotta, the goddess of navigation, but he merely monitored and taxed the Muslim merchants who actually controlled the day-to-day business of shipping. ludovico di varthema (ca. 1465–1517), an italian merchant, observed that “the pagans [i.e., Hindus] do not navigate much, but it is the Moors who carry the merchandise; for in Calicut there are at least fifteen thousand Moors, who are for the greater part natives of the country.”<sup>15</sup> Tomé Pires likewise recorded that “all the merchants of Malabar who trade on the sea are Moors, and they have the whole of the trade.”<sup>16</sup> Muslims from Gujarat (in northwestern india), Malabar, Coromandel, and bengal ventured into maritime Southeast Asia in the thirteenth century, bringing their trading contacts and religious devotion. Within a hundred years, a substantial Muslim population in the Archipelago made it profitable enough to import tombstones—a funerary memorial not part of indigenous traditions—made of fine cream marble and decorated with panels of Kufic calligraphy, from as far away as Gujarat. The oldest islamic tombstone in northern Sumatra dates from 1320, the oldest in Java from 1376. Muslim traders from Calicut introduced the black pepper plant (Piper nigrum) to Sumatra and Java, and foreign Muslims held office as harbormasters (shabandars) in Southeast Asian ports.<sup>17</sup> ibn battuta noted that the piety of Muslims in Sumatran courts compared favorably with that of fellow believers in the long-established islamic communities of Southwest Asia. influenced by both Sumatran precedents and Muslims from China, the Hindu-buddhist ruler of Melaka converted to islam in 1414. Expansion of the religion thereafter went along with extension of Melaka’s trading connections in the Archipelago. According to Pires, one early-sixteenth-century Melakan ruler even proposed that his city “be made into Mecca, and that he would not hold the opinion of his ancestors about going [on pilgrimage] to Mecca.” Chiefs of the northern ports of Java converted to islam in the early fifteenth century. Pires notes that Muslims from Arabia, Gujarat, Persia, and bengal began to trade in the country and to grow rich. They succeeded in way of making mosques, and mollahs came from outside, so that they came in such growing numbers that the sons of these said Moors were already Javanese and rich, for they had been in these parts for about seventy years. in some places the heathen Javanese lords themselves turned Mohammedan, and these mollahs and the merchant Moors took possession of these places.<sup>18</sup> Tradition maintains that Malik ibrahim (d. 1419), the first Muslim apostle of Java, earned a living as a merchant and served as harbormaster on the northern coast. A century later, a coalition of Muslim coastal polities launched an attack on Majapahit (ca. 1290–1528), the Hindu-buddhist kingdom in the interior of Java, eventually forcing the royal family to flee to the island of bali, immediately to the east of Java. Unlike the disunited and vulnerable kingdom of Majapahit, bali in the early sixteenth century experienced political consolidation and religious reform under powerful Hindu-buddhist rulers; they used their connection with Javanese royalty to shape an ideology justifying strong monarchy.<sup>19</sup> As a consequence, the wave of islam swept past bali, leaving it the only sizable outpost of the old faith in indonesia. Around the same time islam began making advances into the heartland of Java, Muslim holy men and merchants from the sultanate of brunei on borneo brought their faith to Mindanao in the Philippines, the southernmost point of that insular chain. The Spanish arrived in the Philippines in 1565, however, and they plundered Muslim settlements on the central island of luzon soon after.<sup>20</sup> The profusion of porcelain discovered by Spanish soldiers in the home of a Muslim chieftain astounded them and seemed to herald future riches. legazpi reported that on Chinese junks captured near the island of Mindoro “the decks of both vessels were full of earthen jars and crockery; large porcelain vases, plates, and bowls; and some fine porcelain jars, which they call sinoratas.”<sup>21</sup> With a secure base of operations on the American mainland and subsidized by American silver, Spanish forces headquartered in Manila subjugated the Philippines and Christian friars began to convert the native peoples. The Spanish governor warned the brunei sultan to stop propagating islam in luzon and the southern Philippines. Thus by the narrowest of margins, in an unwitting race with a hostile faith across half the globe, islam failed to win over all of maritime Southeast Asia. As Juan González de Mendoza (ca. 1540–1617) wrote in his History of the Great Kingdom of China (1585), “our lord has had great mercy, sending them the remedy for their souls in so good season; for, had the Spaniards delayed a few years more, all the natives would now be Moors.”<sup>22</sup> The Philippine islands came onto the global stage as the remotest satellite of Christendom, a bastion of Western power and commerce. The better part of a century after Columbus set sail from the Gulf of Cádiz for the fabled land of Cathay, inspired by The Travels of Marco Polo and intent on outflanking the Muslim powers of Southwest Asia, the Spanish at last had drawn within reach of what he described as the riches and “manifold marvels” of China.<sup>23</sup> despite the Spanish advance to the northern margin of the Archipelago, however, islam eventually became the faith of the majority in maritime Southeast Asia. Muslims adapted as readily to the harbor principalities of Sumatra, Java, and borneo as they did to the inland dominion of Majapahit and the bureaucracy of the Middle Kingdom. Their religion made for a practical fusion of cultural flexibility and confessional solidarity, a combination that enhanced their commercial enterprise in unfamiliar settings. All Muslims regarded themselves as belonging to the umma, the universal community of the faithful. Everywhere believers gathered, they shared social norms and practices, such as alms-giving, dietary restrictions, and public prayer; they took pride in having a lettered high culture, a common canon of learning, and a collective background that transcended parochial loyalties.<sup>24</sup> Pilgrimage to Mecca, or hajj, one of the obligations of the faith, joined believers from diverse cultures in a stirring collective ritual. As witnessed by ibn battuta, a host of pilgrims came to worship in the holy city, “so many that the earth surged with them like the sea and their march resembled the movement of a high-piled cloud.”<sup>25</sup> They carried banners embroidered with sacred texts in Arabic calligraphy, the all-embracing script of the faith. Pilgrims used the hajj as an occasion to take part in an immense, short-term market fair at Jedda, the port not far from Mecca on the coast of the red Sea. Muhammad had been a trader before taking the mantle of a prophet, and believers quoted him as saying that “the merchant enjoys the felicity both of this world and the next.”<sup>26</sup> The high esteem accorded traders in islam and a body of commercial law shaped by the Qur’an bestowed coherence and legitimacy on a widespread maritime culture. in going from his hometown of Tangier to beijing, ibn battuta traveled almost entirely within what his fellow believers called the “Abode of islam” (dar al-islam). The intercontinental reach of the islamic umma made for a remarkable flow of communication, commodities, and pilgrims. ibn battuta met the same religious scholar from Ceuta, a town close to Tangier, in both northern india and coastal China; he later encountered the man’s brother near the niger river in sub-Saharan Africa. He considered it providential that an expensive robe of goat hair that he owned in bengal ended up in the hands of a Muslim holy man in beijing. The pilgrim from Morocco served as a judge in islamic courts in the Maldive islands, relied on gifts and loans from Muslim merchants in Malabar ports, received hospitality from Muslim notables on the Swahili coast, and recited the Qur’an with worshipers everywhere he went. Significantly, only in China, which had promised to be the climax of his journey, did his passion for novelty finally peter out: The land of China, in spite of all that is agreeable in it, did not attract me. on the contrary i was sorely grieved that heathendom had so strong a hold over it. Whenever i went out of my house i used to see any number of revolting things, and that distressed me so much that i used to keep indoors and go out only in case of necessity. When i met Muslims in China i always felt just as though i were meeting my own faith and kin.<sup>27</sup> Although ibn battuta condemned China as a land of infidels, at least its southern ports made him feel at home. He regarded Quanzhou as a cosmopolitan city when he stayed there for a time in 1342. its residents used Persian as a lingua franca, and Chinese administrators identified the substantial population of foreigners, especially Arabs, Persians, and indians, as “people with colored eyes” (semuren).<sup>28</sup> Muslims controlled their own quarter of the city, and ibn battuta remarks that calls to prayer from the minarets of mosques sounded through the streets. According to the traveler, Muslims of Quanzhou became so elated when a fellow believer arrived from abroad—“They say ‘He has come from the Abode of islam’ ”—that “they make him [rather than orphans or the poor] the recipients of the tithes on their properties, so that he becomes as rich as themselves.”<sup>29</sup> in Canton, also a harbor of diverse cultures, ibn battuta strolled through the markets, the largest of which was the porcelain bazaar. He expressed astonishment that high-quality vessels could be purchased for less than the cost of lackluster earthenware in Tangier. naturally, he knew from personal experience that merchants of his faith circulated porcelain throughout the ecumene. it is exported, he wrote, “to india and other countries, even reaching as far as our own lands in the West, and it is the finest of all makes of pottery.”<sup>30</sup> ## SonG PorCElAin And SoUTHWEST ASiAn PoT TEry Chinese whitewares and celadons came as a revelation to Southwest Asia, especially as the region previously knew only utilitarian, generally unglazed pottery. The foreign vessels seemed to have a jewel-like, magical quality. The earliest extant Southwest Asian description of porcelain accentuates its unique character: in Accounts of India and China (Akhbar al-Hind wa’l Sin [851]), an Arab merchant named Sulayman, who had traveled to the Middle Kingdom, wrote that “there is in China a very fine clay from which are made vases having the transparency of glass bottles; water in these vases is visible through them, and yet they are made of clay.”<sup>31</sup> Chinese pottery retained its reputation for the marvelous down the centuries. in Samarqand, a generation after ibn battuta’s visit, a Chinese envoy to the court of Shah rukh (r. 1405–47) of the Timurid dynasty (1378–1506) of Persia, observed of Persian imitations of porcelain that “they are very beautiful but they do not match the light, blue, clear and sparkling ones of China. if such a vessel is hit, it makes no sound. The nature of clay is like that.”<sup>32</sup> of course, it is more accurate to say that the nature of Southwest Asian clay is like that. in striving to imitate porcelain, potters of the region fell back on an ancient tradition of compensating for inferior resources with artistry and ingenious substitution. lacking good stone for monumental architecture, builders instead employed mud-bricks and carved, gilded, and painted stucco.<sup>33</sup> lacking abundant timber for firing kilns, potters turned to dried grass, weeds, straw, and animal dung. lacking kaolin and china-stone for pottery, craftsmen in ninth-century basra developed a pottery body made of crushed quartz, white clay, and ground glass (frit). The new ceramic recipe, now known as fritware, turned out an unusually hard earthenware product that did not require firing at a very high temperature. brittle, stiff, and difficult to work with, the material made possible very thin vessels and, like porcelain, could be molded into fantastic shapes.<sup>34</sup> it became a standard material for fine pottery in many parts of the islamic world. Another innovation proved among the most significant in the history of pottery. Since the low-firing earthenware of Southwest Asian potters could not duplicate the lustrous white surfaces of porcelain, artisans also developed a novel glaze technology around the same time fritware emerged. They simulated the effect of Chinese whitewares by adding tin oxide as an opacifier to a clear glaze: a fine cloud of tin-oxide particles diffused through the lead-glaze coating, covering up the brownish tones of the earthenware with a soft, matte white.<sup>35</sup> Practical and profitable, the technology of tin glazing shaped the development of pottery in the ecumene for centuries. it became the standard technique in Southwest Asia for hundreds of years. From the thirteenth century, it swept through Europe, generating the emergence of maiolica, faience, and delftware; it reigned supreme there until the advent of Chinese porcelain and its Western counterparts in the period between vasco da Gama and August the Strong. With the decline of trade in the Persian Gulf in the tenth century, Fustat (old Cairo) in Fatimid Egypt emerged as one of the largest cities in the islamic world and a center of trade and industry. The geographer Al-Muqaddasi (d. 1000) declared that “the City of Peace [baghdad] cannot compare to it in greatness. it is the treasure-house of the West and the emporium of the East.”<sup>36</sup> Fustat paid high prices for porcelains as they had to be carried overland 1,100 kilometers from red Sea ports, a trek that inescapably raised costs. Egyptians referred to the imports as hindi (india-ware), a usage similar to a louça da India, the phrase used by the Portuguese centuries later. Twenty percent of 700,000 pottery shards excavated at Fustat are Chinese in origin, with longquan celadons dominating through the thirteenth century, after which Jingdezhen blue-and-white becomes most common. Craftsmen repaired tens of thousands of Song whitewares with copper wire and iron clamps, an indication of how much owners valued the pottery. virtual mountains of earthenware fragments also reveal the extent to which Egyptian potters ingeniously tried to imitate the Chinese white vessels.<sup>37</sup> because tin-glazed pottery lacked the gleaming appearance of white porcelain, Southwest Asian potters enhanced it with painted decoration. indeed, monochromatic Song ceramics ran counter to a venerable regional tradition of color and decoration on glass and pottery. Around 4500 b.c.e., Egyptians imitated the prized mineral lapis lazuli by using cobalt oxide and copper to dye soapstone blue, a color deemed magical, representative of life and resurrection. Centuries later, they also replicated the bright red of carnelians and the rich blue-green of turquoise stone. When Egyptians discovered how to make glass around 2000 b.c.e., they naturally turned to cobalt as a coloring agent. in the Eighteenth dynasty (ca. 1570–1293 b.c.e.) of the new Kingdom (ca. 1570–1070 b.c.e.), artisans used cobalt oxide to decorate pottery as well as tiles. nebuchadrezzar ii (r. 604–562 b.c.e.) of the neobabylonian Empire (625–539 b.c.e.) of Mesopotamia built the turquoise-colored Gate of ishtar in babylon, the grandest ancient achievement in the art of glazed brickwork. The succeeding empire of the Achaeminids (559–330 b.c.e.) continued the tradition of using colored brickwork for palaces and monuments, though the regime’s conquest by Alexander the Great (336–323 b.c.e.) of Macedonia and Greece ended the practice until its revival in the Abbasid period. in the fifth century c.e., Egyptian and Mesopotamian glassmakers applied colors to their wares derived from copper and silver, but potters seldom glazed works other than those used for ceremonial purposes.<sup>38</sup> Fustat potters in the tenth century adapted the ancient glass-tinting methods to their novel tin-glazed vessels. Known as luster-glazing, the technique involved painting decorations on the surface of a glazed vessel with a compound of silver and copper; after a brief, third firing in a smoky kiln, the metals diffused in an extremely thin film on top of the glaze. Subsequent polishing of the vessel produced an iridescent sheen of hues ranging from a coppery-red bronze to a pale lemon yellow.<sup>39</sup> in a treatise written in 1301, Abu’l Qasim al-Qashani, scion of a prominent tilemaking family of Kashan (Persia), declared that the glaze of lusterware “reflects like red gold and shines like the light of the sun.”<sup>40</sup> in the Seljuq period, when precious metal became scarce due to a worsening economy, lusterware appealed to moneyed customers who desired table settings with familiar, glittering sun colors. Moreover, Qur’anic tradition condemned those who ate and drank from silver and gold, so lusterware functioned for some Muslims as a stylish substitute for plate of precious metal. Scholars quoted Muhammad as saying, “He who drinks from a silver vessel will have hell-fire gurgling in his belly.”<sup>41</sup> They also counseled abstaining from costly metal to thwart lower-class indignation, for when the poor witness the opulence of the rich, “they get desperate at the thought that these have gold and silver plate when they cannot even get earthenware.”<sup>42</sup> At some Muslim banquets, ibn battuta noted, servants brought delicacies such as pomegranates “in vessels of gold and silver with golden spoons, and others in vessels of glass with wooden spoons.”<sup>43</sup> He recorded that Muhammed bin Tughlaq (r. 1325–54) of the delhi Sultanate used porcelains at dinners and receptions. Many scrupulous Muslims steered clear of precious metal utensils. Although the throne room of Süleyman i (“the Magnificent”) (r. 1520–66) of the ottoman Empire (1288– 1918) boasted a stunning display of inlaid gold and jewels, the sultan and his viziers dined on blue-and-white porcelains and used wooden spoons. A century later, a French visitor reported that in the holy month of ramadan, when believers had to fast during the day, high ottoman officials used yellow porcelain bowls for their food when they feasted after sunset. Still, most wealthy Muslims scorned severity at the table as Qur’anic proscriptions failed to eradicate long-standing associations of gold and silver with nobility, luxury, festivity, and wine drinking. nor did privileged ranks fret that their conspicuous consumption might inflame the pottery-deprived masses. despite his piety, ibn battuta clearly regarded it as a mark of his own consequence that powerful men of the islamic world entertained him at sumptuous feasts served on gold and silver platters. When he rebuked a local potentate in Persia by pointing to his gold goblet—“there is nothing to be brought against you as a ruler but this!”—it was not because the man drank wine from a forbidden vessel but because he had become shamefully drunk.<sup>44</sup> in addition to elite attachment to tableware of precious metal, practical considerations limited the scope of lusterware. luster-glazing required costly metal compounds, but the technique proved difficult to control; hence wastage ran high, making the final product commensurately expensive. More important, the ware also proved virtually impossible to clean without damaging the very surface that made it attractive to purchase in the first place.<sup>45</sup> As a consequence, luster-glazed vessels never entered into everyday use but remained restricted to celebratory and ceremonial occasions, such as regal feasts and religious observances. in such settings, the shimmering wares, often decorated with images of the sun and stars, evoked identification with divinity and brought to mind the much-cited “light verse” of the Qur’an (24:35–36): “God is the light of the heavens and the earth. His light may be compared to a niche that enshrines a lamp, the lamp within a crystal of star-like brilliance.” ## THE MonGolS And EUrASiAn UniFiCATion As it turned out, the color of the sky rather than that of the sun and stars held the greatest promise for the future of ceramics. At the same time Egyptian potters developed luster-glazing, Persian craftsmen experimented with painting designs in cobalt blue on the white face of their tin-glazed products. They concentrated on blue as a coloring agent because cobalt oxide was readily obtainable in central Persia, where it appeared near the surface of the ground in flowery masses of pink or metallic-black crystals. Elsewhere, cobalt could be obtained only by mining, followed by hazardous methods of processing. Cobalt derives from the German Kobald, “goblin,” because smelting of the ore produces toxic fumes of arsenic, regarded by silver miners in August ii’s Saxony as an emanation of malevolent, subterranean spirits. Persian artisans called cobalt lajvard in reference to the radiant blue characteristic of lapis lazuli.<sup>46</sup> Persian potters had difficulty achieving good effects with cobalt, however, since it tended to run in the tin glaze and blur the painted designs. This technical problem became the stimulus for bringing the two great ceramic traditions of the ecumene into closer contact than ever before. in fact, significant change had been taking place in both traditions during roughly the same time: in the last decades of the Southern Song, craftsmen at Jingdezhen experimented with a new formula for their qingbai wares, while in Southwest Asia, under the stimulus of Song imports, potters created an innovative glaze and explored several original techniques of decoration. one of the most extraordinary events in world history provided the context in which these developments came together to create blue-and-white porcelain and foster the encounter of Chinese and islamic design traditions. in the early thirteenth century, the Mongol leader Genghis Khan (ca. 1167–1227) united the mounted archers of the Central Asian steppes into a powerful confederacy and launched their force against the centers of urban civilization. The Jin state in northern China fell to the Mongols in 1234, though the regime of the Southern Song held out for another generation. Campaigns in the west between 1218 and 1241 led to establishment of Mongol khanates in Central Asia and russia, territories loosely integrated into what the conquerors termed the “Great Mongol Empire” (yeke Mongol Ulus). in the early 1250s Hulegu (d. 1265), third grandson of Genghis, led a Mongol army of 200,000 men into Persia and iraq, a force spearheaded by Mongols and Turks but also including russian, Armenian, Georgian, and Chinese troops, as well as some European experts in siege-craft. Hulegu sacked baghdad in 1258, killed the last Abbasid caliph, and founded the dynasty of the ilkhanids, “the vassal khans.”<sup>47</sup> Mongol invasion meant pillage and destruction on a frightful scale, including extermination and enslavement of some urban populations; Samarqand lost threefourths of its population of 100,000 households. When Marco Polo and ibn battuta passed through northern Persia many years after Hulegu’s devastation, they found parts of the region still desolate and abandoned. reflecting the political realities of the new Eurasian empire, Persia became oriented more toward China than toward Southwest Asia, while iraq survived as a weak, vulnerable territory wedged between Egypt and the ilkhanids. Except for Mamluk Egypt, which fought off Hulegu’s troops in 1260, the people and culture of Southwest Asia suffered terribly. of course, potters and ceramic traditions were no exception: old workshops disappeared, those that survived declined into provincialism, and sophisticated pottery such as lusterware died away. Kublai (1215–94), the fifth Great Khan of the Mongols and the second grandson of Genghis, proclaimed the yuan dynasty of China in 1272. After the Southern Song finally fell in 1279, the descendants of Genghis Khan ruled a loose-jointed dominion that stretched from Korea and vietnam to Hungary and russia, the greatest land empire in history, extending across an area of between 26 million and 31 million square kilometers, roughly the size of the African continent. They created a postal system across Eurasia that sped communications as never before, with 10,000 staging posts and 200,000 horses for couriers. Mongol troops guarded the network, guaranteeing secure passage for traders on the Silk road, such as the Polo family. Francesco Pegolotti, a well-traveled Florentine who wrote La practica della mercatura (The Practice of Trading) in the late 1330s, around the same time ibn battuta journeyed to China by sea, declared that “according to reports by merchants who have used it, the route from Tana [at the head of the Sea of Azov] to Cathay is absolutely safe by day as well as night.”<sup>48</sup> Unprecedented cross-cultural exchange flowed from Eurasian unification under the Mongols, dwarfing that of the early Tang period. This was not a predictable result of the so-called Pax Mongolica, for the nomadic warriors had trouble establishing long-term peace, especially among themselves. rather, cultural interaction stemmed from Mongol strategy inasmuch as the conquerors used the skills, technologies, and traditions of their subject peoples to advance their own command and riches. A Chinese writer in the fourteenth century boasted that “loyal, virtuous, brave and talented men from a multitude of places and myriad countries all willingly enter the emperor’s service.”<sup>49</sup> Perhaps that was true; but given the small Mongol population at the time of Genghis—a total of 700,000, including 100,000 horse warriors—in relation to the overwhelming numbers they conquered, the ruling elite of the Eurasian empire actually had no alternative but to depend on the self-interested collaboration of their subjects. ogodei (r. 1229–41), the second Great Khan, drew on the resources of Eurasia to construct and provision Karakorum, his capital city in central Mongolia, built from scratch on the orkhon river, a good distance from trade routes. He commanded that five hundred wagons loaded with food and drink arrive in the city every day from China, a task that required sixty thousand teamsters working fulltime. in his History of the World Conqueror (1260), Ata Malik al-Juvayni (1226– 83), an ilkhanid minister, declared that ogodei’s extravagance created a boom for traders from far and wide, “and whatever goods they had brought, whether good or bad, he would command them to be bought at the full price.”<sup>50</sup> not only that, the khan ordered that the merchants receive a 10 percent bonus on top of their handsome charges. naturally, porcelain manufacturers counted among those who profited from this bonanza. Mongols transplanted 100,000 artisans, including 20,000 captured at the sack of Samarqand, from Transoxiana to Karakorum and China. Chinese millet farmers moved to Azerbaijian, and groups of Central Asian Turkic speakers settled in both Persia and China. An account of the journey of Zhang Chun (1148–1227), a daoist monk, from China to Southwest Asia noted that “Chinese craftsmen are found everywhere” in Samarqand and that the vessels of the inhabitants are “usually of brass or copper; sometimes of porcelain.”<sup>51</sup> German and French workers seized in Hungary smelted metal and manufactured weapons in Karakorum. Persians served as garrison troops in Chinese harbors. Chinese cooks, engineers, physicians, and administrators traversed the Silk road to Southwest Asia; Persian scribes, translators, architects, and carpet weavers went in the opposite direction. Chinese experts brought printing and gunpowder to the west; Southwest Asian craftsmen introduced distillation and sugar refining to China. rashid al-din (ca. 1247–1318), a minister of the ilkhanids and a historian of the Mongols, asserted that as a consequence of God bestowing empire on the dynasty of Genghis, “philosophers, astronomers, scholars and historians from north and South China, india, Kashmir, Tibet, [the lands] of the Uighurs, other Turkic tribes, the Arabs and Franks, [all] belonging to [different] religions and sects, are united in large numbers in the service of majestic heaven.”<sup>52</sup> distancing themselves and their people from the Confucian ideology of the Chinese elite, Kublai and his successors patronized Tibetan Tantric buddhism, whose magical and supernatural aspects they found compatible with Mongolian folk religion. determined to assert control over their imperial bureaucracy, yuan emperors suspended civil service examinations and barred Chinese from office for decades. The Persian and Mongolian languages joined Chinese as official tongues of government. Muslims from Southwest Asia dominated financial and commercial policy, and they monopolized the office of maritime trade commissioner. Most strikingly, Sayyid Ajall Shams al-din (ca. 1210–79), a Muslim from bukhara in Transoxiana, won appointment from Kublai to govern the newly conquered region of yunnan in southwestern China, a frontier province to which countless Muslims migrated. Sayyid displayed a religious eclecticism and tolerance typical of Mongol rule, founding mosques, subsidizing buddhist monasteries, and supporting Confucian education. His son nasir al-din, who commanded the first Mongol invasion of burma in 1278 (and thereby won mention in Polo’s Travels) succeeded Sayyid as governor of yunnan.<sup>53</sup> After establishment of Mongol power across much of the ecumene, sovereigns began looking upon it as an arena for diplomatic stratagems, especially as latin Christendom for the first time established direct contact with Central Asia. in the mid-thirteenth century Franciscan envoys of roman popes journeyed to Karakorum, where they argued for an alliance of Mongols and Christians against the Mamluk regime in Egypt and Syria. in 1260 the father and uncle of Marco Polo traveled to China, where they joined a thriving community of italian merchants. Kublai asked the Polos to have the pope send a hundred learned Christians to his capital—the kind of imperial suggestion that later would lead to dentrecolles being sent to China.<sup>54</sup> Kublai also sponsored a pilgrimage from China to the Holy land by rabban Sauma (ca. 1225–94), a nestorian Christian monk; the ilkhanid ruler Arghum (r. 1284–91) dispatched him farther west on a diplomatic mission to the kings of France and England. in 1287 rabban Sauma buoyed the hopes of the College of Cardinals in rome by telling them that “today there are many Mongol Christians,” including offspring of the Great Khan and their wives.<sup>55</sup> Ghazan (r. 1295–1304), Arghum’s successor and the first of his dynasty to embrace islam, dreamed of an alliance with Christian monarchs against the Mamluks. in the half century before 1312, the ilkhanids sent fifteen diplomatic missions to Europe seeking an accord, a strategy that led to the Mongols being transformed in Christian eyes from the apocalyptic Gog and Magog to prospective redeemers of sacred Jerusalem. ## EUrASiAn CUlTUrAl ExCHAnGE in THE AGE oF THE MonGolS Eurasian cultural exchange in the Mongol period extended to the realms of design and art.<sup>56</sup> Sini, as China was known in Southwest Asia, came to represent the standard of excellence in painting and other media. by the end of the thirteenth cen tury, Chinese textile workers transplanted to Transoxiana contributed to the diffusion of East Asian motifs and forms to western Asia. Chinese and Central Asian cultural fashions and materials influenced a school of Persian artists established in Tabriz (Persia) by rashid al-din. The painting traditions of the regions facilitated artistic interaction inasmuch as they all employed flat colors, without shading or chiaroscuro. Persian painters of manuscript miniatures depicted foliage, mountains, and horizons in a style derived from China, though without the sense of flowing motion and spatial depth characteristic of Chinese design. They also adopted Chinese standards of beauty for the human countenance, such as a round face, arched eyebrows, rosebud lips, and dark, almond eyes. As represented on the brocades of Central Asian weavers, the Chinese dragon took on a violent demeanor it never had in its birthplace, transformed from an aweinspiring imperial symbol into a fire-snorting monster.<sup>57</sup> in like fashion, the phoenix, which in China symbolized the empress, turned belligerent on Southwest Asian illuminations and bookbindings, shown locked in mortal combat with dragons and griffins. in an early-seventeenth-century Mughal painting, the bird tackles the Gaja-Simha, a monster with a lion’s body and elephant’s head. The qilin, a Chinese mythical beast with the body of a deer, hooves of a horse, and tail of an ox, became transmuted in Southwest Asia into a sort of winged unicorn with a flowing mane. Persian artists also modified aspects of the qilin to portray the Simurgh, a creature from ancient Southwest Asian mythology with a stag’s body, goose’s wings, and cock’s head. ornate cloud patterns from China, which stemmed from decoration on bronze vessels of the Shang and Zhou periods, appeared on Persian pottery and stone reliefs, transmitted by designs on Central Asian and Chinese fabrics. Persian metalworkers supplemented their customary griffins and sphinxes with dragons and phoenixes copied from Chinese embroidered silks and Mongol saddle decoration. in the fourteenth century, The Seven Beauties, the great Persian poem by nezami de Gandjeh (1141–1209), received its first illustrations by painters in baghdad and Tabriz: bahram-Gour, the hero of the epic, is depicted slaying a Chinese-style dragon, a motif that subsequently became a staple of artworks in Mughal india, ottoman Turkey, Safavid Persia (1501–1722), and latin Christendom. An ancient Chinese adage held that the dragon must be honored “because it cannot be taken alive.”<sup>58</sup> in western Asia, however, the only good dragon was a dead one. Chinese vegetal patterns, the lineal descendants of ornamental motifs introduced to the Middle Kingdom from Persia in the Tang period, migrated back across the Silk road and took root in ilkhanid territory, refashioned over the centuries and enhanced by respect for things Chinese among the islamic upper stratum. The motif of the lotus flower blossomed everywhere, ceaselessly reproduced on carpets, metalwork, stucco, bookbindings, tiles, and pottery. indeed, Persia under Mongol rule witnessed the first appearance of chinoiserie, an artistic style reflecting Chinese influence as manifest in fanciful representations of Chinese culture.<sup>59</sup> Centuries later, around the time of louis xiv, chinoiserie, especially as it appeared on pottery, architecture, and interior design, had an even more brilliant efflorescence in the West. both Persians and Europeans could admire China so unreservedly because it was far enough away not to pose a political threat, yet in close enough communication to inspire imitation. in the age of the Mongols, however, Central Asian and Chinese themes had less direct impact on European art than on Southwest Asian, chiefly because porcelain reached the West in such trifling quantities. Genoese and Florentine merchants bought large amounts of Chinese silk on the shores of the Sea of Azov and then sold it in Europe for three times its purchase price in China. Christian weavers and stonemasons copied the Chinese dragons and phoenixes embroidered on the fabric for decoration on textiles and cathedral facades. A painting of a dragon looked down from the wall of the choir in the cathedral of notre-dame in Paris, while Giotto (ca. 1266–1337) employed Mongol Phagspa script as a decorative motif in the famed frescoes of the Arena (or Scrovegni) chapel in Padua. in masterpieces of the international Gothic style, the limbourg brothers (fl. 1410), in the service of the dukes of burgundy, portrayed figures in Central Asian and Turkish costumes, and in the early fifteenth century, the bedford Master produced Festivities at the Court of the Grand Khan, showing a scene bustling with courtiers in Asian dress.<sup>60</sup> italian painters, such as Ambrogio lorenzetti (d. 1384) and Antonio Pisanello (1395–1455), incorporated Central Asian costumes and figures in their works. in Giovanni del biondo’s Martydom of Saint Sebastian (ca. 1370) in the duomo of Florence, Mongol archers take aim at the holy victim. Simone Martini (ca. 1284–1334), an influential artist of Siena, painted an altarpiece, Saint Louis of Toulouse, with the central figure wearing Persian cloth decorated with rings of gold and seated on a chair draped in Central Asian silk adorned with tiny representations of animals. in Martini’s Annunciation (ca. 1333), the angel Gabriel wears a Mongol white-andgold robe that is strikingly similar to vestments held in the treasury of Pope boniface viii (r. 1294–1303).<sup>61</sup> Mongolian gold-threaded silk fabrics (panni tartarici) had a significant impact on the Sienese textile industry, and Martini evidently developed new painting techniques in an attempt to reproduce the glittering patterns and textures of the exotic cloth. When Marco Polo died in 1324, an inventory of his possessions included panni tartarici as well as Chinese silk cloth embroidered with “strange animals.”<sup>62</sup> Paolo Uccello (1397–1475) painted Saint George Fighting the Dragon (ca. 1455– 60), showing the monster covered with gaudy rosettes, a motif inspired by Asian carpets or brocades. in the sixth century the holy warrior from Cappodocia typically appeared in byzantine art as torturing and beheading tyrannical persecutors of Christians, such as the roman emperor diocletian (r. 284–305). The dragon entered the legend only in the twelfth century: recently arrived in Southwest Asia from China, the winged monster came to Europe with soldiers and monks returning from papal crusades to Syria and Egypt. in The Inferno, dante Alighieri (1265–1321) describes the dragonlike Geryon, with his pointed tail and horrid stench: He had two paws, both hairy to the armpits; His back and breast, and both sides down to the shank Were painted with designs of knots and circlets. no Tartar or Turk has ever woven a cloth More colored in field and figure.<sup>63</sup> Cangrande della Scala (r. 1311–29), the lord of verona and dante’s patron, had himself buried in robes of Chinese silk, a fitting interment for a princeling who appropriated the title of the awesome Great Khan. Cangrande obviously was captivated by China, almost surely from reading about it in Polo’s Travels, a highly popular work that sometimes was reproduced with illustrations of Chinese dragons in European guise. it is likely, however, that the veronese despot never laid eyes on a piece of porcelain, for chinaware remained exceedingly scarce in the West because of the limited quantities carried on the Silk road. With few exceptions, the porcelains that came west by caravan remained in the islamic world, the premier export market for Chinese commodities. Significantly, Pegolotti’s comprehensive book on trade never mentions porcelain coming into the hands of his fellow italians in their depots on the Sea of Azov and in the levant.<sup>64</sup> As always, a great deal of porcelain came by ship to the Persian Gulf and red Sea, but Southwest Asian markets handily absorbed it all. if Europeans wanted porcelain, they would have to journey to its source. in 1291, a year before Polo returned from China and the same year the Mamluks captured the city of Acre, the last Christian stronghold in the Holy land, the vivaldi brothers departed Genoa in two trading galleys in an attempt to reach the indian ocean by circumnavigating Africa. After sailing through the Strait of Gibraltar and heading south down the Moroccan coast, they vanished forever.<sup>65</sup> if they had succeeded in their audacious venture, a maritime route linking Europe to Asia, with all its ramifications for the history of the world, might have been established two centuries before da Gama’s voyage. inasmuch as that did not take place, Europe had to wait until after 1500 to have the same access to porcelain (and many other commodities) that the rest of the ecumene already took for granted. The scarcity of porcelain in the West in the days of Polo and dante thereby testifies to the peripheral position of that region in a world system dominated by Muslim commerce, Mongol power, and Chinese economic might. Even taking into account their sporadic diplomatic forays, the various rulers of the Great Mongol Empire regarded latin Christendom as marginal territory, a land of paltry kingdoms, the remotest and most impecunious market for Asian merchandise. What is now known as the “Gaignières-Fonthill vase” indicates the extraordinary value placed on the few porcelains to reach the West during the Mongol period. Made in Jingdezhen, the white porcelain bottle with a bluish-tinged glaze came to Europe by the Silk road in the early fourteenth century, perhaps carried there by nestorian Christians of China on their way to meet with the roman pope in Avignon, France. Mounted in silver gilt and inscribed with gothic gold letters, the qingbai vase became a prized possession of the Anjou kings of Hungary and naples in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. After further peregrinations and some heraldic embellishments in burgundy and Germany, the vessel eventually ended up at Saint-Cloud near Paris, into the hands of the most august collector of porcelain in Europe, louis de France, Grand dauphin.<sup>66</sup> The illustrious credentials of the piece attracted him, as did its enduring rarity: Europeans in the reign of the Sun King, as dentrecolles points out, rarely saw anything but blue-and-white porcelain. in fact, the Gaignières-Fonthill vase is symbolic of the end of an era inasmuch as blue-and-white porcelain came to dominate Jingdezhen’s export trade after the early decades of the fourteenth century, around the same time the qingbai bottle departed for the West. Although the early history of cobalt-decorated porcelain is obscure, potters evidently began experimenting with the new painting technique in the opening years of the century, at a time when Jingdezhen still concentrated on manufacturing qingbai and other whitewares.<sup>67</sup> Entrepreneurs sold the small, clumsily painted blue-and-white vessels produced at first to undemanding customers in the Archipelago. The porcelain city had no inhibitions about finding a market for its shoddiest wares. A Chinese shipwreck indicates that Jingdezhen did not produce blue-and-white in quantity until after the first two decades of the fourteenth century. on a voyage from China to Japan in 1323, a trading junk sank off southwestern Korea. Underwater excavation in 1976 revealed that it held twenty-eight tons of copper-cash (equivalent to one year’s supply of coinage in Japan) and a single icon, a green-glazed porcelain figurine of Guanyin, probably specially ordered for a family temple or shrine. The main cargo comprised eighteen thousand porcelains, including celadons from longquan, black-glazed teabowls from Zhejiang, and qingbai from Jingde zhen.<sup>68</sup> Significantly, it carried no cobalt-decorated wares. That state of affairs soon changed, however. Though the longquan kilns continued to claim a portion of the export trade until they finally ceased production in the 1600s, they suffered a long, irreversible decline as Jingdezhen improved its output of blue-and-white after the first quarter of the fourteenth century. As it happened, ibn battuta arrived in China in the early 1340s, soon after the new azurepainted ware began to appear in quality and quantity. The pilgrim certainly witnessed evidence of a historic turnabout when he wandered through the porcelain bazaar of Canton—piles of blue-and-white plates and bowls being readied for shipment to the Abode of islam. ## THE oriGinS oF blUE-And-WHiTE PorCElAin beginning in the final decades of the yuan dynasty, Muslim merchants in Quanzhou and kiln owners in Jingdezhen engaged in a commercial venture unprecedented in world history: cobalt ore shipped eight thousand kilometers from Persia to China; pottery customized in bulk for islamic customers and then transported to Southwest Asian markets. Quanzhou merchants acted as midwives for the birth of blueand-white porcelain, and they continued to play a crucial role in the development of the ceramic into the era of the Ming. on the one hand, they knew about the market for high-quality pottery in Southwest Asia, as well as about the frustrating attempts by Persian potters to paint in cobalt on tin-glazed vessels. on the other hand, they recognized that the potters of Jingdezhen had developed an improved ceramic body that offered an ideal white surface for painted decoration and sufficient strength to replicate in pottery the massive metal basins and platters that Southwest Asians used as utensils. Moreover, the Quanzhou merchants filled their homes with Southwest Asian metalwork that could serve Jingdezhen artisans as models, along with carpets, textiles, and leather goods as sources of islamic design. To experiment with cobalt oxide for decoration, the merchants even could provide samples of “Muslim blue,” which they sold as medicine in their apothecary shops.<sup>69</sup> For their part, Jingdezhen potters discovered that the viscosity of their colorless glaze prevented the huihui qing from diffusing during firing, thereby allowing intricate designs to be executed on their white vessels. They also gained a decisive economic advantage over the craftsmen of longquan since blue-and-white proved cheaper to produce than celadons. Manufacturing the latter was a chancy proposition; it demanded precise control of the amount of oxygen in the kiln, failure of which resulted in many ruined pieces. Potters fired blue-and-white with greater precision, producing substantially less wastage in firing; hence profits were higher in Jingdezhen than among its longquan rivals.<sup>70</sup> Muslim officials and the court of Kublai supported the Quanzhou merchants in their enterprise. in 1278, a year before conquest of the Southern Song capital, the new emperor established the Fuliang Porcelain bureau to oversee production at Jingdezhen, the first time a monarch of China appointed magistrates to such a task. The Porcelain bureau, which increased fourfold in personnel by 1295, came under the direction of the bureau of imperial Manufactures, the agency charged with supplying luxury goods to the court. Foreigners, especially Mongols and Persians, dominated imperial Manufactures. They sent motifs taken from tapestries, war banners, and imperial robes to Jingdezhen for decoration on ceramics, and they provided cobalt oxide to the imperial workshops.<sup>71</sup> The early development of blue-and-white porcelain owed a great deal to the patronage of the yuan court. imperial interest in Jingdezhen was primarily financial and commercial rather than aesthetic, however. The yuan organized the tax system to extract maximum profits from the output and sale of salt, tea, metals, and pottery. They levied heavy payments on Jingdezhen, assessing rates based on the size of kilns and the number of workers employed; shop owners and river porters had to pay taxes for the first time.<sup>72</sup> Along with generating returns from taxation, the court aimed to boost production. Even more than the rulers of the Southern Song, the yuan dynasts promoted foreign trade as a means of increasing state revenue. They therefore encouraged export of longquan celadons and Jingdezhen qingbai as well as production of the promising blue-and-white ware. According to government records, “upon his ascent to the throne, Kublai Khan sent envoys with ten edicts to countries in Southeast Asia to invite merchants to come to China to trade.”<sup>73</sup> The Mongols looked favorably on merchants, an attitude shaped by the chronic desire of nomads to attract sellers of desirable commodities to the barren steppes. basing themselves on Song precedents, the yuan created a scheme, termed “Government-invested Ships,” that combined official vessels with private merchant participation in maritime trade. in 1285 the court devoted nineteen tons of silver to building ships for the venture. These measures bore fruit, for Chinese merchants and those of other nationalities made profitable use of the spacious domain opened up by the steppe conquerors. According to a writer of the yuan period, “China traders who go forth among the different courts and various territories travel as if between the prefectures of the east and the west.”<sup>74</sup> in contrast to the Mongol upper stratum, Confucians traditionally viewed merchants with disdain. From the time of the Han dynasty, they ranked at the bottom of the social scale in Confucian estimation, below gentry, artisans, and peasants. The official ideology stigmatized merchants as a disruptive social element, perpetually in need of supervision and regulation, necessary parasites whose materialism ran counter to Confucian ethics and harmonious social order.<sup>75</sup> Too much can be made of such condemnations, however, for they were more routine flourishes of conventional opinion than faithful descriptions of reality. From the Han through the Song, ideological scorn for merchants never significantly hampered commercial activity, just as ecclesiastical prohibitions against usury never stopped interest payments and loan-sharking in latin Christendom. As regimes have discovered throughout history, it is virtually impossible to stop people eager to make money. When the Ming tried to enforce draconian laws prohibiting overseas trade, a sixteenth-century Chinese writer pointed out that it was a fruitless enterprise: “China and the barbarian countries have their respective unique products; thus trade between them is difficult to terminate. Where there is profit, people will certainly go for it.”<sup>76</sup> in any case, the yuan did away with the Confucian social assessment by endorsing merchants and introducing many new social categories. Mongol princes entered into partnership with merchants, and Mongol rulers placed foreign traders (such as Marco Polo) in administrative positions.<sup>77</sup> When Quanzhou Muslims considered how to employ the potters of Jingdezhen to serve the markets of Southwest Asia, they therefore could count on backing from the yuan court for a venture that benefited both merchants and the imperial treasury. in addition, trade in blue-andwhite porcelain attracted the court because it established a mutually profitable link with ilkhanid Persia, yuan China’s most loyal ally. From early in the fourteenth century, Quanzhou merchants imported cobalt oxide from Persia to China, sometimes in processed form, smalt (powdered glass, potash, and cobalt), more often as raw material. Chinese potters identified the bestquality huihui qing as “buddha’s head blue.”<sup>78</sup> After it was roasted in an oven for twenty-four hours, special workers, recruited from among the aged and lame, ground the cobalt ore, dentrecolles records, “in an unglazed porcelain mortar using an unglazed porcelain pestle” for several weeks until it was reduced to a dustlike powder. According to Zhu yan, Jingdezhen manufacturers considered the ore worth “twice the value of gold”: every sixteen ounces of the unrefined oxide yielded just six-tenths of an ounce of pure pigment. A little bit of the cobalt went a long way, however, as it possesses extraordinary coloring power: just one part in 500,000 produces a perceptible tint, and one part in 5,000 creates a brilliant blue.<sup>79</sup> Although by the mid-sixteenth century artisans exploited native Chinese sources of cobalt oxide and combined it with the foreign product, the Persian material remained so expensive that dentrecolles recommended to his superiors that if the same ore were discovered in Europe, it could be shipped to China to exchange for “the most beautiful porcelains.”<sup>80</sup> He noted that workers reused even tiny dried drops of the paint after scraping them up from paper placed under the vessel being decorated. Given the value of the substance, craftsmen in the imperial workshops routinely stole it to sell to private kilns. in the early Ming, the bureau of imperial Manufactures tried to stop the larceny by doling out exact portions to the workshops. A Fuliang official in the mid-Ming stopped the pilfering for a time by checking the weight of the cobalt before and after use. Some supervisors even compelled porcelain decorators to paint with their arms through wooden screens to restrict their opportunity for filching the precious pigment.<sup>81</sup> by the middle of the fourteenth century, Jingdezhen potters were making large vessels in “vivid blue on a white background,” as dentrecolles described it, embellished with elaborate designs. An illustrious pair of porcelains, inscribed with the date 1351 and made for a daoist temple in Jiangxi province, provide a benchmark. Known as “the david vases,” they stand slightly over sixty-three centimeters tall and are decorated in eight horizontal bands with images of lotuses, plantain leafs, chrysanthemums, cloud scrolls, phoenixes, and dragons. in scale, layout, and quality of workmanship, the vases are striking evidence of the level of sophistication Jingdezhen had reached by the mid-fourteenth century in producing the novel ware.<sup>82</sup> Just when blue-and-white porcelain had attained this level of maturity, however, the decline and fall of the yuan regime, impelled by Mongol infighting, hard economic times, and epidemic disease, halted further development of the commodity for two decades. Peasant forces rebelling against the Mongols occupied Jingdezhen in 1352, forcing potters to abandon their kilns. in the same year, the Persian garrison in Quanzhou, led by the Pu trading family, rose up against the yuan. The rebellion plunged Fujian into tumult for a generation, in the course of which Chinese soldiers and mobs massacred Quanzhou Muslims and destroyed their mosques and shrines.<sup>83</sup> From midcentury until the flight of the last yuan emperor to the steppes in 1368, China was wracked by rebellion against the Mongol rulers and by conflict among competing warlords. Fighting convulsed the lower yangzi region, the power base of Zhu yuanzhang (1328–98), the future Hongwu emperor, the “Grand Progenitor” (Taizu) of the Ming dynasty. His last major battle against a rival warlord, a monthlong naval clash, took place on lake boyang, not far from Jingdezhen. in January 1368, when the Hongwu emperor made the obligatory sacrifices to Heaven and Earth at his enthronement ceremonies in nanjing, the entire Middle Kingdom came under native Chinese rule for the first time in four hundred years. ## THE TriUMPH oF blUE-And-WHiTE PorCElAin in CHinA Following the custom of all new Chinese sovereigns, the Hongwu emperor devoted attention to providing his court and palaces with suitable trappings. According to a contemporary account, in his first year on the throne, he “decreed that vessels for the imperial Ancestral Temple should be changed and made of gold. . . . in the second year it was decided that all sacrificial vessels be made of porcelain.”<sup>84</sup> He commanded that ritual wares be glazed monochromes of auspicious color, shades that mirrored the cosmological ordering of the imperial realm: white for official rituals at the Altar of the Moon, blue for use at the Altar of Heaven, red for that of the Sun, and yellow for that of the Earth. He appointed magistrates to supervise the reconstruction of the Jingdezhen kilns, and he ordered his palace in nanjing, the capital of the early Ming, roofed with white porcelain and embellished with red dragons and phoenixes on the end tiles of the eaves. building the palace and renovating the city required tiles produced by seventy kilns.<sup>85</sup> in an act weighty with symbolism, the Hongwu emperor designated red-glazed vessels as official ware for his palace. The reign name Ming (bright) connoted red or fire, the element that represented the south of China, the region in the vanguard of the rebellion against the yuan, whose centers of power naturally lay in the north. Ming also could be taken to stand for the red Turbans, partisans of a Manichaean cult that had rallied to the future emperor because they regarded him as the millenarian Prince of radiance (ming wang) destined to defeat the dark force of the Mongols. And, fittingly enough, the ideographic character for red is zhu, the same as that for the surname of the Grand Progenitor.<sup>86</sup> Acutely sensitive to political gestures that legitimized his rule, Hongwu played up such evocative correspondences when he selected his palace tableware. The Ming founder’s second son, who came to power as the yongle emperor (r. 1403–25), overthrew Hongwu’s successor and grandson, the Jianwen emperor (r. 1399–1402). The usurper declared, “it is deeply satisfying to one’s spirits that the court should utilise familiar, bright, clean and unadorned Chinese porcelain vessels.”<sup>87</sup> He favored white porcelain, perhaps because he and his wife, Empress xu (d. 1407), paid special devotion to Guanyin, a figure almost always depicted in that ideally pure, achromatic tone. The empress even wrote a buddhist sutra as a result of a dream vision in which she saw Guanyin standing on a thousand-petaled lotus and holding a bejeweled rosary. Most of the shards excavated at Jingdezhen from the yongle reign come from vessels of “sugar-white,” a term applied to the wares from the sixteenth century, when refined sugar became a significant commodity. As adherents of Tantric buddhism, the yuan emperors also had preferred white porcelain, so even though Hongwu and yongle despised the Mongol conquerors and explicitly based their governance on precedents from the Han and Tang dynasties, their selection of the same ceramic for important occasions suggests continuity with their immediate predecessors at odds with their official proclamations. in fact, although the early Ming emperors upheld Confucian precepts, in their reliance on military force and their hostility to the Confucian establishment they resembled the alien rulers they had supplanted. in their attitudes to foreign trade, however, Hongwu and yongle diverged sharply from the yuan. As a result, Chinese overseas merchants faced significant obstacles in the early fifteenth century, and exports of porcelain and other commodities declined. White also represented mourning and filial piety; hence when the yongle emperor in 1412 ordered construction of the nine-story buddhist baoen Temple in nanjing in memory of his parents, he ordered its masonry frame sheathed with lshaped tiles of white porcelain made at Jingdezhen. His splendid tribute conveyed the political message that despite his violent seizure of the throne from his nephew, he nonetheless remained obedient to the will of his father. octagonal in shape and eighty meters high, the baoen temple had 100 bells suspended from its eaves and 140 lamps that glowed in its windows at night.<sup>88</sup> dentrecolles extolled it as the highest and most beautiful of all towers in China, and kilns in Jingdezhen turned out porcelain models of it as tall as a man, a few copies of which reached Europe and America in the eighteenth century. The building became renowned in the West after Johann nieuhoff (1618–72) published An Embassy from the East India Company of the United Provinces to the Emperor of China (1665), a best-selling account of a dutch legation to beijing in 1656. it provided the first information to Europe on Chinese architecture, a topic prominently featured in the volume’s one hundred engravings. in his narrative, nieuhoff highlighted a description and illustration of the baoen Temple, christened “the Purceline Pagoda” in English translation. French and English potters used the illustration of the pagoda as a decorative motif on their wares, and artisans in Japan painted it on teapots commissioned by the dutch for their home market. based on nieuhoff ’s description, Westerners acclaimed the pagoda as the eighth wonder of the world in the belief that it was built entirely of porcelain. When Wedgwood told Erasmus darwin that Chinese potters, by ornamenting entire pagodas, “employ their art in the formation of works of great magnificence,” he evidently was thinking of the Porcelain Pagoda. inspired by nieuhoff ’s report, louis xiv’s most extravagant gesture of esteem for China was the Trianon de Porcelaine in the park of versailles, designed by louis le vau in 1670 and built for Madame de Montespan (1641–1707), the king’s mistress. The first of numerous European buildings in chinoiserie style, the one-story Trianon, with a doric facade and mansard roof, actually bore no resemblance to the nanjing tower. instead, the association with China appeared in numerous decorative elements: blue-and-white faience urns bordering the roofline, metal flower tubs painted blue and white, wooden window casements adorned with motifs taken from blue-and-white porcelain, and rooms outfitted in Chinese embroidered silks, Chinese lacquer screens, and blue-and-white earthenware tiles. Poorly clad in blueand-white dutch tiles on the exterior walls, the Trianon de Porcelaine fared so dismally in the clammy ambience of versailles that louis xiv ordered it demolished in 1687. Thirty-two years later, when defoe, no lover of the French, in The Farther Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, mocked a supposed Chinese porcelain palace for being just timber “plastered with the earth that makes China ware,” he most likely was making a sly allusion to the fabled Trianon. Although Jingdezhen produced modest amounts of blue-and-white porcelain for Hongwu and yongle, neither emperor cared for the ware, presumably because it had too close an association with the despised Mongols. in addition, Hongwu came to prominence as an ill-educated warlord, and yongle, though not uncultivated, devoted much of his energy to leading armies into the steppes against the Mongols. The two monarchs showed negligible interest in art—yet altogether too much for the court painter put to death by Hongwu for portraying a jellyfish mauling a five-clawed dragon, the imperial symbol. He also ordered the execution of Zhao yuan in 1375 when his unconventional paintings of ancient worthies, such as Lu Yu Brewing Tea, offended the emperor’s conservative taste.<sup>89</sup> The new dynasty did not sponsor blue-and-white until the rule of the xuande emperor (1426–35), Hongwu’s great-grandson, a century after the new style first emerged and fifty years after the end of Mongol domination. After the tempestuous reigns of Hongwu and yongle, the Ming dynasty settled down into long-established modes, eager to buttress its political legitimacy through emulation of venerated predecessors. Modeling himself on the Huizong emperor of the Song, xuande likewise became an accomplished painter and art patron. He ordered the casting of bronze vessels for the Ancestral Temple, including hundreds of antique-style pieces based on illustrations in Song catalogues. Metalsmiths modeled some of the bronzes on Song porcelains that were themselves approximate copies of ancient bronzes in the same catalogues. A zealous promoter of porcelain, the emperor had his reign mark (nianhao) written on imperial wares, a practice in imitation of inscriptions on old bronzes. He sent paintings to the imperial kilns as models for designs, and in some years he ordered over 400,000 pieces of pottery for his palace. Fond of cricket fighting, xuande commanded a court official to provide a thousand of the insects every year, and he commissioned porcelain cages to keep them cool in summer.<sup>90</sup> (See figure 13.) Although some well-off families placed blue-and-white porcelain in their tombs in the late yuan and early Ming, indicating that it had a certain appeal, the elite generally looked down on the ware until it won xuande’s patronage. After centuries of connoisseurship devoted to stylish, understated whitewares and celadons, the cobalt-decorated vessels struck many as vulgar and ostentatious. in the eyes of their enthusiasts, Song porcelains epitomized excellence by virtue of their sculptural quality and the patina on their flowing bodies, a range of hues that made them seem in harmony with both the natural world of flowers and the polished world of jade. Painting pictures and designs on celadons and qingbai was out of the question. Potters employed only subtle, restrained decoration on monochrome vessels, slightly incising the glaze or ceramic body, a technique known as “secret ornament” (anhua); at their most delicate, the designs could be seen only by holding the vessel to the light or when liquid filled it. Another decorative technique arose from the actual firing of the pottery: sometimes as the porcelain cooled in the kiln, the glaze contracted at a rate greater than that of the body of the vessel, causing crackling, or crazing, of the glaze shell. The effect attracted admirers, so potters by the late Song deliberately created the fine network of cracks as embellishment, a procedure that dictated exact control of kiln temperature. in praise of a Song vase, the Qianlong emperor wrote, “despite the pattern of hundreds of intermingling crackle lines, its texture is fine and smooth to the touch. . . . one discovers that the value of these undecorated wares is the same as that of unpolished gems.”<sup>91</sup> Song connoisseurs and literati regarded the crackling as in accord with their aesthetic principles inasmuch as the effect seemed natural, arising spontaneously from the materials and techniques being employed. in contrast, porcelains ornamented with designs in blue paint, the end product of a common artisan’s routine toil, appeared contrary to the simplicity and moderation acclaimed so fervently by scholars and gentry. With imperial support in the xuande reign, however, blue-and-white porcelain made its crucial breakthrough among the elite. Potters abandoned their fastidious subtleties and adopted new painterly techniques; the death knell sounded for celadons, and the longquan kilns lost their extensive market. Following the lead of the court, connoisseurs speedily revised their perceptions and presumptions. They learned to take pleasure in ceramics with vibrant blue designs, fresh painting styles, fanciful portraits of animals, illustrations of scenes from classical drama, motifs conveying auspicious messages, and landscape compositions on a three-dimensional surface. imperial porcelains in the new style were so admired that they set a formidable standard for subsequent generations. blue-and-white vessels of the xuande period became so prized that potters later in the century illicitly inscribed the emperor’s reign mark on their wares to boost their value or to pay homage to an early zenith of the art.<sup>92</sup> in the late Ming, the best xuande porcelains reportedly fetched higher prices than fine jade figurines. (See figure 14.) but the early Ming renovation in taste amounted to a segregation of old aesthetic principles rather than their wholesale rejection. Song monochromes took on elevated status as antiques, emblems of the revered past, treasures to be commended and collected. Commitment of the scholar-gentry class to archaism thus consigned Song porcelains to a privileged niche, along with ancient jade carvings and bronze vessels, even while new standards of appreciation turned against the principles informing them. in any case, by the end of the first decades of the fifteenth century, elite taste came to regard painted decoration on ceramics as more significant and gratifying than body shape and glaze tone. This had significant ramifications for the relationship of pottery to other media. Emphasizing form and sheen, Song ceramics had taken slight notice of other decorative arts, with the outstanding exception of pottery replicating ancient bronzes in response to court-promoted archaism and upper-stratum demand. The new blue-and-white style changed all that; ceramics now entered into a close relationship with painting, printing, calligraphy, weaving, and carved woodwork. Potters increasingly adopted motifs and designs from silk scrolls, published texts, embroidered fabric, and lacquer panels.<sup>93</sup> Porcelain thus joined in a long-term convergence of the arts in which ceramics borrowed patterns from other media while the latter looked to designs on ceramics for inspiration. The administrative procedures of the Ming and Qing encouraged this development since their centralized procurement system, first established by the yuan, meant that the same designs could be dispatched from the bureau of imperial Manufactures to potters, print shops, weavers, painting studios, and furniture workshops serving the court. The assumption that aesthetic forms are basically interchangeable is seen in the Qianlong emperor’s fondness for treasure boxes (duobaoge), artfully designed storage chests for small objects—carved jade, ivories, lacquer boxes, calligraphic texts, pottery—from different periods and contexts. The triumph of blue-and-white porcelain in the early Ming represented as striking a break with conventional standards and perspectives as had ever taken place in Chinese art. it signified a greater rupture with aesthetic tradition than that which occurred in the transition from the Tang to the Song, when potters turned away from painted adornment and exotic motifs in favor of elegantly proportioned, jadelike monochromes. Whereas the transformation in the Song registered recoil from the outside world, an expression of xenophobia and cultural seclusion, the move toward blue-and-white in the yuan and Ming arose from an embrace of foreign styles and techniques. in effect, by applying the standards of expressive painting to pottery and rejecting those of sculpture, the Chinese, under Muslim and Mongol influence, accommodated themselves to the traditional aesthetic values of Southwest Asia. ## PorCElAin ArT And CroSS-CUlTUrAl ExCHAnGE Though the Chinese had been converted to the Southwest Asian cause of painted decoration on pottery, they generally relied on their own tradition for compositions. They had a kaleidoscopic repertoire from which to draw: plant forms (white lily, magnolia, morning glory, camellia, peach, crab apple), animal figures (peacock, lion, hen, heron, qilin, cicada, crane, quail), symbols of longevity, endurance, and wealth (evergreen, bamboo, flowering plum, gourd, tortoise, deer, goldfish), representations of the seasons (summer–lotus, autumn–chrysanthemum, winter–plum tree, spring–peony), and scores of auspicious emblems from buddhism and daoism (the shell, lotus petal, wheel, scepter, furled umbrella, vase, flaming pearl, sacred fungus, sun disk, calabash, endless knot).<sup>94</sup> (See figure 15.) When combined in ornamentation of a plate or scroll, these elements usually conveyed symbolic meaning by way of encoded designs based on rebuses, that is, representations of words in the form of pictures or pictorial puns, often presented as a puzzle. A tonal language, Chinese is exceptionally rich in homophones inasmuch as it does not make morphological distinctions between grammatical categories; no linguistic structures, such as inflections, derivations, and compound forms, make it possible to distinguish between verbs, adverbs, complements, subjects, adjectives, and attributes. in the absence of these syntactical markers, the sound and meaning attributed to an ideographic character are powerfully determined by context. As ricci explained, “Many of the symbols have the same sound in pronunciation, though they may differ much in written form and also in their signification. Hence it results that the Chinese is probably the most equivocal of all languages.”<sup>95</sup> Precisely that aural ambiguity encouraged the literati to indulge in complex puns and layered meanings in both literature and ornamental design. Except for tonal pitch, the word for goldfish, yu, sounds the same as that for “abundance,” while tang can mean either a pond or a hall: thus a portrait of a goldfish in a pond is a rebus denoting a wealthy household.<sup>96</sup> The word for a carp, li, sounds like that for “profit,” so representation of the fish swimming upstream is taken to symbolize a scholar’s effort to surmount obstacles in the grueling Confucian examination system. The same academic struggle is personified by depiction of an egret (lu, which also can mean “road”) in a lotus pond (lian, which also indicates “success”), while the painting of a lotus with two crabs and a reed stands for congratulations on passing the examination with high marks. The image of a rooster crowing near a peony tree brings together a cluster of homophones that punningly translates as “an official heaped with riches and honor.” The word for “vase,” ping, has the same sound as “peace”; hence a vase on a table (an, which sounds like “tranquility”) accompanied by the buddhist symbol of a scepter ( ju, which also stands for “wish”) conveys the sentiment, “May you achieve your wish for peace and tranquility.” A quail is regarded as an auspicious bird because it too is pronounced an, while two quail, a butterfly, a peony tree, and a chrysantheum coalesce to form a rebus for “rich living and redoubled tranquility.” The yongzheng emperor commissioned a porcelain painted with nine quail and a long-tailed pheasant, an avian menagerie that cued the expression, “May the country be in peace and order forever.” A homonym for “good harvest” ( fengdeng) is provided by an ornament of a wasp ( feng) flitting round a lantern (deng). The bat (fu) represents happiness or good fortune since the same sound also denotes those concepts; “red” (hong) sounds like the word for “vast”; hence the image of a red bat signals an expectation for “vast good fortune.” Extending the conceit, five red bats correspond to the notion of “fivefold happiness” (virtue, progeny, riches, health, and longevity), and if a butterfly (die), the sound of which also evokes the word for “duplicate,” flutters around the quintuple red bats, then the message is that the hope for those manifold blessings is doubled. Comprehending the symbols and concealed meanings of such ornamental designs called for considerable verbal wit and erudition, an art of the cognoscenti. The same sophisticated circles indulged in it that delighted in calligraphic finesse, tea-tasting contests, flower arranging, and ranking ancient works of bronze and ceramics. rebuses that spoke of success in taking examinations and in scaling the imperial administrative ladder naturally appealed to scholar-officials. The welfare and future of their families depended so critically on the student or bureaucrat that relatives saw his accomplishments as attended by prophecies, omens, spirits, and revelatory dreams.<sup>97</sup> Still, the allure of decorated porcelains cannot be explained simply in terms of camouflaged exhortations to realize ambitions or advance a career. For the intelligentsia, a cardinal attraction of the ornamental repertoire resided in its very multivalence: a design could be appreciated in turn for its message regarding professional accomplishment, its appeal to religious sensibility, its allusion to classical literature, its witty adaptation of a conventional motif, and its engaging depiction of a scene from nature. Just as a high-ranking Chinese gentleman might assume roles as a Confucian civil servant, daoist devotee, authority on antique objects, connoisseur of contemporary art, and admirer of natural beauty, so too he relished the sensation that the painted scene on a vase or platter could be contemplated on several levels of implication. of course, the repertoire’s symbolic associations spoke to a relatively small social group in China. The same was true in Korea, Japan, and vietnam, where refined court circles comprehended the Chinese floral and animal symbolism inasmuch as their culture was strongly influenced by that of the Middle Kingdom. but when the decorated pottery traveled far abroad, its designs necessarily lost their multifaceted allusions. in the Archipelago and Southwest Asia (as well as later in Europe), plant forms and other imagery, removed from their original settings, became mere ornamentation or took on new meanings germane to the indigenous culture. Members of the Chinese elite termed the pine, bamboo, and flowering plum collectively the “Three Friends of Winter” (suihan sanyou); they regarded the plants, which endure through harsh weather, as symbols of resolve, candor, and purity. As decoration on an early Qing vase, they expressed covert loyalty to the ousted Ming dynasty, the refusal of “leftover people” (ymin) to take office under the steppe conquerors.<sup>98</sup> yet the plant motifs had no political resonance beyond that context, and in distant lands they became mere botanical adornment. A porcelain vase shaped like a double gourd symbolized daoist notions of the relationship between Heaven and Earth, and its decoration of red bats stood for abundant good fortune from the gods; outside of a Chinese context, neither the shape nor the motif conveyed significance, though their idiosyncrasy evidently possessed a certain allure. A porcelain parrot with a pearl in its beak represented a companion of Guanyin in China but only a vivid tropical bird elsewhere. Cranes were regarded as celestial beings and as symbols of longevity in China; depicted on porcelains with the Eight Trigrams—eight combinations of three horizontal lines taken from the Book of Changes—they communicated a complex message about daoist cosmic order. When Southwest Asian artists copied the motif, however, their customers saw it merely as an eccentric geometrical design surrounding a familiar animal. distant potters appropriated styles and motifs heedlessly, with no comprehension of the original significance of the exotic decoration. in delhi, damascus, and dresden, an egret was just another bird. Misreadings by cultures distant from China were inevitable, although the scale on which they happened always varied. Sometimes alien artisans took over shapes and motifs with no change; sometimes they creatively combined the original source with a native one. Faced with bewildering buddhist and daoist symbols on Chinese porcelains, Persian potters sometimes mixed them helter-skelter on their earthenware. They fused Chinese images of a flowering crab apple and a stalk of peony into a single hybrid species, portraying the imagined plant alongside a cypress tree, a Southwest Asian evergreen associated with the Qur’anic garden of Paradise. not recognizing the Chinese lotus on porcelain as a water plant, Persian and ottoman potters sometimes rendered it with a bulky trunk and minuscule leaves. on some ottoman earthenware, dragons stalk through jungles of towering lotuses, Chinese cloud patterns metamorphose into garlands on a lion’s head, and Chinese peonies are translated into a mixture of forms, sometimes emerging from the other side of the cultural divide as tulips and carnations. An image of a naked boy on a yixing teapot, symbol of a newborn soul in buddhist iconography, insinuated something else altogether when laid out on an Egyptian platter. in Persian art, the holy figure of Guanyin is transformed into a pretty maid buying fish, though she unaccountably carries a rosary as well as a shopping basket. in China, decoration of a peach tree on a porcelain plate is a representation of spring, but on a Persian pot, it turns into a flowering rose shrub, a Sufi reference to mystic union with the godhead. A painting on a Chinese vase of a hoary daoist sage with a gourd of magic, life-prolonging elixir becomes a portrait of a grizzled wine guzzler on a Southwest Asian bottle. A porcelain representation of Chinese scholars in a wintry landscape, a representation of integrity and passive resistance to Mongol or Manchu conquerors, is transmuted on Persian pottery into warrioraristocrats hobnobbing at a princely court.<sup>99</sup> Cast adrift from their native moorings, Chinese motifs and symbols lost their original meanings and took on new significance. not surprisingly, material objects crossed frontiers with far less difficulty than cultural suppositions. ## THE EnCoUnTEr oF SoUTHWEST ASiAn And CHinESE dESiGn in their production of blue-and-white porcelain for islamic markets, Jingdezhen potters turned out many utensils foreign to Chinese taste, such as pot-bellied jugs, ewers with handles and curved spouts, tankards, fish baskets, washbowl stands, gourd-shaped bottles, rose-water sprinklers, flasks with loop handles, massive rectangular vases, and large, deep dishes. They modeled the pieces on Egyptian, Syrian, and Persian metalwork, some sent to China by Muslim merchants for copying, others supplied by Muslim households in Quanzhou and Canton. in a few cases, the model from which the potter worked can be identified. brushwork on a porcelain stand of the early fifteenth century indicates that the painter had a fourteenthcentury Mamluk brass stand in front of him, and a porcelain candlestick of the xuande period clearly derives from a thirteenth-century Persian brass counterpart.<sup>100</sup> (See figure 16.) of course, the potters of Jingdezhen had to accommodate themselves to novel vessel shapes because the dining styles of Southwest Asia were so different from their own. Eating meals in communal fashion called for wide platters, deep-welled basins, and big pouring vessels. Moreover, unlike the Chinese, Southwest Asians dined while seated on the floor or carpet-covered ground; hence they required platter stands to raise their utensils to a convenient height. in the early stages of the development of Chinese blue-and-white, pottery painters decorated the large vessels with busy, cramped designs, paying little attention to overall layout or elegant composition. but they soon learned how to embellish the pieces with their own designs in a coherent, well-ordered fashion, separating different categories of ornament (as on the david vases) into horizontal bands surrounded by ample white surface. Potters decorated many items with motifs from islamic culture, such as renditions of Arabic calligraphy and arabesques, that is, ornate designs of intertwined floral and geometric elements. They also used naturalistic images of a general nature, especially abstract floral patterns that were known in both China and Southwest Asia through reciprocal influence across the centuries. in the century of production of blue-and-white before the imperial court adopted the new fashion, however, the export market most influenced ornamentation. Pottery painters working on official wares proved “unwilling to take risks” (as a Qing connoisseur wrote), with the result that designs on their vessels sometimes appeared formulaic and uninspired, even when the pieces otherwise were painstakingly executed and of high quality. in contrast, export wares included imperfectly produced items, with slightly warped bodies and glaze impurities, yet with lively decoration and more varied, inventive designs.<sup>101</sup> After the xuande court adopted blue-and-white, official wares benefited from an injection of the vigor and imagination that derived from potters having directed their talents toward export markets. Creation of blue-and-white porcelains for islamic customers, combined with Southwest Asian replication of the wares, entailed a remarkable encounter and accommodation between the two great design traditions of the ecumene. Since those traditions had developed largely in isolation from each other, they naturally embodied different aesthetic values and perceptions, which themselves arose from contrasting views of reality.<sup>102</sup> The Southwest Asian approach to design emphasized symmetry, mathematically structured space, rectilinear patterns, and meticulous enrichment of surface. From the seventh century, that style became synonymous with the islamic tradition, which incorporated design patterns used by the Achaeminids and Sassanians. The focus was on repeated figures and elastic effects, an indefinite extension of two-dimensional ornament. Geometric pattern appeared on all kinds of surfaces—stucco, brickwork, floor mosaics, metalwork, manuscripts, saddles, costumes, coins, bookbindings, and pottery. Arabic calligraphy was similarly ubiquitous, gliding ineluctably into geometrics as letters were intricately embellished with plaits, stars, and stylized flowers. inspired by Sufi mysticism, Persian potters and metalworkers concealed the fundamental letters of God’s name, lam-alif (l-A, Allah), amid a lattice of cursive script, rosettes, and flower buds. Perhaps with some irony, they camouflaged maxims urging restraint in speech within calligraphic convolutions, even leaving out the diacritical marks on Arabic characters that would make them decipherable.<sup>103</sup> in a predominantly illiterate society, a pleasing aesthetic pattern trumped textual substance. ornament typically consisted of squares and lozenges, zigzag bands, overlapping circles, radiating polygons, dovetailed hexagons, sunburst disks, floral-filled quatrefoils, and stellar grids.<sup>104</sup> The principles of Southwest Asian design are most famously displayed on Persian carpets, works that exemplify the horror vacui (abhorrence of empty spaces) supposedly characteristic of islamic art. images of porcelains appear on sixteenth-century Persian “vase carpets” as central medallions around which are spread out mirror images on a longitudinal axis, sometimes with as many as six layers of detailed pattern superimposed on one another. Carpet weavers also turned to the formal framework of actual gardens to create designs. viewers saw their works as representations of Paradise, with a vase, fountain, or flowering tree depicted in the center of the carpet standing for the axis of the four cardinal directions.<sup>105</sup> Artists favored designs taken from vegetation since Paradise, lush and well watered, appears prominently in the Qur’an, a consideration that gave prominence to gardens, fountains, and floral decoration in islamic cultures. A popular motif was the paradisiacal Tree of life, a symbol in Southwest Asian religions since ancient babylon. islamic believers located it in the highest reaches of Heaven, its trunk so colossal that it would take a horseman a century to canter around it. The motif appeared on window grilles, prayer rugs, palace facades, city gateways, ceremonial robes, and earthenware platters.<sup>106</sup> on the tiles of mosques, passages from the Qur’an threaded through stems and branches of the Tree of life, the integration of the texts into the labyrinthine maze expressing the notion that the transcendent truths of Scripture are implanted in the created world. Elaborating on Qur’anic passages, Sufi mystics regarded all of Creation as united in praising God, including the scent of flowers, the humming of bees, and the color of sunsets. Southwest Asian potters painted vessels with images of Chinese peacocks and ducks, yet they so skillfully formed the silhouettes of the birds from vegetal patterns, such as petaled blossoms and undulating stems, that the figures all but vanish into the device. This represented a standard mode of adapting Chinese figural designs: the islamic artist flattened them out, rendering them as abstract patterns, arrayed in endless succession or caught in a web of geometric embellishment. Chinese craftsmen portrayed the dragon as a dynamic creature, an emblem of primal energy, whirling amid clouds or chasing a flaming pearl (a buddhist symbol of perfection) across the sky; but Mamluk potters and tile makers, oblivious to the Chinese tradition, employed the motif of the dragon as a recurring decorative feature, statically flanking a series of indistinguishable phoenixes. islamic tile makers produced individual pieces as components of a larger configuration, decorated so they could be joined edge to edge in a notionally infinite pattern, as when blue-and-gold tiles adorned with eight-pointed star medallions swathed the domes of mosques in Samarqand, isfahan, and istanbul. indeed, decorative design in islam seems modeled on the employment of textiles, as if representations of motifs, graphic symbols, and geometric elements were a brocadelike adornment to be wrapped around any object, large or small, fixed or mobile.<sup>107</sup> More significantly, however, the ubiquity of all-enveloping ornament and calligraphic inscription reflects the islamic conception that transcendent creation informs the mundane world, made manifest in all aspects of daily life. in contrast to the Southwest Asian tradition, Chinese aesthetic conventions stressed asymmetry, a flowing sense of space, naturalism, curvilinear patterns, and rotating directional motifs, such as cloud, wave, and peony scrolls.<sup>108</sup> dense, unrelieved ornament on Shang bronzes conveys a sense of horror vacui; but that design technique gave way after the Han era to open spaces and atmospheric effects, techniques of landscape painting and ink drawing that capture the evanescent qualities of trailing clouds, rushing water, and cliff-clinging mist. A classic example of Chinese modes of representation is the influential Southern Song hand-scroll by an unknown artist, Dream Journey over Xiao Xiang (ca. 1170): executed in a style known as “apparition painting” (wangliang hua), the work shows man-made structures— boat, bridge, pavilion, and path—set amid a fog-shrouded landscape dominated by crags receding in the distance.<sup>109</sup> Purely geometric designs were rare in Chinese art; repetition and alternation were unobtrusive, masked by rhythmic movement and plentiful room around ornamental figures. Significantly, tiles decorated with comprehensive, interconnecting designs played no role in Chinese architecture, though sometimes large ceramic statues of gods and sacred animals topped the eaves of palaces.<sup>110</sup> Usually white or yellow, tiles generally served as an unadorned ground against which other architectural elements, as well as the landscape setting, appeared to best advantage. in fact, use of plain tiles suggests the bias in Chinese aesthetics against vivid color in favor of muted tones, a reflection of the dominance of monochrome ink in painting after the late Tang period. retreat of bright, alluring color and concentration on monochromes brought painting into closer association with calligraphy. in his Reports on Famous Painters for All Dynasties (ca. 847), Zhang yanyuan, a calligrapher and commentator on art, contends that “mountains are green without needing malachite, and the phoenix is iridescent without the aid of the five colors. For this reason one may be said to have fulfilled one’s aim when the five colors are all present in the management of ink [alone].”<sup>111</sup> This point of view confounded ricci, who wondered why landscapes by well-known artists were in great demand “despite the fact that Chinese pictures are only outlines, done in black rather than in varied colors.”<sup>112</sup> When Chinese potters and connoisseurs shifted their allegiance from monochromatic to blue-and-white porcelains, they of course embraced a vivid color; but they were aided in doing so by the new style, like calligraphic art, making use of a single hue to delineate contour and volume. Moreover, spontaneity, which the literati enormously valued in calligraphy, came into play even in the routine labor of decorating blue-and-white. As with painting on silk, porcelain offered an unforgiving surface, permitting no second thoughts for those wielding brushes; it was essential that “their minds are not distracted,” as Tang ying puts it. And even more than the calligrapher and silk artist, the painter of porcelain had to master the tricky potentialities of the solution being applied: while the cobalt pigment looks murky black when applied to clay, after firing it is varied shades of blue, much as (dentrecolles says) “the natural warmth of the sun makes the most beautiful butterflies, with all their tints, come out of their eggs.” Focusing on contour and volume, Chinese artists evoked the sense that the indeterminate field occupied by the design unfolds in three dimensions; they valued the impulsive, impressionistic, and undomesticated. Whereas Southwest Asian space functioned as an infinite, homogeneous expanse to be packed with fixed elements, Chinese space constituted an opening into limitless distance, a milieu through which things progress. islamic painters rendered a pine tree as an elegant geometric pattern, its branches sinuously and meticulously entwining, all elements presented in a flat, symmetric outline; it is seen head-on, a still point of uniform order. Chinese painters depicted a pine tree as an embodiment of dynamic tension and natural movement, with a gnarled, twisting trunk, shaggy leaf clusters, and zigzag branches drooping to the ground and thrusting to the sky; it is seen from all sides, a manifestation of inexhaustible vitality. in Chunjuan’s Compilation on Landscape, Han Zhuo (d. 1125), a functionary at the court of the Huizong emperor, explained that some pine trees possess the force of angry dragons or frightened young dragons, and some have forms like ascending dragons or crouching tigers; and some seem proud and haughty, or humble and modest; some spread out and lean over a bank as if to drink from the middle of a stream; some lean over from precipices of lofty mountain ranges with their trunks bending upward. These are the attitudes of pines, whose aspects are manifold and whose transformations are inestimable.<sup>113</sup> According to Han, the painter strives to capture a fleeting moment in the life of a great pine tree, “the venerated ancient” of the world of flora, “a noble gentleman among lesser mortals.”<sup>114</sup> Wu Zhen (1280–1324), a prominent yuan artist, added an inscription to his Crooked Pine, a painted silk scroll: “you may hang [my pine tree] on a white wall in your hall; / At midnight it will fly away amidst the wind and clouds.”<sup>115</sup> While the worldly omnipresence of a transcendent divinity is expressed in the elaborate geometry of islamic art, the Chinese notion of cosmic energy pervading the immanent order of the world gives birth to an aesthetic that values transformation, spontaneity, and potentiality. Contrast between the two traditions is epitomized by islamic earthenware bearing interlocking units of rectangular Kufic script and Chinese porcelain decorated with cranes winging toward an imperceptible horizon.<sup>116</sup> China and Southwest Asia thus were committed to strikingly different views of reality that found expression in opposing aesthetic values and techniques. Still, while they could obviously never be reconciled and they halted considerably short of fusion, the two traditions of design nonetheless learned from each other. When Egyptian, Syrian, and Persian potters began copying Chinese blue-andwhite patterns in the early fifteenth century, they slowly adopted a more liberated sense of movement and space, opening up their designs to some of the vitality and spontaneity that characterized Chinese practice. For their part, Chinese craftsmen adopted elements of islamic composition, such as banded ornamentation and stricter regulation of space. They became adept at rendering their own visual idiom in the context of Southwest Asian spatial organization. The result was an art unmistakably Chinese, yet with elements new to that culture, a coming together of traditions that proved irresistible in the Abode of islam as well as around the world.