# The Primacy of Chinese Porcelain Korea, Japan, and Continental Southeast Asia, 1400–1700 Matteo ricci recounted that when he showed some Chinese officials a European map of the world, they were puzzled to find the Middle Kingdom placed at its farthest eastern margin. When he later drafted a map for the Wanli emperor, he therefore so arranged it that “the empire of China occupied a more or less central position.” nat urally, ricci was concerned to respect the sensibilities of his hosts (and potential converts); yet he also believed that the exceptional nature of the Chinese domain justified the revision: “Considering its vast stretches and the boundaries of its lands, it would at present surpass all the kingdoms of the earth, taken as one, and as far as i am aware, it has surpassed them during all previous ages.”<sup>1</sup> in any event, as ricci realized, both Western and Chinese notions of cartographic propriety had more to do with cultural convictions than with strictly geographic considerations. in the eyes of the Confucian ruling class, China graciously spread its culture to other countries while less civilized peoples expressed gratitude and ritual submission by presenting gifts to the imperial court, tribute to the Son of Heaven. Culture represented China’s most significant export, establishing the image of the Middle Kingdom as a fountainhead of antique traditions, revered sages, and sacred texts. naturally, Korea, Japan, and vietnam felt the gravitational pull of China most powerfully. They constituted part of an interacting East Asian sphere of which China was the central domain, a realm that pursued a mission civilisatrice by sending abroad its ideographic script, state ceremonies, elite attire, law codes, bureaucratic methods, and Confucian canon along with its silks, paintings, and porcelains. Chinese served as the lingua franca of East Asia, Chinese writing its common medium for literate discourse. in some form, however attenuated and merely honorific at times, the Chinese examination system and Confucianism formed the basis of official ideology, administrative management, and scholastic knowledge.<sup>2</sup> Chinese culture played the same role in East Asia that, in late antiquity, Hellenistic culture did in the eastern Mediterranean and roman culture did north of the Alps: it provided a framework within which the elite traditions of other peoples found expression. The ruling classes of Korea, Japan, and vietnam even adopted the Chinese concept of zhongguo, regarding their own respective polity as a political and cultural “Middle Kingdom,” extending universal principles to people on the margins of high civilization. The cynosure of East Asia, China attracted many buddhist monks from nearby kingdoms who thereafter carried its culture back to their own communities. After lengthy stays in Chinese monasteries, they returned home with sacred texts and relics, as well as with porcelains, paintings, and a passion for tea. by the Song period, porcelain had become a central emblem of Chinese culture, an artifact peoples in other countries coveted and tried to emulate. They eagerly purchased the ceramic and incorporated it into their societies, sometimes in surprising ways. in general, the most creative response to Chinese porcelain by other ceramic traditions arose in regions with a sophisticated culture (as characterized by density of urban life, organized religion, and some measure of literacy), and peoples in relatively less developed areas sometimes abandoned their own pottery styles altogether. As far as ceramics were concerned, however, Korea, Japan, and continental Southeast Asia shared something more fundamental than a collective cultural context. The tectonic unit that underlies the geology of southern China also extends to parts of continental Southeast Asia (much of vietnam, Cambodia, and Thailand) and, after a plunge under the yellow Sea, reappears in the southern half of the Korean peninsula as well as in the southern islands of the Japanese archipelago.<sup>3</sup> Korea, Japan, and continental Southeast Asia thus possessed igneousbased materials, mainly clays, needed for making fine pottery. And as they were well situated to learn about Chinese kilns, glazes, and craftsmanship, they had the additional advantage of not having to develop a sophisticated ceramic technology entirely from scratch. bringing a native genius and individuality to these twin advantages, material resources and geographic proximity, they not only mastered the attainments of China but also created pottery traditions with unique styles and repertoires. in contrast, Sarawak in northwestern borneo has excellent white clay that potters could have used for producing stoneware but which they exploited only for making rudimentary earthenware and crucibles in which to melt gold dust. Although Chinese craftsmen probably took certain glazing techniques to borneo, Sarawak potters had no economic incentive to produce high-quality wares for a home market already abundantly supplied with jars, pots, and plates from China. As early as the Han period, Chinese merchants sailed to borneo to trade ceramics and other commodities for pearls, gold, iron, camphor, hornbills, scented woods, and birds’ nests (for gourmet soup).<sup>4</sup> Also, Sarawak potters did not work within a tradition of royal or aristocratic patronage, a powerful inducement for improving ceramics in Korea, Japan, and continental Southeast Asia. ## “FirST UndEr HEAvEn”: THE CUlTUrE oF PorCElAin in KorEA in a history of painting written around 1080, Kuo ruoxi praised Korea as the only foreign nation “in which veneration for culture is taught, and which through the gradual infiltration of Chinese ways has attained at last a true refinement in artistic skill.”<sup>5</sup> According to Chinese connoisseurs, pottery ranked among Korea’s greatest accomplishments. Korean artisans replicated Chinese pottery from at least the Han period, though the principal influence on them came from southern China, not from the contiguous north. Sometime in the early centuries c.e., they began to produce stoneware, the earliest-known high-fired wares outside China. by the early ninth century, they made the transition from stoneware to porcelain with such success that the Song court greatly admired the green-glazed pottery Korean monarchs offered as tribute. in his Illustrated Account of Korea, xu Jing (1091–1153), a Song artist and calligrapher, wrote, “Koreans call the green color used in ceramics kingfisher blue [i.e., turquoise]. . . . The lion-shaped incense burners are most intricately made, and the color of the other pieces resembles the mysterious green of the vessels produced at the yaozhou and ruzhou kilns.”<sup>6</sup> located in the northern Chinese province of Shaanxi, the kilns of yaozhou county in fact made only modest quantities of celadons, copies of vessels from Jiangsu and Zhejiang, the principal manufacturers of fashionable greenwares. vessels made at the so-called raozhou kilns actually came from Jingdezhen, best known in the Song for its jadelike, blue-tinted whitewares.<sup>7</sup> in short, xu’s statement indicates that Korean pottery owed a great deal to the techniques of potters from south of the yangzi. The western coast of Korea is highly irregular, sprinkled with thousands of inlets and islands. Unlike the inhospitable, smooth eastern shore, it presents a welcoming face to the sea and easy passage between the peninsula and southern Chinese ports. Kilns in Cholla province in southwestern Korea produced the best pottery, and the westernmost tip of Cholla points like an arrow to the delta of the yangzi, five hundred kilometers across the yellow Sea, a shallow (average depth, about forty-five meters), easily navigable waterway. Trade linked the two regions from the period of fragmentation, lasting from the third to the sixth century, that followed collapse of the Han dynasty. With the fall of the Han in 220, Korea broke free of Chinese control for the first time in four hundred years. The peninsula then entered the war-wracked era of the Three Kingdoms—Koguryo, Paekche, and Silla—all aggressive and expansionist, all tightly organized, each allying with powers in Mongolia, China, and Japan in the struggle for survival and supremacy. division of Korea ended when the southeastern kingdom of Silla (with help from the Tang dynasty) consolidated control over its rivals, inaugurating the period of Unified Silla (675–935). in battles of the Three Kingdoms, an economic strength of the southwestern kingdom of Paekche (18 b.c.e.–660 c.e.), which encompassed the future Cholla province, was that it dominated trade with southern China.<sup>8</sup> disregarding the Chinese states of the north, it sent numerous embassies to those controlling the coasts of Zhejiang and Fujian. Many buddhist monks from Paekche went on pilgrimage to southern China, and according to one account, first recorded in the Tang period, a Paekche monk beheld a vision of Avalokitesvara in a Zhejiang monastery. The Paekche king Muryong (r. 501–23) and his queen were buried in a brick-built, tunnel-shaped vault typical of those on the southern coast of China; objects entombed with them included gold crowns, bronze mirrors, a lacquered wooden coffin, and Chinese-style silver jewelry. A stone statue of a Chinese qilin-like animal guarded the entrance to the grave, clay bricks bore inscriptions of Chinese lotus motifs, and Chinese stoneware vases stood in niches along interior walls. Some of the southern Chinese pottery found in fourth-century tombs of the kingdom of Silla (57 b.c.e.–618 c.e.) entered the peninsula at Paekche ports. Potters in Cholla province may have learned some techniques, such as the construction of modest versions of the dragon kiln, from southern Chinese potters who escaped local turmoil by moving to Korea. According to a Japanese monk who traveled to China in the Tang, migration went in both directions, for families from Paekche and Silla settled in coastal China, where they farmed, traded, and piloted riverboats. The ports of southern Korea and China also gave Korean polities a gateway to the rest of the ecumene. Cosmopolitan and refined, Paekche maintained close contacts with Japan, playing a key role in the transmission of buddhist art and culture there during the formative Asuka era (552–710). buddhist monks from Paekche also went on pilgrimage to india by ship, and a glass goblet from Alexandria in Egypt, excavated from a Silla tomb dating to 300 c.e., most likely came to Korea by sea. An Arab work some time later described Silla as a “gold-glittering nation.”<sup>9</sup> in the period of the Three Kingdoms, rulers established stringent control of their populations and resources by creating agencies to supervise collective labor, status relations, commerce, and craft production. on a national level, the kings of Unified Silla pursued similar authoritarian policies, a legacy carried forward for a millennium thereafter by the Koryo (918–1392) and Choson (1392–1910) dynasties. in the absence of extensive bureaucracies, the compact size of their realms aided centralization. Unlike China and vietnam, the Korean state reached its natural limits, bounded by the Sea of Japan, the yellow Sea, and the broad yalu river, very early in its history, with territorial closure thereby giving it unparalleled stability.<sup>10</sup> Governance extended over just 220,500 square kilometers, a landmass equivalent to that of England, which came under effective centralized rule around the same time the Koryo regime supplanted Unified Silla. The Tang and Song empires possessed considerable space for many kiln centers, few of which received direction or supervision from the imperial court. but the royal houses of Korea and their ruling class of aristocratic literati (yangban) had the capacity to control pottery production in monolithic fashion, thereby ensuring striking consistency of aesthetic purpose for twelve centuries. A government office managed pottery workshops that supplied vases, incense burners, and water pots for the court and aristocracy. Administrators organized potters into craft guilds and registered them on government lists. They took charge of the mining of clay and the provision of pigments, and they ensured that pottery painters correctly executed designs. An office for managing tile manufacture constituted part of the directorate that supervised construction of temples, palaces, and tombs. King Hyonjong (r. 1009–31) appointed officials to oversee dress codes and major handicrafts. King Sonjong (r. 1083–94) decreed that “craftsmen and merchants must serve the king in their given profession and skills and may not be appointed government officials.”<sup>11</sup> The regime enforced strict segregation of ranks; the yangban elite of some fifteen hundred officials served the court, and their families lived in communities that excluded peasants. Government agents regulated pottery use according to class, with the privileged having access to fine vessels and the lower echelons making do with bamboo platters, terra-cotta, and crude stoneware. Masses of chattel slaves huddled at the bottom of the social ladder, constituting fully one-third of Korea’s population by the Choson period, roughly the same percentage as in the antebellum American South.<sup>12</sup> rigorous control of handicrafts by the Korean state resulted in high-quality production serving an extremely restricted domestic clientele. Unlike the more or less self-sufficient entrepreneurs of Jingdezhen, with their eyes on the main chance and return on investment, Korean kiln owners had slight opportunity to sell their firstclass pottery in foreign markets. Still, official supervision and patronage, combined with salutary influence from southern Chinese potters, paid aesthetic dividends. by the end of the first century of the Koryo dynasty, Koreans turned out celadon wares that even the Chinese admired for their excellence. Although Japanese potters generally refrained from imitating Song porcelains, perhaps because their copies would have fallen so short, Koreans rightly felt no such qualm. Their green-glazed vessels have graceful forms, unaffected style, and innovative decoration, comparable to the finest output of Song kilns.<sup>13</sup> At the same time, the high value placed by the Koryo elite and their potters on spontaneity and vitality meant that Korean producers lacked the zeal for technical perfection and high gloss that characterized their Chinese counterparts. Koreans deemed slightly lopsided forms, unpredictable surface markings, and mottled glazes refreshing and attractive—a taste they passed on to the Japanese. Korean potters also turned out wares in natural, beguiling shapes, such as water pots in the form of a mandarin duck, pomegranate cluster, or dragon-headed tortoise; incense burners in the form of a lion, rooster, or fish-dragon; and water droppers in the form of a gourd, monkey, or lotus bud. Along with such wares, the Korean upper stratum also took up the Chinese habit of tea. According to xu Jing, who visited the Koryo court in 1123: The people of Kao-li [Koryo] have become addicted to tea drinking, and many kinds of implement are made: a black tea bowl ornamented with gold, a small tea bowl of kingfisher colour, and a silver ting for heating water are modelled after Chinese wares. . . . Tea is set out there three times daily and is followed by hot water. The people of Kao-li regard hot water as medicinal.<sup>14</sup> A distinctive Koryo technique known as sanggam (inlay), perhaps inspired by Chinese lacquerware with insets of mother-of-pearl, involved incising designs in the gray clay, filling the carved outlines with slip, a dilute black or white clay mixture, then applying glaze and firing. requiring precise control of the furnace, the effect at its best achieved the look of delicate brush painting on a milky-green surface. Potters commonly decorated the porcelains with motifs of stylized cranes, clouds, willow trees, peony scrolls, and chrysanthemums.<sup>15</sup> The most illustrious Koryo ceramics, the inlaid celadons won the greatest praise from contemporaries. A Chinese envoy in Korea’s capital of Songdo (present-day Kaesong) in the eleventh century praised the Koryo court for its sophisticated culture, all derived from his homeland—manuscripts, costumes, wines, inkstones, silk brocades—but he considered its pottery exceptional: “As for the ‘secret color’ of celadons, the ‘secret color’ of Koryo is first under Heaven. Although [potters of] other areas imitate them, none of them can achieve [the same qualities].”<sup>16</sup> King Euijong (r. 1146–70) impressed Chinese visitors with his summer pavilion outside Songdo, roofed with celadon tiles at scandalous expense. yi Kyu-bo (1168–1241), a Korean poet and scholar, evoked the achievement of Korean potters in terms reminiscent of contemporary praise for Jingdezhen’s qingbai: The felling of trees left Mount namsan bare and the smoke from the fires obscured the sun. The wares produced were celadon bowls: out of every ten, one was selected— for it had the bluish-green lustre of jade. it was clear and brilliant as crystal, it was hard as a rock. With what skill did the potters work— it seemed as if they borrowed the secret from Heaven!<sup>17</sup> Centralized royal control and oversight by the yangban hierarchy explain the abrupt transitions in Korean pottery fashions. A change in dynastic power—a markedly rare event in Korean history after 675—meant a change in what potters had to produce for their masters. The great era of Koryo celadons came to a sudden end soon after 1231 as a consequence of repeated Mongol invasions of the peninsula. The Koryo court fled to an island off the west coast, bringing supervision and control of potters to a halt. After finally conquering Korea in 1259, the Mongols permitted the king to return to Songdo so long as he accepted his status as a docile vassal. Weighed against the great prize of China, Korea was a distracting sideshow to the Mongols, who wanted no trouble in the peninsula as they mounted their assault on the Southern Song. When the Korean court sent inlaid celadons painted with gold to Kublai Khan, he responded by berating it for the opulence of the vessels and forbidding further production of them.<sup>18</sup> After the Hongwu emperor forced the last yuan ruler to flee to the steppes in 1368, the discredited Koryo royal house faced a bleak future. yi Song-gye (1335–1408), a Korean general, seized power in a coup in 1392 and became the first ruler of the Choson line. (Hongwu bestowed the name on the dynasty, taking it from an old Chinese designation for the region; in most Korean accounts, the dynastic designation is Yi.) He built a new capital at Seoul and began to change the kingdom’s ideological orientation. buddhism, which had come to Korea from China, had never suffered proscriptions such as those imposed on it by the Tang government after the An lushan rebellion. during the reign of the Koryo, buddhism became a virtual state religion, employed by the royal house to bolster its sacred aura and authority. buddhism also reached down to the common people, among whom Avalokitesvara, in the protean figure of Guanyin, took on the role of the Korean mother-goddess of the Earth. Many of the inlaid celadons produced for the elite were used in buddhist rites and for display on family shrines.<sup>19</sup> Following the lead of the Ming, however, the Choson dynasty adopted neo-Confucian teaching as its governing ideology and restricted the political and cultural sway of buddhism, not least because the new rulers regarded buddhist clergy as loyal to the deposed Koryo line. indeed, Choson Korea developed into a more single-minded Confucian regime than China itself, though Confucianism remained a preoccupation of the yangban and did not filter down to commoners. The Choson dynasty spurned old-style celadons as lavish, corrupt, and pretentious, tokens of the allegedly pleasure-besotted Koryo sovereigns. in the service of Confucian devotion to frugality and simplicity, Choson royalty favored austere, practical ceramics, chiefly white porcelains with a blue-tinted glaze and rustic punch’ong (powder blue) vessels, stoneware coated with a slip of white clay. According to a census of the early fifteenth century, 324 kilns turned out those wares. Potters decorated both types with plain motifs, such as stamped or incised images of flowers, grass, birds, and fish. natural and lively in character, the ornamented vessels did not aspire to high art or sophistication. The court reserved undecorated white porcelains for use in the royal palace and in official rituals.<sup>20</sup> The Choson government suppressed the production and importation of colorfully ornamented pottery. blue-and-white porcelain proved acceptable, though, inasmuch as the Ming court was Korea’s political patron and cultural model. Choson rulers received gifts of the Jingdezhen ware from the emperor, and they responded by having their own potters imitate the style. Although the potters at first routinely copied Chinese blue-and-white, Korean individuality quickly asserted itself, with wares displaying the elegant simplicity typical of white porcelains and punch’ong. in addition, scarcity of fine cobalt pigment dictated spartan decoration and modest output. Although Koreans discovered their own source of cobalt ore in the 1460s, it produced only unsatisfactory grayish blue tones, so the Persian material still had to be imported at great expense; functionaries doled it out only to accomplished painters at select kilns. As with white porcelains, Choson rulers prohibited use of blue-and-white by commoners. Korean ambassadors presented blueand-white vessels to the Ming court on tribute missions, but while attractive and admirably executed, they never received the acclaim from Chinese connoisseurs that inlaid celadons had centuries earlier. in spring 1592 a foreign army once again invaded Korea. obeying the commands of Toyotomi Hideyoshi (1536–98), the warlord-unifier of Japan, 150,000 troops stormed from Pusan in the southeast to Seoul, a distance of 355 kilometers, in only three weeks, their way cleared by devastating use of gunpowder weapons. Claiming a heavenly mandate for his ambition (but poorly informed about his adversaries), Hideyoshi aimed at nothing less than the conquest of China, after which he intended to march on Southeast Asia and india.<sup>21</sup> Unlike the Mongols almost three hundred years earlier, however, the Japanese ultimately failed in their attack, in part because the Ming sent tens of thousands of troops across the yalu to support Korea. Although a negligible matter amid the untold misery and hardship of the Korean people, the Japanese invasion derailed the ceramic history of the peninsula. Armies ravaged Cholla province and the countryside around Seoul, the main centers of pottery production, destroying kilns and forcing potters to flee for their lives. Moreover, when Japanese troops withdrew from Korea in winter 1598, after the death of Hideyoshi, they took with them at least sixty thousand prisoners, sometimes removing the inhabitants of entire villages. Hundreds of potters and their families numbered among those carried into captivity. Korean pottery did not regain its vitality for two generations, for when the Choson court finally turned its attention to the industry, clay mines had to be reopened, kilns rebuilt, and new craftsmen trained. The wars spelled the end of production of punch’ong vessels, evidently because the Japanese killed or captured so many rustic potters. From the mid-seventeenth century, white and blue-and-white porcelains reigned supreme among the Korean elite, while commoners used rough, brown stoneware. With increased imports of cobalt pigment, potters produced vessels in blue-and-white, with a delicate silvery-blue tone and spontaneous brushwork, more extensively than before. (See figure 17.) The Japanese assault, then, temporarily wrecked the Korean pottery industry but failed to destroy the high tradition of Korean ceramics. Well into the nineteenth century, the Choson royal house, the most enduring and stable dynasty in world history, the apex of a slave society and despotic hierarchy, encouraged the production of pottery that combined unaffected simplicity with warmth, refinement with humanity, subtle design with subdued shades. Partly as a consequence of the kidnapping of Korean potters, Japanese ceramic artistry also displayed those qualities as it came to maturity in the seventeenth century. ## “CHinESE obJECTS”: THE CUlTUrE oF CHinA in JAPAn The invasion of Korea by Hideyoshi meant suffering for all involved. Japan experienced humiliating defeat and serious casualties among its lordly class of daimyo (lit., “great names”) and their bands of samurai retainers. Japan would not return in force to Korea until its stunning victory in the russo-Japanese war of 1905 enabled it to take over the peninsula without opposition. As a result of pouring men and money into aiding the Choson, the late Ming regime, already facing a financial emergency, failed to withstand the Manchu threat from the north a generation later. With their countryside and towns in ruins, Koreans naturally suffered the most. The toll on them could hardly be calculated, though the Japanese did their best. They kept track by cutting off the noses of Korean fatalities and packing them in salt tubs to be dispatched to Kyoto, where Hideyoshi’s clerks counted tens of thousands in a given month. The contingent of warriors led by nabeshima Katsushige (1580–1657), first lord of Hizen province in Kyushu (modern nagasaki prefecture), claimed credit in 1597 for garnering 5,444 noses in just five weeks.<sup>22</sup> nabeshima, however, is not remembered for his battlefield heroics but rather for kidnapping scores of Korean potters and settling them on his estates. Along with the hostages of other daimyo, they never made it back home. restricted to their villages and despised by neighboring Japanese, they could not move elsewhere. daimyo kept guards at the kilns and required craftsmen to wear identification tags to monitor their movements. A local potentate placed one potter under house arrest for six years for begging to return home. A century later, a Japanese visitor to a so-called Korea Town on the coast of Kyushu, two hundred kilometers across the Straits of Tsushima from Korea, reported that the fifteen hundred residents in the area, mainly descendants of nabeshima’s prisoners, still gazed out to sea and longed for their ancestral soil.<sup>23</sup> nabeshima supervised foreign trade in Kyushu and developed the potteries under his control into the largest producers in Japan. He evidently had no aesthetic interest in pottery but rather hoped to augment his revenue and to present wares as gifts to other clan lords. by the opening years of the seventeenth century, his Koreans had unearthed kaolin at Mount izumiyama near Arita, forty kilometers north of the town of nagasaki; they discovered it near hot springs, evidence of ancient volcanic activity. The potters soon after introduced the Korean version of the dragon kiln, called the noborigama (rising kiln), to Japan, which not only increased production tenfold but also, for the first time, provided the high temperature needed to fire porcelain. it is because of such achievements that the Korean conflicts between 1592 and 1598 are called the Potters’ Wars (or Teabowl Wars). The designation proposes that the merits of Japanese pottery derived from a virtual act of larceny inasmuch as Korean prisoners introduced new kiln technology and use of kaolin to the land of their captors. Korean potters, however, had worked in Kyushu long before Hideyoshi’s assault, and their wares had been prized in Japan for generations. Karatsu, the port in Hizen from which Hideyoshi’s warriors sailed for Pusan, sold plentiful Korean-style pottery to its neighbors.<sup>24</sup> Japanese kidnapping of Korean potters thus points to eagerness for acquiring more such expertise, the pitiless seizure of an opportunity arising from war, not the beginning of something new. Japan knew only crude, red-colored terra-cotta before Korean potters arrived there in the early centuries of the common era, bringing with them knowledge of glazing, the potter’s wheel, and high-firing techniques.<sup>25</sup> According to legend, a Paekche king sent a teacher to Japan in the early 300s to instruct a crown prince in the Confucian classics and Chinese poetry. Along with ceramics, other elements of Chinese culture to reach the Japanese islands by way of Korea during the same period included bronze technology, mounted warfare, ideographic script, the calendar, chronicle writing, and worship of Avalokitesvara/Guanyin. Shotoku Taishi (574–622), a crown prince and regent, granted official recognition to buddhism, hired Korean architects to design Chinese-style temples, and brought a Korean monk to court to supervise the manufacture of paper, ink, and inkstones. The regent won posthumous elevation for his devotion when buddhists declared him the incarnation of Kannon, the Japanese name for Avalokitesvara/Guanyin. during the time of the crown prince, buddhists established pilgrimage routes dedicated to Kannon, lined with a string of thirty-three temples to memorialize the manifold forms taken by the bodhisattva. in the late seventh century, elite refugees from the kingdoms of Koguryo and Paekche, fleeing the takeover of Korea by Unified Silla, brought Tang styles of painting, sculpture, and temple architecture to Japan. Soon after, some twenty Japanese diplomatic missions went to the Tang court and brought back extensive collections of Chinese texts. in the Asuka and nara (710–94) periods and in the early Heian era (794–1185), Japan looked to the Tang regime as a model of imperial centralization. The Tang capital of Chang’an served as the ground plan for the Japanese capital at Heijokyo (modern nara) in 670 and for that at Heiankyo (modern Kyoto) in 794. Japanese emperors (tenno) mandated Tang dress for men at court, and they imported Chinese green-glazed tiles at great expense to roof their palaces in Kyoto. When the emperor appeared enthroned during state ceremonies, large silk-covered panels depicting Confucian sages garlanded the wall behind him. Emperor Saga (r. 809–23), a skilled calligrapher and poet in Chinese-style (kanshi) verse, enormously admired Confucian moral teaching and political doctrine; he staged court ceremonies according to Chinese protocol and sponsored the compilation of three influential anthologies of kanshi poetry. He followed the counsel of his imperial predecessor, Cao Pi (r. 220–26), whose essay on Chinese literature declared that “writing is a great enterprise for governing the state,” a phrase Saga appended as a title to one of his anthologies.<sup>26</sup> Substantially linked to the commerce of the mainland for the first time, Japan imported large quantities of Chinese merchandise. it also became the easternmost destination for goods carried on the Silk road: Saga and other Heian monarchs stored Persian silver vessels and Persian gold-threaded brocades in the Shosoin imperial Treasure-House at nara. Since indigenous high culture had yet to develop substantially, Japanese traditions came close to being overwhelmed by elite partiality for things Chinese in the Asuka and nara periods. As much as they admired Chinese culture in its own right, however, Japanese monarchs also employed it to bolster their power and prestige, thereby setting a fashion emulated by the nobility. The court sent at least seventeen embassies to China, each comprising hundreds of men, before 779. Above all, the emperor’s entourage aimed to control the import of karamono (Chinese objects), especially celadons, hanging scrolls, bronze incense burners, books, and writing utensils.<sup>27</sup> For the Japanese elite, situated at the outskirts of the ecumene, Chinese objects represented concrete signs of civilized life, verifications of cultural refinement. Around the same time that Chinese monks such as xuanzang journeyed to india to acquire buddhist texts and cult souvenirs, Japanese monks, licensed by the imperial court, visited buddhist temples in Zhejiang and Fujian to collect scripture and karamono. by the mid-eleventh century, however, demand for Chinese commodities outran the efficiency of government controls. As Japan shifted from an administrative system of trade to a private mercantile one, the court lost its monopoly on Chinese contacts. Concurrently, the Japanese economy expanded and a provincial military aristocracy gained power. The overpowering Chinese economy of the Song period, especially its exports of copper-cash, played a crucial role in stimulating these changes. in some years, cash imports to Japan came to 100 million pieces, the equivalent of the coinage minted annually by the Southern Song government. Since it sold in Japan for five times its worth in China, Korean and Chinese entrepreneurs gained fortunes trading the currency. Song cash spurred transition to a money economy, fostered growth of market towns, and enriched noble landholders. As the circulation of Chinese coins undermined the traditional, barter-based economy, contemporaries bewailed the plague of “money sickness,” a grievance associated with the appearance of professional moneylenders in the mid-1250s. Japan did not mint its own copper coins until the sixteenth century, by which time it had begun exploiting its own copper and silver mines and exporting huge amounts of the two metals to China.<sup>28</sup> in a long perspective, economic developments stemming from the flood of Chinese cash established a unique setting for the cultural role of porcelain. in Korea, the royal dynasty and yangban served as exclusive channels of Chinese culture and supervised production of restricted pottery forms. in Japan, the edgy collaboration of buddhists in monasteries, merchant commoners in towns, daimyo in the provinces, the emperor and his court nobility, and a ruling generalissimo, or shogun, with his own entourage determined the value of Chinese things, as well as advances in Japanese ceramics. As central power weakened in the twelfth century and society became increasingly militarized, daimyo emerged as the focal group, the one linking all others. Even as late as the sixteenth century, the age of the three great unifiers of Japan—oda nobunaga (1534–82), Hideyoshi, and Tokugawa ieyasu (1543–1616)—the hegemony of the bakufu (tent government, or shogunate) depended on the eminence of some 250 daimyo on their local estates.<sup>29</sup> Centuries before Hideyoshi’s Korean adventure, provincial barons such as nabeshima Katsushige maintained ties to monasteries and market towns, established pottery kilns, patronized eminent potters, and controlled the ports through which Chinese commodities and karamono entered the country. Merchants imported longquan celadons, Fujian whitewares, and Jingdezhen qingbai to Japan from early Song times. Archaeologists have dug up Chinese shards from a tenth-century Kyushu trading post, and antique fragments still wash up on beaches after storms on the inland Sea, the major commercial highway in premodern Japan. Fujian and qingbai pottery was produced in white, the achromatic color favored by buddhists; hence worshipers buried thousands of the vessels in sutra mounds in the late Heian and early Kamkurara (1185–1333) periods. The widely popular Pure land Amida sect of buddhism preached the messianic doctrine that mankind had crossed into the “latter days of the law” (Mappo), a time of suffering, disorder, and darkness. From the late Heian, believers buried copies of buddhist scripture in clay and metal cases to preserve them during the epoch of decline, which they thought had begun in 1052 (1,500 years after the buddha Gautama’s death) and expected to end with the buddha Amida shepherding them into the Pure land paradise. Most of the pottery cases came from Fujian kilns, made to order for the purpose.<sup>30</sup> While the pessimism of the latter days of the law represented a response to the tumult that accompanied the rise of samurai warriors from the eleventh century, it also expressed the Japanese sentiment of the fleeting nature of existence, typically epitomized in poetic imagery of impermanence—the scattering of autumn leaves, the fall of cherry blossoms, pine trees in winter, the moon at dawn.<sup>31</sup> discussing Japanese taste in representations of nature, rodrigues enumerates favorite painting scenes, such as those showing the moon reflected in water or snow descending at night: “All this is in keeping with their temperament, and makes them feel very nostalgic and quietly lonely.”<sup>32</sup> That outlook had a lasting impact on Japanese taste in material culture, above all in ceramics. it appears in The Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu (973–ca. 1013): acclaimed today as the world’s first psychological novel, its plot was plundered for centuries by Japanese artists for illustrations on porcelains, silk hangings, and lacquer panels. Murasaki has her eponymous prince say, “i have been told that in China nothing is held to surpass the brocades of spring, but in the poetry of our own country the preference would seem to be the wistful notes of autumn.”<sup>33</sup> Sei Shonagon, Murasaki’s contemporary, expressed the same view. in her Pillow Book (ca. 1000), a compendium of ruminations and complaints, she lists “Things That Give a Clean Feeling,” all of them distinguished for being unadorned and colorless: “A new earthen cup. A new metal bowl. A rush mat. The play of the light on water as one pours a vessel. A new wooden chest.” yet after viewing a procession in the imperial palace, Sei, a consummate snob, recorded her approval at “how everything was done with proper ceremony in the Chinese style,” thus alluding to fashions far removed from plain, homely things that evoke clean feeling. At a gathering in a palace chamber, she delighted in a brilliant Chinese screen painting of long-legged, monstrous creatures and “a large celadon vase, full of magnificent cherry branches; some of them were as much as five feet long, and their blossoms overflowed to the very foot of the railing.”<sup>34</sup> So too, however much Genji waxed melancholy over the notes of autumn, he took pleasure in jaunts in imperial “dragon and phoenix boats . . . brilliantly decorated in the Chinese fashion” and in feasting with the emperor on Chinese tableware of silver and lapis lazuli.<sup>35</sup> Style in Heian Japan was manifested in both sumptuous and subdued effects— vibrant paintings and inky drawings, Chinese crimson cloth and home-dyed pastels, gilded celadons and unadorned whitewares, karamono magnificence and native temperance, elegant simplicity (kotan) and splendor (karei).<sup>36</sup> in rough measure, this came down to lavish colors for public occasions and spartan hues for private. The distinction persisted in Japanese tradition, for rodrigues observes that in aristocratic households, “the rooms and apartments where guests are received are richly gilded with various paintings in colour,” whereas rooms used only for private life are “excellently painted with black water-colour.”<sup>37</sup> Clearly, the reserved decoration and cool-toned shades of Song porcelains ideally matched Japanese taste in the private realm; hence, in the normal course of events, the immense prestige of China most likely would have impelled the Japanese elite to adopt the ceramic for tableware. Turbulent international relations, however, ruled out that prospect. With the Tang regime in chaos following the An lushan rebellion, Japanese diplomatic and commercial relations with China deteriorated, finally to be severed in 894, the year of the last official embassy dispatched by Japan. Although regular commerce (including imports of pottery) began again around 1200 in the early Kamakura period, Japanese law permitted no more than five Chinese ships in its harbors at any time, so trade remained strictly limited. War between the Mongols and the Southern Song disrupted exchange between China and Japan for over a generation, and attempted Mongol invasions of Japan in 1274 and 1281 naturally brought it to a standstill.<sup>38</sup> A hiatus of more than three centuries in intense relations with China proved crucial for the development of Japanese high culture inasmuch as it gave space for indigenous attitudes and values to come to the fore, curbing immoderate regard for the Middle Kingdom. in the realm of government, this meant that a Confucian bureaucracy effectively died stillborn. Great clans retained power at court and in the provinces, making Japanese politics akin to the superseded aristocratic system of the Tang. The civil examinations of the nara and early Heian periods, which initially promised to create a Song-type bureaucratic polity, survived merely as hollow ritual. in China and Korea, Confucianism shaped official mentalities, though it had little impact on the mass of the populace. in Japan, the moral dimensions of Confucianism held sway, promoted by the court as a means to inculcate ethical behavior in all ranks, from the privileged to ordinary villagers, though the ideology rarely determined who had access to administrative office.<sup>39</sup> in the realm of religion after 900, the government followed the Tang practice of supporting buddhist temples; yet unlike in China, where buddhism won converts largely within educated circles, buddhist monks in Japan popularized the faith, laced with elements of Confucian ethics, among both commoners and elite. Emperor Godaigo (r. 1318–39) regarded himself as an avatar of the legendary Shotoku Taishi, backed neo-Confucianism, surrounded himself with Zen (Chan) buddhist advocates, and subsidized Zen monasteries. in addition, the sentiment of the latter days of the law shifted the focus of religious behavior inasmuch as many believers regarded traditional buddhism as having degenerated into empty formalism. in the nara and early Heian periods, ritual, prayer, and textual study had been paramount; but in the Kamakura era, Zen, which emphasized meditation, spiritual experience, and sudden enlightenment, swept in from southern China, transmitted by hundreds of Japanese monks returning from extended pilgrimages. numerous Chinese monks of like persuasion, fleeing the disorder of the late Tang, amplified the influence of their Japanese counterparts in Zen monasteries.<sup>40</sup> in the realm of ceramics, as in government and religion, the hiatus after 900 had the effect of displacing Chinese forms in favor of Japanese. Cut off from supplies of clay and glazing materials from southern China, Japanese pottery fell into decline, with kilns abandoned and production reduced. Though Song porcelains reached Japan between the ninth and thirteenth centuries, they did so only in limited amounts, to be used for storage and display, buried in sutra mounds, or cherished as heirlooms (densei, “handed down”) and karamono. The wares remained too uncommon and expensive to persuade the elite to adopt them as tableware. but by the time sizable porcelain imports resumed in the early Muromachi era (1336– 1573), Jingdezhen had shifted from qingbai to blue-and-white, and Chinese fashion had recast longquan celadons as outdated relics. between the reigns of the Heian and Muromachi, then, in the absence of plentiful Chinese monochrome pottery, the Japanese upper stratum adopted lacquered wood, usually tinted deep black, as their customary tableware. That remained the case until the late eighteenth century, when porcelain finally secured a dominant place on dining tables.<sup>41</sup> in short, if Chinese potters aimed to capture a share of the Japanese market in the Muromachi era, they would have to produce a ware that appealed to the distinctive taste of the Japanese. Their answer was the teabowl. ## THE CUlTUrE oF PorCElAin in JAPAn Tea first came to Japan in the early ninth century, introduced by the buddhist monk Eichu, who had spent decades in China around the same time lu yu was writing The Classic of Tea. As with other aspects of Chinese culture, Emperor Saga became passionate about the beverage; he ordered tea bushes planted in the provinces and within the precincts of his palace. Although tea won many converts thereafter, Sugawara no Michizane (845–903), the great statesman and scholar-poet, suggested that whatever its alleged health benefits, it could not allay personal distress: “When one’s heart is choked with grief and his innards knotted with anguish, not even a cup of tea will bring relief.”<sup>42</sup> Perhaps it caused Michizane anguish to end official embassies to China in 894, seven years before the powerful Fujiwara clan defeated him in a power struggle. Exiled to faraway Kyushu, he wrote Chinese-style poems and drank bitter tea in his final wretched years. His vengeful spirit is said to have caused epidemics, bizarre weather, and the death of princes. To appease the wraith of Michizane, the Fujiwara in 947 built a shrine to him as the guardian deity of learning at Kitano, a pine forest north of Kyoto, which became a major pilgrimage site and eventually the setting for a remarkable tea fête convened by Hideyoshi. As with other things Chinese, however, Japanese interest in tea declined in the three hundred years after Michizane, though buddhist shrines, temples, and monasteries kept tea drinking alive. Along with a new focus on Zen principles, buddhist monks returning home from China in the Kamakura period brought greater interest in secular Chinese customs than had earlier religious pilgrims, especially in calligraphy, garden design, and tea culture. in the arts, Zen valued spontaneity, irregularity, and the natural, precisely those aspects of Korean pottery that the Japanese most admired. Zen monks brought back quantities of teabowls produced by kilns in Zheijiang and Fujian. Known as temmoku—after Mount Tianmu in Zhejiang, a setting with many Zen temples— the wares had a glossy black glaze with orange-brown streaks (or hare’s fur decoration). The Huizong emperor, whom Kamakura and Muromachi dynasts regarded as a model ruler, had favored the somber teabowls, and Chinese traders shipped them in large quantities to Japan in the late Kamukura.<sup>43</sup> As excavations reveal, the trading junk that sank off Korea on its way to Japan in 1323 carried lots of temmoku. yosai, the buddhist monk credited with reintroducing the tea plant to Japan in 1191, declared in his Record of Curing Disease with Tea that “in Japan we do not drink tea.”<sup>44</sup> Under his influence, and with the decisive support of the imperial court, that quickly changed: tea culture took off as never before, even becoming the focus of renewed enthusiasm for Chinese things. For a while, chawan, the Chinese term for “teabowl,” designated Chinese pottery in general.<sup>45</sup> The Southern Song technique of stewing tea leaves in a pot never caught on, however. Japanese tea preparation remained essentially the same as that developed during the Tang: the host put powdered tea into a heated cauldron filled with water, after which he scooped the liquid into a bowl, beat it with a bamboo whisk into a green lather, and served it to guests. Much more time-consuming than stewing and calling for about thirty utensils, the Tang technique became the centerpiece of chanoyu (lit., “hot water for tea”), the highly structured social and spiritual ceremony that emerged between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. At the end of the Kamakura, a prominent politician wrote that “the popularity of karamono and tea grows ever greater” among propertied ranks.<sup>46</sup> led by the military aristocracy, tea judging (tocha) sessions grew in popularity, often accompanied by gambling and drinking of rice wine (sake). Showy guest halls (kaisho), detached from the rest of the home, became the setting for flower viewings, poetry recitations, and incense competitions (in which participants identified various fragrances). They also served as venues for presentation of Chinese objects in an ostentatious decorative style that mandated use of ornamental lacquer screens, a triptych of scroll paintings, porcelain flower vases on stands, and bronze incense burners set on embroidered brocade. Under the Ashikaga shoguns (1336–1573) of the Muromachi period, tea gatherings shifted to special chambers (shoin) outfitted by daimyo (and their Zen advisers) with asymmetrical shelves, a decorative platform, an alcove, a built-in desk, and woven rush floor matting, or tatami. like the guest halls, the shoin also functioned as a backdrop for exhibition of karamono, treasures shown off by the host while attendants served tea to guests. in time, the shoin became the basis for the main room of traditional Japanese residential architecture.<sup>47</sup> in an attempt to appropriate the prestige of the emperor, Ashikaga shoguns collected Chinese art, validating their political ascendancy by acting as stewards of culture. recently raised to supreme authority and sensitive to imputations of social inferiority from aristocrats with more illustrious pedigrees, the Ashikaga also used their Chinese connections and artworks to assert their authority over daimyo. Ashikaga yoshimitsu (r. 1368–94) styled himself “King of Japan” in dispatches to the Chinese emperor, designated his gifts to the Chinese court “tribute,” and, to some scandal, accepted status as a vassal of the Middle Kingdom. He promoted trade with China, which provided revenue to pay for his cultural largesse. He sponsored noh drama, poetry competitions, and neo-Confucian doctrine, and he probably ordered Japanese kilns to turn out imitations of Song celadons. He built the Temple of the Golden Pavilion (Kinkakuji), the most famous Japanese structure, in the outskirts of northern Kyoto. Eclectically combining styles from imperial and temple architecture, the building epitomizes yoshimitsu’s strategy of using his position as supreme champion of arts and culture to enhance his political power.<sup>48</sup> Ashikaga yoshinori (r. 1429–41) owned portraits of legendary Zhejiang monks, a thirteenth-century depiction of Avalokitesvara, and numerous other Chinese paintings. He put his Chinese possessions—porcelain vases, incense burners, writing utensils, calligraphic scrolls, and candleholders—on display when buddhist and literati dignitaries came to visit from the continent, and, adhering to Chinese etiquette, his courtiers provided chairs when tea was served. When Emperor Go-Hanazono (1419–70) paid yoshinori the honor of visiting the guest hall at his Muromachi villa in 1437, the shogun set out more than a thousand items for viewing, including Landscapes in the Four Seasons, a paper-screen painting by the Huizong emperor. Certifying the authenticity and arranging the exhibition of such collections became a matter of professional expertise, giving rise to a class of art curators known as doboshu (companions). by the early fifteenth century, they also served as arbiters for shoguns and daimyo on the proper forms of the tea ceremony. Ashikaga yoshimasa (1436–90), the eighth shogun of his line, is renowned for his patronage of the arts, especially for building the Temple of the Silver Pavilion (Ginkakuji) at Higashiyama, a hilly retreat in Kyoto. He also is notorious for his political ineptitude and effective abdication of power. “The daimyo do as they please and do not follow orders,” he moaned. “That means there can be no government.”<sup>49</sup> during yoshimasa’s reign, 1449 to 1473, Japan plunged into the onin War (1467– 77), and the shogun, out of hopelessness or heartlessness, turned from anxiety about political stability to exclusively artistic diversions. The term chanoyu first appears soon after he took the title of shogun, and although his own taste in the tea ceremony generally remained old-fashioned, he employed Murata Shuko (1423– 1502), a tea master (chajin) who encouraged turning the ceremony into a more restrained affair, purging it of the raucous conduct of the early Muromachi, such as gambling and sake drinking, as well as banishing shows of sumptuous karamono. Cultural glamour increasingly took on reserved tones. Under Shuko’s tutelage, servants vanished from the tea ceremony, which instead came to focus on the host himself displaying civility and skill in personally catering to select guests away from the madding crowd. The increasingly ritualistic drinking of the beverage moved from elaborate shoin to secluded tea rooms; the one built at the Silver Pavilion provided the standard layout that evolved into the distinctive tea hut of the sixteenth century. Preparing and sharing tea shifted to the tatami, for “etiquette on the mats” displaced use of the chair, one of the Chinese fashions introduced during the Kamakura period.<sup>50</sup> Although yoshimasa admired elegant Chinese pottery, and even sent his favorite celadon vessel to China to be repaired when it broke, he nonetheless heeded tea preceptors who directed him toward the ideals of the Way of Tea (chado), an approach to the ceremony that called for modest, plain wares and cultivation of an ethos of restraint and self-possession. despite squandering funds on luxurious trappings, the shogun cultivated a reputation for ascetic taste. The new tea style had some of the appeal of monochrome ink painting in that it conveyed an aura of impoverished beauty, an intimation of the wistful notes of autumn, an aesthetics of the “cold and withered” (hiekareru), as practitioners called it.<sup>51</sup> Heavily influenced by Zen buddhism, the Way of Tea accentuated what became known as wabi-chanoyu, or wabicha for short (roughly, “austere tea”), a ceremonial mode characterized by lack of formality, affectation, and opulence. it embodied a spirit of detachment from the standards and responsibilities of conventional, everyday life, even a tacit critique of them. in the realm of elite taste, the rise of wabicha points to the same shift in values that took place in Korea almost a century earlier as reflected in the rejection of ornate celadons in favor of simple white porcelains and rustic punch’ong. Takeno Joo (1502–55), a tea master who carried forward the style endorsed by Shuko in yoshimasa’s circle, went so far as to seek out crude teabowls owned by common villagers for use in wabicha. Chanoyu not only assumed a central position in elite social life, it also entailed employment of certain ceramics. Tea adepts placed astonishing value on specific types of teabowls from kilns in China, Korea, and vietnam. They prized vessels characterized by coarse texture, patchy tonality, glaze drips and crackle, slight malformations, and inadvertent kiln markings. A studied rusticity, a sentimental idolization of country life by urban sophisticates, lay behind appreciation of such works. indeed, the fashion bears a resemblance to the romantic cult of nature and folk culture that beguiled the intelligentsia of late-eighteenth-century Europe. The kind of botched wares that flea market hustlers sold at cut-rate prices in Jingdezhen became treasures beyond compare in Japan. Merchants imported Jingdezhen blue-and-white porcelains to Japan from the fifteenth century, and tea practitioners often used them in the meal that came before the serving of tea; small water jars designed to look like wooden buckets were a popular item. but the only blue-and-white teabowls employed in the all-important tea ceremony itself were “old blue-and-white” (ko-sometsuke), a term coined in the nineteenth century. They typically bore unsophisticated decorations of bamboo clusters, rustic monks, and rough-hewn fishermen. Tea masters particularly fancied “worm-eaten” or “insect-nibbled” (mushikui) old blue-and-white, that is, pieces with glaze flaking away from the rim.<sup>52</sup> A late-seventeenth-century work instructed the naive practitioner on the proper, refined perspective: “Utensils used in the small tea room need not be entirely perfect. There are people who dislike even slightly damaged objects. This, however, is merely indicative of thinking that has not attained true understanding.”<sup>53</sup> in turning out ko-sometsuke and temmoku teabowls, Chinese potters faced the problematic task of mass-producing an emphatically idiosyncratic ware. For the Japanese enthusiast, every porcelain vessel in the tea ceremony had to be unique in the particulars of its shortcomings. The flaws of a bowl endowed it with an inimitable personality and thus with warrant for conferring a given name. Sen no rikyu (1522–91), the most celebrated and influential tea master in Japanese history—in the late seventeenth century, his ideological heirs proclaimed him the guardian deity of tea—collaborated with raku Chojiro (1516–92), a tile maker and perhaps the son of a Korean immigrant, in the design of teabowls. A famous one, with a warped rim, pockmarked black glaze, and repairs with black lacquer, received the sobriquet Otogoze, an allusion to a woman with homely features. rikyu possessed a number of notable teabowls that he variously christened “old Eggplant,” “Snipe,” “bursting bag,” and “Swelled bottom”; his colleagues dubbed other famous tea utensils “Turnip,” “Hag’s Mouth,” “Flat Spider,” and “Potato Head.” in his quest for an ideal tea ceremony, rikyu doggedly sought out imperfection, cultivating a sense of surprise as well as freedom from orthodoxy and hierarchy. He once created a minor sensation by displaying a flower without a porcelain vase in a tea hut, and he reportedly marred a porcelain teabowl that had too elegant a profile.<sup>54</sup> ## PorCElAin, PoliTiCS, And THE JAPAnESE TEA CErEMony Westerners found it hard to believe that the Japanese placed enormous value on blemished porcelain bowls and other mundane tea gear. The Portuguese Jesuit luis de Almeida (1525–83) struck that note in the first European description of a tea ceremony: The way of drinking this [beverage] is to pour half a nutful of this powdered herb into a porcelain dish and then drink it mixed with very hot water. And for this purpose they have very old iron kettles, some porcelain dishes, a small receptacle into which they pour the water with which they rinse the porcelain dishes, and a small tripod on which they place the lid of the iron kettle. . . . The vessels into which they pour the cha powder, the spoon with which they pour it, the dipper with which they transfer the hot water from the kettle—all these utensils are regarded as the jewels of Japan, much in the same way as we value rings, gems, and necklaces made of many costly rubies and diamonds.<sup>55</sup> That estimation also baffled Fra Alessandro valignano (1539–1606), the visitor, or inspector-general, of the Jesuit mission in the indies: Quite often one of these vessels, tripods, bowls or caddies will fetch three, four or six thousand ducats and even more, although to our eyes they appear completely worthless. The king of bungo [the daimyo otomo yoshishige of Kyushu, 1530–87] once showed me a small earthenware caddy for which, in all truth, we would have no other use than to put it in a bird’s cage as a drinking-trough; nevertheless, he had paid 9,000 taels (or about 14,000 ducats) for it, although i would certainly not have given two farthings for it.<sup>56</sup> rodrigues observes that it is in keeping with the “naturally melancholy disposition” of the Japanese that “there are utensils, albeit of earthenware, that come to be worth ten, twenty, or thirty thousand crowns or even more; this is something that will appear as madness and barbarity to other nations that hear of it.”<sup>57</sup> never before or since have humble objects played such a commanding role in conspicuous consumption. Even the Chinese silk brocade bags and boxes of paulow nia wood used to protect the bowls had a place in the elaborate aesthetics of the tea ceremony, thereby becoming cherished and expensive objects in their own right. rodrigues, however, went beyond the puzzlement of his Jesuit colleagues by recognizing that the apparent absurdity of the costly equipment made sense if seen from the perspective of competition for social esteem: “For what was bought and sold in such transactions was the artistic taste of both parties and not the item itself.”<sup>58</sup> one of the most remarkable transactions involved ruinously expensive tea caddies that rodrigues describes as possessing “the special property of preserving the cha leaf from one year to another with such constancy that it always seems to be as fresh, even at the end of the year, as when it was poured in.”<sup>59</sup> The brewed tea would be regarded as unpalatable if workers improperly handled the leaf or powdered tea, thereby ruining the spiritual harmony of the tea gathering along with the reputation of the host. At the most extreme, this meant that officials prohibited peasants who harvested tea leaves destined for the imperial court from eating fish for weeks ahead of time so that their breath would not pollute the tender plant. Called “luzon jars” (rusontsubo) by the Japanese, the most sought-after tea caddies were stoneware imported from Manila, where some fifteen thousand Japanese lived in the early seventeenth century. According to Francesco Carletti, the stoneware actually came from vietnam, Cambodia, and Thailand—a nice indication of the extent to which tea culture and ceramics linked Japan to the wider Asian commercial world. The Florentine merchant reports that officials boarded foreign ships in nagasaki to search for the stoneware jars inasmuch as Hideyoshi aimed at monopolizing them, to the extent of threatening execution for anyone not handing them over. The Japanese elite, Carletti remarks, possess “an infinite number of these vases, which they regard as their principal treasure, esteeming them more than anything else of value. And out of vainglory and for grandeur they make a contest of who possesses the largest quantity of them, displaying them to one another with the greatest satisfaction.”<sup>60</sup> rodrigues devoted twenty thousand words of his account of Japan to the social and spiritual significance of the tea ceremony. its contradictions fascinated him— its retreat from the world and its use for political promotion, its function as a venue for solitary meditation and for camaraderie, its posture of material indifference combined with barefaced avarice in acquiring rare utensils. Above all, he highlighted the paradox that the ceremony purportedly embodied an ethos of temperance and poverty, yet it necessitated precious tea paraphernalia and furniture, Chinese ink paintings and ancient porcelain vessels, banquets of crane and the choicest fish, silk robes as bribes for cultivators providing the finest cha, and pretentiously humble tea huts made of rough cedar, wattle, and thatch, constructed by high-paid carpenters and expensively landscaped to appear entirely natural. “So this poverty is really very rich and wealthy . . . ,” he concludes. “indeed, it is so rich that it is beyond poor people, and it is so poor that even the rich and mighty can keep it up only with difficulty.”<sup>61</sup> rodrigues believed that the culminating elaboration of the tea ceremony as a rich man’s “imitation of poverty” stemmed from chanoyu being taken up by powerful merchants of the city of Sakai. located on osaka bay, fifty kilometers south of Kyoto and facing the eastern shore of the inland Sea, Sakai emerged as a political and economic force during the Sengoku period (“the age of Warring States”), which spanned from the outbreak of the onin War in 1467 to oda nobunaga’s consolidation of military authority in 1568. like a handful of other cities, Sakai gained independence similar to that enjoyed by the ports of the Hansa on the baltic and north Seas and by the thirty-odd German imperial Free Cities (Reichsfreistädte) in the late medieval period. building on wealth from textile, iron, and lacquer production, Sakai emerged as an international entrepôt when yoshimasa designated it in 1469 as the base for tribute embassies to the Ming court. That transformed the city into the most important Japanese gateway for Chinese cash and karamono. According to luis Frois (1532– 97), a Jesuit who lived there for several years, “no other place apart from Kyoto is as important as the city of Sakai. The venice of Japan, it is not only large, wealthy, and full of commerce, but it is also like a central market for all the other provinces, and people of different regions are continually flocking there.”<sup>62</sup> Allied with local buddhist temples and daimyo, for whom it collected rents and acted as a financial broker, Sakai manufactured and imported munitions, indispensable commodities in the violent Sengoku period, especially after nobunaga and Hideyoshi introduced gunpowder firearms to the battlefield. rich and enterprising, Sakai rivaled Kyoto in its patronage of poets, painters, noh drama, and temple construction. As rodrigues spells out, the conditions of their urban environment compelled the merchants of Sakai to develop a more restrained version of the tea ceremony. They shied away from Ashikaga-style guest halls and fancy shoin in favor of tea huts that accommodated only two tatami mats (3.3 square meters, adequate sitting room for about three persons). They made up for the absence of “lonely and refreshing places” in the hot, sandy plain outside Sakai by investing large sums in constructing rustic-style hermitages, often with arbors, springs, and rock gardens, in the congested city itself.<sup>63</sup> The tea huts provided locations, not otherwise available, for merchants to convene for frequent rounds of urbane conviviality. rodrigues explains that in order that “the furnishings might be in keeping with the smaller hut, they did away with many of the utensils and items required by chanoyu.” Although still very expensive, this reserved approach brought the tea ceremony within financial reach of a broader privileged clientele and closer to the sober, luxury-spurning ideals of Zen. The new style was adopted by well-to-do merchants in Kyoto, nara, and Hakata (in Kyushu), as well as by numerous daimyo throughout the realm. However sincerely Sakai’s merchant oligarchs espoused the tea ceremony, they also employed it to put themselves on a more secure social footing with daimyo, imperial courtiers, and buddhist abbots. in principle, rigorous egalitarianism distinguished the tea ceremony, so it constituted a ritual space in which merchants could gather with their social superiors on terms of formal leveling.<sup>64</sup> Still, their status as commoners obliged Sakai’s prominent entrepreneurs to be discreet. They steered clear of lavish exhibitions and the hiring of doboshu curators to oversee their karamono collections. Experts on the tea ceremony and Chinese objects perforce came from within their own ranks. Murata Shuko, founder of the wabicha style of tea, came from a merchant family in Sakai, as did Takeno Joo, who sold lacqueredleather armor to samurai warriors. Sen no rikyu, the most exalted tea master of all, enjoyed financial independence as a member of a wealthy Sakai clan of fish wholesalers. He also sometimes dealt in munitions: nobunaga once sent him a thankyou note for supplying one thousand musket balls. nobunaga gained control of Sakai in 1569 with the support of imai Sokyu (1520– 93), a manufacturer of armaments and a distinguished tea master. From having only a passing interest in the tea ceremony, the warlord converted to enthusiasm for it virtually overnight, making a show of attending tea gatherings with leading merchants. He bullied the governing tea men of Sakai into surrendering treasured stoneware caddies. He bestowed famed tea utensils on his chief lieutenants; he gave his general Hideyoshi a dozen pieces as a reward after a crucial, hard-fought campaign. nobunaga even reserved to himself the right to determine whether military aristocrats could hold formal tea ceremonies and acquire valuable tea equipment.<sup>65</sup> After he came to power, Hideyoshi emphasized the significance of tea culture for both himself and his predecessor: “The tea ceremony was [nobunaga’s] Way of Politics. He gave me permission to perform the tea ceremony, and i was most honored. i will never forget it.”<sup>66</sup> The practice of awarding porcelains to followers and designating who could take part in tea ceremonies expressed and reinforced hierarchical relations. nobunaga thus integrated tea culture into his conception of the Way of Politics, a violation of the cocoon of spirituality and fellowship that ostensibly exemplified the tea ceremony. Since the fourteenth century, chanoyu had developed into the epitome of aesthetic discrimination, the ideal incarnation of the “cold and withered,” while also becoming a key social rite of privileged ranks, an elite vehicle of communication and sociability. in the late sixteenth century, however, chanoyu effectively became a casualty of its astounding success as warlord-unifiers struggled to bring an end to the turbulent Sengoku era. in the eyes of nobunaga (and his successors, Hideyoshi and Tokugawa ieyasu), the Way of Tea had become too significant to be allowed even nominally to withdraw into its own sheltered enclave and to stand for a counterculture isolated from and implicitly critical of the Way of Politics. in addition, extending control over wabicha proved expedient for nobunaga since it demonstrated to political and mercantile leaders—at least from his perspective—that decorum and sophistication graced his mandate to rule. He followed the tradition established by powerful rulers from the Asuka to the Muromachi of using symbolic conduct and cultural distinction to shore up political dominance.<sup>67</sup> Significantly, nobunaga took rikyu into his entourage soon after he negotiated Sakai’s capitulation. The tea master advised nobunaga in his hunt for famous tea utensils (meibutsu, “pieces of renown”) held by daimyo and the last of the impotent Ashikaga shoguns.<sup>68</sup> When nobunaga died by assassination in 1582, Hideyoshi proved even more zealous than his predecessor regarding matters of tea. As Japan’s most powerful warlord, he laid claim to nobunaga’s outstanding collection of tea implements, and he retained the services of rikyu, who became a close political adviser, using wabicha ceremonies as venues to reconcile powerful daimyo, such as otomo yoshishige, to the ruler’s policy of national unification. in 1585 rikyu assisted Hideyoshi in serving tea to Emperor ogimachi (r. 1560– 86) in Kyoto. The event coincided with Hideyoshi’s accession to the office of imperial regent (Kampaku) and marked rikyu’s designation as “Tea Master of Japan” (tenka gosado). of course, Hideyoshi never contemplated performing the unprecedented ceremony in a wattle-daubed tea hut erected on the grounds of the imperial palace. instead, he held it in a gold-plated tea room with a luxurious brocaded carpet on the floor, a portable apparatus he subsequently took with him on military campaigns; the emperor, regent, and tea master sipped frothy tea from solid gold teabowls.<sup>69</sup> There is no indication that these opulent circumstances offended rikyu’s aesthetic sensibility. Two years later, in the most spectacular demonstration of tea culture of the era, Hideyoshi, once again seconded by rikyu, put on a tea party in the Kitano pine forest of Kyoto, at the pilgrimage shrine dedicated to Michizane. Hideyoshi invited all well-known tea practitioners to attend, even poor men, and he prohibited those who failed to show up to engage in chanoyu thereafter. Participants built hundreds of tea stalls, and Hideyoshi shared tea with countless guests; he set out his gold-plated tea room and famous utensils for them to gawk at. With his status as autocrat of tea culture and unifier of the realm—the one corroborating the other—unreservedly conceded in the public festival, Hideyoshi brusquely dismissed the assembly days ahead of time.<sup>70</sup> Four years later, to the shock of everyone, Hideyoshi ordered rikyu to commit suicide by disembowelment, or seppuku. in 1591, at the age of sixty-nine, in a Kyoto house surrounded by a regiment of guards, the Tea Master of Japan took his own life. His death poem intimates that his fate recapitulated that of an earlier defeated statesman and that his reputation eventually would reach similar godlike heights as a consequence of his pitiful end: That fellow rikyu, What great good fortune: To think that he will turn out to be A second Michizane!<sup>71</sup> rikyu’s suicide remains the murkiest event in the history of chanoyu. it most likely stemmed from the disquiet of Hideyoshi at rikyu exercising an authority in the Way of Tea superior to his in the Way of Politics, an incongruity that contravened the ruler’s drive for supremacy in all spheres. According to a contemporary chronicler, rikyu’s eminence endowed him with unchecked aesthetic sway: “in [tea] objects he liked, [rikyu] declared good points bad and bought them for mean prices. in vessels he disdained, [rikyu] declared bad points good and bought them at high prices. He called new old and old new. no he made yes, false he made genuine.”<sup>72</sup> The calculated eccentricity of tea culture introduced disturbing notes of capriciousness and contradiction into public affairs, a situation intolerable to Hideyoshi, a notoriously prickly and haughty ruler. As rodrigues recognized, the art of tea hinged on ineffable “artistic taste,” not on the intrinsic value of homely porcelain bowls. Tea culture fostered a cultlike exclusivity, informed by secret teachings (mitsuden) and oral traditions (kuden) known only to the elite, dependent on a mentality that had attained “true understanding.”<sup>73</sup> nothing like wabicha existed in China, where tea culture remained a subsidiary feature of literati connoisseurship, drinking tea lacked egalitarian connotations, the Confucian literati and imperial court set aesthetic standards, merchants aped the taste of their social superiors, and nobody conferred transcendent value on mottled porcelains. in Japan, however, the radical aesthetics of Zen, through its manifestation in the Way of Tea, posed a challenge to the existing order, uniting the tea ceremony—one of the most extraordinary subcultures in world history—with notions of social leveling, spiritual reformation, and exemplary austerity. A vital expression of elite culture, chanoyu nonetheless endorsed principles subversive of authority and hierarchy. As such, it could not be allowed to stand. oda nobunaga and his successors successfully domesticated the tea ceremony, marginalizing its troubling aspects and placing its performance under official scrutiny. With rikyu’s suicide as an object lesson, urban tea men surrendered their lead to the warrior elite. Furata oribe (1544–1615), a samurai in origin and heir apparent to rikyu, emerged as the most talented and influential tea master serving Tokugawa ieyasu, the first shogun of the Tokugawa dynasty of the Edo period (1615– 1868). He made oribe a daimyo, situating the tea ceremony firmly within the social milieu of the provincial aristocracy. This made the ceremony more appealing to imperial courtiers, who until then had shown slight interest in it, perhaps because merchant commoners so thoroughly dominated tea culture. oribe instructed his fellow daimyo in chanoyu, worked closely with daimyo-sponsored kilns, and produced tea wares attractive to courtiers; he organized tea gatherings that separated participants by social status and provided room for daimyo to bring their samurai retainers.<sup>74</sup> Endlessly inventive in designing pottery, a champion of both rikyu-style flawed tea wares and elegant porcelains with dazzling glaze, oribe, like rikyu, proved too eccentric and forceful a tea master for his authoritarian master. ieyasu ordered him to commit seppuku, apparently because the shogun regarded oribe as a “defiler of treasures,” given to cutting up valuable Chinese calligraphic scrolls to fit his tea hut and breaking shapely porcelains so that he could glue them back together to suit his ideal of imperfection.<sup>75</sup> The fates of rikyu and oribe reflected the constraints of Japanese public order in the closing stages of the age of Warring States. They also marked the point at which the tea ceremony, shorn of subversive elements, entered the mainstream of Japanese popular culture. it gained considerably in popularity under the Tokugawa, though as a diverting pastime, comparable to calligraphic expertise and competitive incense sniffing, rather than as an expression of Zen mysticism or as a vehicle for a radical social message. it took its place alongside Kabuki drama, puppet theater, and other leisure pursuits of the middling classes in the emerging urban pleasure quarters, the well-known “floating worlds” (ukiyoe) of the Edo period.<sup>76</sup> no tea master after rikyu and oribe served in such a high capacity or with such official approbation. in Edo Castle, headquarters of the Tokugawa, in-house functionaries supervised the tea ceremony after oribe’s suicide; by the mid-seventeenth century, they occupied a respected niche in government administration. They also looked after the shogun’s porcelain collection, which included over one thousand blue-and-white bowls. Among other responsibilities, they organized the annual procession of hundreds of peasants bearing stoneware caddies to Edo Castle, a ritual that obliged onlookers to bow deeply as the tea jars passed by. For the wider society being introduced to tea, printed manuals spelled out instruction on all phases of the ceremony in stultifying detail. A strict code of etiquette stipulated proper demeanor between social groups, as when a manual instructed a low-echelon tea novice that if an aristocrat “urges you to join him, you must sit cross-legged on the bench [in the arbor near the tea hut] without letting your legs dangle in front of him.”<sup>77</sup> national unification and formation of the Tokugawa regime witnessed the comeback of the imperial court as a center of culture after two centuries of relative obscurity. once again it became an arbiter of taste, especially in the fields of landscape gardening, flower arranging, architecture, and chanoyu. Extravagant accouterments returned to favor in the tea ceremony. As the latter won imperial patronage and reached a larger urban audience, manufacture of Japanese porcelain, made possible by the innovations of kidnapped Koreans, increased in response to demand for fine wares. Kilns near Arita in Kyushu began turning out blue-and-white porcelains around 1620, often with motifs quite different from those on Jingdezhen wares, including spacious, abstract designs strikingly modern in appearance.<sup>78</sup> At the same time, Chinese culture retained its high reputation, so decoration in Chinese-style brushwork and with traditional Chinese motifs, such as mandarins at repose in a pavilion set in idealized natural surroundings, remained popular. (See figure 18.) Under the impact of court and middling-class taste, the color range of pottery expanded several decades later, with decoration in translucent, jewel-like enamels on the white porcelain surface, sometimes drawn from patterns on noh costumes. Potters also took motifs from Chinese manuals, such as the Illustrated Compendium of Eight Styles, printed in Anhui province around 1616 and widely used in Japan. The nabeshima kilns took the lead in making the novel enameled vessels. Kakiemon, a much-admired pottery produced by several Arita kilns, commonly displayed the bright orange-red shade characteristic of the persimmon (kaki). A wider palette of enamels, including vivid shades of gold, turquoise, cobalt blue, and iron red, appeared on imari pottery, named after a port near Arita from which the voC shipped the wares. Jingdezhen took advantage of the growing Japanese market in the early seventeenth century. Since the Tokugawa regime cut off most trade with Europeans in 1639 as part of its policy of stamping out Christianity, the voC served as commercial middleman from its base at deshima, a dreary, cramped island in nagasaki harbor, not much more than a mudflat, where authorities confined the dutch merchants. For its part, Jingdezhen aggressively expanded overseas markets because of disruptions in demand at home. it had to find new customers, in part because the court halted its huge orders when the Wanli emperor died in 1620. Some 25 percent of Chinese ceramic exports went to Japan in the early decades of the seventeenth century; the voC delivered 800,000 porcelains in both 1635 and 1637. but the struggle between the Ming and Manchu brought the marketing surge to a halt, cutting Jingdezhen’s exports in half. Even after the Qing dynasty came to power in 1644, warfare and rebellion plagued Jiangxi province, destroying Jingdezhen kilns in the late seventeenth century. in response, seeking alternative supplies, the voC turned to Japan. dutch merchants placed their first large order with Kyushu kilns in 1658, and they sent almost one million Japanese pieces abroad in subsequent years. loads of wares went to kingdoms in continental Southeast Asia, with the result that beer mugs originally made in Japan for the dutch market ended up gracing the tables of Thai aristocrats and buddhist abbots. Many Japanese porcelains carried a forged Chinese reign mark on the bottom since customers in Europe regarded it as a guarantee of quality.<sup>79</sup> (See figure 19.) Japanese porcelain, the tardy offspring of Chinese and Korean traditions, barely two generations old, seemed on the verge of winning dominance over Jingdezhen in the first new marketplace to open up for Chinese ceramics in almost a thousand years. dutch troubles at home played a role in preventing that from happening.<sup>80</sup> The United Provinces fought wars with England in 1665–66 and 1672–74, while war with France in 1672–78 resulted in French troops overrunning much of the republic’s territory, halted only by the expedient of breaching the dikes and flooding the approaches to Amsterdam. by the time the dutch recovered from this disaster, Chinese pottery production was rebounding as well. in 1683 the Kangxi emperor ordered Jingdezhen’s kilns rebuilt, and when production came back on line, the volume and expertise of Jingdezhen eventually demolished the Japanese competition. overseas trade revived, with more than nine thousand Chinese merchants on board 193 Chinese ships going to Japan in a single year. Japanese competition also faced obstacles in the Tokugawa regime itself inasmuch as it adhered to a strict version of neo-Confucianism that drove it to discount commercial profit as a revenue source and instead rely on agrarian taxation. in addition, the Tokugawa adhered to the mercantilist view that export of precious metal harmed the economy; but whereas Western nations generally tried to boost stocks of specie by expanding commercial exchange, Japan disdained foreign trade and focused exclusively on product innovation to eliminate the need for spending silver on imported merchandise. Shoguns could enforce such a policy inasmuch as they held a virtual monopoly over the country’s silver mines. <sup>81</sup> As a consequence of dutch commercial setbacks, Tokugawa policy, and Jingdezhen initiative, Chinese pottery in Japan in the early eighteenth century cost a quarter the price of Japanese wares. Jingdezhen’s finest blue-and-white became popular in the tea ceremony since “insect-nibbled” wares held scant charm for most new practitioners. The porcelain city also cut into the Japanese export market by expertly imitating colorful Kakiemon and imari vessels for Europeans. not only that, Jingdezhen copied Japanese copies of dutch blue-and-white earthenware— which themselves copied Chinese blue-and-white from the Wanli era—and sold them to the voC for its Western customers. Faced with this onslaught, Japanese kilns fell into decline, and many folded by 1720, including those producing Kakiemon wares.<sup>82</sup> Clearly, Jingdezhen’s centuries of experience dealing with large overseas markets could not be gainsaid. in the long run, however, Western competition turned out to be far deadlier than that from Japan. Harbingers of the threat first loomed in the early eighteenth century, as Chinese and Japanese porcelains reached Europe in unprecedented amounts, and European entrepreneurs scrambled to cash in on the rage for Asian ceramics. dutch enamelers in delft converted Chinese blue-andwhite into pseudo-Japanese wares by “overdecorating” them with their own versions of Chinese and Japanese designs in red and gold enamels, then firing them at low temperatures. They took their motifs from embellishments on Chinese blueand-white, Kakiemon, and imari, as well as from travel books such as nieuhoff ’s Embassy from the East India Company.<sup>83</sup> Another serious omen for Jingdezhen emerged at the Meissen manufactory, the trendsetter in the early days of European porcelain. by turning out table services imitating Kakiemon and imari, ornamented with Chinese dragons in red and gold, Japanese tigers dappled in black and yellow, and indian flowers in glowing shades, the potters of August ii appealed to affluent customers who wanted colorful pottery in fashionable Asian styles. both delft and Meissen produced a truly hybrid cultural commodity, an amalgamation of Chinese pottery, Japanese enamel colors, and European chinoiserie ornament, the creation of an ecumenical style, the end result of bringing together motifs, patterns, and shades from around the world. (See figure 20.) Jingdezhen manufacturers knew about the European innovations because merchants of the voC and the EiC, extending the round robin of Eurasian cultural exchange, sent commissions to the porcelain city to copy the Japanese-style wares of delft and Meissen. inasmuch as Jingdezhen lacked central direction, however, there was no way its many kiln owners could perceive, much less respond to, the threat implicit in the ingenious European replications. in any event, Jingdezhen had succeeded since time immemorial in overpowering all competition by its capacity to produce high-quality copies in volume, so there was no reason to think that Western rivalry would be any more troublesome than that already encountered from the Japanese. by the end of the eighteenth century, however, Wedgwood and his Staffordshire colleagues would show that was not the case. ## “EArTHS riGHT For PoTS And CErAMiCS”: viETnAM And CHinA Archaeologists in recent years have investigated a number of fourteenth- and fifteenth-century shipwrecks in the waters of Southeast Asia, a minute sample of the countless vessels that came to grief there during that time.<sup>84</sup> Excavation of the Pandanan wreck near Palawan island, a 400-kilometer sliver of land stretching southwest between Mindoro island in the Philippines and the great island of borneo, yielded more than 5,000 Chinese and vietnamese ceramics. A Chinese ship, the Turiang, sank 160 kilometers off the Malaysian coast, perhaps as a result of being top-heavy with a sizable cargo of Thai pottery, supplemented with wares from China and vietnam. The Hoi An wreck, a Thai ship found by fishermen off central vietnam, went down with some 250,000 pieces of pottery, mostly from kilns in the Hong river delta, including cobalt-decorated stoneware and a large number of kendi jars. A Chinese junk, discovered in the waters south of Mindoro, may have been delivering an order commissioned by a wealthy aristocrat: its cargo included 5,000 ceramics, mainly Jingdezhen blue-and-white but also pottery from vietnam and Thailand, along with bronze cannons, copper basins, writing boxes, lacquerware furniture, and elephant tusks. An indonesian wreck discovered beneath the Java Sea carried around 100,000 pieces of pottery from Fujian, as well as Jingdezhen qingbai, Thai kendi, bronze weights, and 190 tons of iron bars. besides their pottery cargoes and regrettable fates, the ships had other things in common. They all sank on the way to ports in continental and maritime Southeast Asia, locations where merchants found the best customers for relatively unsophisticated jars and plates. They all carried pottery from different regions of East Asia, evidence of the cosmopolitan nature of the trade by the fourteenth century. The Chinese, vietnamese, and Thai wares are similar in shape and decoration, suggesting a common pool of knowledge about markets thousands of kilometers apart, probably as a consequence of clients in the Philippines and indonesia ordering desired pottery by sending drawings and wooden models to various kiln centers. A few of the vietnamese teabowls and Thai stoneware caddies on the wrecked ships might have ended up in Japan, imported from the Philippines to share shelf space with Jingdezhen ko-sometsuke, Zhejiang temmoku, and Korean punch’ong in the collections of merchants and daimyo. on the other hand, some of the best vietnamese blue-and-white may have been manufactured for the Southwest Asian market inasmuch as Arab and Persian merchants living in Thang-long (sixteenthcentury Tonkin, present-day Hanoi) imported cobalt from Persia and commissioned pottery for their homelands, just as their compatriots did in Quanzhou and Canton. The stoneware potters of vietnam so skillfully copied Jingdezhen blue-andwhite that Southwest Asian customers reportedly could not tell the difference. Ceramics of continental Southeast Asia, like those of Korea and Japan, were greatly influenced by China. As vietnam bordered on China, however, its pottery owed a much greater debt to the technology and aesthetic traditions of the Middle Kingdom than did that made in Cambodia and Thailand. According to legend, a Chinese potter came to the Hong river valley in the second century c.e., where he built the first kiln and passed on his skills to the natives. The story may contain a residue of truth, for potters in northern vietnam during the neolithic period did in fact produce wares similar to those made south of the yangzi, an area with close ties, based on common linguistic and ethnic features, to coastal vietnam.<sup>85</sup> both southern China and coastal vietnam are archipelagic in nature, made up of deltas, shallow waters, and inshore islands that the Chinese referred to collectively as “the inner sea” (neihai) in contrast to “the outer sea” (nanhai), that is, the deep reaches of the South China Sea.<sup>86</sup> Hemmed in by hills and linked by river networks, both areas comprise islandlike enclaves oriented to saltwater commerce and linked historically to similar societies in the Archipelago. A different historical trajectory could have led the twin littorals of southern China and vietnam to coalesce into an enduring “blue China,” an independent state shielded from both steppe warrior invasion and beijing domination. From the last centuries before the common era, however, both southern China and northern vietnam became incorporated into the Middle Kingdom. Having extended his rule south of the yangzi, the emperor Qin Shihuang ordered invasion of northern vietnam in 214 b.c.e.<sup>87</sup> After the fall of the Qin dynasty, the Han maintained control there, attracted by valuable products such as coral, tortoiseshell, cinnabar, malachite, and woods of teak and camphor. According to a Tang poet banished to the area, the natural resources of the Chinese protectorate of vietnam, named Annan (the pacified south) by the Tang, included “Forests rich in cassia and juniper; / Earths right for pots and ceramics.”<sup>88</sup> yet though Chinese immigrants built Han-style tombs and buddhist monasteries in the fertile, triangular-shaped plain of the Hong river, Chinese of high rank spurned northern vietnam as a miserable backwoods, a land of droning heat, pestilent vapors, and perfidious peoples. The viet (or yue) ruling class, however, adopted fundamental aspects of Chinese culture, such as ideographic script and Confucian education, and they sought enrollment within the hierarchy of imperial administration. in the tenth century, after the collapse of the Tang dynasty and a millennium of Chinese rule, the viet elite rebelled against foreign domination. Following a period of disorder, the ly dynasty (1009–1225) came to power, establishing the first independent state in the region. it made buddhism a virtual state religion and encouraged expansion of the ceramic industry to serve the construction needs of the new capital of Thang-long, as well as the building of many temples and monasteries. Under the ly and and Tran (1225–1400) dynasties, Annan expressed its Chinese heritage by regarding itself as a Middle Kingdom, spreading the gifts of high civilization to the Champa region of central vietnam (now binh dinh province), a territory of loosely associated communities with close ties to Thailand and Java. The claim bred deep resentment among China’s leaders, who saw the onetime protectorate as fittingly part of their own imperial realm.<sup>89</sup> Chinese culture thus represented a double-edged sword for Annan, giving it confidence in its own identity while simultaneously persuading the yuan and Ming that the region must be brought back under the bona fide Middle Kingdom. Chinese culture continued to hold large sway in elite circles of Annan, not only because of the outlook of viet aristocrats, but also as a consequence of turmoil to the north impelling well-to-do Chinese to seek safety in the Hong river area. When the Southern Song fell to the Mongols, thirty ships filled with refugees escaped to Hanoi, and when Mongol troops invaded Annan in 1284, they discovered more than four hundred senior Song bureaucrats and court officials living there. At least some reminders of home surrounded the exiles, for indigenous potters turned out excellent stoneware facsimiles of Jingdezhen qingbai and longquan celadons. Acknowledging the skill of the potters, Kublai Khan demanded white pottery in trib ute from Annan, along with pearls and rhinoceros horn, and some Chinese potters of the yuan copied Hong valley wares for export to Southeast Asia.<sup>90</sup> in the early Ming period, the yongle emperor ordered armies totaling 215,000 into vietnam, yet another effort to regain the territorial rights held until the fall of the Tang. Although the Mongol invasion lasted only four years, the Ming endeavor persisted for almost a generation, from 1407 to 1427, causing great loss of life, destruction of buddhist temples, and the fall of the buddhist-oriented regime of the Tran. in the end, however, the Ming could not afford the huge expense of occupation, and they found the lines of communication between China and its would-be protectorate too extended for secure control of the country.<sup>91</sup> Within a few years of the death of yongle in 1424, Chinese troops, by order of the xuande emperor, finally withdrew from the unpacified south. They left behind a changed country, for the years of invasion and upheaval represented as great a transition for vietnam as the contemporaneous shift from Koryo to Choson did for Korea. le loi (r. 1428–33) founded the le dynasty (1428–1527), a regime ideologically based on neo-Confucianism, devoted to a Chinese-style bureaucratic government, and focused on imperialist expansion. The superpower of East Asia, China had used gunpowder weapons to defeat vietnamese resistance, but during the decades of Ming occupation, the vietnamese adopted the military technology and turned it against their oppressors. in 1471 they employed firearms to conquer the Champa region to the south, taking a giant step toward rounding out the borders of present-day vietnam. The Cham people had made stoneware for several generations, but after conquest by northern vietnam, pottery imports from there took precedence, and local kilns went out of business. When they resumed again in the early fifteenth century, the Cham kilns produced blue-and-white stoneware, copies of wares from the Hong river that were themselves modeled on Jingdezhen porcelain.<sup>92</sup> Chinese and Muslim merchants imported Jingdezhen blue-and-white to vietnam from the early fourteenth century inasmuch as it was on the route from Quanzhou to the Persian Gulf and the indian ocean. Hong river potters had followed Chinese traditions for centuries, adding individual touches to their own wares, such as spirited brush painting and distinctive shades on celadons, which expressed an independent cultural identity. in all likelihood, however, they shifted entirely to production of blue-and-white stoneware only in the aftermath of the Ming invasion, when conditions of peace and prosperity made such industry practicable. They developed their own vigorous styles for blue-and-white, shunning many of the standard designs used on Jingdezhen wares. Given the intensity of buddhism in vietnam, the lotus naturally remained a highly popular decoration; but idiosyncratic motifs included a creature with a dragon’s tail and elephant’s head, jungle scenes with hunters, panels of overlapping petals and peonies, serrated bands with pineapple-like designs, images of peacocks and parakeets, and dragons with large central fins rising in clouds. vietnamese potters also adopted motifs from india, including the garuda, an unusual avian incarnation of the Hindu deity vishnu, and the makara, a beast combining features of a fish, crocodile, and elephant.<sup>93</sup> in the fifteenth century, during vietnam’s most fruitful period of pottery manufacture, the le dynasty encouraged the export of ceramics to increase the kingdom’s revenue. The Ming government restricted private overseas trade much of that time, thereby providing vietnamese potters (as well as those of Thailand) with an opportunity for selling their wares in foreign markets. Merchants in southern Chinese ports also may have relocated to vietnam to avoid the Ming restrictions. blue-and-white pottery was exported from the Hong valley and Champa to the Archipelago and Southwest Asia. At least one vietnamese kendi in polychrome was buried in a sixteenth-century Thai stupa monument, suggesting that buddhists there valued the ware. Some kilns filled orders from Japanese connoisseurs for plain blue-and-white stoneware to use in the tea ceremony.<sup>94</sup> Most important, vietnamese potters made ceramics for the court and mosques of the kingdom of Majapahit in Java. Court officials in the capital of Trowulan specially commissioned blue-and-white tiles decorated with images of cranes, deer, lotuses, and chrysanthemum sprigs. royal dignitaries had a monopoly on use of tableware in red, yellow, black, and gold, and they controlled circulation of the finest ceramics. Muslim and vietnamese merchants supplied blue-and-white and polychrome tiles for the gates and walls of mosques at demak, the leading port on the north coast of Java. Many of the pieces have decoration resembling that on Southwest Asian pieces, indicating that the islamic community in Java, which traded with both China and countries on the indian ocean, ordered the tiles from vietnam when China temporarily closed its harbors to foreign trade.<sup>95</sup> Javanese artisans, however, did not cover buildings with tiles in the all-encompassing, interlocking fashion of Southwest Asia but rather set them on walls independently as architectural adornment, as if each piece were to be appreciated for its own sake. Exports of pottery from mainland Southeast Asia fluctuated according to the status of Chinese shipping, expanding when China went into a period of withdrawal, losing ground when it reemerged. by the mid-sixteenth century, Jingdezhen and Fujian kilns began sending their wares to the Archipelago once again, putting an end to the bonanza enjoyed by manufacturers outside China. but mainland Southeast Asia had a second opportunity in the late seventeenth century, during the Ming-Manchu dynastic turnover. As with Japanese kilns, those in vietnam and Thailand benefited from China’s time of troubles for more than two generations. They also used the voC as middleman in the trade: between 1663 and 1682, the dutch exported around 1.5 million pieces from Hanoi to batavia; from there, the wares went off to the southern Philippines and the Sulu Archipelago, a cluster of islands immediately southwest of Mindanao. but when Jingdezhen recovered its footing after 1680, vietnamese potters had to make do with selling their products only in local communities.<sup>96</sup> by the late seventeenth century, then, as a consequence of Jingdezhen’s retreat from and return to overseas trade, something like a common market for pottery and a common pottery style had been created throughout East Asia.<sup>97</sup> Japanese, vietnamese, and Thai kilns modeled their wares on Chinese porcelain, and Jingdezhen copied them all when it came back into competition. by that time, Westerners had joined the circuit of ceramic exchange, and designs from dutch pottery were making their way onto wares in Persia, vietnam, Thailand, Japan, and China. (See figure 21.) ## “Go odS FroM CHinA”: KinGdoMS oF THE KHMEr And THAi Khmer and Thai kingdoms on the lower Mekong river experienced a cultural environment very different from that to the east on the Hong river. According to a legend recorded by Chinese officials, an indian brahman named Kaudinya came to Cambodia in the first century c.e.; he married a dragon-princess (nagi) and spread the teachings of the buddha. The myth accounts for the early transplanting of Sanskrit culture into mainland Southeast Asia. in fact, from the fourth century, indian art and coinage, Sanskrit terminology, and Hindu-buddhist religious traditions influenced continental Southeast Asia from present-day burma to the Archipelago. Converts to the new faith identified indigenous deities and spirits with Hindu gods and buddhist bodhisattvas. As usual, Avalokitesvara occupied a central place in the pantheon. Early in the common era, indian merchants, especially from the coast of Coromandel, established trading colonies in settlements on the Gulf of Siam. Powerful indian states, most notably the Gupta Empire (320–ca. 550), the first longlived indian political entity, provided the region with models of religious and political organization.<sup>98</sup> Since kingdoms of the subcontinent communicated with Mekong river polities by sea, however, those states had little fear of conquest by indian powers. on the other hand, Chinese invasion of vietnam seemed to confirm that the Middle Kingdom represented a lively threat, thereby making indian political models an appealing alternative to Khmer and Thai communities. Although numerous Chinese merchants settled in the region, they came from the ports of southern China, remote from (and often hostile to) centers of authority in the north. Chinese traders never promoted Chinese political institutions abroad, while Chinese officialdom regarded the seafarers with suspicion as both merchants and expatriates, consumed by self-seeking profit and treacherously self-exiled from the Middle Kingdom. Khmer and Thai kingdoms developed modes of governance remote from both China and the Chinese-style state of vietnam, where Confucian ideology and strong administrative traditions circumscribed the sacral role of monarchy.<sup>99</sup> Those kingdoms comprised shifting federations of communities and lacked clearly articulated state structures of finance, law, and military command. Kings maintained loose unity by distinguishing themselves as enshrining cosmic notions of political space. The ruler, conceived of as a “God-king” (devaraja) or “Universal Monarch” (Cakravartin), nominally established a realm in harmony with the Hindu-buddhist universe, built monuments and ritual centers reflecting cosmological structures, and figured as the linchpin of religious ceremonies. Court protocols dramatically exhibited the monarch’s preeminence over those not part of the god-sanctioned dynasty of royal blood, with aristocrats obliged to prostrate themselves before the king, who presented himself clad in gold cloth, seated on a silver throne, and elevated above all spectators. A principal obligation of the monarch was the building of temples, veritable sacred mountains of stone, to honor his dynasty and guardian deity. The “lord of the Heavens” protected the king, one of whose titles was “lord of the Mountains.”<sup>100</sup> in the seventeenth century, a dutch merchant in the kingdom of Ayutthaya (1351– 1767) in Thailand (called Siam by Westerners) described the king performing a pious ritual that confirmed his legitimacy: “once every year . . . the king of Siam shews himself by water and land in state to his people, going to the principal Temple of the Gods, to offer there for the welfare of his Person and Kingdom.”<sup>101</sup> Generally weak in administrative authority, Khmer and Thai monarchs achieved exalted status by virtue of their embodiment of religious principles, compelling political loyalty by being seen as avatars of Hindu gods and buddhist bodhisattvas. This endowed their kingdoms with considerable resilience, helping to explain the failure of islam (as in the Hindu-buddhist kingdom of bali) to make great advances in continental Southeast Asia. building magnificent temples and royal palaces placed great demands on ceramic technology, especially for tiles and sculptural relief. buddhists and Hindus built at least one hundred temples over 250 square kilometers in the Khmer-speaking region of what is now northwestern Cambodia. The base of the twelfth-century Shwedagon pagoda at Angkor Wat includes a frieze of rectangular ceramic panels in yellow and green depicting the life of the buddha; the Sulamani pagoda of the same period boasts glazed cornice tiles decorated with a motif of lotuses. in addition, large ceramic statues topped many temples and stood in niches along their walls.<sup>102</sup> The source of the pottery technology ultimately was China, most likely by way of vietnam and Champa. Glazed pottery and efficient kilns developed incrementally in China and vietnam, yet they made a sudden appearance in Khmer-speaking regions in the lower Mekong river basin around the ninth century, suggesting they arose from outside influence. Khmer stonewares of the late ninth century are shaped like Chinese porcelains, and Khmer tiles copy Chinese ones. Artisans used both Khmer and Chinese ceramics in constructing Angkor Wat, the core of the most important early state of the region, centered on the Tonle Sap (Great lake), a body of water that gave the area efficient links to the outside world by way of the Mekong river.<sup>103</sup> built in the reign of Suryavarman ii (r. 1113–ca. 1150) and devoted to the cult of vishnu, Angkor Wat attracted pilgrims from india and (as a palace inscription declared) “goods from China.”<sup>104</sup> Zhou daguan, a Chinese ambassador who visited the Khmer kingdom in the late thirteenth century, noted the large number of Chinese living there, as well as the strong demand for Chinese commodities, saltpeter and porcelain in particular. The palace-temple complex of Angkor Wat housed over ten thousand persons, prompting a European visitor to the ruins in 1609 to conclude that it must have been built by the roman emperor Trajan (r. 98–117), renowned in Europe for his grand construction projects. As was true in many other countries, privileged ranks in Khmer kingdoms monopolized glazed ceramics, whether indigenous stoneware, vietnamese pottery, or porcelain. Chinese merchants may have been responsible for introducing pottery production at Sisatchanalai (also known as Sawankhalok, “the Place of Heaven”) in northern Thailand, a center that eventually grew to include one thousand kilns spread over an area of more than six kilometers. Chinese incising techniques and Chinese embroidered silks served as major sources of inspiration for embellishments on Khmer pottery. Above all, Khmer potters copied metal vessels from india; a sharp profile and angled base on their vessels are among their most distinctive features. Chinese merchants evidently sent samples of indian-style Khmer stoneware to Chinese kilns, where potters made facsimiles to be shipped back for sale in Cambodia. Suryavarman ii maintained diplomatic relations with the Southern Song court, though those tailed off with the rise of internal conflict after his death. With the sacking of Angkor Wat by invaders from Champa in 1177, Khmer ceramic art largely disappeared, displaced by imports of Chinese porcelain.<sup>105</sup> legend claims that King ramkamhaeng (d. 1317) of the kingdom of Sukotai (ca. 1238–1419), the first polity established by Thai-speaking people, paid state visits to Kublai Khan in the late 1290s, supposedly returning with a Chinese bride and hundreds of potters from Hebei province. Presumably this fable stems from the migration of Chinese potters to the Thai region during the death throes of the Southern Song regime. They established kilns at Sukotai in north-central Thailand and introduced celadon production to the older kilns at Sisatchanalai. Wares from those pottery centers carried on the Khmer practice of reproducing indian shapes and ornament, including decorative patterns associated with Hindu gods. The most popular motif on dishes was a fish, one of the buddhist emblems of good fortune as well as a reference to the god vishnu, who was reincarnated as a fish and rescued mankind from a flood.<sup>106</sup> Potters turned out many kendi jars, which priests used at wedding ceremonies for decanting purifying water onto the hands of participants. After the founding of these productive kilns, Thai wares for the first time began joining Chinese and vietnamese ceramics in the extensive maritime marketplace of the Archipelago. (See figure 24.) located in the Chao Phraya river basin, ninety kilometers upriver from the Gulf of Siam, the Thai kingdom of Ayutthaya, after incorporating Sukothai in 1438, maintained the overseas pottery trade as a royal monopoly, customarily working through resident Chinese merchants. indeed, expansion of Chinese commerce encouraged the foundation of Ayutthaya, the capital city. but merchants there could not sustain exports of Thai ceramics when Chinese seaborne trade revived after its fifteenth- and late-seventeenth-century disruptions. Thai pottery thus suffered the same rapid decline in international markets as did vietnamese wares. nonetheless, Ayutthaya continued to prosper as one of the busiest cosmopolitan centers of East Asia, even recovering rapidly from a destructive burmese invasion between 1563 and 1569. Chinese merchants played an important role in this. They invested in pepper and sugar plantations, and making use of good-quality native teak and low labor costs, they built ships in Ayutthaya, saving as much as 90 percent of the expense of doing so in China.<sup>107</sup> in its tribute trade with Ming and Qing China, Ayutthaya exported forty-four different kinds of goods, including tons of pepper, aromatic woods, and deerskins. it also showed itself more adept than other states at taking advantage of that trade: while Ayutthaya’s diplomatic emissaries made the time-consuming overland journey from southern Chinese ports to beijing to pay their respects to the Son of Heaven, the kingdom’s tribute ships, commanded by Chinese mariners, sailed home with merchandise and then speedily returned for a second (illicit) load.<sup>108</sup> Chinese formed the largest expatriate group in the capital city, accounting for as much as a third of the population of ten thousand. Jeremias van vliet (1602–63), an agent of the voC in Ayutthaya, wrote in 1638 that “in the kingdom of Siam many Chinese are still living who enjoy reasonable freedom in trade throughout the whole country and are well respected by the previous as well as the present king, so that some of them have been appointed to high positions and offices and others are considered the best factors, traders, and sailors.”<sup>109</sup> in addition to the Chinese and dutch, indian and Japanese entrepreneurs kept commercial agents in Ayutthaya. These outsiders made it possible for the Universal Monarch to profit from being a “Great Merchant,” as a French diplomat said of King Phra narai (r. 1658–88), one of the last powerful monarchs of his dynasty.<sup>110</sup> Joost Schouten, a director of the voC in Ayutthaya in 1636, wrote that King Prasat-Thong (r. 1629–56), founder of the dynasty and father of Phra narai, “himself is also a Merchant, and hath his own Ships and Factors, trading to Choromandel and China, being for that cause more favored and privileged than any other Prince.”<sup>111</sup> nonetheless, the king took care to appear aloft from disreputable trade. As Schouten describes him, he was aided in this artifice by elaborate ritual, backed by wielding absolute power over priests, grandees, and aristocrats: When he gives them Audience, he is richly clothed and crowned, sitting upon a golden Throne, at whose feet his Gentlemen and Attendants reverently kneel. . . . All, as well Strangers as Subjects, who have audience of his Majesty, whilest they are in his presence, must continually kneel, with folded hands and heads hanging down; when they speak to him, it must be in this humble posture, loading him with titles and praises; his answers are esteemed oracles, and his commands unchangeable.<sup>112</sup> ## “An iMiTATor oF THE KinGS oF ASiA”: loUiS xiv in 1686 Chinese traders delivered large quantities of porcelain to Ayutthaya, both humdrum and high-quality pieces. Muhammad rabi’ bin Muhammad ibrahim, a Persian diplomat at Phra narai’s court in 1685, attended a royal banquet in which the king, styled the “lord of the White Elephant,” dressed in Persian costume and servants laid out more than fifty dishes in porcelains topped with silver lids. in the same year, the Jesuit Guy Tachard (1648–1712) arrived in Ayutthaya on an ambassadorial mission for louis xiv. He was accompanied by Joachim bouvet, who continued on to China to serve at the court of the Kangxi emperor. Tachard recorded seeing splendid porcelains everywhere in the king’s palace, especially set in niches along walls. He and his colleagues purchased fifteen hundred Chinese vessels for louis. They also negotiated with Phra narai for dispatch of the first Asian diplomatic legation to Europe. French officials and Jesuits had high hopes of converting the king to roman Christianity, thus gaining Ayutthaya as an Asian beachhead that would smooth the way for trade with China and thereby counter the voC, an enterprise that functioned as an arm of the dutch state, France’s foremost opponent.<sup>113</sup> in 1686 three envoys from Ayutthaya arrived in France, an occasion soon commemorated in The Siamese Ambassadors in Paris, a tapestry produced by the royal beauvais workshop. Crowds gawked at the exotic visitors everywhere they went; the envoys toured all the high spots, including Parisian palaces, the tapestry works, and the Trianon de Porcelaine (soon to be demolished). They presented louis with a host of gifts from Phra narai, most notably fourteen hundred pieces of Kangxi porcelain, described by one observer as “the most remarkable ever found in the indies.”<sup>114</sup> An aristocrat told the envoys that with the porcelains on exhibit in a royal apartment, it seemed that “the indies are more present in this cabinet than in the indies themselves, since it contained the best of all the beautiful things ever produced in the East.”<sup>115</sup> The porcelains ignited the French rage for chinaware that would burn even brighter at the turn of the century with the destruction of aristocratic silver plate in the War of the Spanish Succession. in the most extraordinary reception ever granted by louis xiv, the Siamese ambassadors processed to their royal audience down the glittering Hall of Mirrors at versailles.<sup>116</sup> Having ordered a meticulous study of the protocols of Phra narai’s court, the French king flaunted himself as a Siamese despot, seated on a silver throne on a high platform, dressed in a suit of cloth of gold set with huge diamonds, flanked by silver urns and candelabra, and, in a marked break with established protocol, surrounded only by individuals (including bastards) sharing the royal blood. Eyes ritually averted from this awesome spectacle, the Siamese diplomats prostrated themselves before the throne, their noses grazing the floor. looking beyond the custom-bound, constrained sovereigns of the West, the Sun King finally had discovered a monarchical style that measured up to his lofty standards for splendor and extravagance. Adam Smith’s appraisal of louis captures the singular nature of the moment: “He had a step and deportment which could suit only him and his rank, and which would have been ridiculous in any other person.”<sup>117</sup> From his post in beijing, bouvet later applauded the unprecedented performance in the Hall of Mirrors, just as he commended the autocratic modes of the Kangxi emperor to “the most Glorious Monarch upon Earth,” as he fawningly described louis xiv in 1697.<sup>118</sup> regalia and riches, however, did not stop the enemies of Phra narai from imprisoning the sick, elderly monarch in his own palace after a revolution in 1688, a bloody response to his unpopular strategy of accommodation to France and the Christian religion. Ministers who had promoted that policy lost their heads, and the king died an ostensibly natural death within a few months. The reception of the Siamese ambassadors was not forgotten in France, for memory of it lingered well into the next century, helping to solidify the image of a profligate, despotic, and therefore perhaps superfluous monarchy. immediately after the death of louis, the marquis de la Fare (1644–1712), in Mémoires et réflexions de Louis XIV (1715), wrote that the king in 1686 had revealed his ambition to be “an imitator of the kings of Asia, whom slavery alone pleased.”<sup>119</sup> The marquis d’Argenson (1694–1757) attacked louis for his indulgence in “Asiatic luxury.” Montesquieu worried in The Spirit of the Laws that the French monarchy appeared to be degenerating into an “oriental despotism,” with the king “referring everything to himself exclusively[,] . . . the state to its capital, the capital to the court, and the court to his person alone.”<sup>120</sup> in his Essaie de le despotisme (1775), the comte de Mirabeau (1749–91), a leader in the opening years of the French revolution, criticized the bourbon monarchy and likened it to an Asian despotism. in some small measure, then, the Sun King’s infatuation with Asian majesty came home to roost. Perhaps the context and connotations of Phra narai’s gift of Kangxi porcelains should be set alongside the destiny of a pair of cannon also presented to louis by the Siamese envoys: almost two meters long, “inlaid with silver, mounted on carriages also inlaid with silver,” they were seized by a mob from the royal palace in Paris on 14 July 1789 and used to storm the bastille.<sup>121</sup>