# The Triumph of Chinese Porcelain Maritime Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean, and Southwest Asia, 1400–1700 According to Matteo ricci, the Confucian elite regarded peoples beyond their empire with scorn, differing “but little from the beasts of the fields and the forest,” because they lacked the social and political virtues characteristic of the Middle Kingdom. As he explained, “The few kingdoms contiguous to their state, of which they had any knowledge before they learned of the existence of Europe, were, in their estimation, hardly worthy of consideration.” in summer 1598, when ricci at last achieved his ambition to enter beijing, he discovered that the Chinese there made so little distinction between foreigners that he faced the danger of being taken for Japanese at the very moment when Hideyoshi’s warriors in Korea seemed poised to cross the yalu river and invade China.<sup>1</sup> inasmuch as ricci’s writings circulated widely among the Western intelligentsia, they helped establish an enduring image of imperial China as implacably arrogant and aloof, a hermetically sealed realm disdainful of the wider world, foreign contact, and overseas trade. ricci also contributed to the European perception that the Chinese were inherently hypocritical. He pointed out that the vaunted tribute system of the empire, the paramount international expression of China’s cultural superiority, functioned as an elaborate charade: The term tribute is more of a name than a reality. . . . When the time arrives [to depart for China], the so-called ambassadors forge letters in the names of various kings who are supposed to be sending them, and the letters are filled with the highest praise of the Emperor of China. . . . The Chinese people realize that the whole thing is an imposture, but they make nothing of the deception. rather, by way of adulation to their king, they permit him to believe that the whole world is paying tribute to the Chinese Kingdom, whereas, in fact, China is really paying tribute to the other countries [by buying their commodities at inflated prices].<sup>2</sup> ## TrAdE And TribUTE in CHinA Although ricci was correct that the way the Chinese dealt with tribute pandered to imperial self-satisfaction and fostered official duplicity, there nevertheless was a great deal more to tribute than that. in fact, the practice survived for many centuries because it represented an effective, flexible, and usefully muddled blend of cultural propaganda, reasoned diplomacy, and economic pragmatism. From as early as the Han period, tribute payments to the imperial court developed as an institutional expression in foreign relations of the centrality of the Middle Kingdom, as an instrument whereby dealings with alien peoples could be translated into traditional terms of respect and deference from inferior to superior. in principle, Chinese cultural superiority found expression through ritual and aesthetics: “barbarian” ambassadors performed the kowtow (koutou) ceremony, which included three genuflections and nine prostrations, before the Son of Heaven (or sometimes, as in the late Ming, even before his empty throne) and presented tribute gifts in the form of commodities from their own countries. For his part, the emperor gave his tribute clients ritual offerings, including official calendars, umbrellas, formal costumes, and gold seals of office. in reality, acknowledging the preeminence of the distant emperor was a cheap price for a ruler to pay in order to gain the opportunity to ship large amounts of merchandise to China under the rubric of tribute. And not only did a ruler gain an economic benefit from his nominal submission, but being recognized as a tribute client of the emperor could be parlayed into an advantage at home in competition with both internal political rivals and powerful neighboring enemies. Emperors generally recognized that they served their own interests by encouraging overseas trade or, at least, not obstructing it. A northern Song emperor commanded maritime trade commissioners “to attract foreign tribute [from the Archipelago], and exchange [Chinese goods] for spices, raw medicine, rhinoceros horn, ivory, pearls, and borneol [a camphor-based drug].”<sup>3</sup> Southern Song and yuan monarchs promoted foreign commerce even more vigorously, with both regimes keeping huge quantities of silk in stock to bestow on ambassadors in return for merchandise presented under the guise of tribute payments. in 1385 Korea sent 5,000 horses, 225 kilograms of gold, 14,000 kilograms of silver, and 50,000 bolts of cotton. A few years later, a tribute mission from the kingdom of Ayutthaya arrived with more than 77,000 kilograms of aromatic wood, only a fraction of which was bestowed on the Hongwu emperor; the rest was put on sale. A Japanese mission numbered twelve hundred persons and over half a million kilograms of goods in nine ships, including 12,000 kilograms of sulfur, though only 4,500 was the established tribute, and 37,000 swords, only 100 of which were presented to the court. Moreover, gifts bestowed on tribute envoys invariably turned up for sale in foreign markets. in 1393 representatives of Thailand were awarded 19,000 pieces of porcelain, which they sold at a handsome profit when they returned home. When a ruler in the ryukyu islands ordered his envoy to purchase huge amounts of porcelain in 1404, the yongle emperor permitted it on the grounds that benighted foreigners did not comprehend Chinese tribute-trade prohibitions.<sup>4</sup> in truth, this was little more than a face-saving justification, for overseas clients of the Middle Kingdom had a clear, even ruthless appreciation for how to manipulate the tribute system for their own advantage. during the early Ming, however, the link between trade and tribute came under concerted assault, with long-term, damaging effects on Chinese merchants. The Hongwu emperor regarded the customary, generally informal practices of tributetrade as fraudulent and pernicious, an affront to Confucian ethics and a corrupting influence on his bureaucracy. He detested the Mongols as alien conquerors of the Middle Kingdom and saw himself as the divinely ordained restorer of traditional values and institutions. basing himself on the supposed principles of Han and Tang monarchs, he held to the revolutionary belief that China should conform to Confucian standards in all areas of state policy.<sup>5</sup> in regard to foreign relations, that meant a break with the liberal, expansive policies toward foreigners and maritime commerce that had been promoted by emperors since at least the tenth century. For the first time, tribute relations took on a truly systematic character, transformed from ceremonies and mutual, tacit accords into a set of bureaucratic regulations that spelled out operations and obligations down to the smallest detail, such as which foods were to be served to tribute envoys and which to their servants.<sup>6</sup> The system was still nominally in place when ricci arrived in China, and he mistakenly assumed it was ancient in character, reflecting China’s immemorial perspective on the outside world. in 1374 the Hongwu emperor abolished the office of maritime trade commissioner because not only did the bureaucrats fail to supervise trade, but they often opposed the very idea of supervision itself. He later decreed that “severe punishment will be inflicted on those who desire to do business privately with foreigners.”<sup>7</sup> He prohibited his subjects from using many foreign products, such as spices, incense, and tortoiseshell, and he required all ships sailing overseas to purchase an imperial seal in advance. He also commanded all Chinese living overseas to return home on pain of death. Perhaps to assert the legitimacy of his new dynasty, Hongwu took the unprecedented step of dispatching envoys to invite states into a tribute relationship with the Ming court. Equally unparalleled, he coupled those summons with restrictions on tribute-trade, permitting only those countries paying tribute to engage in commerce, though under draconian regulations regarding the size, timing, and number of tribute missions. He aimed to severely reduce the commercial dimensions of the tribute system and to reorganize it as an exclusively hierarchical relationship between imperial center and subservient client. He believed his extreme measures would cauterize the wound inflicted on the Chinese moral and political order by Mongol influence and foreign exchange. He apparently never recognized (or cared) that by imposing new tribute rules he was disrupting trading customs and networks that had existed for hundreds of years.<sup>8</sup> An immediate result of Hongwu’s prohibition of private maritime commerce and his sweeping cutbacks in tribute-trade was to imperil the livelihood of numerous coastal inhabitants and foreign merchants. Some overseas business continued under different auspices, however, for by a stroke of the pen, the emperor had transformed ordinary traders into legally proscribed smugglers. in an attempt to stop illicit commerce, he placed rigorous controls on the coastal provinces, in some prefectures conscripting as much as a third of the adult male population into the military forces. For all practical purposes, the imperial administration had embarked on a campaign against the most enterprising ranks of its society. After Hongwu’s son, the yongle emperor, seized the throne from his nephew in 1402, he had to deal with the tumultuous situation created by the Ming founder. yongle shared his father’s authoritarianism but not his stiff-necked devotion to Confucian fundamentalism. He sought to extend imperial control by a forward policy of military force, most notably by launching an invasion of vietnam and by leading armies into the steppes against the Mongols in five grueling campaigns. in the southern coastal provinces, he continued Hongwu’s policy of outlawing overseas trade, even ordering the people of Fujian to convert their oceangoing vessels into “flat-nosed ships” (pingtouchuan) suitable only for river traffic.<sup>9</sup> Faced with widespread lawlessness and economic hardship among the coastal population, however, yongle took the action for which he is now most famous: he dispatched to the southern seas the largest maritime expeditions the world had ever seen. ## THE TrEASUrE SHiPS oF ZHEnG HE, 1405–1433 The yongle emperor appointed Zheng He (1371–1435), a senior military officer, to command a fleet of 317 ships carrying some 28,000 men that left China in 1405. Six more such armadas would be sent out over the next generation, each voyage taking about two years. by the time the last of them returned home in 1433 (in the reign of the xuande emperor), they had taken imperial emissaries and Chinese merchandise to Southeast Asia, the indian ocean, and Southwest Asia. yongle did not merely invite tribute clients to China: figuratively speaking, he went out soliciting them. His employment of maritime power represented an extraordinary break with traditional imperial policy, the most audacious effort by a Chinese sovereign to restructure the relationship between the Middle Kingdom and the wider world. For the first and last time, yellow China attempted to encompass and direct the seaborne enterprise of blue China. This is reflected in the production at Jingdezhen of blue-and-white porcelains with sea animal motifs—flying shrimp, winged dragon-fish, mollusks, turtles, and wave-cresting dragons—a fashion unique to the early Ming period.<sup>10</sup> Scores of treasure ships (baochuan) formed the nucleus of Zheng He’s fleets. The greatest vessels ever built, each was some 2,000 tons in capacity, carried around 600 men, boasted nine masts, and measured perhaps 76 meters in length.<sup>11</sup> in contrast, vasco da Gama in 1498 commanded about 170 men in four ships ranging from 70 to 300 tons in capacity, each with a maximum of three masts and with no vessel more than 25 meters long. There were as many medical personnel in the Ming armada as there were mariners in da Gama’s. The largest fleet ever assembled by the Portuguese in Asia was the forty-three ships sent to raise a Muslim siege of Melaka in 1600, about the same number as the junks in the Ming flotilla that supplied Zheng He’s men with rice and water. The total European and Eurasian population of Ásia portuguesa at any time in the sixteenth century—including soldiers, bureaucrats, clerics, women, and servants—was never more than 10,000 strong, about one-third the complement of men in a single Ming expedition.<sup>12</sup> Zheng He, the agent of yongle’s maritime imperialism, was a Muslim from the landlocked southwestern province of yunnan.<sup>13</sup> born into the Ma family, he proudly traced his lineage back six generations to Sayyid Ajall Shams al-din, the Turkic-Muslim governor of yunnan appointed by Kublai Khan. Ma He’s grandfather and father both claimed the title “hajji,” a designation that signified they had fulfilled the obligation to go on pilgrimage to Mecca. After Ming armies subjugated yunnan in 1381, Ma was among many yunnan boys rounded up, castrated, and enrolled in the burgeoning eunuch establishment that served members of the new dynasty. by employing eunuchs, who were altogether separate from the formal imperial bureaucracy, Ming rulers gained a measure of independence and initiative from the Confucian elite.<sup>14</sup> That was to be crucial for the maritime expeditions, for yongle put his eunuch entourage in charge of them against the opposition of his own civil administration. loyal and competent, Ma commanded troops under the future yongle emperor in his rebellion against Jianwen, Hongwu’s successor. As a reward for Ma’s valor in a decisive encounter, yongle in 1404 rechristened him Zheng, the name of the battle site. The emperor later awarded him the prestigious title “San bao Eunuch” (San bao taijian, the Triple-Jeweled Eunuch), a reference to the triratna (triple gem), the heart of buddhist veneration—the buddha himself, his teaching (dharma), and his community (sangha). As commander of the treasure ships, Zheng He’s title was “Admiral and representative of the Emperor.” As the Ming armadas would be visiting many ports in Southwest Asia, Zheng He’s Muslim background undoubtedly played a role in his appointment. Several of his eunuch captains (though not Zheng himself) went on pilgrimage to Mecca on the seventh voyage, discovering (as they reported) that the walls of “the Heavenly Hall” (the Ka’aba) were “formed of clay mixed with rosewater and ambergris, exhaling a perpetual fragrance.”<sup>15</sup> Word of arrival of Chinese ships on the Arabian coast came to the attention of Sultan al-Ashraf barsbay (r. 1422–38) of Mamluk Egypt. As the historian ibn Taghri birdi (1411–69) records, “A report came from Mecca the Honored [to Cairo] that a number of junks had come from China to the seaports of india, and two of them anchored in the port of Aden.”<sup>16</sup> Eager for trade, the sultan permitted the Chinese ships to enter Jedda, the port on the red Sea nearest Mecca. Merchants of venice, the sultan’s most important partners in the spice trade, apparently never learned that official representatives of Cathay, the virtual dreamland of their very own Marco Polo, had anchored such a comparatively short distance from their trading outposts in the eastern Mediterranean. The failure of Zheng He to go to Mecca, despite anchoring on the Malabar coast, suggests he was not a deeply pious Muslim. in fact, he displayed the same religious forbearance for which Sayyid Ajall had been known. on a plaque Zheng He affixed to a mosque in Shaanxi province, he associated himself with that thirteenth-century ancestor; but the admiral also established a daoist shrine in the nanjing boatyards, where the treasure ships were built, and he worshiped at a buddhist temple in the city before he sailed for the indian ocean. As military commander of nanjing, he supervised construction of the buddhist baoen Temple, or Porcelain Pagoda, a task that stretched over nineteen years. in Quanzhou, where he recruited members of the Muslim Pu family as commanders and translators for his fleet, he prayed for a blessing on his voyage at the Holy Tomb of Muhammad’s presumed disciples. At Changle harbor in Fujian province, a staging post for the fleet, Zheng He built a temple to the Queen of Heaven, the buddhist patron-goddess of mariners, and he erected an altar to her in a two-story cabin at the stern of his flagship. in ports of Southeast Asia, he bestowed gifts on shrines dedicated to Guanyin, another holy guardian of seafarers.<sup>17</sup> in Voyage of the San Bao Eunuch to the Western Ocean (San bao taijian xia xiyang), a 1597 novel by luo Maodeng, when Zheng He prays to the Heavenly Queen during a storm, she appears holding a red lantern to pacify the wind and waves. She also proclaims her presence by the spectral appearance of Saint Elmo’s Fire, an electrical discharge at the peak of the mast during a storm. luo drew some of his material from a chronicler on the voyages who recorded that when a gale once endangered the junks, the Queen appeared astride a giant turtle and guided the fleet to safety. during another tempest, Zheng He spurned a proposal to sacrifice crewmen to propitiate angry spirits and instead threw overboard dummy figures filled with the blood and intestines of shipboard geese.<sup>18</sup> on the whole, the admiral’s assorted devotions are a case in point of ricci’s charge that the Chinese believed “the more different ways there are of talking about religious questions, the more beneficial it will be for the common good.” Appropriately, Zheng He received the same posthumous reward as the Jesuit—elevation to celestial status. in northern Javanese ports, descendants of Fujianese and Guangdong emigrants set up cultic altars, usually decorated with blue-and-white porcelain bowls, to Sam Po, that is, the Triple-Jeweled Eunuch, the viceroy of the Son of Heaven. in legends of the Archipelago, Zheng He appears in the guise of “the Master of the Sky” (dampu Awang), the commander of “fully laden ships” (jong sarat), bearer of spectacular riches from the Middle Kingdom.<sup>19</sup> Zheng He’s treasure ships made a stunning impression when they coasted into foreign harbors, their sails dyed red with henna, their railings festooned with yellow banners, their hulls painted with giant images of white seabirds, their masts towering over everything in sight. When thousands of troops marched off the junks and built fortified warehouses (chinakotta), it surely inclined their hosts to consider that a client relationship with the Ming emperor was an offer they could not refuse. This was reinforced by the consideration that the number of soldiers in every expedition was greater than the population of any port between Canton and Calicut. According to Ma Huan (ca. 1380–ca. 1460), a Muslim translator on Zheng He’s staff and author of The Overall Survey of the Ocean’s Shores (ying-yai Sheng-lan), the principal source of information on the voyages, “chieftains and heads of the barbarous tribes all vied to give [the emperor’s representative] greeting.” 20 in the course of the seven Ming expeditions, representatives of some seventy states became tribute clients of the yongle emperor, many formally acknowledging Chinese suzerainty for the first time. The Middle Kingdom became the arbiter of the rise and fall of powers throughout the Archipelago. A cluster of harbors on the northern coast of Java asserted their independence from the kingdom of Majapahit after the Ming fleets appeared on the scene. Under Chinese protection, brunei and Palembang renounced allegiance to Majapahit and the kingdom of Ayutthaya. Most significantly, the Chinese armada provided an umbrella of protection for Melaka against its powerful enemies in Java and Thailand. yongle acknowledged Melaka as a tribute client, declaring in an official inscription that it “wished to be better than barbarian and wanted to be permanently part of the imperial domain.”<sup>21</sup> Zheng He made the port his central depot and command center in the Archipelago. His role as godfather of Melaka, the key figure behind its swift rise to autonomy and prosperity, was recognized in the seventeenth century when a shrine to Sam Po was set up there. His protection and sponsorship proved of utmost significance inasmuch as the city-state immediately became a leading commercial center, an achievement that eventually enabled it to become a hub for the spread of islam in the region. At Melaka and elsewhere, “chieftains and heads of the barbarous tribes” hailed the ships of Zheng He because of desire for the cargo in their holds. As Francesco Carletti wrote later about fleets of Chinese junks delivering goods to Spanish Manila, “They have enough so that they could furnish the whole world.”<sup>22</sup> A Portuguese observer explained around the same time, “When the Chinese smell silver, they will bring mountains of merchandise.”<sup>23</sup> The armada of Zheng He functioned as an emporium offering a wealth of products, including nails, cast-iron kettles, axes and hoes, copper basins, bronze jewelry, lead and zinc ingots, vermilion, saltpeter, lacquerware furniture, bed furnishings, fans, umbrellas, embroidered velvet and taffeta, carpets, tapestries, thread and needles, clothing, dyes, glass beads, paper and ink, candles, pickled plums and lychees, raisins, sugar, dried rhubarb, chicken and geese, wheat flour, salted meats, and preserves of ginger, orange, pear, and peach.<sup>24</sup> Zheng He returned to China with at least 180 kinds of tribute goods, most prominently silver, spices, sandalwood, precious stones, ivory, ebony, camphor, tin, deer hides, coral, kingfisher feathers, tortoiseshell, gums and resins, rhinoceros horn, sapanwood and safflower (for dyes and drugs), indian cotton cloth, and ambergris— which the Chinese knew as “dragon’s spittle” and used for making perfume. The Ming fleets brought back such a huge amount of Persian cobalt ore that Jingdezhen could draw on it for decades after the conclusion of the voyages. Exotic animals, especially a few ostriches, elephants, and giraffes, also figured in the consignments.<sup>25</sup> Although the Chinese government realized a profit from its monopoly on the sale of silk and merchants had to pay duties both on commodities sold overseas and on those imported from there, the fleets of Zheng He represented a serious drain on the treasury. An estimate of 1424 put the price tag of a single voyage at one million taels of silver (or a billion pieces of copper-cash).<sup>26</sup> in addition, the obligation to produce enormous quantities of silk fabric and porcelains for the voyages put considerable strain on weavers and potters, especially as they were not paid the full market price for their products. Along with opposition of the Confucian establishment to eunuch administrators, the financial burden of the maritime expeditions explains why there was just one more after yongle died in 1424, a fleet dispatched by the xuande emperor to return hundreds of stranded tribute envoys to more than a dozen countries. Perhaps those sorriest to see the retreat of the treasure ships were natives of Fujian and Guangdong who had settled in the Archipelago, many during times of turmoil such as the collapse of the Southern Song and yuan regimes. in some respects, those coastal provinces had more in common with maritime Southeast Asia than with the heart of the Middle Kingdom: it was easier to sail to the Philippines or borneo than to journey overland to Hunan or Hubei. Coastal inhabitants thrived on maritime traffic and regarded the sea as a profitable thoroughfare, not a hindrance. As a Ming functionary declared in 1639, “The sea is the paddy field of the Fujianese.”<sup>27</sup> All but a few of the Chinese loanwords in the principal Malay and indonesian languages derive from dialects of Fujian, and the word junk, commonly regarded as Chinese in origin, most likely derives from the Javanese jong.<sup>28</sup> overseas Chinese generally maintained contact with their homeland, forming a trading diaspora that overlapped with and complemented the Muslim network. Although Chinese tradition in Java maintains that Zheng He founded the major trading centers on the northern coast, he in fact relied on the collaboration of Javanese Muslims and Chinese (many of whom were Muslim) already resident in longestablished ports.<sup>29</sup> According to Ma Huan, Huihui (Muslims) from Southwest Asia, as well as emigrants from Fujian and Guangdong, dominated the principal Javanese ports of Tuban, demak, Gresik, and Surabaja. He reported that all the residents there were “very fond of the blue-patterned porcelain-ware” of the Middle Kingdom, which they purchased with Chinese copper-cash, the chief currency of the region.<sup>30</sup> Chinese literature commemorates the association of porcelain with the adventures of Zheng He. in Voyage to the Western Ocean (xia xiyang), an anonymous play written for the Ming court in the early fifteenth century, Zheng He lures a hostile Sulu chief on board his flagship with the promise of showing him a magical tree that bears porcelains instead of fruit. on another occasion, the admiral lulls hostile kings into complacency with an offering of porcelains in the form of a Chinese junk; he also hands out porcelains fashioned like a tree, accompanied by the menacing suggestion that through magic he can spy on enemies from a great height. Enchanted by the gifts, the rulers board Zheng He’s flagship, where the admiral browbeats them into submission. in Voyage of the San Bao Eunuch, the surprise is on Zheng He. luo Maodeng portrays him meeting in Arabia with envoys from Mecca, who present him with tribute gifts of porcelain. Astonished to be presented with merchandise from his own land, Zheng He asks how the Meccans obtained the chinaware. They reply that it came by way of a “thousand-league camel,” that is, by caravan on the Silk road. The San bao Eunuch, however, thinks to himself that only the magic of the Heavenly Queen could have brought the porcelains to so distant a place.<sup>31</sup> Along with silk cloth, porcelain was the most sought after commodity in places visited by Zheng He. For just one of the voyages, the Ming court commanded Jingdezhen to make 443,500 pieces. if an equivalent amount were carried in all the expeditions, a total of 3,104,500 pieces would have been exported to the Archipelago and the indian ocean between 1405 and 1433. That fell a great deal short of satisfying demand, however—which explains why markets opened up at the time for vietnamese and Thai imitations of chinaware. by comparison, in the late seventeenth century, Chinese and voC merchants shipped at least 800,000 porcelains to batavia annually for regional consumption, which would amount to 21,600,000 pieces over the same number of years covered by Zheng He’s fleets. And not only did the latter venture abroad just seven times in the course of a generation, they called only at harbors of the most important tribute clients, bypassing many trading centers that had long relied on exports from China. As a result, some localities, such as borneo and the Philippines, experienced something of a porcelain famine in the early Ming, a sharp reduction in the quantities of the ceramic that had been received in the Song and yuan eras.<sup>32</sup> However fully laden, even Zheng He’s treasure ships could not satisfy the prodigious demand for porcelain in overseas communities. ## PorCElAin TrAdE in MAriTiME SoUTHEAST ASiA between 1611 and 1615, the dutchman Peter Floris journeyed through Asia as chief factor of the Globe, a frigate of the East india Company. it was the seventh voyage of an EiC ship to Asia and the first to trade in the bay of bengal and the Gulf of Siam, making layovers in the ports of Ayutthaya, burma, and the Coromandel coast. in the isolated Andaman islands in the bay of bengal, Floris noted an intriguing phenomenon: “Heere uppon a little ile wee founde a greate percell of broken porseleyn of all manner of sortes. . . . From whence it was come wee coulde not knowe, for wee sawe no signe at all of any junckes or shipps which might there have bene caste awaye.”<sup>33</sup> Shattered porcelain on the shorelines of Asia represents the flotsam and jetsam of myriad catastrophes. The sea passage from Canton to the Persian Gulf was the lengthiest in regular use in global commerce until Spanish inauguration of the route from Manila to Acapulco in the early 1570s. in the course of centuries, ships were destroyed on coral reefs or in storms, their crews lost, their cargoes often cast up at the water’s edge. As a consequence, porcelain shards are everywhere on the beaches of Southeast Asia and the indian ocean, often turned up even today by casual digging in the sand. Two tons of porcelain rubble have been collected from the coast of Cebu, an island of the central Philippines, just north of Mindanao. Hundreds of thousands of pieces piled up in the river deltas of northwestern borneo, some dating to the ninth century. Shards are scattered on the shores of the Malay Peninsula, the eastern coast of Sumatra, the littoral of the Gulf of Siam, and approaches to the southern burmese port of Martaban. They also are found in abundance on the treacherous, reef-edged passage between india and Sri lanka, as well as on the shallow seaboards of the red Sea, southern Arabia, and the Persian Gulf. Every lagoon, island, and headland on the East African coast likewise is littered with fragments of chinaware. At all times the quantity of porcelain arriving in maritime Southeast Asia represented the best gauge of prosperity for both buyer and seller, the clearest indication of whether Chinese merchants were surging overseas or in governmentenforced retreat. The Archipelago responded unfailingly to the rhythms of Chinese seaborne commerce, with autonomous ports, ambitious chiefs, and royal potentates competing for trading advantage by sending tribute emissaries to the Middle King dom and by enticing Chinese merchants to patronize their markets. Even more than continental Southeast Asia, the Archipelago served as China’s undeveloped but resource-rich hinterland, a cheap, easily accessible source of forest produce and a sprawling marketplace avid for manufactured goods. it was Jingdezhen’s favorite dumping ground for its coarsest products, and the kilns of Fujian and Guangdong found some of their best customers there among natives of those provinces who had migrated to the harbors of borneo, Java, and Sumatra. Moreover, Chinese ceramics often functioned as the “small change” of commerce in areas without a dominant cash economy. A ship wrecked off Java in the tenth century did not carry enough Javanese and Chinese coins for the purpose of trade, but the great variety of ceramics on board, from the finest to the most routine, certainly smoothed the progress of commerce.<sup>34</sup> From sometime during the Tang, not long after the creation of porcelain, the ceramic began entering the life of maritime Southeast Asia. in the early thirteenth century, Zhao rugua (1170–1231), a superintendent of trade and minor member of the Song imperial family, recorded in his Description of Barbarian Peoples (Zhufan zhi [ca. 1225]) that merchants long had traded Chinese pottery and other goods for Southeast Asian pearls, tortoiseshell, hemp, beeswax, and incense woods. in the Philippine islands, Zhao relates, outsiders greatly fear natives who skulk in the jun gle and shoot arrows at passersby, yet “when the trader takes them a porcelain jar, they bow and take it, and then uttering cries of joy, run away with it.”<sup>35</sup> However patronizing the tone, Zhao’s anecdote indicates that many peoples in maritime Southeast Asia responded to porcelain in a fashion dramatically different from those in Korea, Japan, and vietnam. Since potters in the Archipelago made only rough, unglazed earthenware in bonfires and small, crude kilns, the peoples of the region enormously admired the Chinese imports and came to discount their own terra-cotta. in some cases, having employed mainly seashells, woven holders, or bamboo for eating their meals and storing their foodstuffs, they made the transition to porcelain with only slight experience of common crockery. A Chinese observer in 1618 declared that the inhabitants of banjarmasin in southeastern borneo stopped using banana leaves for dishes only when chinaware came into their hands.<sup>36</sup> Sarawak in northwestern borneo, an iron-smelting area, imported such huge amounts of chinaware in the twelfth century that vessels of the ceramic supplemented copper-cash as a trade currency. Maintaining close commercial ties with China from at least the Song period, the port of Santubong on the Sarawak river imported porcelains and provided over fifty tons of iron for a pagoda in Hebei province. on the swampy coast south of the river, the Melanau people traded for chinaware from Santubong, including vessels of longquan celadon and Jingdezhen blue-and-white, which they used for storing oils, medicines, cosmetics, and magic charms. The traditional dowry given by the father of the bridegroom to the family of a high-status bride comprised a sword, gold bracelets, and blue-and-white plates inscribed with Chinese script. Trudging up steep footpaths into the remote, mountainous interior, Melanau traders brought porcelains to hunter-gatherers who never laid eyes on the sea.<sup>37</sup> in borneo and elsewhere, coastal peoples represented the major consumers of porcelain at all times, though inland areas received increasing amounts from the time of the late Song. by the Ming period, the Kelabit of borneo, living twelve hundred meters above sea level, had access to Chinese, vietnamese, and Thai pottery. They had a penchant for offbeat and colorful items, such as porcelain pots shaped like ducks, crayfish, and parrots. Coastal residents preferred an assortment of small wares—bowls, plates, jarlets, cups, saucers—but hefty jars and other large pieces were the principal articles in interior communities.<sup>38</sup> Many martaban jars, also called dragon jars or pesaka (heirloom jars), came from burma, Thailand, and China. Tall, conical-shaped, and brown-glazed, the stoneware jars stood in the longhouses of warring clans in the Kalimantan region deep in borneo, sometimes with porcelain plates suspended from vines above them. (With vast tracts of borneo rain forest currently being hacked down, hundreds of martabans have come onto European auction blocks, where they fetch high prices.) Thomas Forrest (ca. 1729–1802), an English traveler, visited the longhouse of a chief on the island of luzon that had “much the appearance of a china shop,” with some thirty porcelain jars, each holding at least seventy-five liters, displayed on shelves; another chief treated Forrest to a feast on fifty-three porcelain dishes, including several sizable tureens. The Englishman also noted that humble villagers of new Guinea and small neighboring islands often possessed “a china plate or basin.”<sup>39</sup> Sturdy and handsome, with a thick wall, solid foot, and interior glazing, stoneware martaban jars had been shipped to the Archipelago since the Han dynasty, after which they were joined by those made of porcelain. They were costly items: the voC paid as much as twenty-one guilders (or about five taels of silver) for a martaban at a time when a blue-and-white vase went for ten guilders and a humble jug for a small fraction of the coin. ibn battuta reports seeing martabans in Malabar ports that stood a meter high and held as much as two hundred kilos. on voyages from the Coromandel coast to the Hindu-buddhist kingdoms of Southeast Asia, traders sometimes carried them filled with holy water from the Ganges; in the early eighteenth century, the dragon jars proved handy for shipping balls of opium, each as big as a person’s head, from bengal to China. because of the robust construction of the jar, merchants also employed it for taking metallic mercury—a liquid almost fourteen times heavier than water and used for making red ink, red lacquer, and alchemical compounds—to China. Chinese traders packed martabans with a range of products, including salt pork, ginger, wine, rice, honey, and sugared citrons. Moreover, since a goodly number of small porcelains fit inside the massive jars, they made for excellent ballast.<sup>40</sup> Peoples of the Archipelago used their own terra-cotta jugs for holding water as the porosity of the vessels caused evaporation on the surface, removing heat from the interior and thus cooling the liquid. Martabans, however, proved superior for containing alcoholic liquors made from rice, honey, or sugarcane, as unglazed earthenware could not keep fermented beverages in potable condition for more than a brief time. The jars also kept insects and other vermin from invading large stores of fish sauce, pickled bamboo shoots, rice, dried meat, and lime paste (necessary for the common practice of betel-nut chewing). Sawn in half and fitted around a corpse in a fetal position, martabans in the Philippines and borneo also commonly served as coffins for individuals of prominent status, cherished possessions whose use supposedly placated the spirits haunting burial grounds. Jars bearing the design of a dragon, regarded as a symbol of recreation and of rebirth after death, were especially valued for prestigious funerals. People treated the jars as womblike receptacles for processes that seemed to renew and recycle life, such as the fermentation and decomposition of natural things. Jar burial was an ancient custom in the Philippines, perhaps introduced from China soon after the neolithic; but during the Song, martabans supplanted native earthenware jars in elaborate burial ceremonies. Sometimes the funerary jar with its remains would be set overlooking a cliff or river so that the soul of the deceased would find trouble-free passage to the hereafter. in secluded mountain regions of the southern Philippines, martabans occasionally still serve as ossuaries today. Chinese pottery imports devastated the ceramic traditions of maritime Southeast Asia. Joined in due course by Chinese-style stoneware from vietnam and Thailand, porcelain displaced indigenous terra-cotta for all important cultural functions, such as rituals of harvest, feasting, matrimony, and interment. in the Philippines, the switchover began in the Song period as Chinese merchants established links with trading port chiefs in luzon, Mindoro, the Sulu Archipelago, and the western littoral of the Mindanao Sea. A multitude of small-scale maritime bosses (routinely doubling as pirates) dominated the sea lanes to the Moluccas, some eight hundred kilometers south of Mindanao. Ginger and cinnamon were grown in China, but the Moluccas were the exclusive source of cloves, mace, and nutmeg, spices keenly sought by Chinese merchants. Some prosperous and strong rulers of the region even made tribute missions to China. Two chiefs from Sulu paid obeisance to the yongle emperor in 1417, escorted by a retinue of 340 persons and presenting tribute gifts of deer hides, spices, and a pearl reported to weigh 213 grams (7.5 ounces). yongle bestowed on them the title “king,” as well as court robes of gold silk embroidered with dragons, 100 taels of gold, 200 rolls of silk, 2,000 strings of copper-cash, and numerous fine porcelains. by the late Ming period, Chinese merchants routinely shipped a special miscellany of pottery to the islands, catering to the demand of chiefs for certain vessels and fashions. The flood of chinaware dealt a deathblow to customary styles: although Philippine craftsmen continued to turn out huge amounts of terra-cotta, the unique design traditions that informed their production rapidly withered away as trade wares usurped first place in indigenous culture. At Calatagan, one hundred kilometers southwest of Manila, archaeologists have exhumed fifteenth-century graves whose bodies had blue-and-white porcelain dishes lying under the head and covering the pubic region. The second-rate status of Philippine earthenware is indicated by its being positioned at a remove from the corpse.<sup>41</sup> Porcelains and other prestige trade goods had powerful economic and social effects in the Philippines and elsewhere, stimulating the rise of trading networks and more specialized craft production. Above all, warfare increased as chiefs sought to expand their sway by winning official recognition from China, purchasing Chinese weapons, and controlling the entry and distribution of Chinese merchandise. by the fifteenth century, porcelain constituted up to 20 percent of all ceramics in the Philippines, even at ports and islands off the beaten track; at some coastal settlements frequently visited by foreign merchants, Chinese, vietnamese, and Thai wares amounted to as much as 40 percent of the pottery in use.<sup>42</sup> Archaeologists reckon that the iron Age of the Philippines stretched from 500 b.c.e. to 1000 c.e.; but given the quantities of chinaware imported from the Song period onward, as shown by thousands of tons of shards excavated in the islands, they have coined the term Porcelain Age to designate the period of Philippine history from the late Tang to the arrival of the Spanish at Cebu in 1565. Java had an experience similar to the Philippines, though its commercial contacts with China went back as far as the late Han inasmuch as its ports served as obligatory way-stations on the sailing route between China and the indian ocean. Potters in the villages of central and eastern Java produced unglazed, red-colored wares since the early common era, often modeled on indian forms such as the kendi. Terra-cotta sculptural art flourished from the eighth to the tenth century, with numerous kilns on the brantas river in central Java producing tiles, figurines, and building ornaments. Chinese pottery began to arrive in large amounts during the same time, when central Java experienced a construction boom; shards of Guangdong wares have been excavated from around the gigantic stepped stupa of borobudur on the Kedu Plain, built in the heyday of the Sailendra dynasty (ca. 775–860) of the Srivijayan kingdom (670–1025) of central Java and southern Sumatra. by the time Chinese overseas trade mushroomed in the Song, the kingdom of Majapahit in eastern Java had supplanted Srivijaya and extended its sway through much of the island. Majapahit sovereigns adopted Chinese copper-cash as their common currency and as the standard for government levies; Javanese metalworkers replicated the coin in tin and lead, complete with Chinese ideographic inscriptions. The kingdom’s rulers launched a program of building Hindu-buddhist temples (candi), multistory monuments dedicated to the worship of deceased rulers, new deities whose ashes reposed in porcelain jars. As with similar temples being built at the same time by Khmer and Thai royal dynasties, the construction placed great demands on native ceramic technology and encouraged imports of Chinese pottery. From the fourteenth century, Chinese and Muslim traders came to Java for spices. That was a consequence of the policy of Gaja Mada (d. 1351), a powerful Majapahit minister, who promoted bringing spices from the Moluccas to his kingdom, a distance of some sixteen hundred kilometers (or one month’s sail), from where they could be transshipped to China or the indian ocean. in enforcing this strategy, he relied in part on Chinese-descent mariners in northern Javanese ports who had trading contacts with the Spice islands. To obtain the riches available in Java, Chinese merchants carried enormous amounts of porcelain there. To compete with the imports, and surely out of admiration for them, Javanese potters abandoned their own artistic styles and manufacturing techniques for Chinese ones. They eventually did little more than produce earthenware copies of a wide range of Chinese vessels. in particular, they replicated martaban jars down to the last detail of decoration.<sup>43</sup> ## THE CUlTUrE oF PorCElAin in MAriTiME SoUTHEAST ASiA Porcelains and other Chinese merchandise did not spread evenly in the Archipelago, for there was a marked divergence between two cultural environments, a difference reflected in uses and perceptions of porcelain. in terms of high culture— as characterized by urban life, long-distance trade, organized religion, and some measure of literacy—towns on coasts and in fertile river valleys provided a distinctive setting. Wet-rice (sawah) agriculture supported the relatively dense populations of small principalities, such as the brunei Sultanate and the city-state of Melaka, as well as good-sized kingdoms, such as Hindu-buddhist Majapahit and Muslim Mataram (ca. 1600–1755) in Java. depending on seaborne exchange for customs revenue and mercantile earnings, harbormasters, administrative officials, and urban businessmen controlled imports of porcelain, which naturally accumulated primarily in their own localities. They also employed the chinaware as a commercial resource with which to extract desirable forest commodities from peoples unfamiliar with structured governments and complex economies. Small, fiercely independent groups dominated most of the Archipelago, especially on innumerable islets and in the interior of the Philippines, borneo, Sumatra, and the Malay Peninsula. living in isolated valleys and impenetrable forest, they belonged to narrowly defined bands or lineage groups, combined hunting with slash-and-burn agriculture, regarded harbor states with hostility, and communicated little with the outside world. They were the sort of people typified by Zhao rugua as lurking in the jungle and harassing interlopers. They remained entirely illiterate and only lightly touched (if at all) by the religions of india and Southwest Asia that had spread through the Archipelago since the early centuries c.e.. raiding and feasting figured among them as central, related activities; sometimes the heads of enemies hung from funerary poles as warriors held a celebratory meal after a victorious clash. Porcelains filtered into their districts in restricted amounts, brought by agents of the distant entrepôt and traded for stuff such as tortoiseshell, rhinoceros horn, kingfisher feathers, and exotic birds. Although there was some overlap in perceptions, porcelain generally signified different things in the two environments. Peoples in the trading towns of borneo, Java, and Sumatra, often living alongside and marrying expatriate Chinese, treated porcelain as a well-known, prized commodity, signifying both civilized life and continuing association with the Middle Kingdom. They regarded possession of the pottery as a voucher of social reputation, economic standing, and political prestige while also valuing its patent domestic utility. They undoubtedly shared some of the Chinese notions about the magical features of the ceramic, the fantastic consequences of furnace transformation, and it accordingly had a central role in their ritual life. The status of porcelain in comparatively sophisticated communities in the Archi pelago is nicely indicated by the reception accorded Ferdinand Magellan (ca. 1470– 1521) and his mariners. Commanding five ships and 237 men, Magellan left Seville in August 1519 for what turned out to be the first circumnavigation of the world. Almost two years later, on 27 April 1521, he and forty of his men lost their lives on Mactan, a pocket-sized island close to Cebu, in a futile skirmish with local warriors. After seventeen months, only one ship, the Victoria, limped back to home port, captained by Juan Sebastián de Elcano (ca. 1476–1526), crewed by eighteen scurvy-wracked sailors, and loaded with enough cloves to make a modest profit for investors in the voyage. in the end, the closest Magellan himself came to the treasures of Asia took place just before his death. According to Antonio Pigafetta (ca. 1480–1534), the italian chronicler of the voyage, Magellan and a local chief on Cebu ate tortoise eggs from a porcelain dish, and at a feast given by a headman on the coast of Mindanao, the commander and his men banqueted from “large porcelain platters full of rice, and others full of pork.” After Magellan’s death, the Victoria sailed east to brunei, where the Muslim ruler, raja Siripada, greeted the mariners with “silk-draped elephants . . . [accompanied by] twelve men, each with a porcelain tray covered with silk in order to carry their presents.”<sup>44</sup> His attendants laid out a banquet of fish, capon, and peacock in porcelain bowls, along with rice wine in porcelain cups, each “big as an egg.” Siripada’s extravagant welcome of the Europeans, however, involved more than just bringing out the best tableware for distinguished guests: he employed the apotropaic force of his porcelains to establish a harmonious footing with unsettling strangers, perhaps as a way to avoid the sort of carnage that had marked the encounter on Mactan. Among peoples of the Archipelago distant from maritime commerce and urban communities, porcelain took on even greater cultural and spiritual significance than it had in Siripada’s domain. in regions where porcelains (and stonewares) circulated sparingly, gaining control over them meant gaining control over people. Chinaware and other foreign trade goods conferred wealth, prestige, and power on those who acquired and distributed them.<sup>45</sup> in effect, a chief (or proverbial “big man”), the mediator between alien vendors and the native population, severed porcelains from economic exchange and turned them into political capital for his own profit. This was the natural outcome of the economy itself not having an independent existence as such in the local community. rather, considerations regarding material goods and resources were embedded in the culture as a whole, in the assemblage of households and kinship groups that subsumed all aspects of production and consumption. in such an environment, the value of porcelain jars and bowls had virtually nothing to do with their pecuniary cost. rather, when people traded chinaware, they did so to settle social debts between individuals or groups, not to gain a strictly economic advantage. Prestige merchandise from outside the community became a bankable cultural asset with which the big man rewarded followers, cemented alliances, and boosted his status and reputation. The chief who owned the porcelain jars that Forrest saw in the Philippines employed them as exhibitions of power and as markers of exclusivity, not unlike Japanese daimyo showing off their stoneware luzon jars (as Carletti said) “out of vainglory and for grandeur,” with no regard for their economic value outside their own self-validating subculture. This estimation ran down the social scale in the Archipelago, for the ordinary villager who possessed a single porcelain plate or basin also regarded it as a species of social currency, treasured it as an instrument of sumptuary distinction, and therefore endowed it with unique significance. To people who possessed only terra-cotta, or perhaps did not even have that, the ethereal qualities of porcelains—radiant color, entrancing design, silky-smooth surface, resonant tone—made the ceramics seem not merely functional commodities for the domestic economy but also talismanic objects to be comprehended in exalted terms. Porcelains inspired the same sort of veneration that enveloped bronze cauldrons in ancient China. As with the metal vessels in the Shang and Zhou, monopolized by the powerful and vital for religious ceremony and ritual feasting, porcelains in much of the Archipelago were perceived as communal entities imbued with cosmological power. This perspective was immeasurably enhanced by virtue of the porcelains (unlike the bronzes) being novel exotic articles; something impossible for native artisans to produce, scarcely possible for them to imagine how it could be done.<sup>46</sup> Porcelain thereby took on remarkable cultural and symbolic significance, gaining spiritual weight and energy by having journeyed an unfathomable extent, as if from the wraithlike realm of revered ancestors, capricious daemons, and star-dwelling deities. Since porcelains entered the community as foreign objects, people related them not to familiar containers, such as rattan baskets, bamboo mugs, and vegetable gourds, but rather assimilated them to otherworldly contexts. Earnest piety and distance conflated earthly and celestial geography. Porcelains trailed the emotive power and status of the enigmatic craftsman-god shaping his wares in an alien milieu, himself a numinous aspect of the omnipotent, primordial spirits who made all things. regarded as enchanted and magical, porcelain vessels had extraordinary status as tokens of anticipated rank in the afterlife, as chambers inhabited by spirits, and as a means of communication with divinities. Chinaware mediated between the human and animal worlds, the heavens and the earth, the quick and the dead, the present and the future. A borneo legend related that the deity Sanjumang cured the illness of a Majapahit princess and founded a royal dynasty, after which he shaped an infinite number of porcelains from lunar clay and gold, filled the caverns of seven mountains with the items, and then flew back to his home in the sky. in the Kalimantan region, the Jar deity, closely associated with martabans, lived in the heavens and had to be ritually consulted whenever an exceptional jar was traded or intentionally broken. A sacrifice to the deity was required if the vessel shattered accidentally, else the spirit who had occupied the jar would be outraged and vengeful. The Pal’awan of Palawan island in the Philippines believed that shooting stars striking earth caused porcelain jars to be formed. The Tinguian from the present-day region of Abra in the Philippines and the ifugao from the province of that name regarded porcelains as bequests from the same gods who gave them rice and sugarcane and who instructed them on ritual performances that guided their lives and protected their communities. blowing across the mouths of martabans produced vibrating moans that shamans interpreted as celestial warnings against calamity; cords strung across the top of the jars created a percussion instrument that enabled shamans to speak with spirits of the dead. The Tagbanuwa on Palawan island tapped their porcelain vessels to give a musical ring in order to summon gods and spirits to feasts, just as the Chinese did with pottery and bronze bells in the Shang era.<sup>47</sup> A Moluccan chief in the late seventeenth century alluded to the inimitable timbre of chinaware when he told a voC commander that he felt “like a fine porcelain dish upon which rap both the dutch [his allies] and those people of Ternate in the Moluccas [his enemies]. . . . The lord God have mercy on my brain pan.”<sup>48</sup> island peoples conceived of dragon jars as virtuosi of transmutation, possessing mortal characteristics and sharing in the sociability and misfortunes of human lives, as when a jar owned by a borneo chief reportedly wailed pitiably when his wife died. incorporated into families and clan networks, jars were given names, married to each other, buried with ceremony, and passed down through generations; they were seen to converse, play with one another, turn into animals and forest spirits, assume human form, heal the sick, tell fortunes, and deliver prophecies. People in a remote district of southern Sumatra credited a martaban jar with bringing islam to them. A Philippine legend said that a male luzon jar, famed for its chatter, made audacious journeys around the Archipelago but eventually settled down on a secluded island with a jar of the opposite sex. Gender was determined by shape: a male jar typically had a narrow waist and high, wide shoulders, while a female one had sloping shoulders and a round body. The iban dayaks of Sarawak believed that porcelain jars could turn into men and men into jars. The Melanau of borneo held to the fable that a wild boar turned into a jar, a magical change that warranted draping the vessel in costly yellow cloth and keeping it in a protective basket. Another boar, speared to death, instantly came back to life as a jar and scampered away from the hunters. A host of natural things—hooked fish, dead python, trapped turtle, plucked fruit—had the capacity to metamorphose into chinaware jars or plates, the transformation making the wondrous vessels efficacious for curative ceremonies, childbirth rites, and supernatural communication. Shamans and chiefs vigilantly cared for such miracle-working objects, bringing them out in public only on special ritual occasions.<sup>49</sup> The bataks of northern Sumatra used Ming jars for holding medicines and magic potions. in borneo, celadon plates were believed to reveal the presence of poison when food was served on them—a superstition that probably came from Southwest Asia—and porcelain jars were regarded as enhancing the potency of the medicines they held. on the island of Sulawesi (east of borneo), people purified water by casting celadon shards into it. The iban of borneo used chinaware jars for collecting spirits required for bodily health, and their ritual experts made medicine by grinding chips from dragon jars into a fine powder. Among the Tinguian people, a spirit would release a child from illness or possession when a shaman drank rice wine from a porcelain cup. on Java and Sulawesi, women placed newborns, with their placentas, on porcelain dishes, and nine days after giving birth, the mother ritually bathed herself with water from a Chinese pot. An infant’s welfare was safeguarded by keeping the water in which it was washed in a Chinese jar, often in tandem with a piece of copper-cash. Severe infirmities, people in borneo supposed, called for the application of oil kept in chinaware jars, containers seen as so potent that their very presence at the doorway of a longhouse kept disease and demons at bay.<sup>50</sup> Among the dyaks of Kalimantan, if a martaban ornamented with two dragons stood at the entrance of a home, it indicated that a female virgin dwelled within. in a fertility rite after nuptials, dyaks danced and chanted around a pole before which was placed a porcelain jar festooned with fruit and leaves. As part of a Melanau wedding ceremony, women bathed the bride and groom in water from a Chinese jar, and the liquid also was poured over the right foot of the bride when she entered her husband’s home for the first time. Women rubbed coconut oil from a celadon jar on the temples, knees, and elbows of the couple to guarantee fruitful reproduction. For the same reason, the jar remained under the bed of the newlyweds during their first nights together.<sup>51</sup> The Kelabit of borneo suspended Chinese pots along with the heads of their enemies from the rafters of their longhouses so that the spiritual force of the latter would be siphoned off into the containers. Sealed with a wooden stopper to retain the magical energy, the pots had such substantial value that an owner could exchange one for a slave or sacrificial victim. Warriors used Kangxi porcelain pots in the form of ducks and crayfish to offer libations to enemy heads, always careful that women and outsiders did not pollute the precious vessels by touching them. Among the iban of Sarawak, the possessions of a dead warrior were tied to the top of a dragon jar, and only a comrade who had taken a head in combat could remove them. The iban placed Chinese pottery at the base of ornamented poles from which the heads of enemies dangled. The Punan ba numbered among their foes, and they too adorned their funerary columns with porcelains to commemorate the loss of valiant warriors. At the foot of the poles, they set out blue-and-white dishes with offerings of food for the spirits of the men they mourned.<sup>52</sup> in the shrouded green jungle of the Archipelago, gleaming porcelains radiated a spellbinding aura. The vessels seemed to provide access to a remote, mysterious world, a sense that one could get in touch with, and perhaps have an effect on, aweinspiring forces. Chinaware played a vital role in the whole cycle of existence—birth, sickness, marriage, feasting, worship, war, and death. naturally, beliefs and practices taken for granted by the Kelabit and Punan ba were less in evidence in the trading towns and urbane courts of maritime Southeast Asia. Traces of them lingered, however. despite their formal censure of idolatry and heathen custom, islam and Christianity in fact won converts by freely assimilating a host of local folk spirits, rituals, and customs. old and new seldom had trouble reaching accommodation. The salvation religions of Southwest Asia clearly failed to stamp out the notion that porcelain could be employed as an avenue of contact with the supernatural; the ceramic continued to serve as a gesture of reverence for transcendent power, an adornment linked with longstanding devotion. Spanish priests in Manila poured holy water into blue-and-white bowls set in baptismal founts, and they had blue-and-white porcelains cemented into the walls of their churches.<sup>53</sup> Similarly, Muslims in batavia, demak, and Melaka built mosques with walls of brick inlaid with blue-and-white plates, and they decked out the gates of shrines and mosques with blue-and-white tiles from China and vietnam. And raja Siripada staged a pageant with his porcelains and elephants to intimidate and pacify his worrisome Spanish visitors. ## THE CUlTUrE oF PorCElAin on THE SWAHili CoAST in the four voyages between 1414 and 1433, Zheng He’s treasure ships sailed beyond the Archipelago. After steering north through the Straits of Melaka, they turned west for the indian ocean. At an average speed of 2.5 knots (111 kilometers) a day, the fleet covered the 1,750 kilometers to Sri lanka in about a month. From there, it moved on to the Maldive islands, where merchants loaded up on ambergris, coconut-fiber rope, and tons of cowry shells. The islands served as a useful stopover for the fleet, most of which would then proceed north to Calicut on the Malabar coast while a contingent sailed on to East Africa. it took about a week to reach Somalia, which in the late fifteenth century boasted a “Zheng He village” (Zheng He tuan) on the coast, as well as a midden of porcelain shards more than a meter deep.<sup>54</sup> The monsoon system gave the ports of East Africa connections to Arabia, some 5,000 kilometers to the north, as well as to the coast of Malabar, 4,100 kilometers to the northeast (measured from the equator). From April to october, the summer monsoon impelled ships from Africa to india; from november to March, the winter monsoon blew them back to the Swahili coast. by Zheng He’s time, about thirty five Swahili ports used the monsoon winds to take part in indian ocean commerce, the most prominent being Mogadishu (now the capital of Somalia), Pate, Malindi, Mombasa, Kilwa, and Sofala. ruled by merchant oligarchies and titular kings, they preserved their political autonomy inasmuch as the lowland coastal belt was too shallow and extensive—1,750 kilometers from Mogadishu to Kilwa, just north of Mozambique’s Cape delgado—to permit formation of a centralized state. A northsouth coastal axis thus emerged rather than an east-west axis linking the seaboard and the interior. Historically, the Swahili coast looked outward to Arabia, india, and Southeast Asia more than to the vast African heartland. The latter begins some sixteen kilometers from the coast, where an escarpment rises twelve hundred meters above sea level, the rim of a plateau that extends to the great lakes that are the ultimate source of the nile river. The name Swahili, “lands of the Coast,” is Arabic in origin, deriving from sahil (pl. sawahil), “margin” or “boundary.” Africans founded the coastal towns, however, not (as legend has it) Arabian, Mesopotamian, or Persian merchants.<sup>55</sup> ibn battuta, who visited the coast in 1331, observed that the “majority of its inhabitants are Zanj [i.e., bantu], jet-black in colour, and with tattoo-marks on their faces.”<sup>56</sup> He commended them for their Muslim piety and well-built wooden mosques. Although Africans made up the majority of the Swahili people, significant numbers of Arabians, Persians, and indians added to the mix of population. in terms of culture, coastal inhabitants belonged to the cosmopolitan mercantile world of islam. Their port cities acted as intermediaries between the polities of the indian ocean and the African interior, exporting ivory, ambergris, iron ingots, timber (especially mangrove poles), leopard skins, gold, and slaves. Gold came mainly from the stone-built settlements clustered in the area of Great Zimbabwe on the southern margin of the Zimbabwe plateau, a variety of locations that date from the eleventh to the sixteenth century. Archaeologists have excavated indian glass beads, Southwest Asian pottery, and porcelain there. Slaves too came from the interior, usually men captured in war, and merchants sold them throughout West and East Asia. Zhao rugua reports that “many families [in China] buy black people to make gatekeepers of,” referring to them as “devil slaves” (kui-nu).<sup>57</sup> According to ibn battuta, Africans also served as elite warriors for the king of Sri lanka and as men-at-arms on great Chinese junks, such as the one in Calicut on which he booked passage for Canton in a private stateroom for himself and his ever-present slave girls. Merchants imported rock crystal, glass beads, fine metalwork, cotton cloth, spices, weapons, and porcelain to the Swahili coast. Chinese copper-cash first arrived there during the late Tang period, around the same time islam began spreading down the littoral from Arabia and iraq, winning over the indigenous population. The economic demands of the Fatimid and Ayyubid dynasties of Egypt and of the Abbasids of Mesopotamia—especially for timber, iron, and slave labor for swamp drainage and construction projects—provided a powerful stimulus for the establishment of trading towns. by the twelfth century, worshipers had built mosques as far south as Madagascar, and islamic forms of burial, with the head of the body facing east toward Mecca, appeared around the same time. Porcelain first reached the coast in the late Song, but it did not become plentiful until Ming blue-and-white began to arrive not long before the expeditions of Zheng He. Swahili merchants never took significant amounts of it inland, however, just as they never attempted to spread islam there. Their intense social individuality, stemming from their character as tight-knit oligarchies presiding over small, self-governing communities, stymied cultural interaction between the seaboard and the bantu heartland. This exclusivity was intensified by the seaports not developing durable institutions for sustaining and promulgating scriptural tradition. Significantly, potters on the coast and those in the interior preserved entirely distinct customs. in any case, places associated with Great Zimbabwe—settlements primarily for relatively penurious warriors—stimulated little demand for foreign pottery and other Asian luxury goods. Almost all inhabitants of the arid plateau relied on hardscrabble farming or followed an itinerant, cattle-herding way of life, neither of which lent itself to purchasing exotic commodities such as Persian and Chinese pottery. When chinaware did make its way inland, however, it predictably took on the magical quality it enjoyed in the Archipelago: a sixteenth-century Portuguese traveler recounted that natives rubbed their bodies with blue-and-white vessels to assuage a range of infirmities.<sup>58</sup> The Swahili elite, known in the Kiswahili language as Waungwana, “persons of gentility,” regarded porcelain solely as an exotic article to be displayed as a status symbol. They kept trade in foreign merchandise in their own homes and storehouses, away from the public markets of commoners. As described by ibn battuta, the customs of Mogadishu were typical: “Each merchant on disembarking goes only to the house of the young man who is his host. . . . The host then sells his goods for him and buys for him.”<sup>59</sup> local businessmen extended trading concessions to foreign merchants by incorporating them ritually into blood brotherhoods; the putative kinsman generally acknowledged the honor by presenting his hosts with gifts of porcelain. “Persons of gentility” restricted the access of commoners to exotic commodities, hereditary offices, fertile farmland, fishing rights, and weapons. nor were those outside privileged circles allowed to have homes as grand. Whereas most dwellings on the coast were one-story, mud-and-wattle huts, the elite built mansions from coral blocks quarried from reefs and dressed in lime plaster. With windowless walls rebuffing the outside world, the rooms were perfumed with incense and hung with silk cloth; special niches in galleries displayed the owner’s finest chinaware and could be viewed only by those of suitable rank. Since porcelain had so central a role in validating the status of the Waungwana, they made certain it never spread appreciably up the escarpment or down the social ladder. Unlike what happened in the Philippines and Java, then, indigenous terra-cotta traditions remained intact. As revealed by archaeological excavation, only 5 percent of pottery shards excavated on the Swahili coast derive from trade imports.<sup>60</sup> Wealthy merchants and royal dignitaries paid for public structures such as tombs, mosques, and palaces. They decorated the buildings with intricate coral carvings, as well as with insets of porcelain and Chinese-influenced Southwest Asian pottery. At many sacred sites associated with ancestors and honored dead, such as rock shelters and headlands, Muslims left porcelain bowls as offerings to propitiate spirits, believing the dead would drink from them when the living departed the site. Porcelain plates were shattered over the tomb of the deceased; gifts of porcelain were placed in caves for spirits who watched over a lagoon or stretch of coast. Worshipers employed porcelain as decoration in the vaults of mosques and in the spandrels of mihrabs, the niches indicating the direction of Mecca. Muslims decorated the facade of a large domed tomb on Pate island in the lamu Archipelago (in presentday Kenya) with pieces of Chinese and Southwest Asian blue-and-white. Since blue dyes were unknown in East Africa (until the Portuguese planted indigo in the region), blue was a compelling color there, leading Swahili inhabitants to regard imported blue cloth as exceptionally valuable and alluring. The same consideration enhanced the status of blue-painted pottery.<sup>61</sup> Kilwa (in present-day Tanzania) emerged in the twelfth century as the leading commercial power on the coast, chiefly because it controlled the port of Sofala, located over one thousand kilometers south of Cape delgado. Merchants from Sofala ventured far inland to trade for gold, perhaps all the way to Great Zimbabwe. in exchange for the yellow metal, Kilwa supplied glass beads, metalwork, textiles, and pottery. it held sway as the wealthiest city on the coast for several hundred years before the arrival of the Portuguese. The gold trade financed the building of the Great Mosque, a fourteenth-century building with eighteen cupolas and barrel vaults that the Portuguese compared favorably with the Great Mosque of Córdoba in Spain. A portico of the Kilwa mosque had mid-fifteenth-century blue-and-white porcelain bowls embedded in its roof, some with islamic geometric motifs, others with the usual Chinese thematic repertory. The Kilwa citadel possessed a similar grandeur: perhaps built by craftsmen from Egypt or Mesopotamia, it was a double-story structure with a large bathing pool, storage rooms for merchandise, and walls ornamented with insets of porcelain and Persian blue-and-white. Much of the latter was custommade for East Africa, copied from porcelains unloaded in Siraf and Hormuz.<sup>62</sup> like caves and other sacred shelters, pillars were regarded as dwellings for honored spirits. Tall and tapered, the structures rose near tombs and small mosques, usually as memorials for a holy man or an illustrious ancestor. Pieces of blue-andwhite porcelain encircled the base of the Great Pillar of Malindi (10 meters high) on the Galana river (Kenya), and a frieze of Ming plates and bowls crowned the Great Pillar of Mambrui (8 meters high), just north of Malindi. in Mombasa (Kenya) broken seventeenth-century Chinese pots adorned the base of the Mbaraki Pillar (14 meters high) and the walls of a nearby mosque. in the sixteenth century, Muslims set Portuguese imitations of Chinese blue-and-white into the walls of the Small Mosque at Mnarani, a town between Malindi and Mombasa.<sup>63</sup> From the Horn of Africa to Cape delgado, Swahili merchants for centuries measured their good fortune by the porcelains arrayed in the gallery niches of their elegant coral mansions. Their prosperity and power came to an abrupt end with the arrival of the Portuguese, however. The newcomers established fortresses on the coast to support their annual voyages between lisbon and Goa. They drove the Swahili out of the gold and ivory trade with the hinterland; they took over Kilwa, pillaged Mombasa, and monopolized the routes to the red Sea and the Malabar coast. The ports could not muster the unity needed to resist the invaders; nor could the Swahili elite call upon broad social support to salvage their political eminence. impotent and insolvent, the prey of outside forces, the Swahili ruling class ceased to play a major role in the commerce of the indian ocean. yet the Portuguese experienced their own collapse little more than a century later: by the early 1600s the ya’aruba sultans of oman had seized control of the coast, and European competitors, mainly the dutch and English, had dislodged the Portuguese from supremacy in the trade between Africa and india.<sup>64</sup> in The Soul’s Awakening (Al-inkishafi [ca. 1810]), Sayyid Abdalla bin ‘Ali bin nasir contemplates the passing of the “persons of gentility” who ruled the city-state of Pate for so long. both mordant and melancholy, his verse depicts Providence wreaking vengeance on the Swahili for the sins and corruption of its resplendent merchants, men besotted by chattels and profit at the cost of their eternal salvation. The poet suggests they should have feared false times when they did feast: And in their halls dwelt beauty everywhere And veneration stalked them all their days. Their homes set with Chinese porcelain And every cup and goblet was engraved While, placed amidst the glittering ornaments, Great crystal pitchers gleamed luminous. . . . Their lighted mansions [now] echo emptily; High in the rafters flutter bats. There are no murmurings, no happy shouts, And on the carved bedsteads spiders spin their webs. Where once in the wall-niches the porcelain stood Are now the ragged nests of wild birds.<sup>65</sup> ## “i THoUGHT All indiA A CHinA SHoP” For the fleet of Zheng He, Calicut was “the great country of the Western ocean,” its ambassadors taking precedence over all others.<sup>66</sup> The admiral’s traders certainly found their largest and most profitable market there. After the treasure ships docked, weeks of haggling followed between Zheng He’s agents and those of the Hindu king over prices to be set for a mountain of things. The merchants of Calicut naturally were familiar with porcelain and other Chinese products since they had been coming to the port in indian and Chinese ships for centuries before the voyages of Zheng He. After the Ming expeditions ended, Muslims of southwestern india took the lead in the seaborne trade, usually making a round-trip from their home ports to Melaka. An EiC factor in india in the seventeenth century reported that “all sorts of China ware are heere both in great esteeme and use which beinge sorted of all sizes, pryces and fashions will vend here at least 100 tonns per annun.”<sup>67</sup> in Goa in 1578, Francesco Pasio (1544–1612), an italian Jesuit on his way to China with ricci, expressed astonishment at the chinaware on sale in the Portuguese trading center: “There is so much porcelain and at such an attractive price that i saw nobody there making . . . similar things in clay, for porcelain is sold so cheaply that they could not sell clay pots for any price without wasting their time and losing money. And they even have porcelain under the bed to be used at night.”<sup>68</sup> When Sir Thomas roe (ca. 1581– 1644), ambassador of James vi (r. 1603–1625) to the Mughal emperor Jahangir (r. 1605–27), arrived in india, he looked forward to some gratifying purchases: “i thought all india a China shop, and that i should furnish all my Frendes with rarietyes.”<sup>69</sup> roe and other customers, however, had to guard against being palmed off with Persian copies of Jingdezhen blue-and-white, a fiddle exploited by the voC and EiC in india and Europe at times when the Chinese government embargoed overseas trade. According to John Chardin (1643–1713), who traveled in Persia in the 1670s, potters there made earthenware that is “pure Enamel, both within and without, like the China Ware. The Grain of it is as fine and transparent as that is, whereby it happens that one is often deceived in that Earthen Ware, and that one cannot distinguish it from China Ware, so beautiful and lively is the varnish of it. . . . They say that the dutch mix that Persian Ware with the China Ware, and import it into Holland.”<sup>70</sup> The sophisticated consumer looked for the equivalent of a trademark. in dispatching a shipping order from Coromandel to China, a voC agent stipulated that “it should be borne in mind that the aforesaid porcelains are most desired when they have a blue mark drawn like a character on the bottom.”<sup>71</sup> on the face of it, india would seem to be a lucrative market for porcelain: its population reached 150 million in the late sixteenth century, and its Hindu and Muslim aristocrats were renowned for their coffers stuffed with gemstones and precious metal. yet the subcontinent was the only region of the ecumene where porcelain effectively met defeat. Goa aside, as roe soon discovered, all india proved not to be “the China shop” he had imagined. And only in that port, amply supplied by Portuguese carracks, were porcelains so abundant and cheap that Europeans could employ them for chamber pots. To be sure, Muslim merchants and nobles valued the ceramic, and Muslim sovereigns of the delhi Sultanate and Mughal Empire zealously collected it, putting their marks of ownership on vessels in the form of drilled holes and engravings. And they were knowledgeable enough about porcelain to discriminate between wares from various kiln centers.<sup>72</sup> but Muslims numbered less than 20 percent of the population, and the vast majority of indians adhered to Hindu religious and cultural practices. As a corollary of their devotion, brahmin priests and rajput warriors recoiled from using porcelain, and indian potters turned out only unadorned terra-cotta. An English agent for the voC observed in 1614 that Persian merchants in india “eat from porcelain, while the Gentus [i.e., “Gentiles” or Hindus] do not. . . . Most of them observe the heathen rule.”<sup>73</sup> That so-called rule stemmed from Hindu anxieties about spiritual pollution, which dictate that utensils made of terra-cotta, which are porous and difficult to clean, must be discarded after use. From ancient times, indian artisans displayed impressive skill in making large terra-cotta sculptures for cultic ceremonies; but apprehension about pollution reduced conventional ceramics to a stagnant art from at least the Gupta period of the early common era, leading to the production of incalculable quantities of undistinguished, eminently disposable pottery.<sup>74</sup> As a result of clay vessels being identified with pollution-fraught terra-cotta, scrupulous Hindus shunned all ceramic wares and instead used metal dishes or improvised receptacles. (lacking a well-developed caste system, Hindu-buddhists of Southeast Asia did not adhere to such exacting strictures.) ibn battuta remarked that in Malabar and Sri lanka, Hindus often served food on banana leaves to their guests. in Hindu households even today, pottery is imperative for various ceremonies; but since many believers presume that evil spirits may be absorbed by cooking pots and vessels when perturbing events take place—such as illness, death, and menstruation—wares are smashed immediately after use, with a new set of crockery purchased when the occasion for ritual pollution has run its course. not surprisingly, porcelain always cost too much for such ready destruction, and even glazed earthenware seemed a pointless investment. indian craftsmen, perforce, halted on the terra-cotta rung of the pottery ladder. Eager to embellish their tombs, mosques, and forts, Mughal dynasts were forced to import brilliantly colored tiles from Kashan, the Persian center of tile production, and when enemies of the Mughals, Muslim kings and nobles of the sultanate of Golconda (1518–1637) in southern india, wanted to decorate their buildings with similar tiles, they found that local potters lacked the facility to make them; huge quantities had to be imported from distant Kashan.<sup>75</sup> For their own good reasons, then, indian potters never adopted the innovations of Southwest Asian artisans, such as luster glazing and tin glazing, and they had no inducement to turn out imitations of porcelain. in addition, for more than a millennium, Hindu caste restrictions, which aimed to minimize the peril of spiritual pollution, contributed to the immobility of indian earthenware. in the huge caste of potters, called kumbhakars (makers of kumbha, round-bottomed water jars), members of a given subcaste (nyat) abjured social relations with those belonging to another, even when a number of such subcastes worked in the same town.<sup>76</sup> Under the impact of such weighty conventions, there could be no long-term pooling of expertise regarding clays and kilns; hence pottery skills, even within the humble ambit of terra-cotta, remained undeveloped. in striking contrast to everywhere else in the ecumene, potters in india not only had no interest in stealing secrets from one another, but they had no secrets to steal. ## THE CUlTUrE oF PorCElAin in TiMUrid PErSiA A detachment of Zheng He’s fleet steered northwest from Calicut to the island of Hormuz, just off the coast of Persia. With a fair wind in the right monsoon season, the voyage took about twenty-five days. located at the choke point where the Arabian Sea flows into the Persian Gulf, Hormuz flourished by transshipping merchandise from india and China to the Tigris-Euphrates, inland Persia, and Transoxiana. Ma Huan recorded that the markets of Hormuz offered commodities of every description, especially pearls, rubies, topaz, jade utensils, and brocaded velvet. The island’s sultan paid tribute to the yongle emperor with such articles, as well as with consignments of lions, lynx, and leopards.<sup>77</sup> As always, Zheng He’s stevedores carried quantities of Jingdezhen blue-and-white off the treasure ships. The pottery was not entirely new to Hormuz, however, since Chinese junks had taken some there in the mid-fourteenth century, shortly before China fell into the civil war that led to the overthrow of the yuan dynasty. Persian merchants in the port who sold cobalt ore to Zheng He’s factors knew that potters used it to produce the Jingdezhen vessels, though they surely did not realize that Persian tin-glazed, blue-decorated earthenware had stimulated creation of the Chinese blue-and-white style the better part of a century earlier. in a relay of influence typical of ceramic history, after Jingdezhen blue-and-white disembarked in the land of its inspiration, it in turn decisively influenced Southwest Asian pottery. royal courts and artisans developed a new ceramic style, modeled on Ming porcelain designs, which became an integral part of a broad cultural renaissance in the islamic world. The territories most affected were those ruled by the emperors of Safavid Persia (characterized by Westerners as the “Great Sofi”), Mughal india (the “Great Mughal”), and the ottoman dominion of the balkans, Anatolia, Syria, and Egypt (the “Great Turk”). beyond subscribing to islam, the three regimes shared a great deal: they had links to Mongol tradition, derived from Turkic horse warriors of Central Asia, came to power by conquest after 1450, relied on gunpowder weapons to reinforce imperial authority, and sought cultural legitimacy to secure and promote their rule.<sup>78</sup> The three emperors who presided over the greatest cultural flowering of their respective realms all lived around the same time and served as model rulers for their successors: Shah ‘Abbas (1587–1629) of the Safavids, Akbar (1556–1605) of the Mughals, and Süleyman (1520–66) of the ottomans. The Muslim sovereigns looked back to cultural traditions that first emerged at the courts of the Timurid dynasty (1378–1506) of Persia, iraq, and Afghanistan. one of the most famous conquerors in history, Timur (ca. 1330–1405) is best known in the West as Tamerlane, from the Persian version of his name, Temur-i lang, “Temur the lame.” He pursued his ambitions in Central Asia in the context of the legacy established by the Mongols. Although a protracted struggle over election of the Great Khan led to rupturing of the “Great Mongol Empire” in the mid-thirteenth century, it remained a settled principle that political leadership must be in the hands of provincial khans belonging to the house of Genghis. The power of Timur, however, stemmed solely from his own astonishing energy and ability. After sweeping aside the minor Mongol lords of Transoxiana, he tried to make up for his discomforting lack of political legitimacy in various ways. He married a woman from the dynasty of the khans, concocted a spurious genealogy linking himself to the family of the Prophet, erected shrines for Sufi holy men, sponsored religious endowments, and patronized Persian poets and painters.<sup>79</sup> because it was identified with Mongol China and regarded as a token of high culture, he also favored blue-andwhite porcelain. At least in a minor key, Timur, like Korean kings, Ashikaga shoguns, and Philippine chieftains, called on the prestige of China to burnish his cultural credentials. Collecting porcelain along the way in his career of conquest represented an obvious means of doing so. When in 1398 he pillaged delhi, capital of the Tughlaq dynasty (1321–1450) of the delhi Sultanate, he acquired quantities of Ming blue-andwhite. Two years later, when he sacked damascus in Mamluk Syria, porcelain once again figured among the spoils prisoners carted to his capital, Samarqand. Potters captured in damascus, many of them adept at copying Chinese blue-and-white, trained Timur’s potters to do the same.<sup>80</sup> Their expertise accounts for mausoleums in Samarqand being faced with white tiles painted with cobalt to resemble chinaware and for a Samarqand mosque, built in honor of Timur’s niece, being decorated with medallions of stylized blue lotuses taken from porcelain. Miniature manuscript paintings by Junayd, created in baghdad around 1396 to accompany a collection of poems, show numerous examples of blue-and-white porcelain being used in convivial gatherings of Timurid notables. Junayd’s work proved influential in establishing an association in later Persian art between princely entertainment and Chinese blue-and-white.<sup>81</sup> The Castilian ambassador Clavijo recorded that Timur habitually used porcelain at his court. Aside from the blue-and-white looted from delhi and damascus, the ceramic also came to Samarqand on the Silk road, transported in enormous caravans of camels and carts, such as the one Clavijo saw in 1405. For safety, tribute missions journeyed with the caravans as well. Timur presented the Hongwu emperor with steel swords, armor, precious stones, and thousands of horses, and he reciprocated with the standard gifts, mainly silk and porcelains. but Hongwu also sent along imperious messages insinuating that Timur held title as a vassal of the Middle Kingdom. in response, Timur in 1405 began marching his army to conquer China, only to die a few hundred kilometers north of Samarqand. The same year marked the departure from China of the first Ming maritime expedition.<sup>82</sup> When the treasure ships of Zheng He reached Hormuz about a decade later, some of the porcelains unloaded certainly ended up in the hands of Timur’s successors. They lacked Timur’s zeal for conquest and devoted their energies to political consolidation and lavish cultural patronage. Sons and grandsons of the conqueror, they sponsored a coherent style in the arts, tempering Turkic-Mongol aggression by circumscribing it within the framework of Persian literary and aesthetic traditions, a strategy pioneered by the ilkhanids.<sup>83</sup> The result was a remarkable revival of art and culture that spread through the islamic world at the same time the italian renaissance was transforming intellectual life in Europe. The Timurids tirelessly cultivated China, sending envoys there every few years, usually with letters specifically requesting porcelains. Shah rukh (r. 1405–47), Timur’s successor in Persia, several times welcomed Chinese ambassadors bearing gifts of chinaware. Procession Scene, a Timurid manuscript painting of the early fif teenth century, depicts a fantasy version of such an embassy: in a rocky desert landscape, nine men in colorful Chinese dress escort a donkey cart weighed down with enormous blue-and-white jars.<sup>84</sup> in fact, blue-and-white is a common feature in manuscripts sponsored by the Timurids, such as the vessels depicted in texts of rashid al-din’s history of the world, a work originally sponsored by the ilkhanids. The most influential illustrations were those created for the famed Book of Kings (Shahnama), an epic poem by Firdausi (ca. 934–ca. 1026) that recounts adventures from the mythic and historical past of Persia. The ilkhanids had made the Book of Kings a major focus of their painting academies, and, in like fashion, the Timurids incorporated it into their patronage, thereby affirming their ties with traditions as far back as the Sassanids. Porcelain is a recurring decorative figure and symbolic motif in Timurid productions of the Book of Kings. A 1444 text opens with a doublepage frontispiece, A Royal Feast in the Garden, which portrays a royal Timurid couple being presented with a dozen pieces of blue-and-white by three Chinese ambassadors in black headgear.<sup>85</sup> iskander Sultan (1409–35), Timur’s grandson, encouraged manuscript painting at Shiraz in Persia, developing forms and standards that prevailed for the next two centuries in the Persian-speaking world. Ulugh beg (1394–1449), another grandson, built a chinikhana (porcelain house) in Samarqand: the pavilion had vesselshaped niches for pottery, and porcelain tiles, specially ordered for the building, embellished the walls. in 1411 Ulugh beg ordered the release of all craftsmen in Samarqand who had been enslaved by Timur. damascus potters soon found employment throughout the Timurid realm, in particular in the cities of Tabriz, Shiraz, Kashan, and isfahan, thereby helping to disseminate Timurid design techniques based on blue-and-white porcelain.<sup>86</sup> by the end of the fifteenth century, the popularity of Timurid pottery throughout Southwest Asia meant that artisans skilled in the traditional geometrical style of the islamic world were increasingly adopting elements of free-floating Chinese design. Timurid modes of Chinese styles also spread in the islamic world as a result of the increasing use from the thirteenth century of high-quality paper.<sup>87</sup> Southwest Asian potters no longer had to learn their brushwork by working with unfired ceramics but could practice on sheets of the new material. Even more important, they no longer had to rely on chancy memories or vessels at hand for their decorative repertoire but could take their motifs from pattern books. This new practice also facilitated the exchange of designs among diverse media—textiles, architecture, calligraphy, metalwork, illuminated manuscripts, and pottery. The common aesthetic programs that sprang up in the islamic world after 1400 stemmed not only from the undeniable magnetism of the Timurid cultural renaissance but also from pattern books bringing an appealing, coherent style to widely scattered artists and courts. Thus at the same time that a long-term convergence of the arts began in Ming China as a consequence of the introduction of blue-and-white porcelain to a centralized imperial procurement system, the arts of the Safavid, Mughal, and ottoman Empires experienced a comparable, ongoing fusion. Something similar also began in the West from the 1450s: invention of the printing press set up conditions for cross-cultural exchange as book workshops for the first time brought together painters, manuscript illuminators, goldsmiths, engravers, metalworkers, and scholars—all engaged in fashioning a product that in time would create a self-styled Commonwealth of learning throughout Europe.<sup>88</sup> This development intersected with Asian ones, for Western entrepreneurs in the late seventeenth century started to send pattern books to india and China to be used for designs on textiles and pottery intended for European consumers. As a result, motifs, designs, and symbols from diverse cultures began to combine promiscuously on a global scale. Potters, paper, and publications circulated through Southwest Asia and South Asia. After the fall of the Persian Timurid dynasty in 1506, all three of the great Muslim realms claimed the heritage of Timur and his successors; they inhabited a common cultural space with common cultural references.<sup>89</sup> Shah isma’il (r. 1501– 24) brought the Safavids to power in Persia, the first truly native dynasty there in eight hundred years. As a war leader and religious zealot in his youth and a listless drunk in his later years, he paid little attention to cultural endeavors. His son Shah Tahmasp (r. 1524–76), like Timur’s heirs, turned to gentler pursuits, becoming a painter of some skill and patronizing art on a grand scale. His many commissions included an enormous text of the Book of Kings—760 folios in length with 256 miniatures, many including porcelains—that he presented to the ottoman sultan Selim ii (r. 1566–74). Fernão Mendes Pinto, the Portuguese traveler, claims that only Tahmasp’s merchants were licensed to purchase the finest imperial porcelain in China.<sup>90</sup> Tahmasp was far surpassed, however, by his successor, Shah ‘Abbas, known as “the Great,” the most splendid figure of the dynasty. He rebuilt the capital of isfahan, embellishing it with parks, palaces, and public squares. He encouraged use of colored tile, so the city reportedly blazed with vivid hues in the sunlight. Ambrosio bembo (1652–1705), a venetian traveler in 1671, described a marble bridge with twenty-seven arches, with “a very beautiful cornice of porcelain of various designs” above every arch; the royal palace made a majestic sight, “decorated with ornaments in porcelain and gold,” and across from the palace stood a mosque with a “dome and façade in fine polychrome porcelain.” Although homes of the upper stratum appeared drab on the outside, bembo found that many had interior walls decked out with porcelains. in the palace apartments of Shah Sulaiman (1666–94), known as the nightingale’s Gate (bab-i bulbul), he noted that all the rooms had gilt mirrors, European paintings, and “some cabinets full of fine Chinese porcelain.”<sup>91</sup> in 1611 Shah ‘Abbas bequeathed 1,162 porcelains to the shrine of Sheik Safi (1252–1334) at Ardabil, near the southern shore of the Caspian Sea. The pottery formed part of a huge endowment that established ‘Abbas as the foremost champion of the dynasty. The gift, which included more than four hundred blue-andwhite vessels, was put on display in a “porcelain house,” a large octagonal building decorated in blue and gold. With so many pieces of blue-and-white concentrated in one location, the collection became a source of inspiration for Persian potters. Kashan, a center of pottery manufacture three hundred kilometers south of the Ardabil chinikhana, experienced a flowering under ‘Abbas, producing high-quality wares in tints ranging from powder blue to rich lapis lazuli. Working from the originals, potters as a rule faithfully copied the patterns and shapes of the porcelains; but they also painted vessels with Chinese designs from different periods, inventively fashioning a hybrid style that owed its particulars to China while at the same time conveying an overall Persian sensibility.<sup>92</sup> (See figure 22.) The support Shah ‘Abbas gave to the Persian pottery industry was part of his program for the economic prosperity of the empire. Adhering to the same mercantilist views as his royal contemporaries in Europe, he aimed to stop the drain of precious metal to india, that notorious abyss for gold and silver.<sup>93</sup> He established royal workshops for the manufacture of silk and cotton in many cities. in isfahan, tens of thousands of weavers produced damask, satin, and brocade, sometimes decorated with patterns of roses, peonies, and flowering trees taken from porcelains. A Safavid panel of thirty-two blue-and-white tiles from a palace in isfahan portrays a merchant in Western costume presenting an indigo-dyed textile to a woman while a pilgrim flask decorated with a flowering tree perches on the nearby grass.<sup>94</sup> Most remarkably, ‘Abbas had three hundred Chinese potters and their families brought from China and settled near isfahan—something that must have been done without the permission of Chinese officials. The artisans helped improve the quality of Persian pottery, though they naturally were limited in what they could achieve by the clays of the region. ## PorCElAin And THE MUGHAlS: indiA FroM bAbUr To AUrAnGZEb, 1526–1707 Shah ‘Abbas encouraged merchants to export blue-and-white earthenware to india. Huge supplies from Persia, along with the low status of clay vessels in india, account for the Mughals not developing a ceramic industry to support their mammoth architectural projects. Moreover, despite frequent political clashes with the Safavids, the Mughals always looked to the art, literature, and pottery of Persia as the highest expression of their own Timurid heritage. So too did Muslim sultans of the deccan (in south-central india), who viewed the Mughals as mortal enemies but remained culturally close to Safavid Persia and the ottoman Empire.<sup>95</sup> in the early eighteenth century, the indian artist bhawani das produced a painting now titled The Mughal Dynasty from Timur to Aurangzeb. The sovereigns sit on a marble-balustraded terrace overlooking a cypress garden, a blue floral carpet cushioning their feet. Timur takes center stage, flanked by the Mughal founder babur (1483–1530), Humayan (r. 1530–40, 1555–56), Akbar (1556–1605), Jahangir (r. 1605–27), Shah Jahan (r. 1628–58), and Aurangzeb (r. 1658–1707). The artwork embodies a genealogy of Timurid majesty, and as if porcelain figures as a signature emblem of the family tree, two elegant blue-and-white vases filled with flowers rest in splendor on a jeweled gold tray in the middle of the semicircle of sovereigns. in the same artist’s The Sons of Shah Jahan (ca. 1680), two blue-and-white porcelains are once again placed prominently in the foreground.<sup>96</sup> in 1526 Zhahir al-din Muhammad babur invaded india from Kabul in Afghanistan and established what became the dynasty of the Mughals, a name derived from an indo-Persian form of Mongol. He had impeccable credentials, for he descended from Genghis Khan on his mother’s side and from Timur on his father’s. “Shake loose your Turkish locks,” wrote a Timurid poet, “for in your ascendant are royal fortune and Genghis Khan’s position.”<sup>97</sup> A Mughal manuscript painting of 1630, Timur Handing the Imperial Crown to Babur, encapsulates the Timurid connection. The regime babur established became the largest and most powerful in indian history, nominally lasting until the british exiled the twenty-third of his line from delhi in 1858. His engaging memoir, the Baburnama, became a preferred text for his successors to copy and illustrate. He himself, however, did not live long enough after his indian conquest to do more than plan magnificent gardens. like his fellow Timurids, he was enthusiastic about porcelain: he always ate meals from porcelain plates and traveled with a favorite porcelain cup. in the Baburnama, he fondly recalls that when he lost his chinaware in a river mishap, a chieftain gave him “a porcelain cup exactly like the one that had disappeared into the water.”<sup>98</sup> in an illustrated manuscript of the Baburnama commissioned by Akbar in 1590, Mughal courtiers are portrayed dining on blue-and-white porcelain. Similar scenes are pictured in the Timurnama, a chronicle of the life of Timur, also ordered by Akbar. in fact, these were accurate renditions of his own practice, however idealized and formulaic. When the emperor had himself depicted in a watercolor painting, Akbar Receiving the Iranian Ambassador (1590–95), porcelains were included in the work, probably copied from vessels he kept in the chinikhana display rooms in his palace.<sup>99</sup> As with his great contemporary Shah ‘Abbas, Akbar’s high regard for porcelain played a decidedly secondary role in his grand scheme of things. Above all, Akbar aspired to mold the Hindu and Muslim elites into a cohesive ruling class whose loyalty to himself and the Timurids rose above religious differences. rajput warriors were the core of his military force. He abolished the poll tax levied on all Hindus, restricted the power of the Muslim religious establishment (ulema), ordered the translation of Sanskrit classics into Persian, and prohibited forcible conversion to islam. He presided over formal religious disputations by spokesmen for various beliefs—Hindu brahmans, Portuguese Jesuits, Persian Zoroastrians, ulema scholars, and Sufi holy men. The Akbarnama, a 2,500-page chronicle by the Persian scholar Abu’l-Fazl (1551–1602), includes a painting by narsingh, Akbar Discourses with two Jesuit Priests (ca. 1605), that testifies to the emperor’s catholic interests. The chronicle goes on at length about Akbar’s role as an instrument of Providence appointed to bring stability and harmony to mankind, an inspired guide whose message and spiritual charisma transcend the limits not only of orthodox islam but of all outward religious forms as well.<sup>100</sup> naturally, Jesuits waxed enthusiastic about Akbar, including ricci, who spent five years in india and anticipated that the emperor would convert to Christianity. He was the most powerful Asian ruler ever to give their faith a sympathetic hearing. in the realm of art, he exploited Christian iconography as it served his distinctive conception of sacral kingship. For their part, Jesuits applauded Akbar’s employment of Christian imagery while remaining courteously opaque about the extent to which it pointed to common ground with Muslim and Hindus belief. That was the same policy dentrecolles pursued with his parishioners as he cultivated a fruitful confusion between images of Guanyin and the virgin Mary. Angels allowed for an equivalent mystification in india. Abu’l-Fazl, who maintained that Akbar descended from the Prophet Muhammad, said that the angel Gabriel had conveyed an emanation of God’s light to the emperor. in The Nativity (ca. 1600), a manuscript painting by Manohar (d. 1620), who specialized in Christian themes for Akbar, an angel descends from the sky toward the Holy Family bearing a large blueand-white porcelain bowl with a gold lid, seemingly fluttering from a chinikhana in Paradise.<sup>101</sup> Akbar’s heady mix of religious syncretism and messianic fervor proved too idiosyncratic and heterodox for his successors. As a 1618 letter by a Jesuit makes clear, however, Jahangir at least shared his father’s interest in Western art and distant cultures: “The rich and curious pieces from the world are all in the hands of this king, and it seems that all Europe is involved in making pieces for him.”<sup>102</sup> in Jahangir Entertains Shah ‘Abbas (ca. 1618), among the items on display are a German silver case, a table probably made in venice, a venetian glass bottle shaped like a pilgrim flask, and a blue-and-white porcelain bowl. Given the sums Jahangir spent on porcelain and Western objects, Sir Thomas roe thought “the best trade for him were to remove the China Shops and Pawn [the royal Exchange of london] into Agra,” his imperial city.<sup>103</sup> The courts of Akbar and Jahangir gave birth to an international hybrid art, mixing together elements of Timurid fashion, European engraving, indo-Portuguese craftsmanship, and Chinese design. in Jahangir and Prince Khurram Feasted by Nur Jahan (1617), a painting commissioned by nur Jahan (ca. 1581–1645), Jahangir’s powerful wife, the eponymous subjects—Prince Khurram became the next emperor, Shah Jahan—are portrayed sitting in a room in which porcelain pilgrim flasks and an icon of the virgin Mary are installed in marble niches. nur Jahan also had the tomb in Agra of her Persian father (and Jahangir’s chief minister) decorated in Safavid style, its walls covered with images of wine cups, pomegranates, and longnecked porcelain vases.<sup>104</sup> roe commented that Jahangir prized chinaware and crystal “more than gold and silver, horses and jewels,” and he reputedly once almost beat a man to death for shattering a beloved piece of porcelain.<sup>105</sup> Mumtaz Mahal (1593–1631), wife of Shah Jahan, is depicted in a portrait holding a rose in one hand, a blue-and-white demitasse in the other. According to the French doctor François bernier, the emperor Aurangzeb used chinaware along with gold and pewter tableware. yet he had little else in common with either his great-grandfather, the visionary, open-minded Akbar, or with his grandfather Jahangir, a ruler addicted to opium, solely devoted to courtly culture, and dominated by his wife.<sup>106</sup> Jahangir’s son Shah Jahan and then (especially) Aurangzeb shifted the Mughal regime to a policy of rigorous Muslim orthodoxy by enforcing application of Qur’an-based law, levying discriminatory taxes on Hindus, demolishing Hindu temples, dismissing rajput commanders from the army, and abolishing patronage of official chronicles and manuscript illuminations.<sup>107</sup> There would be no more imperial commissions for portraits of Mughal courtiers dining on porcelain, no more imperial chinikhana. yet the change of course stemmed from more than the grim fanaticism of Aurangzeb: although the Timurid renaissance sank deep roots in the Mughal ruling class, it remained very much a thinly spread, minority culture in a vast realm dominated by disaffected Hindus. Porcelain is representative of this—created in an alien land, cloistered in palace collections, depicted in closely held manuscripts, and scorned by Hindus. it never assumed the sort of public role it had in Korea, the Archipelago, and, later, in Europe. The Timurid renaissance in india was a hothouse phenomenon, even more isolated from the general populace than were austere forms of the tea ceremony from everyday life in Tokugawa Japan. Shah Jahan’s most enduring accomplishment remains the building of the Taj Mahal in Agra, now counted among the most exquisite monuments in the world. A tomb for Mumtaz Mal, its very structure in fact embodies a hard-edged, orthodox message inasmuch as its dome is a visual replica of the throne of God on Judgment day, when eternal damnation awaits all nonbelievers.<sup>108</sup> The legacy of Aurangzeb was considerably less constructive. A contemporary of louis xiv, he bears a resemblance to that monarch in that he too plunged his country into neverending wars and drained his kingdom’s resources to finance them. like the French king, he resorted to melting down his household silver when his coffers dried up. His most disastrous conflict took place when he led eighty thousand troops in a virtual jihad in southern india for the last twenty-five years of his reign. yet since the Sun King never forsook his slippered ease in versailles to face danger and distress in the field, the last powerful Mughal despot seems more like a throwback to Timur himself, the fearsome begetter of the lineage. by the time Aurangzeb died at the age of ninety in 1707, Mughal india lay in shambles. Although the dynasty nominally hung on for another 150 years, the breakdown of the imperial system gave the british an opportunity to establish themselves among vulnerable regional powers and ultimately to seize control of the subcontinent. ## THE CUlTUrE oF PorCElAin in THE oT ToMAn EMPirE like the Safavids and the Mughals, ottoman sultans saw themselves as heirs to Timurid culture, though they lacked the family ties of their competing dynasts. in the early fifteenth century, artists from Tabriz relocated to Turkish potteries at iznik (ancient nicaea), ninety-six kilometers east of istanbul on the road to damascus, where they introduced new techniques and Timurid chinoiserie styles. in the 1470s, responding to court demands, iznik began to make blue-and-white pottery, copying Jingdezhen wares that Safavid monarchs presented to the sultan. Perhaps those gifts inspired iznik craftsmen to paint mythical qilin and buddhist lions onto their own pottery.<sup>109</sup> At the western edge of the Timurid culture sphere, the ottomans received only modest amounts of porcelain until they expanded their realm. in 1514 Selim i (r. 1512–20), using gunpowder weapons, defeated Shah isma’il in the critical battle of Chaldiran. After sacking Tabriz, he took a thousand camel loads of plunder back to istanbul, including chinaware. He made a captive Safavid designer head of the ottoman court workshop (nakkashane) in istanbul, from which Timurid-flavored blue-and-white designs poured forth in subsequent decades. The captive also brought along a number of fifteenth-century Timurid illuminated manuscripts, which served as a source of designs.<sup>110</sup> Having dealt with the Safavids, Selim turned on the Mamluks in 1516 and 1517, conquering Syria and then Egypt. This made the ottomans a world power, with geopolitical interests in the indian ocean. in their fight against the Portuguese, who tried to blockade shipment of spices to the red Sea, the ottomans sent aid to Muslims in southern india, to Atjeh in northern Sumatra, and to Java. The seizure of Egypt also gave the ottomans a great deal of chinaware and the forced labor of many Egyptian potters, who in previous years had abandoned their own ceramic traditions to copy Ming porcelain.<sup>111</sup> With new expertise available, as well as stocks of porcelain as models, iznik artisans began to turn out large quantities of tin-glazed copies of Jingdezhen blueand-white. Potters termed stylized lotus and peony blossums hatayi, designs “from China.” by the mid-sixteenth century, however, their own native traditions, combined with the influence of italian maiolica, led to a reduction of emphasis on blueand-white and an expansion of the color palette to red, emerald green, and turquoise. Aiming to create the atmosphere of gardens indoors, iznik and Syrian potters painted exuberant, intricate designs emphasizing the natural world, including tulips, carnations, hyacinths, and flowering trees. They also copied portrait medallions from italian pottery, which they encircled with a spiral pattern derived from the sultan’s elaborate imperial monogram (tughra). ottoman potters were so skilled at replicating porcelain that italian consumers often could not tell the wares apart. italian potters returned the compliment by decorating their wares in porcellana style, with a winding leaf-stem design taken from iznik vessels.<sup>112</sup> (See figure 23.) Some porcelains reached Europe from Southwest Asia in the half century before vasco da Gama brought the first ones by sea from india. between 1442 and 1498 the Mamluk sultan gave fifty-eight porcelains to the venetian government as well as pieces to Charles vii (r. 1403–61) of France and to lorenzo de’ Medici (1449–92), the effective ruler of Florence. in the same half century, venice and Faenza began to make replicas of Chinese blue-and-white, decorating them with arabesques, flowers, and animals from the islamic bestiary.<sup>113</sup> As always, however, Europeans aspired to produce their own porcelain. in 1518 a venetian sought the privilege “in this glorious city of venice to make good and excellent works of porcelain of every kind, like that called levantine, which is transparent.”<sup>114</sup> in 1479 the venetian artist Gentile bellini (ca. 1429–1507) went to istanbul, where he had a commission to paint the portrait of Memhed ii (r. 1451–81), “the Conqueror.” bellini may have returned to venice with the three blue-and-white porcelains that his younger brother Giovanni (1430–1516) included in The Feast of the Gods (1514), a painting later retouched by Titian (1488–1576); or he may have used porcelains already in the hands of the venetian government. depicting a legend recounted by ovid, Greek gods engage in drunken debauchery: a satyr balances a blue and-white dish on his head, gazed at enticingly by a maiden hugging a blue-andwhite bowl to her bosom; neptune leans close to Cybele, a fertility goddess, his hand caressing her thigh, a blue-and-white bowl overflowing with fruit next to the couple.<sup>115</sup> These are the first certain representations of porcelain in Western art. Europe was about to catch up to the Safavids, Mughals, and ottomans. ## “ THE MAKinG oF EArTHEn PoTS”: THE HiSPAno-MorESQUE lEGACy ottoman and italian potters of the sixteenth century, influencing each other and both replicating Chinese porcelain, unwittingly shared a heritage that derived from the artisans of ninth-century iraq. indeed, the Southwest Asian innovation of cobalt decoration on tin-glazed earthenware revolutionized ceramic traditions at both poles of the ecumene. in China, it led to the creation of blue-and-white porcelain, and in the West, it transformed the coarse brown earthenware that had been the dominant pottery made there since the fall of the roman Empire. From the thirteenth century, tin-glazing and painted ornament inspired European potters to reevaluate their craft, to turn from producing mundane, utilitarian crockery to making vessels with vivid colors and imaginative patterns. The Southwest Asian techniques reached Málaga in Andalucia in the early thirteenth century, probably carried there by potters migrating from Fatimid Egypt in the troubled last days of the regime. ibn battuta declared that merchants exported gilded Málaga pottery everywhere. The grandest vessels were in the famous Alhambra palace outside Granada, built in the late fourteenth century by the islamic nasrid dynasty (1230–1492). The “Alhambra vases” (as they were called from the eighteenth century) were the largest lusterware jars ever made: they were 1.25 meters high, with flaring, winglike handles and adornment in blue, white, and gold. rudolf ii (r. 1576–1612) of the Holy roman Empire later purchased one, secure in the knowledge that the Christian god had used it to turn water into wine at the Wedding of Cana.<sup>116</sup> in the 1350s, spurred by political upheaval in Granada, potters carried knowledge of tin-glazing north from Andalucia to Manises in valencia. Tin-glazing transformed everyday life there, for the number of ceramic forms used in the area increased from about ten to more than forty, many with glazed interiors. by the early 1400s merchants were exporting large quantities of vessels in what is now termed Hispano-Moresque style to italy, though some tin-glazed imports had already arrived there from Southwest Asia and north Africa. in a custom reminiscent of Muslim shrines in Java, headhunter poles in borneo, Spanish cathedrals in Manila, and funerary pillars on the Swahili coast, italians decorated the walls of churches and civic monuments with lustrous ceramics.<sup>117</sup> Hispano-Moresque imports stimulated widespread adoption of tin-glazing in italy, especially from the late fourteenth century. in Tuscany and Umbria, potters added rich colors—copper green, manganese purple, egg yellow, and rusty orange— when they copied the floral patterns and arabesques of the Hispano-Moresque vessels. in the sixteenth century, they often employed a pseudo-Chinese style, taken from iznik pottery, in painting stylized plants and animals on their wares. More important, they also used renaissance pictorial conventions taken from paintings and engravings for decorative scenes.<sup>118</sup> The new istoriato, “storypainted,” pottery elevated the respectability of earthenware in the eyes of sophisticated patrons; they came to regard clay as a noble substance, worthy of admittance to the realm of art and thus to the households of the privileged. in 1557 Piccolpasso assured his readers that “the making of earthen pots . . . will not diminish the greatness and worth” of princes.<sup>119</sup> The Florentine sculptor luca della robbia (1400–82) developed a technique for making polychrome pottery figures and established an influential workshop that was continued by his nephew Andrea della robbia (1435–1525). Some italian potters in the sixteenth century even started to put their names on the bottom of their wares, a practice begun by yixing teapot makers in Jiangsu province around the same time. italian potters also copied bronzes from the roman classical period, to be used (as in Song China) to adorn the studios of scholars. Tin-glazing techniques reached Antwerp in the netherlands in the early sixteenth century, carried by Guido di Savino (d. 1541), identified there as a “venetian potter” (veneetsienpotbacker).<sup>120</sup> He was part of a significant talent drain from the Mediterranean to northern Europe of glassmakers, soap producers, weavers, mirror makers, and printers who sought employment in the up-and-coming region. The migration of artisans signaled that Atlantic-oriented cities of the north, first Antwerp and then Amsterdam, were soon to displace venice and the Mediterranean in commercial and industrial supremacy. northern Europeans previously had known only drab earthenware, so they readily embraced the vibrant colors made possible by tin-glazing. venetian porcellana designs soon appeared on tile pavement and pottery in Antwerp. When Philip ii’s unpaid troops ravaged the city in the infamous Spanish Fury in the first days of november 1576, three of Guido’s sons fled to England, where they introduced tinglazing to potteries in london and norwich; another son went to Spain, his craftsmanship enriched with italian and Flemish variations in design and color. After roughly 150 years, then, the Hispano-Moresque legacy had come full circle. Things had changed in the meantime, however. The coming of chinaware to Europe since the voyage of vasco da Gama meant that the art of tin-glazed earthenware, for all its vitality and creativity, was destined for obliteration. The potters of lisbon who greeted Philip iii in 1619 with their “pilgrim art,” their resourceful imitations of porcelain, were on the verge of having their craft supplanted by the real thing.