# The decline and Fall of Chinese Porcelain The West and the World, 1500–1850 in March 1602 two voC ships from the province of Zeeland captured the Portuguese San Jago off the island of St. Helena in the South Atlantic, a convenient layover for carracks on the way home from Goa. The auction of its cargo of porcelain in Middleburg attracted considerable attention, assisted by the voC, which ceremonially presented packages of dishes and bowls to many town councils and dignitaries. A year later, dutch captains took an even more spectacular prize. in early February 1603 the Portuguese carrack Santa Catarina sailed from China for india with a cargo of silk, colored damask, lacquer furniture, spices, and seventy tons of unrefined gold. it also carried sixty tons of porcelain (about 100,000 pieces), probably intended for sale in Goa. near the Straits of Melaka at the end of the month, two voC ships commanded by Admiral Jacob van Heemskerk (1567–1607) attacked the carrack at anchor.<sup>1</sup> The daylong battle resulted in half the cargo being destroyed by fire, though what remained was impressive enough. Auction of the porcelain and other merchandise in Amsterdam yielded the voC about 3.5 million guilders, or 35,000 kilograms of silver, a staggering sum given that a laborer earned no more than 250 guilders a year. At 5,000 guilders for the price of a firstrate house in Amsterdam, the auction netted enough to buy some 750 houses in the most exclusive district of the city. At 100,000 guilders for a carrack, it was sufficient to build a fleet of thirty-five, more than the total number of ships that had departed Amsterdam for Asia in the ten years after 1592. When the East india Company of the United Provinces was formed in 1602, its start-up capital from share subscriptions totaled just short of 6.5 million guilders, so plundering the Santa Catarina brought in fully 54 percent of the value of the voC’s entire stock.<sup>2</sup> Shareholders must have been pleased with Admiral Heemskerk. large quantities of porcelain thus first began to arrive in the United Province of the netherlands as a by-product of the global conflict between the Spanish-Portuguese empire of Philip iii and his erstwhile dutch subjects. A year after the Santa Catarina auction, Hugo Grotius $\left( 1 5 8 3 - 1 6 4 5 \right)$ , a scholar-politician whose major work, Of the Law of War and Peace (1625), is considered the first comprehensive treatise on international law, argued for the righteousness of the dutch piracy and enthused over its bounty: “When the prize from the [Santa Caterina] was recently put up for sale, who did not marvel at the wealth revealed? Who was not struck with amazement? Who did not feel that the auction in progress was practically the sale of a royal property, rather than that of a fortune privately owned?”<sup>3</sup> The auction caused an international sensation and convinced the voC to start purchasing porcelain in China. With a bow to Portuguese precedence in the trade, the dutch coined the term kraakporselein, “carrack-porcelain,” for the imports. The only Asian pottery the dutch had been acquainted with up to 1603 was blue-and-white earthenware imported from Persia; but things changed so rapidly by 1614 that Johannes Pontanus (1571–1639), a danish resident in Holland, wrote, “The East india traffic has brought a large amount of porcelains to the netherlands. . . . [T]hat is why one must conclude about the porcelains, the abundance of which grows daily, that only because of these navigations, they come to be with us in nearly daily use with the common people.”<sup>4</sup> The Western mania for porcelain had begun. ## “So EMPirES ArE ExCHAnGEd”: THE PorTUGUESE And THE dUTCH in EAST ASiA despite the market for porcelain in Europe, massive quantities were not imported until the dutch entered the trade after the Santa Catarina bonanza, one hundred years after vasco da Gama first presented Manuel i with a dozen pieces. neither the Portuguese crown nor its merchants had obtained exceptionally large amounts of chinaware or spread it much beyond Portugal itself. A fair number of pieces reached neighboring Spain, including some embellished with the monogram of Charles v (1500–58), king of Spain and Holy roman Emperor, the father of Philip ii. The presence of a small Portuguese colony in burgundy, arising from the marriage of isabella of Portugal (1397–1471) to duke Philip the Good (r. 1419–67), accounts for modest amounts of porcelain reaching there. in 1521 a Portuguese merchant in Antwerp gave the German artist Albrecht dürer (1471–1528) three pieces of porcelana in payment for a portrait of himself.<sup>5</sup> naturally, some pieces filtered into Europe from the islamic world, though usually they went unrecorded. The historian Paolo Giovio $\left( 1 4 8 3 - 1 5 5 3 \right)$ boasts that he received a superb porcelain escutcheon (uno scudellone di porcellanissima) as a souvenir from an agent of Charles v after that monarch conquered the Muslim stronghold of Tunis in 1535.<sup>6</sup> yet, except for a number of porcelains owned by royal dignitaries, the ceramic remained generally uncommon outside the iberia Peninsula. Aiming for a quick return on their investment, Portuguese monarchs kept prices high, thereby reducing the market for the pottery (and other goods) and providing no incentive for increasing supplies; the crown regarded the Asia trade as a royal monopoly, not as a merchant enterprise. it classed porcelain as one of the “trifles” (miudezas) on the carreira da Índia, along with items such as amber beads, seed pearls, and gilded lacquer boxes.<sup>7</sup> For their part, Portuguese merchants in Asia never devoted themselves fully to sending goods to their home country. Antonie van diemen (1593– 1645), governor-general of batavia for the voC, observed, with a trace of contempt, “Most of the Portuguese in Asia look upon this region as their fatherland. They think no more about Portugal. They drive little or no trade thither, but content themselves with the interport trade of Asia, just as if they were natives thereof and had no other country.”<sup>8</sup> large-scale imports of porcelain to Europe also had to wait on dutch initiative because the Portuguese had the bad luck to reach China at a time when the imperial government regarded foreign merchants and maritime trade with hostility. The policy established by the Hongwu emperor more than a century earlier still determined conditions of seaborne exchange. The Portuguese, however, compounded their ill fortune with deplorable behavior. The first Portuguese ships, eight vessels commanded by Fernão Pires de Andrade, entered Canton harbor in 1517. Tomé Pires was with them: having just finished writing his Suma Oriental in Melaka, he had reluctantly agreed to serve as Portugal’s first ambassador to China. Portuguese sailors killed some local villagers, but Chinese trade superintendents, probably as a result of judicious bribes, still allowed Andrade to buy silk and porcelain. Things went downhill with the arrival of Simão Andrade, Fernão’s younger brother, with four ships in 1519: he angered Chinese officials by violating Chinese law, including constructing a fort, erecting a gallows, and executing a sailor. Finally, after more outrages, Chinese naval vessels attacked the Portuguese mariners, who fled Canton, leaving behind a reputation, not entirely unjustified, as kidnappers, slavers, and cannibals.<sup>9</sup> When Pires reached beijing for an audience with the emperor in 1521, officials turned him away, pointing to the 1511 Portuguese conquest of Melaka, a Chinese tribute client since the voyages of Zheng He, as an offense to the Son of Heaven. Thrown into prison, Pires vanished from sight, perhaps beheaded shortly after, perhaps to die years later under house arrest in a remote province. The Portuguese spent the next thirty years engaged in smuggling on the Zhejiang and Fujian coasts, finding accomplices among countless Chinese violators of the imperial trade interdict. other collaborators came from among Japanese merchant clans in nagasaki, Sakai, and other port cities: they could breach Japanese laws with impunity because feeble Ashikaga shoguns, in the midst of the Sengoku era, lacked the power to keep them in check. The Portuguese had to wait until 1557 to receive permission from the imperial government to occupy a permanent settlement close to Canton, the port that became renowned as Macao.<sup>10</sup> The golden age of Portuguese trade followed, for Macao became the commercial linchpin of China, Japan, and india. Japan experienced a mining boom in silver in the fifteenth century as a result of improved techniques for processing ore introduced from Korea. The Tokugawa invested silver in the silk industry, importing the raw material from China and setting up weaving workshops.<sup>11</sup> The combination of Japanese silver, Chinese silk, and imperial restrictions on Chinese merchants led to the Portuguese playing the role of middlemen. ralph Fitch (ca. 1550–1611), an English traveler in the late 1580s, described the most powerful economies in East Asia as linked by triangular trade: When the Portugales goe from Macao in China to Japan, they carrie much white silke, Gold, Muske and Porcelanes; and they bring from thence nothing but Silver. They have a great Carake which goeth thither every yeare, and shee bringeth from thence every yeare above 600,000 crusadoes [1.2 million guilders]; and all this silver of Japan, and 200,000 crusadoes [400,000 guilders] more in Silver which they bring yearly out of india, they employ to their great advantage in China: and they bring from thence [for trade in india] Gold, Muske, Silke, Copper, Porcelanes, and many other things very costly and gilded.<sup>12</sup> during the years when the Portuguese were bringing “nothing but Silver” from Japan, fleets of Chinese junks sailed to the Philippines to trade goods for the same commodity. According to a governor of the Philippines in 1576, the islands represented nothing more than “an archipelago of China.”<sup>13</sup> The West came to exert a powerful influence on the Chinese economy in the late sixteenth century as a consequence of Spanish seizure of the Philippines in the late 1560s, followed a decade later by the start of enormous output from Peru’s silver mines. About fifty metric tons (176,370 taels) of the precious metal went across the Pacific annually between 1571 and the 1640s. Spanish America, the Philippines, and China thus became connected by a stream of silver: once a year, a galleon packed with it left Acapulco for Manila, where it paid for silk, porcelain, and other merchandise. in the late sixteenth century, porcelain was more commonly found among the Spanish in the new World than in Europe, and silk cloth was cheaper in Mexico City, where fourteen thousand laborers wove fabric from silk yarn, than in Seville or Madrid. in China, however, the influx of silver caused severe price inflation, and, coupled with crop failures and the expense of aiding Korea against Hideyoshi’s invasion, the imperial government by the 1630s faced bankruptcy and lacked the financial resources to defend itself against Manchu enemies.<sup>14</sup> Facing intense competition from the Spanish and other Westerners, the Portuguese remained on top of the pyramid of Asian trade for little more than half a century. ironically, Philip ii, their sovereign since 1580, inadvertently set their fall in motion. in 1598 he imposed an embargo on dutch trade with Spain, and with flotillas of redundant carracks in their home ports, the dutch for the first time launched into trading ventures around the world—to West Africa for slaves, venezuela for salt, Taiwan and brazil for sugar, Persia for silk, and the East indies for spices.<sup>15</sup> in the decades after plundering the Santa Catarina, the dutch ousted the Portuguese from Western leadership in Asian trade. As early as 1605, the dutch conquered the Moluccas from the Portuguese, thereby achieving almost total control of the world’s supply of nutmeg, mace, and cloves. A dutch fleet attacked Manila in 1617, though without success. by 1623, from its central headquarters in batavia, the voC commanded ninety ships in Asia, backed by two thousand troops in twenty forts. Governor-general van diemen had legal warrant from his home government to act with sovereign authority. He drove the Portuguese from Sri lanka and blockaded Goa and Macao; his dutch troops and Southeast Asian auxiliaries conquered Melaka. in 1635 the Tokugawa shogun threw out the Portuguese “Southern barbarians,” leaving the dutch the sole Westerners on the Japanese scene, the only ones with access to the Japanese silver so important for fueling Asian trade. in the early 1660s the dutch won control of the coast of Malabar. When in 1662 the Portuguese ceded bombay to England, as the dowry of the Portuguese princess Catherine of braganza (1638–1705) on her marriage to Charles ii (r. 1660–85), only Goa remained in the possession of the Portuguese crown in india. in contrast to the Portuguese, dutch merchants, under management of the voC, put their energy into dispatching commodities to their homeland. directors, captains, and factors maintained close coordination between what consumers wanted at home and what the voC purchased abroad. And unlike the Portuguese crown’s neglect of investment in Asian commerce, the governors of the United Provinces and especially the burghers who controlled Amsterdam, made sure that the voC, as a joint-stock company engaged in operations half a world away, had the financial and institutional resources to take commercial risks and deliver merchandise to dutch markets.<sup>16</sup> As a consequence, the dutch dominated world trade in the seventeenth century, and Amsterdam emerged as the world’s first central, dominating entrepôt. Striking a note of triumph in a poem of 1639, Joost van vondel (1587– 1679) celebrated the global reach of the dutch: Great Java yields to us her treasures rich, China her porcelain. We of Amsterdam Sail to all coasts and seas where profit calls, Even to the Ganges meeting with the waves. For love of gain no port is strange to us. With Portugal we share the sea and land, And rest from strife with one who’s ceded much. Who doubts, may cast his eye on town and fortress: i’ll show him other towns, another Fatherland With different stars. So Empires are exchanged: our harvests garnered from such widespread fields That one vast indian warehouse holds the East.<sup>17</sup> ## “WHErE ProFiT CAllS”: CHinA, THE dUTCH, And THE inTErnATionAl PoT TEry MArKET From the beginning of the seventeenth century to the end of the eighteenth, the voC imported at least 43 million pieces of porcelain to Europe. That sum represents only the official total, however: a great deal more, impossible to determine, came in as private shipments by voC employees. of course, the primary market at first was in the United Provinces, the most dynamic economic region in Europe. With the most ample diet, most luxuriously appointed homes, and most highly developed market for the decorative and applied arts in Europe, the dutch republic (as it was from 1648) led the way in the demand for new tableware.<sup>18</sup> by 1614 ordinary porcelain bowls and plates were already “in nearly daily use with the common people.” The voC quickly became particular about importing special items, what one trader called “the curious pieces, without which the profits can only be small.”<sup>19</sup> van diemen wrote to Amsterdam in 1638, “As Europe begins to get crammed with common porcelain, we shall after this curtail the assortments of the same and order according to the demand more exquisite and fine assortments.”<sup>20</sup> in response to the flood of porcelain, dutch potters turned out millions of pieces of tin-glazed earthenware, with imitations of blue-and-white chinaware displacing those with italo-Flemish polychrome decoration. in fact, potters in rotterdam and other urban centers had been taking designs from italian copybooks and engravings for several generations, thereby effectively preparing themselves for the task of responding to the visual culture of the Chinese. Stimulated first by the migration of tin glazing from Antwerp and venice and then by porcelain imports, a typical dutch pottery manufacturer increased its inventory from about 1,500 objects in the 1570s to over 10,000 by the 1650s; the size of the largest workshop in delft grew from ten employees in 1570 to about sixty a couple of generations later.<sup>21</sup> Pottery production began in delft in 1614 when an entrepreneur received permission from the States-General, the governing assembly of the United Provinces, to open a manufactory to make vessels like those of “the indies.” yet the industry did not really take off until two calamities took place around midcentury at opposite sides of the globe. The first arose from an extraordinary political decision in China. Struggle between the Ming and the Manchu disrupted export of Jingdezhen’s ceramics, and even when the Qing dynasty came to power in 1644, turmoil in Jiangxi province and on the southern coast continued to curtail pottery output. After expelling the dutch from Taiwan, Zheng Chenggong (1624–62), the Ming loyalist and warlord known to Westerners as “Koxinga,” financed his military resistance to the Qing by seaborne trade and domination of the Fujian coast. To counter this, the Qing government resorted in 1660 to the draconian expedient of ordering removal of the entire coastal population from a 32-kilometer corridor stretching from the province of Guangdong to Jiangsu, a distance of 2,400 kilometers.<sup>22</sup> no other state in the world could have aspired to enforce such a breathtaking directive. nor would a government with a forceful maritime perspective have retreated from its shoreline to resolve its military predicament: as always in China, domestic security trumped seaborne interests. in any event, the Qing lacked the resources to carry out the edict with complete success, not to mention humanely: perhaps millions of farmers, mariners, and fishermen fell into poverty, wandered as refugees, and died miserably. in 1662 the Qing government issued another extraordinary command: “All oceangoing junks are to be burned; not an inch of wood is allowed to be in the water.”<sup>23</sup> While this can stand comparison with the most farreaching diktats of the Hongwu emperor, the motivation for the policy was not as radical: the Qing did not aim to erect permanent barriers between China and overseas countries but rather to enforce emergency measures to regain control of its maritime frontier. When the empire resolved the threat from Ming loyalists in 1684, the government reopened ports and resettled coastal districts. The second midcentury calamity took place in Holland. on 12 october 1654, 41,000 kilograms of gunpowder stored underground near the delft city center exploded, killing at least 500 residents and leveling 200 homes, as well as a number of breweries. Potteries moved into the devastated area and greatly expanded production of what came to be known as delftware. Using high-quality clay discovered a short distance to the south to make their vessels, delft potters covered the inside of them with a transparent lead glaze and the outside with decoration painted on tin glaze. The odd names of their workshops—the Metal Pot (de Metalen Pot), the Greek A (der Grieksche A), the double Jar (de dobbelde Schenckan)—derive from the breweries that blew up in what delft still remembers as the fearsome Donderslag, the “Thunderclap.”<sup>24</sup> before the Donderslag, earthenware from italy, Spain, Portugal, France, England, denmark, China, and Japan competed in the markets of Amsterdam and other dutch towns; but afterward, delft replaced rotterdam as the center of dutch pottery manufacture, and production of delftware ended the bulk of European pottery imports. of course, turmoil in the late Ming and early Qing cut off most imports of porcelain. This called forth the resilience and enterprise of the voC, which found alternative sources of pottery in Japan, vietnam, Ayutthaya, and Persia. in delft, potters acted in the same fashion as their counterparts in vietnam and Thailand: they stepped into the breach opened by disruptions in Chinese exports and turned out their own blue-and-white wares as substitutes. With porcelain imports reduced and uncertain from midcentury, delft opened new potteries almost every year for decades. drawing on an established community of engravers, painters, and printers for labor and inspiration, potters used decoration from chinaware, the bible, classical mythology, still lifes, proverb books, emblems, and escutcheons. by 1680 the industry employed 1,600 craftsmen (or 20 percent of delft’s workforce), had a fixed capital of 300,000 guilders, and turned out at least 300,000 pieces annually.<sup>25</sup> delft blue-and-white, often called porcelyn because of its glossy appearance, entered the international pottery market: the voC took it to Safavid Persia, Mughal india, the Swahili coast, the Archipelago, and the Americas. The dutch company also shipped Persian blue-and-white to Sri lanka, bengal, Ayutthaya, batavia, and Amsterdam. dutch pottery going to the indian ocean and Safavid pottery taken to Holland often boasted a Chinese reign mark on the bottom, the perennial sign of high quality. When the Qing government lifted its ban on overseas trade in 1684, however, Jingdezhen’s exports drove delft and Safavid imitations out of China’s traditional markets as thoroughly as it expelled blue-and-white pottery made in vietnam and Thailand. Faced with Chinese competition, the Kakiemon kilns of Japan stopped production in the early eighteenth century. in Holland, delft lost its quasimonopoly in the home market as porcelain imports flowed in again, eventually constituting as much as 40 percent of the total consumption of ceramics in Amsterdam. (See figure 22.) between the 1620s, when the Wanli emperor cut short his enormous orders for pottery, and the 1680s, when peace was restored on the Chinese coast—a period labeled “Transitional” in Chinese porcelain history—Jingdezhen’s production was transformed. Enriched by silver profits, Quanzhou merchants formed commercial syndicates that bought up many privately owned kilns and made the porcelain city more attuned than ever to the demands of the market, responsive to both middling ranks in Chinese cities and an expanding number of overseas customers. The Kangxi emperor and his successors took a vigorous interest in Jingdezhen, appointing officials to oversee development of new wares and promoting novel decorative techniques, especially enamel colors brought to imperial workshops by Jesuit craftsmen.<sup>26</sup> These developments made Jingdezhen an effective collaborator with European East indies companies, especially the voC and the EiC. The resurgence of Jingdezhen in the international pottery market after 1684 was just one aspect of China’s renewed commercial dominance of East Asia: after its prolonged time of troubles, Chinese trade expanded as never before, achieving a position of supremacy it would retain into the early nineteenth century. The collapse of Ming resistance in China and the end of the Sengoku era in Japan destroyed the raison d’être for permitting Westerners, whether Portuguese or dutch, to have a commanding role in East Asian exchange. After being driven from Taiwan by the Ming and having its trading privileges curtailed by the Tokugawa shogun, the voC gave way before the Chinese, ceding precedence to them in direct trade with continental and maritime Southeast Asia. The dutch rested content with Chinese junks delivering porcelain to batavia rather than fetching it themselves.<sup>27</sup> China did not “yield” its porcelain, as vondel’s poem boasted, but instead conducted business on its own terms. Although the voC continued to control the spice traffic, it was never able to cobble together the sort of lucrative triangular trade—China, Japan, and india—that had proved such a dependable moneymaker for the Portuguese. Samuel Pepys (1633–1703), the well-known diarist and high naval bureaucrat, wrote in 1664 that the dutch in the indies scorn the English, “saying that whatever their masters do or say at home, they will do what they list and will be masters of all the world there, and have so proclaimed themselves Soveraigne of all the South Seas.”<sup>28</sup> reality, however, routed their ambitions: within a few decades, dutch merchants in Asia made a living in the same fashion as their longtime Portuguese antagonists, that is, focusing on intra-Asian exchange and leaving the most rewarding seaborne commerce in Chinese hands. The strength of the Chinese position was that merchants in the Middle Kingdom could rely on the long-established Chinese diaspora throughout East Asia, including Chinese residents in the new, booming entrepôts of Manila and batavia, a vast and experienced trade network that considerably outmatched dutch fleets and forts. in the meantime, the English East india Company, which for much of the seventeenth century took second place to its dutch competitor, established itself in bengal, a power base from which it eventually expanded in the subcontinent and thereby surpassed the achievements of the voC. ## TAblEWArE oF EUroPE: EArTHEnWArE, PEWTEr, And SilvEr Westerners in China had available a wide assortment of porcelain wares as a consequence of the versatility of Chinese potters and the industrial capacity of Jingdezhen. importing huge amounts of the pottery, the East india companies thereby transformed the everyday life of a large part of the European population between 1600 and 1800. Chinaware, however, was not simply a neutral object to be used and admired, for it had a significant effect on Western society: it played a leading role in a consumer revolution, as great a change as had occurred in everyday life since the revival of sophisticated urban culture in the eleventh century.<sup>29</sup> Most consumer wealth in the average household before 1500 added up to little more than a bed, stools, and a few pieces of terra-cotta; but from the inauguration of global trade, Europeans purchased a multitude of new goods.<sup>30</sup> To be sure, the revolution in consumption fully reached into all ranks of society only in the late nineteenth century, when household purchasing power had increased and the industrial revolution had made its effects fully apparent; but the first manifestations of that transformation took place two centuries earlier. indeed, a heightened demand for consumer products preceded and stimulated movement toward machine production in Great britain.<sup>31</sup> Porcelain and its imitations ranked foremost among the commodities newly available, and from the sixteenth century, they proved central to altering viewpoints and practices in elite taste, daily life, and social conventions. With a population of some 100 million in 1700, Europe offered a receptive and lucrative market for good tableware. before 1400 most people used only trenchers, some formed from loaves of bread cut horizontally and some made from wood trays with a depression in the middle to hold liquid.<sup>32</sup> drinking cups often were made of horn and ash wood. Peasants valued their few ceramics and considered it worthwhile to repair terra-cotta cooking pots with a plug of lead. Stoneware from the rhineland enlarged the ceramic repertoire in Germany, England, and the netherlands during the fifteenth century, but standards for tableware still remained abysmally low. in England, unglazed earthenware mugs replaced “black jacks,” tankards made of leather coated with pitch, only in the late sixteenth century. James i (r. 1603– 25) quaffed his beer from a wooden mug, a choice perhaps conditioned by the in dulgence he extended to his gay courtiers, who boisterously smashed costly glass vessels at banquets. Genre paintings of the seventeenth century indicate the scarce quantities and wretched quality of the crockery on most tables: almost all vessels are terra-cotta or coarse glazed earthenware. Although the canvases cannot be viewed as snapshots of the past, there is every reason to believe they more or less reflect everyday reality.<sup>33</sup> in Tavern Scene with Two Men and a Boy at Table by diego velázquez (1599– 1660), a single crude bowl, drinking glass, pitcher, and knife are on the table. in Prayer before the Meal (ca. 1667) by Jan Steen (1626–79), a peasant family of four eats a meal of porridge with a single spoon and an earthenware bowl; a dog licks out an earthenware cooking pot tipped over on the dirt floor. The King Drinks (ca. 1634) by Jan Miense Molenaer (ca. 1610–68) portrays thirteen persons around a table: a glutton guzzles from a storage jar while the rest of the company pass around a pewter tankard, a rhenish stoneware jug, and a glass goblet. Molenaer’s Tavern of the Crescent Moon (ca. 1637) depicts fifteen persons with just three flagons on the table. in all such renderings, the individuals drinking and eating invariably outnumber the pieces of crockery on hand.<sup>34</sup> in contrast, dutch still lifes, which naturally aspired to a different aesthetic effect, commonly feature a range of vessels, from terra-cotta to silver, that never appear together in genre tableaus. While low-status groups habitually used wood and terra-cotta for table vessels, middling ranks favored pewter. Pepys recorded his annoyance at a tavern meal in 1663: it was “very unpleasing that we had no napkins nor change of trenchers, and drunk out of earthen pitchers and wooden dishes.”<sup>35</sup> As a top official moving in highly regarded london circles, Pepys dined on pewter most of the time. but while individuals who had only wooden trenchers surely would covet his tableware, pewter had drawbacks that help explain its eventual replacement by glazed pottery. Metalsmiths made common pewter from low-grade tin alloyed with 15 percent lead; hence scratches occurred easily, requiring hours of scouring by sand to efface. (A marginal advantage of scratches, however, was that they made it more difficult for food to slip off the plate.)<sup>36</sup> in addition, the nature of pewter manufacture meant that designs on the wares were hardly possible, thereby isolating pewter as a medium from rapidly changing decorative fashions in the late seventeenth century. beer drinkers preferred pewter mugs and would continue to do so into the early 1800s; but as tea drinking soared in britain after 1700, per capita beer consumption fell dramatically. So too did use of pewter mugs, which tea drinkers naturally did not employ because the brew made the vessels too hot to handle. The price of tin therefore declined, provoking Cornwall tin miners to denounce pottery manufacturers for their loss of income and employment. in 1776 a mob of miners stormed a building in Exeter that held stores of Staffordshire wares. A friend cautioned Wedgwood “not to trust [himself] among the miners of Cornwall, the tin trade being then so low.”<sup>37</sup> Silver plate ranked infinitely higher than pewter. it was the most prestigious tableware, fashioned of material perceived as noble, an artifact only the very wealthy could afford. in sixteenth-century England, diners were served “in silver vessels, if they be of the degree of barons, bishops and upwards,” whereas lesser ranks at the table had to settle for pewter.<sup>38</sup> A complete silver service in britain in the early eighteenth century cost about £600 (roughly \$103,000 in present-day terms). The annual income of an earthenware-using artisan was about £25 (\$4,300) and that of a pewter-using clergyman or naval officer no more than £60 (\$10,320); polite society took for granted that a gentleman required a minimum income of £300 (\$51,500) a year. Given its enormous cachet, silver plate validated the social status of a household, its very patina, a sign of age on its surface, supposedly declaring the refinement, high standing, and venerable lineage of the owner.<sup>39</sup> it served as an impressive decorative item, but when it was used on the table in the early seventeenth century, other sorts of vessels generally mingled with it helter-skelter. The dining equipment of Charles i (r. 1625–49) included silver plate, crystal cruets and saltcellars, cups of agate and heliotrope (a bloodstone), forty-five pewter dishes, a few wooden platters and porcelain plates, and (as an inventory listed) “one great Purselaine bason sett in a Foote & Frame of Silver and gilt, with two handles to it in a leather case.”<sup>40</sup> This eye-catching article was valued at £42 (\$7,200). That pales in comparison to the £3,600 (\$619,200) that William iii (r. 1689–1702) paid for a silver dining table engraved with his coat of arms, trophies of war, and the emblems of England, Scotland, ireland, and France. vessels of silver plate functioned as a practical investment and repository of value. before the development of deposit banking in the late seventeenth century, silver utensils represented a frozen asset, a resource to cash in when necessary, usually by pawning. Still, merely putting the precious metal on show in a sideboard or on a table made that déclassé expedient less likely. debts owed to irksome tradesmen, the bugbear of milord, could more easily be waved away so long as the defaulter girded himself with massy silver. “Money spent on strong substantial plate,” a young English nobleman was counseled in 1630, “will doe you more service and credit than in your purse.”<sup>41</sup> Silverwares encountered hard times in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, however. Trying to promote the sale of Spanish tin-glazed tableware, Philip iii endorsed sumptuary laws in 1600 barring the use and manufacture of vessels of precious metal. A Spanish comic drama some years later has a queen declare that “if from plates of dirt i must now eat,” she nonetheless still will drink from her remaining silver goblet.<sup>42</sup> in the War of the Spanish Succession, louis xiv bullied his nobles into melting down their plate in the name of patriotism. English aristocrats went through a similar experience in the Civil War (1642–49), when they handed over their silver plate to support the cause of Charles i and replaced it with tin-glazed tableware from london, bristol, and delft. despite their sacrifice, the king lost his head, and it was not until restoration of the Stuart monarchy in 1660 that silver services made a comeback. Still, Pepys complained that at a lord Mayor’s banquet in 1663, diners had to put up with wooden plates because the Civil Corporation’s silver service had been melted down during the Civil War.<sup>43</sup> Price inflation, generated by population increase and imports of American bullion, also put European owners of silver services under siege. With prices rising by about 400 percent for a century after 1550 and with the supply of coins remaining the same, cashing in silver plate and switching to pottery often proved irresistible. The increasing distinction and respectability of pottery eased the pain of divorce. Though still expensive, a porcelain armorial dinner service, priced at £100 (\$17,200) in the early eighteenth century, came to only 17 percent the cost of a silver service. in the decades after 1600, the Western elite recapitulated the experience of Chinese gentry and literati of the Song era in turning from precious metal tableware to high-quality ceramic, a transition that was part of a general move to tone down portentous display in favor of elegant living. in addition, European potteries turned out such huge quantities of wares and the East indies companies imported so much porcelain, that the price of good ceramic vessels in due course came within reach of all social groups. by the end of the eighteenth century, porcelain and its imitations—above all, the wares of Wedgwood—came to occupy all the spaces in the gamut from trenchers and terra-cotta to pewter and silver.<sup>44</sup> ## “ To GETHEr AT TAblE”: FroM CoMMUnAl To individUAl dininG Matteo ricci devoted several pages to the highly structured etiquette that accompanied dinner in a Chinese gentleman’s home: a sequence of invitations sent out beforehand, an opening round of tea, pouring of wine, service of dishes, presentation of toasts, and bowing ceremonies at departure. He emphasized that his hosts “do not use forks or spoons or knives for eating, but rather polished sticks, about a palm and a half long, with which they are very adept in lifting any kind of food to their mouths, without touching it with their fingers.”<sup>45</sup> João rodrigues observed that at a Japanese dinner, chopsticks are used just once: They are changed many times while they are eating, and so there is no need for napkins for they do not touch anything with their hands and all the food arrives at the table already cut up. . . . They are greatly astonished by eating with the hands and wiping them on napkins which then remain covered with food stains, and this causes both nausea and disgust.<sup>46</sup> Christianity would have won few souls in China or Japan if missionaries had not learned some new table manners, for Westerners routinely appalled their hosts by their lack of decorum and hygiene. Fernão Mendes Pinto recounts that in Japan, when “the king of bungo” (a powerful daimyo) invited him and his Portuguese companions to dinner, he had the table set with generous portions of very clean, well-prepared delicacies, served by very beautiful women, and we all very heartily threw ourselves upon what they placed in front of us. However, the charming, courtly remarks of the ladies, and the way they made fun of us eating with our hands, provided the king and queen with far greater pleasure than any kind of farce that could have been presented for their amusement, since all these people are accustomed to eating with two sticks. . . . [T]hey consider it a very dirty thing to eat with our hands, as is our custom.<sup>47</sup> in fact, the mockery and repugnance of Pinto’s hosts say less about a contrast between sophisticated Easterners and uncouth Westerners than it does about different modes of etiquette arising from contrasting technologies of consumption. For Europeans, wiping one’s hands on napkins, the tablecloth, or pieces of bread represented mannerly behavior if they were greasy from handling food. in China and Japan, carving meat was a menial task done out of sight of the diners, and it came to the table in bits small enough to be manipulated with chopsticks. in Europe, carving was a singular public honor, and touching meat with hands remained common practice well into the seventeenth century. in Banquet of the Officers of the St. George Militia (1616) by Frans Hals (1580–1656), a sumptuous portrait of upperclass burghers costumed in the finest lace and velvet, the captain stands at the head of the company, steadying a haunch of roast beef with his left hand as he prepares to carve it with a knife daintily held in his right. As prescribed by etiquette manuals, he touches the meat with just three fingers. His skill and courtly performance establish a befitting tone for the polite gathering.<sup>48</sup> When spoons and knives were the only utensils available, grasping the beef or fowl by hand in order to slice it scarcely could be helped. Perhaps introduced to Europe from the eastern Mediterranean in the eleventh century, the fork first came into significant use in fifteenth-century italy. Seen as an italian affectation, and difficult to manipulate for those first taking it up, it gained acceptance in Europe quite slowly—not least because louis xiv, the model for courtly culture, persisted in eating with his fingers—but by the early eighteenth century, it made almost as much difference in reformed conduct at the dining table as increased amounts of tableware.<sup>49</sup> before the seventeenth century, a person rarely ate alone. With a dearth of spoons, mugs, and plates, meals necessarily were social acts of consumption involving a degree of intimacy, even between strangers, that is alien to the modern world. As genre paintings indicate, communal-style dining was routine: people drank from collective cups, shared bowls, and ate from the same trencher and spoon. An etiquette manual counseled, “When ye shall drink, wipe your mouth clean with a cloth, and your hands also, so that you shall not in any way soil the cup, for then shall none of your companions be loth to drink with you.”<sup>50</sup> Traveling through Germany in 1580, Montaigne noted with revulsion that when soup came to the table in taverns, “everyone fishes together, for there is no individual serving.” He remarked that it was all the same to him whether the dishes were of wood, pewter, or silver; but, he said, “i no more like drinking out of a common cup than i would like eating out of common fingers.”<sup>51</sup> A sixteenth-century italian writer cautioned that the beaker and bowl in the center of the table are there “for lord and cleric without distinction and nobody dreams of an extra cup.”<sup>52</sup> As an etiquette manual pointed out, “Some are so nice, they will not eat Pottage, or any thing of that nature, in which you have put your Spoon unwip’d, after you have put it into your own mouth.”<sup>53</sup> Share-and-share-alike habits died very slowly, however. As late as 1763, the English novelist Tobias Smollett (1721–71) remarked that the French, however beastly otherwise at the table, “will not drink out of a tankard, in which, perhaps, a dozen of filthy mouths have flabbered, as is the custom in England.”<sup>54</sup> Communal meals began to retreat among the upper stratum as pottery became common on the table, with commensurate changes in notions of hygiene, selfdiscipline, and social propriety. The ultimate in individualized consumption of food was the dinner service as it provided diners with a circumscribed social space, thereby promoting self-restraint in interaction.<sup>55</sup> When dinner services and the fork came into wide use among the well-to-do, questions of etiquette shifted from consideration of how to share a bowl or grasp the roast beef to the matter of how properly to employ one’s exclusive set of cups, plates, and cutlery. Wealthy italians used matching appointments in tin-glazed earthenware in the early sixteenth century, but until the seventeenth century, the term service (servizio) referred only to the ceramic equipment in which food was served; vessels of earthenware, pewter, glass, and silver clustered together on the table without a formal designation.<sup>56</sup> The first complete dinner services, with settings for every person, came into fashion in China around the time Westerners first sailed there. According to Zhu yan, early Ming emperors began to use vessels with matching designs and color, with twenty-seven pieces in each service, on their banquet tables. The Jiajing emperor (r. 1522–66) ordered Jingdezhen to produce 1,340 dinner sets decorated with dragons, including 26,350 bowls and 50,500 plates.<sup>57</sup> Though it is possible that Western merchants or Jesuits carried word of the fashion for matching wares to Europe, the notion most likely was suggested by the intrinsically pleasing ensemble look of different shapes of blue-and-white porcelain on the table. The voC and the EiC started to import porcelain dinner services in the early eighteenth century, and, in response, Meissen began to manufacture large quantities at about the same time. The standard service comprised about 130 pieces, including 60 dinner plates, 24 soup bowls, 21 serving platters, 4 sauceboats, 1 fish platter, 6 tureens, 6 saltcellars, and 6 salad bowls. items such as cruets, oval dishes, wine coolers, and candlesticks often supplemented this collection. in the course of the eighteenth century, british families that could afford the extra expense—some ten times the price of ordinary settings—commissioned over four thousand services with coats of arms.<sup>58</sup> in fact, Chinese dinner services had an impact that extends to the present day. The West was imprinted on blue-and-white pottery in the early modern period, shortly before the introduction of sets of tableware; hence the configuration of the modern dinner plate, essentially a flat surface embellished with a border design and a central pictorial emblem, is a legacy of the porcelain of the Ming dynasty. The more exalted the rank, the more extravagant the dinner service. in 1737 Count Heinrich von brühl declared his wealth and power as the chief minister of Saxony by commissioning the Swan Service in rococo style: 3,000 pieces with painted decoration, including serving dishes masquerading as birds, shells, and flowers. The ornate Snowballflower (Schneeballblüten) coffee service represented another triumph of rococo design: made by Meissen in 1739 for Maria Josepha, daughter of Augustus iii of Saxony, it took the blossom of the Japanese snowball tree as its decorative fantasy theme.<sup>59</sup> in 1763 Horace Walpole (1717–97), the English writer and politician, viewed a dinner set commissioned by George iii (r. 1760–80) and Queen Charlotte (1744–1820) for the latter’s brother: “i saw yesterday a magnificent service of Chelsea China which the King and Queen are sending to the duke of Mecklenburg. There are dishes and plates without number, an epergne [a table centerpiece with holders for flowers and fruit], candlesticks, salt-sellers, sauce-boats, tea and coffee equipages, in short, it is complete and cost twelve hundred pounds!”<sup>60</sup> The neoclassical Cameo Service produced by Sèvres in the late 1770s for Empress Catherine ii (the Great, r. 1762–96) of russia included 797 pieces and cost 331,317 livres, the annual wages of over a thousand French workers. in 1783 louis xvi ordered an even costlier service from Sèvres: it comprised about 800 pieces with over a thousand decorative scenes and cost 480 livres a plate. The managers of Sèvres estimated it would take twenty-three years to complete the set. incredibly, the monarch continued to receive reports on its progress until a few weeks before going to the guillotine in January 1793.<sup>61</sup> dinner sets as grand as the Swan and Cameo Services were housed in massive palaces. Farther down the social ladder, room had to be made for more modest collections. From the seventeenth century, homes became larger, first in the dutch republic and then in England and France; specialized rooms emerged for sleeping, cooking, dining, and the domestic servants.<sup>62</sup> builders provided storage space to accommodate the increasing number of possessions in well-to-do households, such as chests, cupboards, mirrors, paintings, clavichords, tea tables, chandeliers, upholstered furniture, textile wall hangings, and tableware. A 1678 dutch book on etiquette advised that a well-furnished home must have venetian mirrors, Amsterdam gilt leather, a silver service, and indian Kraakporselein. indeed, some people may have sought out products to fill the new spaces available. one voC bureaucrat bought an Amsterdam mansion and stocked it with a sizable painting collection, ten porcelain dinner services, and forty-one porcelain tea sets. Smokeless stoves, made of glazed earthenware or porcelain tiles, were adopted in privileged circles, making it possible to cook standing up instead of crouched before a hearth. Stoves also advanced the separation of cooking from presentation, lackeys from masters. increasingly excluded from the common domestic table and intimate family circle, servants were given additional tasks. They were trained in what became known as dinner á la française, that is, the sequence and technique of presenting food and drink, with menus detailing stages of the repast and table plans dictating placement of cutlery, wine glasses, and dinner services. by the end of the eighteenth century, the taste for grandiose banquets had faded as private dinners in a separate dining room took precedence over formal and ceremonial public dining. invention of the dumbwaiter meant that servants need not enter the salle à manger to deliver courses of the meal. intimate dinners, involving cultivated conversation within a like-minded circle, superseded the ritual display and extravagant feasts that had been a standard elite entertainment for centuries. This reflected the values of privacy and intimacy that were keynotes in enlightened circles. restaurants emerged in the late seventeenth century in major urban centers, and dining in one naturally entailed being part of a crowd; but diners were provided with separate tables for their individual group and an exclusive set of utensils for every individual at the table. dining etiquette, a hallmark of modernity, was comprehensively reformed in the three centuries after 1500. The exhortations of fourteenth-century Tischzuchten (table discipline) manuals could have little effect before the advent of both the printed book and a colossal amount of pottery.<sup>63</sup> Treating one’s dining companions courteously became significantly more feasible once an abundance of vessels on the table eliminated need for sharing; many soup bowls make good neighbors. dinner services made dining both individualized and standardized, with each set of utensils the same around the table and the social code for appropriate behavior known to everyone. in the late seventeenth century, a French aristocrat noted the change that was still largely under way: Formerly one ate soup from the dish, without ceremony, and wiped one’s spoon often on the boiled fowl. . . . now each person eats his soup from his own plate. one must make polite use of spoon and fork. . . . never use the same plate for different courses, but change the plate frequently. That is what plates are made for, just as you are given napkins to wipe your mouth. At table as elsewhere, after all, one should think of one’s neighbors.<sup>64</sup> A century or so later, etiquette manuals no longer had to hammer home such elementary reminders, for instruction in table manners in polite society was devolving into a matter of adults coaching youngsters how to eat without making a mess. An English writer’s judgment in 1797 that sitting “together at table is perhaps one of the strongest characteristics of civilization and refinement” indicates how radically dining conventions had altered since Pinto and his companions so heartily threw themselves upon what their Japanese hosts placed in front of them.<sup>65</sup> ## “ THE lAST STAGE oF PoliTE EnTErTAinMEnTS”: CUiSinE And TAblE dECorATion High-quality pottery on the table reached a critical mass for the first time in renaissance italy, which, not surprisingly, also began to define new standards for dining decorum. in the fifteenth century, tin-glazed earthenware became fashionable among the increasingly prosperous middling rank of people who could not afford silver plate or pewter but who desired something better than terra-cotta and wood. in addition, new modes of private expenditure took hold in which those who did not have the wherewithal for patronage of sculpture and painting could express their elite status by purchasing cameos, bibelots, and tableware.<sup>66</sup> displaying maiolica as an ornament in the home served as the precedent for later displays of Chinese and Japanese porcelain. increased use of ceramics altered the look of the table; napkins, tablecloths, and scented water for washing hands became essential items. Although silver plate still ruled the high table, pottery steadily gained ground. At the Este court of Ferrara in 1565, a wedding party banqueted on twelve thousand tin-glazed plates decorated with the coat of arms of the ducal house.<sup>67</sup> While renaissance italians led the way in defining elegant living and judicious spending, the dutch pioneered new standards of convenience and variety in gastronomic culture. From the early eighteenth century, when the voC opened an office in Canton, its agents met with members of Chinese merchants’ associations in contact with brokerage firms in Jingdezhen. The dutch handed over drawings, engravings, and wooden models of earthenware for potters to copy. As best they could, they relayed the detailed, often prolix instructions dispatched by company directors in batavia and Amsterdam: We want a good lot of fifteen to twenty thousand fine butter dishes, and also eight to ten thousand fruit-dishes to be sent, and all kinds of ordinary and small bowls, caudle cups [used at the lying-in to drink to the health of a new mother], half, third and quarter sizes and other kinds, but those cups must be with straight or sheer sides, and not flaring and flat-lipped like common caudle-cups generally are, because the kind with sheer sides are worth a quarter more than those with flaring sides, and even in large lots they will find buyers. When the same are available, of a kind of eight-sided, medium-sized porcelain dishes to which on one side can be added other smallish dishes, so that standing on a table and joined to each other they have the shape of one dish, we should gladly be supplied with one lot, to wit, of eight or more dishes and members, because some curious people have demanded them expressly, having seen them several times.<sup>68</sup> Mercifully, however, sometimes instructions from the dutch were succinct: “a herring must be painted on the herring dishes.”<sup>69</sup> (See figure 24.) Tableware custom-ordered from Jingdezhen or made at delft included a variety of utensils that crowded into dutch cupboards from the seventeenth century: soup tureens, beer tankards, radish saucers, pickle shells, cruets, artichoke cups, ice pails, salad bowls, saltcellars, stem goblets, melon and strawberry dishes, sauceboats, butter tubs, butter coolers, monteiths, cheese cradles, chestnut baskets, juice pourers, tea canisters, custard cups, cream pitchers, mustard pots, dessert plates, oval saucepans, and ornamental nobby bottles (Knobbelflesen). new foods and modes of preparation called for a range of tableware and kitchen paraphernalia. Printed recipe books, an innovation of the italian renaissance, included greater varieties of meat, vegetables, and fresh fruit. Platters of peacock and heron abandoned the table while dishes of mutton and veal moved in. rice, maize, shallots, peas, mushrooms, artichokes, cucumbers, squash, pears, and figs entered the diet of the privileged ranks and very slowly trickled down the social ladder. Pineapple, however, remained a costly delicacy out of the reach of all but the wealthy. From the late sixteenth century, sugar imports from brazil and the West indies gave cooks the means to produce unprecedented quantities of puddings, sweet pies, sorbets, jellies, tarts, and marmalades—each calling for its own distinctive pottery.<sup>70</sup> butter became a foundation of sauces, a triumph of dairy-breeding northern Europe over the olive-growing Mediterranean as decisive as that which took place in industrial leadership during the same time. Plentiful ceramics were essential for dairy activities such as making butter and cheese: milk pans, jars, pitchers, and crocks. in the 1770s Wedgwood won a monopoly on the production of pots and tiles for English dairies, providing wares with patterns simulating the grains of marble, jasper, and porphyry. When dairying became a chic aristocratic diversion in France, louis xvi commissioned a pleasure dairy for Marie Antoinette, equipped with porcelain utensils in the fashionable neoclassical “Etruscan” style.<sup>71</sup> The queen and her ladies played at milking cows and churning butter, enacting a fantasy of rustic delight akin to that which impelled affluent merchants in Japan to build pretentiously humble tea huts. during the Middle Ages, the high cost of spices naturally restricted their use to the wealthy. Ginger, cinnamon, and nutmeg functioned primarily as markers of social discrimination, not as condiments to disguise tainted meat; they set off the aristocracy from lower social ranks as surely as Pantagruelian feasts of roast swan and stewed venison.<sup>72</sup> According to a thirteenth-century English account, one royal feast included the head of a boar, larded, with the snout well garlanded. . . . And then there were a great variety of cranes, peacocks, and swans, kids, pigs, and hens. Then they had rabbits in gravy, all covered with sugar, viaunde de Cypre [ground meat blended with minced dates and marinated in spiced wine] and Mawmenny [chicken pudding with almond milk or spiced wine] . . . and then quite a different multitude of roasts, each of them set next to another: pheasants, woodcocks, and partridges, fieldfares [thrushes], larks, and roasted plovers, blackbirds, woodcock, and song-thrushes . . . and fried meat, crisps and fritters, with sugar mixed with rosewater. And when the table was taken away, sweet spice powder with large dragees [sugar-coated fruits or nuts], maces, cubebs [spicy Javanese berries], and enough spicerie, and plenty of wafers.<sup>73</sup> Medieval aristocrats favored dishes with diverse flavors, accounting for menus with offerings such as spit-roasted pigeons coated with saffron and stuffed with spiced mutton suet, geese stuffed with sugared oysters, and capon slathered with almonds, cinnamon, and quince. As spices poured into Europe in the sixteenth century, privileged ranks abandoned them and adopted new social signifiers. The gastronomic culture of the rich and well-born became characterized by what were regarded as “natural” foods, such as vegetable soups and herb-seasoned meats. nicolas boileau (1636–1711), the French satirist and critic (and a favorite of louis xiv), mocked a diner besotted with spices: “you like nutmeg, it’s put on everything!”<sup>74</sup> dishes calling for a clash of flavors—sweet with sour, bitter with sweet, savory with sour— were spurned in favor of straightforward broths and meat cooked in its own juices. The founding text for French cooking in the age of the Sun King, Le Cuisinier français (1651) by François Pierre de la varenne (1618–78), led the way in establishing nouvelle cuisine. The cookbook sparked numerous follow-ups, most notably Le Cuisinier royal et bourgeois (1691), by François Massialot (1660–1733), which continued to be edited and brought up to date into the late eighteenth century.<sup>75</sup> Modern dining protocols emerged, with the elite distinguished from their inferiors by correct employment of fourchettes and serviettes. displays of expensive ceramic tableware served the same social function, as well as being essential to the new commensal sensibility and genteel protocols. Ceremonial feasting in the Mid dle Ages took the form of showy gatherings, with a lavish carcass on the table, redressed in its skin or festooned with feathers, tinted with cinnamon or spinach juice, exhibited with theatrical panache, and consumed before a crowd of spectators. When the festive occasion ended, an almoner doled out the juice-soaked bread trenchers to the poor at the kitchen door. by the mid-seventeenth century, how ever, aristocratic fashion in dining shifted to the vessels that accompanied the relatively unadorned food, to table services whose refinement testified to the lofty status and urbane taste of the host.<sup>76</sup> Pyramids of spiced songbirds and grilled quail were exiled from the center of the table in favor of new forms of display. naturally, the rich merely changed their modes of affectation, not their ostentatious bent. Table decoration at the court of the dukes of burgundy in the fifteenth century included a gold dragoir (a platter for ceremonial serving of spices) weighing nine kilograms and embellished with pearls, diamonds, and rubies; supposed unicorn horns, elephant tusks, and fossilized shark’s teeth set in gilt mounts also decorated the table. Shiploads of sugar opened up new possibilities for table exhibits, though sugar sculptures (trionfi) were as ephemeral as mayflies compared to tusks and teeth. Specialty cooks (chefs de l’Office) sculpted vases of flowers from painted and gilded almond paste; they built toy palaces and temples from sugar bonded with gum tragacanth (resin from a Mediterranean shrub), with the finished works sometimes weighing over one hundred kilograms. At a feast in brussels in 1565 celebrating the nuptials of Alessandro Farnese (1545–92), a cousin of Philip ii, and Maria of Portugal (1538–77), all the plates, glasses, and candlesticks were fashioned from sugar, as was the three-thousand-piece mock-up of palaces, ports, galleons, carriages, and sea monsters illustrating the stages of the bride’s voyage from lisbon, with each of the sugar-cities en route measuring two meters long and one high.<sup>77</sup> At a 1667 Amsterdam dinner, a delegation of Portuguese Jews presented Cosimo de’ Medici, Grand duke of Tuscany, with “a triumph of sugar, representing a ship, finely worked with its decks and inner rooms in fullest detail.”<sup>78</sup> August ii held a dinner in 1719 in which sugar mountains shaped in the letter A, a tribute to his sponsorship of Saxony’s mining industry, towered over the banquet tables. in 1757, when the vogue for sugar decorations had petered out nearly everywhere, the wedding of an Amsterdam burgomaster featured a sugar temple—one meter wide, two meters high, and three meters long—with eight gilded sugar columns, a floor of colored sugar, and a roof of spun sugar, all decorated with images of flowers, fruits, musical instruments, and river gods. The temple was set on a plateau of mirrored glass, with candlelight illuminating the saccharine extravaganza from below.<sup>79</sup> Trionfi quickly fell from fashion, replaced by prancing porcelain figurines, lilliputian models of splendor and privilege. Gerrit van den brenk, an Amsterdam chef who wrote A Dialogue between a Lady and a Pastry Cook (ca. 1750), told his readers, “nowadays many statues and figurines are made of Saxon porcelain, whereas sugar statues are hardly used any more.”<sup>80</sup> Walpole felt the new fashion demeaned his beloved porcelain: “Jellies, biscuits, sugar plums and creams had long since given way to Turks, Chinese and Shepherdesses of Saxon china. . . . by degrees, whole meadows of cattle, of the same brittle materials spread themselves over the table[,] . . . confectioners found their trade moulder away, while toy-men and china shops were the only fashionable purveyors of the last stage of polite entertainments.”<sup>81</sup> Calling upon the expertise of his Meissen manufactory, August iii launched a cavalcade of china dolls onto his table, including Harlequin, Pantaloon, mandarins, the muses, and olympian gods—pint-sized versions of the actual masked promenades staged a few years earlier by August ii and his courtiers. in dresden in 1748 the british ambassador reported being overwhelmed by a flamboyant porcelain spectacle: “When dinner was brought on, i thought it the most wonderful thing i ever beheld. . . . in the middle of the table was the Fountain of the Piazza navona at rome, at least eight foot high, which ran all the while with rose-Water, and ’tis said that the piece alone cost six thousand dollars [Thalers].”<sup>82</sup> in 1770 Sèvres produced an even grander ceramic monument for a banquet at versailles celebrating Marie Antoinette’s marriage to the future louis xvi. Measuring ten by four meters, the centerpiece included a series of terraces with cascading fountains; a frieze of royal emblems on fifty-six doric columns encircled an arcade topped by a large pottery statue of louis xv. Wedding guests gaped at the 6,576 vibrantly colored porcelain blossoms.<sup>83</sup> ## “ THE ConTAGion oF CHinA FAnCy”: CollECTinG And CrEATinG PorCElAin Horace Walpole, one of England’s foremost porcelain connoisseurs, kept his collection in a China room at Strawberry Hill, his estate in Middlesex. As a companion recorded, on a trip to Paris in 1765 Walpole purchased, for the extraordinary sum of £100 (\$17,200), a tea cup and saucer by Sèvres, “perfect jewels that deserve to be set in gold frames to be admired and looked at, but never to use for fear of breaking them.”<sup>84</sup> lacking Walpole’s fortune but sharing his passion for the Chinese drink, dr. Samuel Johnson (1709–84), the English critic and lexicographer, described himself as a “hardened and shameless tea-drinker . . . who with tea amuses the evening; with tea solaces the midnight; and with tea welcomes the morning.”<sup>85</sup> As he wrote to a friend, however, he was “not yet so infected with the contagion of China fancy” that he cared to spend money on ruinously expensive, gilded porcelain that could shatter in an instant.<sup>86</sup> by the last half of the eighteenth century, costs fell considerably as the EiC imported massive quantities of chinaware for serving the new hot liquors that had entered Europe along with other foodstuffs. According to a london newspaper in 1659, “Theire ware also att this time a Turkish drink to be sould, almost in evry street, called Coffee, and another kind of drink called Tee, and also a drink called Chacolate, which was a very hearty drink.”<sup>87</sup> The extraordinary popularity of coffee and tea—hot chocolate remained chiefly a Spanish taste—both customarily taken with sugar, prompted voltaire to remark that “Martinique, Mocha and China furnish the breakfast of a servant girl.” indeed, that was scarcely an exaggeration: inventories of eighteenth-century Amsterdam pawnshops reveal that those living in poor households routinely consumed coffee and tea and that three-fourths possessed a few pieces of porcelain, though often chipped and broken. The dutch minister François valentijn (1666–1727) wrote in 1726 that coffee had “broken through so generally in our land that maids and seamstresses now had to have their coffee in the morning or they could not put their thread through the eye of their needle.”<sup>88</sup> When large amounts of porcelain began to enter Europe after 1600, however, it first caught on only among those who could best afford it. The crowned heads of Europe, from the kings of Portugal to the tsars of russia, came down with la maladie de porcelaine. like palaces and ermine robes, massed displays of the ceramic functioned as assertions of power and magnificence. Porcelain became the currency of social emulation among the royalty of every country and spread down the social ladder to aristocrats, country gentry, and prosperous burghers. Henry iv bought a chinaware dinner service, and at his marriage to Marie de’ Medici, an observer noted that “tables at the banquet were decorated with gold, silver and porcelain vases.” Their son, the future louis xiii (r. 1610–43), “daily drank his broth” from a porcelain bowl.<sup>89</sup> Sir William Cecil (1520–98), the first lord burghley and the queen’s lord Treasurer, gave Elizabeth i, Henry’s contemporary, a “Porrynger [a small bowl with a handle] garnissed with golde, the cover of gold with a lyon on the toppe thereof.”<sup>90</sup> in 1604, a year after James i, Elizabeth’s successor, came to the throne, William Shakespeare (1564–1616) made his sole reference to porcelain: “a dish of some three pence,” says garrulous Pompey: “your honours have seen such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very good dishes” (Measure for Measure, act 2, scene 1). James received a gift of porcelain plates from Sultan iskandar Muda (r. 1606–36) of Atjeh in Sumatra, an attempt to enlist the king’s support against the sultan’s European enemies. Charles ii had access to a much larger collection after he married Catherine braganza of Portugal, whose dowry included lots of chinaware. After the Glorious revolution of 1688, William iii and Mary ii brought some eight hundred pieces of porcelain and delftware from the dutch republic to England, along with a new continental fashion. The popularity of porcelain throughout Europe stemmed not only from its use in dining but also from its incorporation in the new consumer vogue for interior decoration, a trend that burgeoned as the elite built increasingly spacious homes. Princess Mary went so far as to design rooms and buildings to fit her collection. She installed a porcelain chamber in her country home outside Amsterdam, and she employed daniel Marot (1661–1752), a French Hugenot architect and designer, in the court at the Hague. He introduced the popular fashion of massing porcelains on mantelpieces and placing them in front of mirrors on shelves and sideboards. According to defoe, at Hampton Court (begun in 1689) Queen Mary introduced the English to the “fatal excess” of “piling their china upon the tops of cabinets, scrutores, and every chymney-piece, to the tops of the ceilings, and even setting up shelves for their china-ware, where they wanted such places, till it became a grievance in the expence of it, and even injurious to their families and estates.”<sup>91</sup> The furnishings at Hampton Court were intended to evoke louis xiv’s Trianon de Porcelaine (torn down two years earlier): the porcelain collection was displayed in rooms filled with pseudo-lacquer furniture in blue and white and with swathes of blue-and-white silk hanging from wall fixtures. As the great aristocratic dynasty of the dutch republic and an investor in the voC, the House of orange naturally did much to spread the fashion for porcelain throughout Europe. William iii’s aunt, louise Henriette (1627–67), married Frederick William ii (the Great Elector, r. 1640–88) of brandenburg-Prussia, who built the oranienburg Palace to house porcelain. The Great Elector claimed that louise Henriette was obsessed with her collection: “My wife says she is frightened that if there were a fire, the servants would remove the furniture, etc., whereas she is more concerned about the porcelain.”<sup>92</sup> Another of William iii’s aunts, Albertina Agnes (1634–96), married William Frederick of nassau-dietz (d. 1664) and constructed the oranienstein Palace in 1683 for her porcelain collection. Frederick William i of Prussia in 1702 built a mirrored Porzellankabinett for his collection of four hundred Chinese pieces in his palace at Charlottenburg near berlin. influenced by his visit to Holland, Tsar Peter (the Great) of russia (r. 1682–1725) set up a porcelain chamber in his palace, Monplaisir, near Peterhof. of course, William iii’s great enemy, louis xiv, also promoted the fashion for porcelain. He inherited several hundred pieces from both Cardinal Mazarin (1602–61) and Marie de’ Medici, his grandmother.<sup>93</sup> After he received Kangxi porcelains from the Siamese ambassadors in 1686, he often dined en porcelaine at versailles. in the next decade, dozens of shops dealing in Chinese wares opened in Paris. European princes, however, aspired to manufacture their own porcelain rather than purchase it from China. in the 1450s venetian glassworkers produced an opaque glass, called lattimo because of its milky appearance, in an attempt to simulate porcelain. Maestro Antonio, a venetian alchemist, tried to create the ceramic in the late fifteenth century, perhaps inspired by some vessels in the treasury of the basilica of San Marco, but he produced only a glasslike material. Francesco i de’ Medici, Grand duke of Tuscany and an avid patron of alchemy, poured a fortune into trying to create porcelain by combining ground glass, powdered crystal, and vicenza clay. Although his product turned out as white as porcelain, it proved virtually impossible to fire, carve, or shape; his potters managed to turn out just a few dozen pieces. researchers at Saint-Cloud near Paris in 1698 apparently produced something similar, but no vessels or documents survive from the experiments. After visiting Saint-Cloud in 1701, Tschirnaus told August ii that its product clearly was inferior to Chinese porcelain.<sup>94</sup> Also in 1701, reports circulated around central Europe, even coming to the attention of leibniz, that a journeyman pharmacist and self-proclaimed alchemist in berlin named Johann Friedrich böttger had succeeded in transmuting silver coins into gold. Sought after by Frederick William i, who desired a treasure-house of gold, the nineteen-year-old charlatan fled for nearby Saxony, where he fell into the hands of August the Strong. Failing to transmute base metal into gold for the king—August demanded sixty million ducats as soon as possible—böttger instead was forced to work with Tschirnhaus on a formula for porcelain, the new “white gold.” Penned up in a laboratory in the fortifications of the Jungfernbastei in dresden, böttger bitterly wrote over the door, “a goldmaker has been turned into a potmaker.”<sup>95</sup> Tschirnhaus, böttger, and their associates arguably formed the first research-anddevelopment enterprise in history, driven by visions of enormous profit and haunted by fears of industrial espionage. Clever and industrious, böttger also was lucky: Tschirnaus’s death, just when the final breakthrough was made in creating a version of porcelain, allowed the putative alchemist to claim all the credit for the achievement. The first wares produced in early 1709 actually consisted of red stoneware, a material similar to that used for the much-admired yixing teapots, a score of which August held in his mammoth collection. Within a short time, beds of kaolin were discovered in Saxony, which improved the product and made for increased production. in 1709 August opened the royal Saxon Porcelain Manufactory at Meissen, immediately northeast of dresden. yet despite severe methods of guarding against spies and betrayal, such as locking up his own craftsmen, August failed to keep the secret of porcelain manufacture for himself. Within a few years, workers knowledgeable about the ceramic recipe and the creation of high-temperature kilns escaped from Meissen and peddled the precious information to other princes. Problems with constructing effective kilns and locating sources of kaolin delayed Meissen’s rivals, but by 1760 some thirty porcelain manufactories dotted the map of Europe, about half of them in the states of Germany.<sup>96</sup> in the mid-eighteenth century duke Karl Eugen (r. 1737–93) of Württemberg expressed a commonplace when he declared that a porcelain manufactory was “an indispensable accompaniment to splendor and magnificence.”<sup>97</sup> of course, the Chinese eventually suffered a great deal more than August the Strong from the spread of the secret. They lost their monopoly on porcelain, their longest, dearest-held treasure. There is a certain irony in the consideration that they did so as a direct consequence of the triumphal expansion of their ancient trade in pottery into the new, predatory marketplace of Europe. ## WESTErn And CHinESE PorCElAin in THE EiGHTEEnTH CEnTUry The craze for Chinese porcelain declined swiftly in the West in the last decades of the eighteenth century. it was all the fashion in 1700, with huge quantities arriving every year. The trade reached its height around the mid-1750s, with some thirty ships loaded with porcelain leaving Canton every sailing season; but in the last years of the century, the voC and the EiC suspended pottery shipments, bringing the commerce to an abrupt end.<sup>98</sup> This was not simply a consequence of commercial competition from Western porcelain, since the Chinese imports remained somewhat cheaper throughout the century, and they were regarded as of higher quality than their European counterparts. rather, the fall in popularity resulted mainly from changes in elite fashion, aesthetic sensibility, and intellectual perspective. in 1807 Sir Joseph banks of the royal Society wrote a treatise in which he paid tribute to Chinese porcelain collected by his wife for her dairy at their Spring Grove estate at isleworth in Kent. He maintained: At the latter end of the 17th and the beginning of the 18th century, China ware was much in vogue, it was at that time a necessary ornament of the Table of the opulent & was consequently imported in great quantities & sold at high prices; Fashion however began about 1740 to introduce European Porcelain in its stead, and as the dearer ornaments will always be preferred to the cheaper by those who are able to purchase them, however preferable the cheaper may be, oriental China has at length fallen into total neglect.<sup>99</sup> in addition, while admiring “the pure white, the beautiful colors & the semitransparent brilliancy of the glaze of China Ware,” banks applauded English manufacturers, especially his friend Josiah Wedgwood, for making vessels that combined those qualities with the aesthetic standards of classical antiquity.<sup>100</sup> The decline of Chinese porcelain, then, followed in part from the success of European potters and patrons in situating their wares in the context of Western cultural traditions. Such a definition necessarily meant a rejection of the aesthetic ideals of China. This was a striking volte-face, for no other culture ever struck Europe with such concentrated force: Chinese philosophy, government, art, architecture, and landscape design seized the imagination of Europe’s elite, especially from the late seventeenth to the middle of the eighteenth century. French publication at the turn of the century of Jesuit reports on China and Jesuit translations into latin of Confucian texts established the image of a society uniquely governed by natural law, secular values, and paternal benevolence.<sup>101</sup> voltaire proclaimed that “their empire was already governing like a family . . . while we in small numbers were erring in the forest of the Ardennes.”<sup>102</sup> in his preface to du Halde’s Description in 1738, the English translator held up the Chinese sovereign as a model for George ii (r. 1683–1760): The Chinese emperor raises taxes only for the public good; hears all complaints; redresses grievances on all matters; lets no one oppress the people; pursues all advantages for the public good; encourages manufactures and trade; never does anything contrary to the “inclinations of the People”; and invites his ministers to examine his conduct and correct his mistakes. . . . This is the glorious light in which the Chinese History presents their Monarch to our view; and this is the light in which the inhabitants of these islands figure to themselves your Future reign.<sup>103</sup> Samuel Johnson, who would later turn sour on China, recommended du Halde’s volumes, declaring that readers “will be amazed to find that there is a Country where nobility and Knowledge are the same, where Men advance in rank as they advance in learning, and Promotion is the Effect of virtuous industry.”<sup>104</sup> Striving to capture the essence of the idyllic empire, the elite constructed pagodas and Chinese-style meandering gardens everywhere in Europe. in his Tratados históricos, domingo navarette had highlighted the emperor’s ritual plowing before the Altar of Agriculture at the vernal equinox, prompting voltaire to ask, “What are our European monarchs going to do when they hear about such examples? Admire and blush, yet above all: copy.”<sup>105</sup> in France and Austria, royal heads dutifully took to plowing ceremonially on the first day of spring. during a time of increasing secularism and remarkable economic change, the West defined its identity and relationship with other powerful societies by measuring itself against China. Europe soon entered its own age of empire, however, with a consequent decline in esteem for all things Chinese. Around the middle of the eighteenth century, with Western power growing in Asia, European merchants familiar with China began to counter the idealized Jesuit portrait of that country, detailing the presumed corruption and debility of its administration; intellectuals soon turned against China as an exemplar for their own society. in like fashion, Europeans stopped looking to Chinese porcelain as an ideal. The craze for Chinese ceramics had heralded a period of China worship, and when the Chinese model toppled from its pedestal, Chinese porcelain fell along with it. during the first half of the eighteenth century, however, Chinese porcelain still enjoyed enormous prestige in the West. indeed, potters in both Europe and China attained a level of artistic excellence and technical skill that has never been surpassed. yet while China’s achievement was based on centuries of tradition, Europe’s was founded on astonishingly recent progress: in less than two generations, Western potters located sources of kaolin and china stone, constructed high-firing kilns, developed new ceramic formulas, and so completely mastered their craft that the Chinese copied their wares and adopted their decorative techniques. in fact, the rapid development of European pottery stemmed from the same consideration that accounted for the exceptional achievements of Chinese craftsmen in the Song period: a large number of competing pottery centers stimulated experiment and innovation, thereby increasing the pool of industrial expertise as well as the variety and quality of production. blue-and-white porcelain, however, was solely Jingdezhen’s creation, and its triumph in China in the Ming period effectively crushed other ceramic centers, especially those manufacturing celadons. by the sixteenth century, a combination of natural resources, capital investment, and imperial patronage transformed Jingdezhen into the colossus of Chinese potteries. Having nothing to learn from competitors at home, the entrepreneurs and craftsmen of the porcelain city responded instead to their Western rivals. in the end, however, Jingdezhen collectively failed to respond to the innovations of Staffordshire that radically changed the nature of pottery production. Control and support of Jingdezhen by the Qing dynasty greatly facilitated the Chinese response to Europe, for the rulers employed Jesuits in the imperial palace who were well informed about Western artistic innovations. They also forged closer links between the pottery center and beijing than had earlier regimes. The Kangxi emperor appointed a resident official to supervise reconstruction. As director of Jingdezhen from 1683 to 1688, Zang yingxuan oversaw rebuilding of the kilns and ensured that the imperial household received the huge amounts of porcelain needed for its daily life and routine rituals. Equally energetic supervisors followed him: lang Tingji (1705–12), nian xiyao (1726–28), and Tang ying (1729–56). because of his long term in office and his technical expertise, Tang was particularly important; he looked back to the period of the early Ming as a model of excellence, and his innovations in glaze colors helped bring porcelain decoration closer to the styles employed for painting. The importance of the office of supervisor became clear in 1786 when its abolition to cut bureaucratic costs hindered Jingdezhen’s ability to compete in world markets.<sup>106</sup> The Kangxi emperor established workshops in his beijing palace for porcelain, lacquerware, jade carving, painting, and calligraphy. He also promoted the brilliant new “foreign colors” (yangcai or falang) that Westerners had devised for cloisonné and glass working. As had happened four centuries earlier with Persian cobalt, new color came to Chinese porcelain from the outside world. The pigments involved the use of lead arsenate to create opaque white enamel to which colorants could be added. Tints in which green predominated gave an adamantine sheen, known as famille verte (green family) in the West and yingcai (hard colors) in China. Pastels derived from employing colloidal gold chloride to create lilac, and ruby-magenta tones were called famille rose (rose family) and fencai (powdery colors). Mixed with other pigments, the new hard and powdery colors produced a wide range of hues.<sup>107</sup> The European marketing of Prussian blue after 1704 and of rose Pompadour after 1756 rounded out a palette that gave an intense, new experience of color to the world. in the West as well as in China, porcelain graduated from blue and white to all the shades of the rainbow.<sup>108</sup> Eager to acquire European color innovations, the Kangxi emperor assigned two italian Jesuits, Giuseppe Castiglione (1688–1766) and Matteo ripa (1682–1746), to teach enameling techniques to Chinese artisans, and he requested the Jesuit general in rome to send more handicraft experts. Under the yongzheng emperor, the new colors and designs became prominent on porcelain. Castiglione was a friend of nian xiyao, resident director of Jingdezhen, and he persuaded him to translate Andrea Pozzo’s influential Perspectiva Pictorum (1693–98) under the title Shi Xue (visual learning). nian xiyao wrote that Castiglione had taught him “the way to give three-dimensional effect to the drawing of an object with its particular light and shade aspects.”<sup>109</sup> A porcelain painter in the imperial workshop even reproduced one of Castiglione’s perspective paintings on a dish. Western colors and design techniques also greatly appealed to the Qianlong emperor, the foremost connoisseur and art collector of the Qing dynasty. He wanted the “oceanic styles” (yang shi), as the innovations were called in China, put in the service of “copying the ancients,” the convention that had a powerful impact on the decorative arts. of course, under Qianlong, there was renewed interest in manufacturing vessels modeled on Song wares, using illustrated catalogues of antiquities as guides to forms and decoration. The West had long followed a tradition of copying its own ancients, most notably during the renaissance. Painters, sculptors, and architects from Giotto to Michelangelo adhered to notions of human form and coherent space that they regarded as faithful to classical Greece and rome. in their istoriato vessels, italian potters extended renaissance precepts of classical composition and subject matter to the newly respectable medium of clay. but the popularity of Chinese design in the West, especially its asymmetry and lack of Europeanstyle perspective, represented a rejection of the classical-renaissance tradition, even liberation from it. Significantly, designs on blue-and-white porcelain and their chinoiserie variations never made as great an impact in italy as elsewhere, no doubt because classical and renaissance standards were so deeply rooted there. italian potters even drew their fantasy decoration from ancient roman motifs—dolphins, satyrs, grinning skulls, grotesque beasts—thereby filling the arena that the exotic Chinese menagerie occupied in northern Europe.<sup>110</sup> Westerners regarded Chinese pictorial space with some ambivalence, not unlike the way the islamic world had viewed it much earlier. on the one hand, they cherished its feeling of freedom, its sense of space as fluid and unlimited. Charles lamb (1775–1834), who spent thirty years working at leadenhall Street for the East india Company, wrote that as a youth he loved those “lawless, azure-tinctured grotesques, that, under the notion of men and women, float about uncircumscribed by any element, in that world before perspective—a china tea-cup.”<sup>111</sup> on the other hand, the legacy of the renaissance maintained its force: Western chinoiserie designs routinely imposed the regularity of perspective on Chinese compositions, bringing the license of the exotic scenes under the dominion of Western principles of design.<sup>112</sup> This suggests that, despite its passion, the Western love affair with Chinese art was destined to cool in time. As millions of pieces of blue-and-white porcelain poured into Europe beginning in the early seventeenth century, the decoration on them appealed to educated elites disenchanted with classical-renaissance design and drawn to the fashionable eccentricities of mannerism. later in the century, chinoiserie patterns reflected a baroque taste for serpentine curves and dynamic rhythms. After the death of louis xiv in 1715, with the heavy hand of the Sun King removed, Meissen and other porcelain manufactories embraced the rioting flamboyance of rococo style. The plasticity of porcelain allowed realization of the most extravagant decorative fantasies in material form, while the exoticism of Chinese patterns and themes was custom-made for sophisticated circles weary of both the balanced certainties of renaissance design and the heroic sweep of baroque ornament. in a work on garden projects in 1683, Sir William Temple (1628–99) employed the term sharawadgi— perhaps from the Chinese sarowaichi, signifying elegant disorder—to characterize the asymmetries of Chinese art. in landscape gardening and elsewhere, he wrote, the Chinese imagination is employed in contriving figures, where the beauty shall be great, and strike the eye, but without any order or disposition of parts, that shall commonly or easily be observ’d. And though we have hardly any notion of this sort of beauty, yet they have a particular word to express it; and where they find it hit the eye at first sight, they say the Sharawadgi is fine or is admirable, or any such expression of esteem. And whoever observes the work upon the best indian gowns, or the painting upon their best screens or purcellans, will find their beauty is all of this kind, [that is,] without order.<sup>113</sup> Walpole and others later applied sharawadgi to pleasing, irregular patterns as they appeared on porcelain, wallpaper, lacquerware, and furniture. Treatises on Chinese style provided hundreds of engravings that professional and amateur artists plundered for decoration on pottery, wallpaper, silverware, textiles, and furniture, as well as for models of gardens, gazebos, and pagodas. Among the most important texts were nieuhoff ’s An Embassy from the East India Company (1665) and Treatise on Japanning and Varnishing (1688) by John Stalker and George Parker. robert Sayer’s The Ladies Amusement (1760), drawing on these works, decreed that Chinese subjects, since they typically display luxuriant fancy and carefree coloring, sanction unrestrained liberty with traditional forms.<sup>114</sup> The most influential treatise on Chinese architecture and landscape gardening was Designs of Chinese Buildings (1757) by Sir William Chambers (1723–96). The author, who had visited Canton, was commissioned by the dowager Princess Augusta (1719–72) to build a Chinese-style aviary and a “House of Confucius” in the royal gardens at Kew in london. His most famous work, however, was the Great Pagoda of Kew, constructed in 1761 and inspired by depictions of the Porcelain Pagoda of nanjing. other buildings had ostensibly been based on Chinese models— most outstandingly, the Trianon de Porcelaine—but the Kew pagoda was the most accurate copy of a Chinese structure yet erected in Europe. its balconies were painted in blue and red, and eighty gilded dragons projected from its ten octagonal stories. From Prussia to russia, the Great Pagoda inspired scores of imitations.<sup>115</sup> Unlike the Porcelain Pagoda, it is still standing. ## “PorCElAin ElEPHAnTS And CHinA GodS”: THE dEClinE oF CHinESE PorCElAin in THE WEST blue-and-white porcelain had kindled enthusiasm for Chinese design in arts and crafts, and when reaction set in around the mid-eighteenth century, pottery took a leading role in the revival of classical style. ironically, neoclassicism in ceramics sprang from the pursuits of one of the last great aficionados of chinoiserie, Charles iv (1716–88), King of naples and the Two Sicilies and great-grandson of louis xiv. in 1738 Charles married Princess Marie Amalia (1724–60), daughter of August iii, thereby uniting the bourbon dynasty of France with the Saxon line of August the Strong. The bride brought seventeen Meissen dinner services to her neapolitan palace. Ambitious for the splendor and magnificence of a modern prince, Charles built the Capodimonte porcelain manufactory near naples with workmen sent from Meissen. When he succeeded to the Spanish throne as Charles iii in 1759, he packed up the establishment (including tons of porcelain paste) in three ships and reassembled it in the gardens of the buon retiro, a palace outside Madrid. There he built the Saleta de la China, a fairy-tale room entirely sheathed in panels of blueand-white porcelain embellished with rococo tracery.<sup>116</sup> Ten years after his wedding, pursuing the newly fashionable aristocratic hobby of archaeology, Charles started excavations on the ancient roman site of Herculaneum, which had been destroyed (along with Pompeii) by the eruption of vesuvius in 79 c.e. The pottery unearthed there, mistakenly identified as Etruscan, caused a sensation. naples soon became a center for collectors of antique vessels, and August iii commissioned the art authority Johann Winckelmann (1717–68) to report on the discoveries. Clambering around the volcano looking for new finds, the German savant dined on pigeons cooked in the smoldering lava. His vesuvius-inspired books on Greco-roman painting and sculpture became fundamental texts for neoclassicism, benchmarks for pottery connoisseurs such as Sir William Hamilton and pottery manufacturers such as Wedgwood. As Winckelmann decreed, “Most porcelain is in the shape of ridiculous dolls. From it originated the childish taste which has become so widespread. in its place we should strive to emulate the eternal works of classical art.”<sup>117</sup> Excoriating porcelain figurines adopted from the italian Commedia dell’arte, such as Harlequin and Pantaloon, he encouraged manufacturers to reproduce ceramic replicas of antique statues, miniatures of noble pieces such as the Apollo Belevedere and the Dying Gladiator. in effect, Winckelmann agreed with the venerable view of Chinese literati: “the only way to become great . . . is by imitation of the ancients.”<sup>118</sup> immediately after Hamilton arrived in naples to take up his diplomatic post in 1764, he began to collect antique pottery. The four-volume catalogue of his antiquities, published at a cost of £6,000 (or \$1,032,000 in present-day terms), with colored illustrations and a text by the self-styled baron Pierre d’Hancarville (1719– 1805), a connoisseur of classical art, a con man, and a pornographer, was a publishing masterwork of the century. it became the indispensable guide for the decoration and forms of neoclassical ceramics throughout Europe; its color plates were incorporated into pattern books and used in producing countless imitations of antique objects. The catalogue helped persuade the british Parliament in 1772 to purchase Hamilton’s collection for £8,400 (\$1,444,800), with the pottery forming the nucleus of what evolved into the british Museum.<sup>119</sup> rococo style faded quickly from ceramics and other art forms after the discoveries at Herculaneum reached a wide audience. European wars had an impact as well. Meissen production, which led the field in rococo design and chinoiserie, suffered ruinous setbacks in the War of the Austrian Succession (1740–48). King Frederick ii (the Great, r. 1740–86) of Prussia invaded Saxony—the Porcelain regiment marched in his ranks—and looted precious materials from the pottery manufactory. in the Seven years’ War (1756–63), Frederick occupied Meissen once again, halted production for seven years, and plotted to move the entire works to berlin. To celebrate victory in the war, he held a musical concert at Meissen and then withdrew from Saxony with one hundred crates of porcelain, the last of the inventory in the stockroom of the manufactory. When Meissen finally reopened, potters and artists had to be retrained. Some practiced their craft by reproducing plaster models of antique statues; managers dispatched a few painters to Paris to learn up-todate designs. in order to regain its share of a market no longer enamored of rococo style, Meissen turned to copying the neoclassical wares of Sèvres.<sup>120</sup> Always restrained in its chinoiserie, Sèvres emerged as the dominant force in European porcelain when Meissen was beset by its midcentury troubles. The French manufactory began specializing in wares in à la etrusque style. The Cameo Service that Sèvres made for Catherine of russia in the 1770s highlighted neoclassical fashion and set a new standard for elegant tableware. Catherine suffered from what she called “cameo fever,” a symptom of her devotion to the classical world; Minerva, goddess of wisdom and the arts, with whom the queen identified, served as the chief symbol of the service. Following the trend set by the Cameo Service, the Sèvres dinner ensemble commissioned by louis xvi in 1783 was decorated with scenes from classical mythology and roman history. When Marie Antoinette later wanted a dinner service for her faux dairy at versailles, Sèvres modeled it on the antique vessels in Hamilton’s catalogue.<sup>121</sup> With the triumph of neoclassicism, the dazzling porcelain statuettes of Meissen, an artistic legacy of the italian renaissance and the most innovative genre of rococo, fell out of fashion. Exiled from banquet tables to cabinet shelves, they became the first knickknacks, eventually to suffer a debased twentieth-century reincarnation as Hummel figurines. Porcelain lost its function as a manifestation of aristocratic self-esteem and magnificence; no longer an emblem of princely splendor, it evolved into a token of middle-class gentility.<sup>122</sup> Pushed from the Porzellanzimmer and reception hall into the boudoir and kitchen, it entered the increasingly separate sphere of females, now leading patrons of the booming consumer economy. John Gay (1685–1732), in To a Lady on her Passion for Old China (1725), satirizes their supposed infatuation with porcelain: What ecstasies her bosom fire! How her eyes languish with desire! How blest, how happy should i be, Were that fond glance bestow’d on me! new doubts and fears within me war: What rival’s near? a China Jar. China’s the passion of her soul; A cup, a plate, a dish, a bowl Can kindle wishes in her breast, inflame with joy, or break her rest.<sup>123</sup> in The Metamorphoses of the Town (1730), Elizabeth Thomas (1675–1731) depicts olympian gods so incensed at English gentlewomen engaging in “Scandal o’er a dish of Tea” that they destroy the tea sets of the gossips—“Each Cup (‘tis said) was broke to Shatters, / now as it broke, the liquor scatters”—and then reconstitute the utensils by transforming the women into lovely but speechless “China-Cups.”<sup>124</sup> A generation later, in The Ladies Amusement, Sayer portrays frivolous upper-class women visiting newfangled shops in london, filling time by browsing the goods on display: Some brittle wares, we now must see, delft, china, glass and stone; We’ll say they’re cracked, we’ll say they’re dear, And a shopping we will go.<sup>125</sup> Given prevailing gender stereotypes, porcelain became identified with domesticity, coarse taste, slack morals, and incessant shopping. Critics perceived both porcelain and women as fragile, decorative, and, in the end, merely clay in a stylish wrapping. As an English writer remarked in 1751, “the finest and most beautiful bodies are but earthen vessels as well as chamber-pots.”<sup>126</sup> A taste for Chinese porcelain thus became synonymous with effeminacy, and (as a journalist put it in 1755) a soft spot for porcelain and chinoiserie by a man smacked suspiciously of a “delicate make and silky disposition.”<sup>127</sup> by the 1750s the image of porcelain, both Chinese and European, fused with a host of antifeminine clichés and convictions that had been gathering momentum for two generations. There was a widespread sense among intellectuals, publicists, and politicians—articulated with greatest force in England but present as well in Holland and France—that the supremacy of fashion, exotic commodities, and troubling financial innovations worked to destabilize traditional society and its values. defoe stood out around 1700 for his hostility toward China, porcelain, and luxury trade; but by the outbreak of the Seven years’ War, such views had become commonplace. “Effeminacy” evolved into a codeword for the degeneration of masculinity that supposedly had resulted from opulent fashions, self-indulgence, and Asian commodities. Critics perceived social hierarchy as under attack on all fronts. Governmentsponsored banks, a national debt, joint-stock companies, lotteries, volatile markets, and foreign exchange eroded the stature and power of landholding elites. defoe denounced moves “to stock-jobb the nation, Couzen the Parliament, ruffle the bank, run up and down the Stocks, and put the dice upon the whole Town.”<sup>128</sup> He wrote spirited articles on the menace of “lady Credit,” a goddess of reckless appetite and debauched imagination. in the course of the century, such attacks became ever more strident as critics portrayed other termagants joining forces with lady Credit in plays, novels, and pamphlets—lady luxury, lady Fortune, lady of the South Sea, lady of the bank. The assorted iconographic females invariably appeared as hysterical, emasculating, and bewitched by material possessions. The antifeminine rhetoric stemmed from anxiety and resentment at the commanding role women played in the emerging consumer society, their enhanced influence in establishing fashions, and (in Great britain) their increasing share of stock ownership in the bank of England.<sup>129</sup> The novel force of fashion swept through social classes, seemingly obliterating material distinctions that had fixed social identity since time immemorial. The vogue for low-cost indian cottons appeared to open the door to social anarchy, permitting the servant girl to vie publicly with her mistress, “the Tradesman’s Wife to out-do the Gentleman’s Wife.”<sup>130</sup> According to Jonas Hanway in his Essay on Tea, the hoi polloi mimic their betters by guzzling tea, “an epidemical disease,” as a consequence of which “the different ranks of people are too much confounded.”<sup>131</sup> When both great aristocrats and parvenu merchants purchased relatively inexpensive porcelain, privileged status could no longer be determined simply by the flaunting of silver plate. Time-honored artistic standards apparently meant little amid the craze for alien ceramics bedecked with peculiar adornment, inscrutable calligraphy, and outlandish deities. Elizabeth Wortley Montagu (1720–1800), a writer on aesthetics and leader of the group known as “bluestockings,” supported british manufactures (such as Wedgwood’s pottery) and protested that “we must all seek the barbarous gaudy [taste] of the Chinese . . . and Apollo and venus must give way to a fat idol with a sconce on his head.”<sup>132</sup> Her contemporary, James Cawthorn (1719–61), a poet and critic, attacked the fad for placing “porcelain elephants and china gods” on every mantelpiece.<sup>133</sup> in The Citizen of the World, oliver Goldsmith (ca. 1730–74), the novelist and playwright, describes a fashionable lady’s apartment decorated “in the Chinese manner; sprawling dragons, squatting pagodas, and clumsy mandarins, were stuck on every shelf.”<sup>134</sup> War with France intensified such perceptions, fueled by resentment about imports from there of allegedly effeminate commodities such as perfume, toilet water, pomades, and umbrellas.<sup>135</sup> during the war, Smollett asserted that women in France were markedly subject to the “caprice of fashion,” as a consequence of which “France is the general reservoir from which all the absurdities of false taste, luxury, and extravagance have overflowed the different kingdoms and states of Europe.”<sup>136</sup> in his novel, The New Héloïse (1761), the Swiss Jean-Jacques rousseau (1712–78) has his French spokesman (who has visited China) condemn the Chinese in terms robinson Crusoe would have applauded: they are “learned, craven, hypocritical, and devious; speaking much without saying anything, full of wit without a bit of genius, abounding in signs and sterile in ideas; polite, fawning, clever, sly, and knavish.” in the eyes of the leading apostle for the values of nature, the worst abomination of the Chinese was to sin against that sacrosanct realm, for they were responsible for the European vogue for gardens littered with “porcelain flowers, magots [porcelain figurines] . . . and fine vases full of nothing.” 137 in English eyes, both France and China were metaphorically feminized and thereby devalued: the former as England’s leading imperial rival and spawning ground of fashion, the latter as the great stumbling block to English domination of global commerce. Just as the French allegedly were obsessed with “fripperies, fancies, & Chinese trash,” so too China was seen as dwelling in a fantasy world isolated from economic reality—that is, the presumed necessity for free trade—every bit as infantile and capricious as its ubiquitous porcelain.<sup>138</sup> Critics lumped together French and Chinese taste as degenerate, ostentatious, and epicene. Around the time of the Seven years’ War, the English began to stereotype the French as “frogs,” a slur they formerly reserved for the dutch. in The Tryal of Lady Alluria Luxury, a satire published anonymously in the middle of the war, Sir oliver roastbeef commands a jury that convicts lady luxury of transforming the honest “English hospitable Table” into “nothing but Frenchified disguised dishes,” servings of “highseasoned ragouts and masqueraded Poisons.”<sup>139</sup> during the war, Hanway patriotically lamented, “As the modern phrase expresses it, We live in hot water,” enervated financially and spiritually by consuming tea from China and lace, brandy, and baubles from France.<sup>140</sup> An English newspaper in 1759 bemoaned the nation’s lack of heroes and condemned commanders who dress “like an ape, stinking with perfumes and ointments,” preferring affable dissipation to confronting danger on the field.<sup>141</sup> The backdrop to the denunciation was the notorious case of Admiral George Byng (1704– 57), commander of the Mediterranean fleet in the Seven Years’ War and an eminent devotee of porcelain. He came from a family with several expensive armorial services, and he filled his estate in Hertfordshire with a large chinaware collection.<sup>14</sup> In May 1757, after he ordered the retreat of his armada before the French, the latter captured the strategic stronghold of Minorca in the Balearic Islands. As a consequence, he was court-martialed for cowardice and shot on the quarterdeck of HMS Monarch, his own flagship. The controversial execution provoked Voltaire’s wellknown gibe in Candide (1759): “In this country it is a good thing to kill an admiral from time to time to encourage the others [pour encourager les autres].”<sup>143</sup> The English press lampooned Byng with a broadsheet depicting him sailing away from the enemy: his allegedly spineless, decadent character is revealed by the colorful Chinese porcelain arrayed on the cabin shelves of the Monarch. England had heroes enough, however. In the same year that Byng retreated at Minorca, Colonel Robert Clive (1725–74) of the East India Company defeated a huge Indian army at the battle of Plassey, some 120 kilometers northwest of Calcutta. As it turned out, this gave the British their first significant foothold in the province of Bengal, the base from which the EIC soon would seize additional territories and go on within a few decades to win effective control of the subcontinent. A year before the end of the Seven Years’ War, just after British fleets captured the ports of Manila and Havana, Walpole said, “I wish we had conquered the world and had done! I think we were full as happy when we were a peaceable, quiet set of tradesfolks as now we are heir-apparent to the Romans and over-running the East and West Indies.”<sup>144</sup> By the terms of the Treaty of Paris (1763) at the end of the war, France ceded Canada, Senegal, and a number of islands in the Caribbean to Britain; the latter also laid claim to Louisiana east of the Mississippi and to Spanish Florida. The island nation thus emerged as the greatest naval and commercial power in the world, possessing the largest European colonial empire and the most profitable network of seaborne commerce. In London and Westminster Improved (1766), the architect John Gwynn (1713–86) noted the epochal change with gratification: The English are now what the Romans were of old, distinguished like them by power and opulence, and excelling all other nations in commerce and navigation. Our wisdom is respected, our laws are envied, and our dominions are spread over a large part of the world. Let us therefore, no longer neglect to enjoy our superiority; let us employ our riches in the encouragement of ingenious labour, by promoting the advancement of grandeur and elegance.<sup>145</sup> Contemplating a newly redrawn map of the world, one of Gwynn’s compatriots had a haughtier perspective: “I shall burn my Greek and Latin books. They are the histories of little people. We subdue the globe in these campaigns, and a globe as big again as it was in their day.”<sup>146</sup> Although imperial China and Chinese porcelain enjoyed an excellent reputation at the beginning of the eighteenth century, by the end of it, both had fallen precipitously in esteem. The more Westerners learned about China—that is, the more they looked beyond the superficial, idealized image set forth in du Halde and the Jesuit relations—they less they liked what they saw; the more porcelain and chinoiserie were seen to clash with neoclassical norms, the more contempt was heaped on Chinese aesthetic standards. In 1778, forty years after Samuel Johnson praised du Halde’s rosy portrait of China, James Boswell (1740–95), his companion and biographer, noted that Johnson “expressed a particular enthusiasm with respect to visiting the wall of China.” Yet the learned doctor had otherwise come to scorn the Chinese, who (he said) had not even been able to invent an alphabet. Boswell recorded their ex change when Johnson castigated “East Indians” as “barbarians”:<sup>14</sup> Boswell: “You will except the Chinese, Sir?” Johnson: “No, Sir.” Boswell: “Have they not arts?” Johnson: “They have pottery.” ## JOSIAH WEd GWO Od, “VASE MAkER GENERAL OF THE UNIVERSE” Wedgwood disdained the styles of rococo and Chinese porcelain as corrupt, an affront to proper proportion and respectable taste. He regarded Hamilton’s catalogue as the bible of neoclassicism, and when he made a Greek-style ceramic portrait of Hamilton, he told the diplomat that antique pottery “may be the means, not only of improving and refining the public taste, but of keeping alive that sacred fire, which [your] collection of inestimable models has happily kindled in Great Britain.”<sup>14</sup> Some enthusiasts even made the suggestion that modern Etruria would rise superior to the ancient world inasmuch as production of high-quality Etruscan pottery collapsed when Romans succumbed to vulgar silver plate; but, as an admirer told Wedgwood, “when English luxury seems at the height, your elegant taste has put to flight Gold and Silver vessels, & banished them from our tables.”<sup>149</sup> Neoclassicism embodied all Wedgwood’s ideals—rationality, republican virtue, discipline, sobriety, capitalism, and Whig supremacy. He agreed with Winckelmann that antique masterpieces ennobled the human spirit. He saw first-rate, welldesigned pottery as part of a cultural crusade, with the properly designed teacup an emblem of civilized life, a force for progress in the new Age of Improvement. He issued pottery medallions supporting abolition of slavery—in a best-selling item, a kneeling slave pleads, “Am i not a man and a brother?”—and moral rehabilitation of reprobates in the british convict colony of Australia. As he wrote to his partner, Thomas bentley, in 1769, they should dedicate their business to “the pursuit of Fortune, Fame, & the Public Good.”<sup>150</sup> on an earthier note, Wedgwood rejoiced that the public was “randy for the antique.”<sup>151</sup> With waning of “the contagion for China fancy,” Wedgwood profited from what he called an epidemic of “violent Vase madness.”<sup>152</sup> Classically minded connoisseurs and collectors favored the vase because its circular form offered a fine medium for friezelike compositions of figures and repeating patterns taken from antiquity. When Wedgwood ceremonially opened the Etruria manufactory in 1769, he ordered the first vessels decorated with figures from Hamilton’s catalogue, which he also pillaged for designs for cameos, plaques, intaglios, and bas-reliefs. Most famously, Wedgwood produced a replication of a work in cobalt-blue glass with sculptural relief in white cameo, believed to have been made during the reign of the roman emperor Augustus (r. 31 b.c.e.–14 c.e.) and most likely modeled after a vessel made of onyx or agate. After painstaking experiment and sizable investment, Wedgwood at last produced a remarkable ceramic reproduction in blue and white known as the Portland vase—in fact, a skeuomorph that traced its lineage back to an antique skeuomorph. it was a singular triumph, making him a leader of neoclassical fashion in Europe. He arranged a private showing for influential patrons, sent it on a promotional tour of Holland and Germany, and later produced a limited edition of some thirty-five copies.<sup>153</sup> Another celebrated creation was the Green Frog Service, produced in 1773–74 for Catherine of russia; each piece bore the emblem of a frog in reference to the monarch’s palace, la Grenouillère (“The Froggery”), in St. Petersburg. Comprising fifty-two dinner settings (and 952 pieces) it represented, Wedgwood told bentley, “the noblest plan ever yet laid down or undertaken by any Manufacturer in Great britain.”<sup>154</sup> Although Wedgwood barely broke even making the Green Frog Service for the tsarina, he employed it (like the Portland vase) to enhance his reputation and publicize his main line of wares; titled dignitaries were given private showings of the service before it went off to russia. decorated with 1,244 views of English landscape, garden scenes, and notable residences, including Etruria Hall, the Green Frog represented an iconographic program of commercial prosperity, national purpose, and political freedom—ideals the russian Minerva ceaselessly extolled and selectively pursued. decoration on the service was almost entirely in monochrome, for in Wedgwood’s view gilding and vibrant color evoked rococo decadence, unrefined taste, and aristocratic profligacy. Just as he believed that English civilization would redeem societies mired in Asian despotism, he also sought to wean high-class pottery from its associations with political absolutism. As d’Hancarville declared in his text for Hamilton’s catalogue, “Porcelain is nearly always made into idiotic puppets.”<sup>155</sup> Wedgwood spent substantial amounts of money and energy producing his ceramics. He purchased kaolin clay from Cornwall, France, Germany, and (through Joseph banks) the convict colony in new South Wales. in 1768 his agent bought five tons of first-rate clay from Cherokee indians in western north Carolina and shipped it to England at the cost of £615 (the contemporary equivalent of \$106,000); using it sparingly for his most expensive items, it lasted Wedgwood for two decades. He also arranged for a Canton agent of the EiC to send him samples of clay from Jingdezhen. in the end, however, he did not rely on kaolin to create creamware, his most lucrative product and the end result of lengthy research. (After winning the patronage of Queen Charlotte in 1765, Wedgwood promoted it as Queen’s ware.) Superlative earthenware made from white-firing clay and ground flint, it is still the basis for many contemporary dinner services.<sup>156</sup> it provided a hard, white surface and fired more reliably than the various materials used for making European porcelain. Wedgwood used it for an extensive range of wares, including imitations of classical antiquities by coloring glazes to make vessels resemble porphyry and agate. He asked bentley, “don’t you think we shall have some Chinese Missionaries come here soon to learn the art of making Creamcolour?”<sup>157</sup> Wedgwood also achieved fame among potters by creating jasper, an entirely new ceramic formula that he considered “my porcelain.”<sup>158</sup> A white stoneware, jasper made an ideal material for neoclassical ornament, especially when colored with cobalt. in using blue as a principal color and painting Chinese reign marks on the bottom of some of his wares, Wedgwood, like all other European potters, traded on the reputation of Jingdezhen. At the same time, unlike his continental competitors, he was not devoted to creating a ceramic recipe like that for Chinese porcelain. rather, he aimed to turn out an incomparable product with the best raw materials, whether earthenware or stoneware. And like the entrepreneurs of Jingdezhen, he needed a commercially successful commodity to survive and flourish. in contrast, continental manufactories functioned primarily as vanity enterprises, with rulers such as louis xv and the Electors of Saxony treating their potteries like private stockrooms and toy boxes, sustaining them with state subsidies and authoritarian directives. Sèvres never made a profit, and one-half its annual income came from sales forced on cowed aristocrats. The marquis d’Argenson quoted Madame de Pompadour as telling courtiers that “not to buy as much of the porcelain as one could afford is simply not to be a good citizen.”<sup>159</sup> The son of a hapless potter from the town of burslem in Staffordshire, and determined to make his own way, Wedgwood aspired to be “vase Maker General of the Universe,” as he told bentley in 1769.<sup>160</sup> He was an organizational and entrepreneurial genius, not only adopting the elaborate division of labor used at Jingdezhen (as described by dentrecolles), but also introducing other innovations to Etruria, such as apprentice training, foreman management, clocking-in, and female employment. He introduced strict, military-style discipline to Etruria to ensure punctuality, cleanliness, thrifty use of materials, and (above all) an alcoholfree workplace.<sup>161</sup> one of his declarations forecasts the rigors of the emerging industrial age: he told a correspondent that he aimed “to make such machines of the Men as cannot Err.”<sup>162</sup> Wedgwood’s introduction of machine power to production made Etruria a great deal more efficient than Jingdezhen, which remained organized on a labor-intensive, workshop basis. Wedgwood was the first Staffordshire potter to exploit steam power, perhaps with some advice from his friend James Watt. He used the steam engine to ground flint, prepare enamel colors, and mix clay. He led the way in employing the engine lathe in pottery manufacture (for making patterns on clay). He invented a kiln thermometer, or pyrometer, an enormous help in controlling the firing process and thus reducing wastage—an achievement that won him election as a Fellow of the royal Society in 1783.<sup>163</sup> Wedgwood substantially speeded up production by adopting the new transferprinting process, which involved inking a copper-plate engraving, printing it on paper, and then transferring the image to the ceramic piece. by the last part of the century, Jingdezhen craftsmen faced the difficulty of keeping pace, by hand-copying, with English manufactures decorated with mechanical devices. At the same time, Wedgwood promoted the kind of cost-effective transportation that linked Jingdezhen with the wider world. He sponsored turnpike construction, which enabled coal to be delivered to the Staffordshire region at reduced rates, and he figured as a leading champion of the Trent and Mersey Canal, cutting the first sod for it in 1766 and making sure it ran past the front gate of Etruria Hall.<sup>164</sup> As he wrote to bentley in 1765, “i scarcely know without a good deal of recollection whether i am a landed Gentleman, an Engineer or a Potter, for indeed i am all three and many other characters by turns.”<sup>165</sup> Wedgwood supplemented Etruria’s industrial innovations with new marketing methods that made its production highly responsive to consumer demand and stylistic changes. He pioneered techniques that became fundamental to modern commerce, such as market research, stock inventory, traveling salesmen, money-back guarantees, pattern books, sales catalogues, newspaper advertising, glamorous showrooms, and product endorsement by the rich and famous.<sup>166</sup> About a year’s voyage from European markets, Jingdezhen could not match the coordination with rapidly shifting fashions made possible by these novel entrepreneurial tactics. in 1786 Joseph banks wrote that Wedgwood’s “genius & ingenuity has put the business of Pottery in England so much above its original mechanical rank[,] . . . excelling both as an Art & a Science.”<sup>167</sup> in close collaboration with other Staffordshire potters, Wedgwood made English pottery universally renowned. A magazine cartoon of the british icon John bull depicted him with Wedgwood’s name stamped on his hat and with Etruria’s pottery serving as his face. Having inherited £20 from his father, Wedgwood died with a fortune of £300,000 (\$51,600,000 in present-day terms), making him one of the two dozen wealthiest men in Great britain, perhaps the only one not born to the aristocracy. His epitaph declared that he had “converted a rude and inconsiderable manufactory into an elegant art and an important part of national Commerce.”<sup>168</sup> indeed, those were Wedgwood’s ambitions from the time he began his career as a small-town potter. As he said in 1775 when preparing a show of his finest wares, he aimed to “Astonish the world all at once, for i hate piddling you know.”<sup>169</sup> ## “no MorE FroM CHinA, CHinA brinG”: THE dEClinE oF CHinESE PorCElAin in THE World Wedgwood’s aspiration to be “vase Maker General of the Universe” seemed on the verge of realization by the time he died in 1795. led by Etruria, Staffordshire potteries exported 84 percent of their annual production by the late 1780s. bentley often referred to Wedgwood as “Generalissimo,” for he approached foreign markets as if waging a military campaign, with Etruria as his machine de guerre.<sup>170</sup> He lobbied ambassadors and English travelers to talk up his products in Spain, denmark, Turkey, the netherlands, naples, and even China; he employed native speakers in several European languages to write letters urging foreign luminaries to buy his pottery. As a Swiss traveler noted in 1797, Wedgwood’s unrelenting, decades-long campaign created a commerce so active and universal, that in Travelling from Paris to St. Petersberg, from Amsterdam to the farthest point of Sweden, from dunkirk to the southern extremity of France, one is served at every inn from English earthenware. The same fine article adorns the tables of Spain, Portugal & italy, and it provides the cargoes of ships to the East indies, the West indies and America.<sup>171</sup> Wedgwood’s pottery was purchased and copied everywhere from Portugal to russia. instead of complaining about Chinese porcelain draining silver bullion from their treasuries, European rulers turned their wrath on English tableware. The director of Meissen complained in 1774 that “the incredible number of English stoneware” entering Saxony had ruined his manufactory and damaged the economy.<sup>172</sup> A few years later, Stanislaus Augustus of Poland (r. 1764–95) established a pottery near his belvedere palace in a vain attempt to stop the flow of precious metal from his kingdom. both the buon retiro manufactory of the Spanish crown and the Portuguese manufactory of Miragaia began to copy blue-and-white Wedgwood pottery instead of Chinese porcelain.<sup>173</sup> Wedgwood expressed confidence that an appealing assortment of vases and an effective agent “will insure us success in the Conquest of our sister Kingdom [of ireland].”<sup>174</sup> in short order, a nascent pottery industry in ireland closed down as a result of imports of Wedgwood creamware. Huge amounts of the same commodity going to north America ensured that English colonists (including some potters who had absconded from Etruria) would not employ Cherokee clay to compete with Staffordshire, as Wedgwood long had feared. in 1769 Wedgwood asked bentley, “And do you really think we may make a complete conquest of France?”<sup>175</sup> When French import duties dropped in 1786, the answer delighted him: inexpensive, hard-wearing, and attractive, Staffordshire products with neoclassical designs claimed the lion’s share of the market and all but destroyed the French tradition of tin-glazed earthenware. French workers purchased Wedgwood tea services; Sèvres copied Etruria’s forms and decoration. Meissen likewise produced what it termed Wedgwoodarbeit, replicas of Etruria’s manufactures. delft suffered the price of not developing designs independent of Chinese style: dutch customers turned against delftware, and sales of both delftware and Chinese porcelain gave way before the onslaught of Wedgwood creamware. The potteries of delft shut down in the late eighteenth century, after which the place appeared to visitors like a ghost town, une ville morte. in like fashion, Wedgwood also drove italian tin-glazing kilns out of business.<sup>176</sup> Creamware supplanted delft exports to America. The Puebla potters of Mexico, who had copied blue-and-white chinaware for almost two centuries, turned to duplicating Staffordshire wares. Etruria produced customized wares for the ottoman market, painted (Wedgwood bragged) “with proper subjects for the Faithfull amongst the Musslemen.”<sup>177</sup> Pottery from Staffordshire flooded the markets of Southwest Asia, and Persian craftsmen painted English transfer-printed decoration onto their blue-and-white earthenware. Wedgwood produced six-gallon oval basins in various colors “to please the fancy of a black King in Africa,” keeping the price low so that additional sales would follow.<sup>178</sup> English ceramics reached East Africa in the early nineteenth century and dominated it after the great Taiping rebellion (1850–64) destroyed the kilns of Jingdezhen. Wedgwood creamware joined chinaware on the great pillars of the Swahili coast, and it displaced both Chinese and Spanish-style pottery in the Philippines. A song in a play staged at Covent Garden in london in 1788 nicely sums up the worldwide fate of Chinese porcelain: “no more from China, china bring, / Here’s English china ware!”<sup>179</sup> “i shall be glad to give you joy on the Conquest of Peking,” Wedgwood wrote to bentley in 1792, just as the McCartney ambassadorial mission to open trade with China set off from England.<sup>180</sup> George lord McCartney (1737–1806) presented the Qianlong emperor with gifts of English manufactures. According to the british record of the embassy, Chinese officials and courtiers feigned indifference to the merchandise, yet in fact “all eyes were fixed . . . on the vases, which were amongst the finest productions of the late Mr. Wedgwood’s art. of porcelain every Chinese is a judge. The specimens of the beauty of European manufacture were universally acknowledged and extolled.”<sup>181</sup> Wedgwood’s copy of the Portland vase attracted special attention, and Jingdezhen at once tried to copy it, though without success.<sup>182</sup> Since McCartney’s mission failed to open China to british trade, Wedgwood himself never cracked that market. Chinese resistance eventually collapsed, however, and within a generation, the Wedgwood firm was one of many Staffordshire concerns shipping pottery to the homeland of porcelain. The decline of Chinese porcelain in Europe and the triumph of English pottery in international markets reflected a great reversal in the relationship between the West and Asia. Europe rejected an idealized image of China, as well as Chinese porcelain and chinoiserie, at the same time it began to exercise greater commercial and political dominion on the far side of the world. Until the eighteenth century, Westerners had flourished in the East by occupying enclaves that gave them entry to commerce but little political power. Their possessions were of negligible territorial significance, merely modest harbors on the margin of powerful empires (Goa and Macao), isolated strategic ports (Melaka and batavia), and outposts valuable for their access to crops (the Spice islands) and Chinese trade (Manila).<sup>183</sup> Everything changed after midcentury, however. From 1757, the English East india Company carved out a state in bengal and then used sales of indian opium to transform its financial dealings with China. defoe had a glimpse of that lucrative future: in The Farther Adventures, robinson Crusoe takes opium to China to trade for porcelain.<sup>184</sup> opium reversed the balance of payments with Europe: after 1814 China for the first time experienced a net outflow of silver, as much as 13 percent of its supply by 1850. in disputes with the Qing government, british commanders employed the military aggression that had worked so effectively in india. As John Gwynn had advised at the conclusion of the Seven years’ War, Westerners did not neglect to enjoy their superiority. in the First opium War (1839–42), the british used steam-driven gunboats to destroy Chinese ships, bombard Canton, and force the Qing to capitulate to their terms, including possession of Hong Kong, payment of huge indemnities, and extensive trade privileges. A british observer of the conflict derided the Chinese navy as “a monstrous burlesque.”<sup>185</sup> At the end of the war, british seamen swarmed over the Porcelain Pagoda of nanjing, using hammers and pickaxes to rip off white tiles as souvenirs.<sup>186</sup> The vandalism reveals how far Chinese power and Western admiration of China had fallen, for the action would have been inconceivable several generations earlier, when European trading companies still kowtowed to Chinese authority and when Europeans regarded the Porcelain Pagoda as an eighth wonder of the world, a symbol of the brilliance of Chinese culture. Chinese humiliation in the opium War impelled Wei yuan (1794–1856) to write the Illustrated Gazetteer of Maritime Nations (Haikuo tuzhi [1847]), in which he urges the Qing to lead the empire’s ancient tribute states in expelling Westerners from Asia.<sup>187</sup> He invokes the memory of Zheng He, the towering figure of Chinese maritime adventure, who, as it happens, had supervised construction of the Porcelain Pagoda more than four hundred years earlier. in Wei’s perspective, the Middle Kingdom paid a momentous price for ending the Ming expeditions and turning its back on the sea. The coming of porcelain to the West after 1500 inaugurated more than two centuries in which Europeans abandoned their own varieties of tin-glazed earthenware in an attempt to match the achievements of the Chinese. “Porcelain disease” represented the earliest manifestation of high regard for the culture of the world’s most ancient empire at a time when the West first was moving onto the global stage. The high opinion in which Chinese porcelain was held, as well as the prices it commanded, impelled European princes, potters, scientists, and alchemists to replicate it. Creation of European porcelain in the opening years of the eighteenth century, however, signaled the beginning of the end of an extended tutelage to the distant culture. Half a century later, when the utopian image of China itself was being rad ically recast, the rise of neoclassicism marked the end of the supremacy of Chinese porcelain and chinoiserie design. Fatefully, the reaction against an idealized China, Chinese porcelain, and Chinese aesthetics took place around the same time English potters pioneered industrial and entrepreneurial techniques that soon made their products ascendant not only in Europe but around the world as well. After centuries of supremacy, Jingdezhen finally had encountered an adversary it could not defeat. representing the climax of handicraft industry before the age of the industrial revolution, its labor-intensive methods and large-scale, decentralized structure served it excellently when its only challenges arose from relatively small kiln centers in Japan and continental Southeast Asia, potteries that did little more than copy the methods and products of the porcelain city. A behemoth that predictably rolled over the competition, Jingdezhen had developed to its fullest, most proficient extent by the time dentrecolles arrived to discover its secrets. it was caught, however, in the trap of its own technical superiority: precisely because it had reached such a peak of efficiency, and therefore experienced no impetus for far-reaching reform, it proved unable to respond to a vigorous new opponent, one that created innovative products and techniques by experimental means and employed mechanized production to turn out its wares.<sup>188</sup> Moreover, the backing given to Jingdezhen by the Qing court proved halfhearted and haphazard, perhaps reflecting certain drawbacks emerging in the central government itself as the century drew to a close. At the very moment british potteries were pushing into foreign markets customarily dominated by China, the imperial administration abolished the all-important office of director of the Jingdezhen kilns. When the porcelain city most needed central direction and renovation, nobody took charge. Things were different several generations earlier, when the Kangxi emperor restored the kilns, promoted innovations, and thus helped bring Chinese pottery back into international markets. Significantly, delft was beaten back by Jingdezhen only a century before Wedgwood’s international triumph. by 1800, however, both delft and Jingdezhen represented the past while Staffordshire stood for the future. in fact, in its handicraft technique and conventional organization (though not in its scale), delft resembled Jingdezhen—as well as the potteries of Korea, Japan, vietnam, Thailand, Persia, the ottomans, Meissen, and Sèvres—more than it did the new style of factory production in the English Midlands. And on top of the advantages that Wedgwood and his Staffordshire colleagues won by enterprise and ingenuity, their invasion of global markets was eased immeasurably by virtue of being able to ship their pottery anywhere in the world inasmuch as Western nations dominated the seas. in a long perspective, the influence of Chinese porcelain on the West was a brief episode in the millennium-long history of the ceramic’s ecumenical impact. The encounter with the West proved decisive, however, for it was by way of European seaborne commerce that Chinese porcelain expanded its cultural influence in the new global ecumene. And it was that encounter which propelled the West into competition with Chinese porcelain and ultimately to victory over it. The Chinese ruling elite since before the common era had regarded their culture as a model for the rest of the world, a way to impart virtue and civility to those whom they considered barbarians. Chinese porcelain had carried that culture vast distances, reshaping ceramic traditions, circulating in societies in manifold ways, and compelling the wonder of peoples everywhere. As Chinese porcelain lost its global markets, however, the “barbarians” of the West forcefully came to China, convinced of their superiority and bearing their own redeeming cultural messages. The awe of Qing officials before Wedgwood’s Portland vase, the sale of british pottery in Chinese markets, and british sailors clambering onto the Porcelain Pagoda were events of considerable symbolic significance. They represented a turning point in the history of the world. For the West, they signaled the rise to global dominance; for China, they marked the end of an epoch.