# Epilogue ## The Pilgrim Art in the late eighteenth century, louis-Sébastien Mercier expressed astonishment at the exhilarating, cosmopolitan life of Paris. The people thronging the streets, he said, included Japanese, indians, Persians, laplanders, Hottentots, and Quakers. He noted that his contemporaries took up novelties in clothing and tableware with enthusiasm, akin to “electricity passing from one to another.” The commodities available in the city gave him a powerful sense of connection with the wider world: if one likes to travel, one can voyage a long way in imagination even while dining in a good house. China and Japan have furnished the porcelain in which aromatic tea boils; with a spoon made from the ore of Peruvian mines, one takes the sugar that unfortunate negroes, transplanted from Africa, have raised in America; one sits on brilliant indian fabrics, from that land over which three great powers have fought a long and cruel war.<sup>1</sup> Mercier singled out the most significant trades in the new global economy: porcelain, tea, silver, sugar, slavery, and indian painted cottons. in terms of commercial importance and political impact, chinaware counts as the least of these. its role in the circuit of cross-cultural exchange, however, was uniquely important not only in the eighteenth century, but long before. The history of the lotus design exemplifies this. Persian potters in the ilkhanid period copied undulating lotus scrolls from the borders of Chinese plates, unaware that the foliage was a mutation of acanthus patterns and vine scrolls carved on classical temples of Southwest Asia in the Hellenistic period. The acanthus and vine motifs had been transferred in Sassanian Persia from Greek temples to silver vessels, which merchants then traded eastward along the Silk road. in their long journey, the Hellenistic designs merged with buddhist artistic themes that came from india. by the sixth century c.e., the distinctive lotus design appeared as sculpted decoration in buddhist cave temples in northern China. As a boddhisattva, Avalokitesvara, soon to be transformed into Guanyin, had a special affinity for the lotus blossom. Sometimes the motif appeared on nestorian Christian stone crosses in the Tang, the lotus emerging from the cross just as the buddha ascends from the pristine bloom. Chinese craftsmen adopted the lotus design for ornamentation of vessels in silver and then ceramics. When merchants exported porcelains with lotus decoration to ilkhanid Persia in the fourteenth century, potters there copied the foliage onto their earthenware. Two hundred years later, the lotus appeared so often on Chinese blue-and-white in Europe that botanists referred to it as the “porcelain flower.” Those unfamiliar with the stylized plant termed it “the artichoke pattern.”<sup>2</sup> (See figure 14.) Porcelain thus played a central role in the transmission of a prominent artistic theme from region to region—from Southwest Asia to China and back—and from medium to medium—from architecture to silverwork to sculpture to silverwork to porcelain to earthenware. nor did the motif ’s pilgrimage stop there. once Persian potters had painted the lotus design onto a plate or bowl, craftsmen adopted it as ornamentation on textiles and buildings. because ceramic workers in Persia (and other places) invariably made tiles, transfer of a design from utensils to architecture was commonplace. Thus potters decorated tiles with medallions of stylized lotus flowers on the mosque dedicated to Timur’s niece in Samarqand, and patterns of lotus blossoms and Chinese plum branches appear on the Masjid-i-Jami, a sixteenthcentury mosque in Kirman.<sup>3</sup> Pottery adopted and transmitted symbols, themes, and shapes from all other media, including jade, lacquer, sculpture, metalwork, coins, textiles, engravings, woodblock prints, and painting. decorative patterns and shapes journeyed from medium to medium, from country to country, were adapted to different cultures, took on innovative readings, and promiscuously mingled cultural referents. While China and its porcelain had a dominant role in this far-reaching exchange, the ecumene as a whole collaborated in the creation of a ceramic culture that in significant measure transcended territories and peoples. Two kinds of flasks exemplify the remarkable fusion of influences typical of this process. Kendi is a Malay word deriving from the Sanskrit kundika (water pot) and denoting a metallic vessel used for ritual ablutions and drinking. With a round body and a mammiform spout set at a sharp angle to the shoulder, the kendi is designed so that it will not touch the drinker’s lips, thereby avoiding pollution; it is filled from a large opening, much like that of a tea kettle, on top of the bulbous body. The earliest known kendi, found in northwestern india, dates from the second millennium b.c.e.<sup>4</sup> Along with other ritual paraphernalia associated with buddhism and Hinduism, it spread into continental Southeast Asia by the early centuries of the common era. The Khmers considered silver or copper kendi essential for Hindu rituals of pouring sacred waters over the king at his installation, though they later also used kendi made of pottery. The Khmer and Thai favored kendi in zoomorphic shapes, such as ducks and geese; the vietnamese made some shaped like elephants and storks. A kendi is sculpted in relief on a thirteenth-century temple of the Khmer royal city, Angkor Thom, and a real one was deposited in a chamber of a stupa in central Thailand. relief sculptures of kendi also appear on the stupa of borobudur in central Java. (See figure 4.) Potters first copied kendi into porcelain in China in the Tang period, though the vessel never held a major place in the Chinese ceramic repertoire. Confucians used the vessels as water droppers in calligraphy, with some shaped like phoenixes and dragons with outstretched wings. Koreans sometimes replicated kendi in celadon and used them as water sprinklers in buddhist rituals, a practice also followed by the Japanese. Merchants sold miniature Chinese versions of the ware in the Philip pines and Java, where indigenous peoples incorporated them in burial rites, marriage ceremonies, and folk divination. in bali, a bride signified submission to her husband by pouring water over his feet with a kendi. A sixteenth-century Chinese kendi found in Malaysia carried decoration of buddhist auspicious symbols and islamic inscriptions. Jingdezhen made a blue-and-white porcelain kendi shaped like a crescent moon, the symbol of islam, to appeal to buyers in Southwest Asia. China exported many kendi, often in fanciful animal forms, to Southwest Asia, where artisans copied them in earthenware in the seventeenth century. The porcelain collection of the ottoman sultans included seven Ming elephant kendi fitted out with silver-gilt mounts. Shah ‘Abbas collected several kinds of kendi, including one in the form of an elephant and decorated with carnation motifs. in the seventeenth century, Persian potters translated the vessel into a hookah (kendi-qalian). Some kendi were imported to Europe, where German potters replicated the zoomorphic types, sometimes embellished with dutch versions of Chinese designs; they featured in paintings by Jan brueghel the Elder (1568–1625) and Willem Kalf, the latter depicting a kendi accompanied by oysters and a lobster. in the course of this remarkable peregrination, the kendi shed all connections with indian religious ritual and became instead a scholarly utensil, a magic instrument, and an appealing curio for peoples of various cultures. The pilgrim flask (bianhu, “flattened flask,” in Chinese) traced a similarly wide circuit. An early version appeared in nabatean pottery in Petra (now in Jordan) in the second century b.c.e., and the shape—a tapering neck and compressed moonshaped body—resurfaced in Mesopotamian and roman pottery, often decorated with images of Eros, Pan, and the Medusa. At the turn of the first millennium c.e., potters made such clay flasks at several locations on the Mediterranean coast. Early Christian pilgrims employed small replicas for carrying holy water and sanctuary oil, objects classed among “blessings” (eulogiae) by the faithful. From the fifth century, flasks stamped with the image of Saint Menas were turned out at Abu Mina, a popular Egyptian pilgrimage center, forty-five kilometers southwest of Alexandria. Cheaply manufactured and of slight practical utility, they had value for pilgrims mainly as prestige items and pious souvenirs, affirmation of having made a taxing journey to a sacred site or shrine. Many flasks were decorated with representations of travel: Saint isidore, a protector of seafarers, in a boat; the virgin Mary fleeing into Egypt; the Magi on the road to bethlehem; and Jesus entering Jerusalem on a donkey.<sup>5</sup> Silk road merchants took pilgrim flasks to Central Asia, where they became conflated with leather saddle flasks since the shapes are much alike. Persian earthenware and metallic flasks entered China in the Tang period, often bearing Hellenistic decoration, including acanthus patterns, dancing girls, and piping boys. Chinese craftsmen simulated the flask in porcelain, and, embellished with designs from Greece and Persia, they became prestige items as funerary goods in the Song period. in the yuan and Ming periods, pilgrim flasks were made for export to Southwest Asia, often with islamic-style floral decoration in the center. Comparable flasks made in the reigns of the yongle and xuande emperors are decorated on both sides with brocade patterns, floral scrolls, and Southwest Asian geometric patterns.<sup>6</sup> (See figure 13.) in the sixteenth century Jingdezhen potters decorated a pilgrim flask, probably made to order for Portuguese Christians in Goa, with a choir of angels at bethlehem. Persian potters produced a blue-and-white flask in 1523, copied from a Chinese porcelain example from a century earlier; they adorned it with a nightingale on a rosebush, perhaps an adaptation of a Chinese phoenix on a plum branch. Merchants traded Southwest Asian copies of Chinese flasks by way of ottoman Anatolia to central italy, where early-sixteenth-century potters in Umbria reproduced them in blue-and-white earthenware. venetian artisans, who called the vessel una inghistera fracada, “a flattened bottle,” reproduced them in glass and earthenware, decorated with floral and vegetal patterns in enamel paints. Around the same time, Flemish artisans made a large facsimile of the pilgrim flask by linking two nautiluses with a gilt hinge; the handle was in the shape of an elegantly coiling snake, and pearls and garnets set off the body.<sup>7</sup> Philip ii’s agents in Manila and Macao commissioned a number of blue-andwhite pilgrim flasks for the king. A bavarian count, one of Philip’s Protestant opponents, had a flask made for him in 1581, decorated with his coat of arms and anti-Catholic caricatures, including monkeys in ecclesiastical vestments. A German replica of a Chinese flask from about 1600, which ended up in August ii’s Japanese Palace, is so embellished with silver chains, gilt mounts, mother-of-pearl, and emeralds that it is scarcely recognizable. Finally, in the early eighteenth century, Meissen produced Pilgerflaschen decorated with Chinese floral motifs and with landscape scenes copied from Japanese lacquerware.<sup>8</sup> (See figure 1.) The history of kendi and pilgrim flasks suggests the way in which ceramic vessels lent themselves to a bewildering cross-fertilization of influences. Styles, shapes, and decorative themes wandered as freely and as far as any buddhist or Muslim pilgrim, though the concepts informing them generally remained behind. in the Chinese tradition, multivalent meanings clustered around symbols, such as the lotus, peony, and winter-flowering plum, evoking, respectively, ideas of spiritual attainment, female sexuality, and dynastic loyalty. in the West, severed from their roots, these plant forms were reduced to quaint embellishment. dutch treatment of Chinese compositions was typical. delft potters painted their wares with fanciful versions of Chinese themes, such as the lotus and peony, so that their so-called porcelyn mimicked the appeal of the foreign product. They thus developed a make-believe Chinese style that proved so popular and attractive that Jingdezhen potters later imitated the novel chinoiserie patterns when their porcelain once again entered Southwest Asian and European markets after the time of troubles in the early Qing. in effect, the end result of this cultural encounter between East and West was a creative imagining of China, a way of assimilating and domesticating it. Chinoiserie designs, especially those with figural and landscape elements, acted as filters that reduced the complexity of Chinese visual culture to stereotyped constituents, thereby rendering it picturesque and accessible rather than potent and enigmatic. Painted in pseudo-Chinese style and planted in a European perspective, the lotus retreated from buddhism, the peony lost its sexual charge, and the flowering plum shed its links to political alienation. in like fashion, imperious Confucians turned into quaint mandarins, solitary daoists became affable gentlemen, and the boddhisattva budai, the chubby bringer of prosperity whose symbol is a bag of cash, changed into a gluttonous Christian friar. Sometimes pottery painters employed the exotic imagery for mere comic relief: a Meissen saucer of the early eighteenth century depicts huge mosquitoes hovering over a Chinese mandarin attempting to drive his wheel-less chair harnessed to two tortoises. Chinese potters reinforced this benign, reductive image of Chinese culture when they replicated the Western fantasy of China on their own porcelain exports. (See figure 20.) in the end, something was gained, as well as lost, for the circuit of cross-cultural exchange promoted both innovation and misreading. immense simplification inevitably took place when foreign craftsmen and artists reformulated artistic representations of Chinese culture; yet that very simplification resulted in creation of new decorative patterns with international currency. The world grew closer together through mutual misunderstanding. Porcelain and its imitations played a primary role in cross-cultural exchange because potteries linked to remote markets pursued the strategy of replicating foreign artistic forms to win customers. From the seventh century to the sixteenth, the principal circuit of exchange ran between China and Southwest Asia, with blue-andwhite becoming the standard color scheme in all cultures. The circuit thereafter expanded to encompass the West, including European settlements in the Americas. Chinese potters copied lotus scrolls and Persian silverwork in the eighth century, Arabic calligraphy and islamic basins in the fourteenth, biblical illustrations and dutch flagons in the eighteenth. Just as enterprising, Southwest Asian and European potters reproduced the Chinese decorative repertoire and devised their own versions of it to compete with the Chinese imports. Completing the circuit, the chinoiserie patterns migrated to China, where craftsmen copied them for the marketplaces of Southwest Asia and Europe. Global patterns of trade thus fostered the recycling of cultural fantasies, the creation of hybrid wares, and the emergence of a common visual language. (See figure 21.) Turkish potters at iznik in the early sixteenth century combined Chinese ornament, ottoman court design, and European silverwork shapes to produce wares that appealed to customers throughout the Mediterranean. venetian potters adapted floral patterns from iznik pottery and designs alla porcellana from Chinese potters, while Chinese craftsmen replicated venetian glass ewers in porcelain. Florentine potters decorated a pilgrim flask with a grotesque mask from ancient rome statuary and tulips from iznik ware. At the same time, italian earthenware, itself shaped by pottery from islamic Spain, influenced iznik pottery, which sometimes combined medallion portraits in renaissance istoriato style with spiral scrolls derived from the sultan’s imperial monogram (tughra). From the late sixteenth century, Spanish galleons carried hundreds of thousands of porcelains from Manila to Acapulco, after which mules transported it 450 kilometers over the mountainous camino de China (China road) to Mexico City. The town of Puebla, the chief center of Mexican pottery production, lay along the route, and the porcelains inspired potters to produce their own distinctive blue-and-white earthenware in order (as an eighteenth-century priest boasted) “to emulate and equal the beauty of the wares of China.”<sup>9</sup> Chinese designs on Mexican pottery, such as chrysanthemums and cranes, mixed with images of the prickly pear cactus and the quetzal, icons of the shattered Aztec culture. Many porcelains also reached Peru, where they influenced native potters, who turned out wares combining traditional inca motifs (such as a bird in flight with extended wings) with patterns taken from Chinese porcelain and Chinese-influenced Puebla vessels. Japanese potters in the seventeenth century decorated blue-and-white beer mugs for the Amsterdam market with dutch versions of Chinese lotus scrolls and with human figures drawn from Japanese traveling puppet shows, while Japanese officials placed orders with delft and Jingdezhen, providing wooden models of the wares they desired. Agents of the dutch East india Company ordered plates from Japan with the monogram “voC,” and potters bordered that central motif with emblems of phoenixes, pomegranates, and a flowering camelia; panel decorations— a standard device on kraakporselein—consisted of bamboo plants and peonies. The coat of arms of Horatio Walpole (cousin of Horace) appears on a Kakiemon plate, the reverse side of which bears a traditional Japanese design of a tiger prowling in bamboo. decoration on a Meissen service, probably made for August ii, includes the armorial shield of the Elector of Saxony and King of Poland surrounded by Kakiemon-style flowers and sheaves of grain. The Porcelain Pagoda is featured on a Japanese teapot, copied from an illustration in a dutch account of travel in China. Potters in Jingdezhen copied a square dutch gin bottle in blue and white, after which the Chinese object was replicated in Japan, Persia, and italy. in the late seventeenth century, a French earthenware ewer from a nevers pottery had a shape that ultimately derived from Southwest Asian metalwork, a color scheme (blue and white) from China, and ornamentation from diverse sources, including classical antiquity (a coiled serpent), early Christianity (a winged angel), and China (exotic birds). (See figures 5 and 19.) Jingdezhen artisans in 1690 made a plate decorated with a scene of a tax riot in rotterdam, copied from a dutch commemorative coin, with representations of the Eight Precious objects of buddhism around the central medallion. Chinese plates of 1722, commissioned by dutch merchants, satirized the financial debacle of the South Sea bubble, accompanied by advertisements for defltware and with human figures derived from the Commedia dell’arte, a fashion the dutch copied from Meissen. A Chinese tureen and platter from the same time was copied from a French faience model, which was most likely based on pieces of Parisian silver, and when the Chinese objects reached France, potters in rouen soon reproduced them. Pottery made at Chelsea in the early eighteenth century imitated Meissen porcelain wares, which imitated Japanese imitations of Chinese vessels. A Worcester manufactory produced a teapot based on a contemporary European form that derived from the stoneware teapots of yixing; it was ornamented with Asian-inspired motifs, especially Japanese Kakiemon designs in vivid enamel colors. Chinese copies of dutch wares included marks on the bottom signifying delft manufacture, while a Chinese copy of a Meissen copy of a Japanese dish came with a forged Meissen mark. A Chinese plate of 1750 decorated with a painting of a knight and his squire, surrounded by Chinese scenery and birds, represented a four-step adaptation: it derived from a pattern on a Meissen porcelain service of 1742 that replicated a dutch engraving, which in turn copied a woodprint in a French translation of Miguel de Cervantes’s Don Quixote (1605–15). A Chinese tureen of the late eighteenth century had a similarly tangled genealogy: its precursor was a Staffordshire creamware variation on a Sèvres porcelain bowl, which itself stemmed from a piece of French silverwork whose shape originated from an engraving in Hamilton’s catalogue of pottery excavated at Herculaneum. (See figure 11.) To be sure, tracing such connections induces a certain vertigo; but the exercise conveys the extent to which artists, craftsmen, and entrepreneurs around the world during the early modern period were relaying, integrating, and generating cultural forms. The history of the flowering tree design, a counterpart to the earlier creation of the lotus motif, exemplifies the extraordinary circuit of exchange at work. Sometime after the fifteenth century, Persian painters, in adapting themes from blue-andwhite porcelain, translated the blossoming plum into a flowering tree, a theme that soon appeared on Persian earthenware and indian cotton fabric. in the seventeenth century, European potters and textile producers adopted the Persian chinoiserie design, after which it mutated into the most characteristic of the patterns known as chintz (from Hindi chint, “many-colored”). Sending the design back to its source, English merchants commissioned indian weavers to produce cottons with chintz patterns. in the eighteenth century, the merchants even sent drawings of the indo-European chinoiserie fantasy to China as instructions for porcelain artists. The flowering-tree motif also surfaced on Japanese and Meissen porcelain of the eighteenth century and as an element in the famous blue-and-white Willow pattern, still the most popular ornamentation ever devised for tableware.<sup>10</sup> The flowering-tree decoration is representative of ceramic development in that it sprang from the intersection of art and commerce as well from the long-distance collaboration of anonymous craftsmen in diverse media. Most significantly, it is impossible to say which culture was responsible for creating the celebrated design, since China, india, Southwest Asia, and Europe all played significant roles in its thematic development and geographic expansion. Porcelain artistry of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries suggests that the various regions of the global ecumene, across the countless boundaries dividing them, joined forces in the formation of a common cultural tradition. Although the tastes of elites played a crucial role in shaping it, the tradition stemmed far more from the ingenuity and enterprise of the potters themselves, in China, Japan, Southwest Asia, Europe, and the Americas. by the end of the eighteenth century, craftsmen around the world had created a collective visual language, a koinē of ceramic art. The potters of lisbon acclaimed their copies of Chinese porcelain as examples of “the pilgrim art,” products of a globally integrated circuit of aesthetic and commercial exchange. Given the peripatetic and imitative nature of ceramics, extended and intensified by the exemplary status of porcelain, potteries active in long-distance trade shared a common legacy, however provisional and indiscriminate. The lotus scroll and the flowering tree, the kendi and the pilgrim flask, tureens and platters did not represent either high art or monumental achievement. At their best, they embodied a novel and creative cultural synthesis, enhanced by the charm of surprising associations; at their worst, they epitomized a sort of international kitsch, a harbinger of the tourist art of a later century. in neither case did they engage the attention of intellectuals striving to comprehend the emergence of a new global consciousness at the beginning of the modern era. nevertheless, porcelain and its imitations provide the first and most widespread material evidence for sustained cultural encounter on an ecumenical scale, perhaps even for intimations of truly global culture.