## references A Archaeometry AB Art Bulletin BM Burlington Magazine BOCSHK Bulletin of the Oriental Ceramic Society of Hong Kong ECS Eighteenth-Century Studies HJAS Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies JESHO Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient JRASGBI Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland JWH Journal of World History MA Magazine Antiques O Orientations OA Oriental Art SCC Science and Civilisation in China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. SMJ Sarawak Museum Journal TOCS Transactions of the Oriental Ceramics Society WA World Archaeology Abungo, George H. o. 1994. “islam on the Kenyan Coast: An overview of Kenyan Coastal Sacred Sites.” in Sacred Sites, Sacred Places, edited by david l. Carmichael, Jane Hubert, brian reeves, and Audhild Schanche, 152–62. london: routledge. ——, and Henry W. Mutoro. 1993. “Coast-interior Settlements and Social relations in the Kenya Coastal Hinterland.” in Shaw et al. 1993. Adas, Michael. 1989. Machines as the Measure of Men: Science, Technology, and Ideologies of Western Dominance. ithaca, ny: Cornell University Press. Addis, John. 1980–81. “Porcelain-Stone and Kaolin: late yuan developments at Hutian.” TOCS 45: 55–66. Adhyatman, Sumarah. 1987. Kendi: Traditional Drinking Water Containers. Jakarta: Ceramic Society of indonesia. . 1990. Antique Ceramics found in Indonesia: Various Uses and Origins. 2nd ed. Jakarta: Ceramic Society of indonesia. ——, and Abu ridho. 1984. Tempayan di Indonesia/Martavans in Indonesia. Exhib. cat. 2nd ed. Jakarta: Himpunan Keramik indonesia. Adshead, S. A.M. 1997. Material Culture in Europe and China, 1400–1800: The Rise of Consumerism. london: St. Martin’s Press. ———. 2000. China in World History. 3rd ed. new york: St. Martin’s Press. . 2004. T’ang China: The Rise of the East in World History. new york: Palgrave Macmillan. Agnew, Jean-Christophe. 1993. “Consumer Culture in Historical Perspective.” in Consumption and the World of Goods, edited by John brewer and roy Porter, 19–39. london: routledge. Albis, Antoine d’, and T. M. Clarke. 1989. “vincennes Porcelain for orry de Fulvy.” Apollo 129/6: 379–83. Allen, James de vere, ed. and trans. 1977. Al-Inkishafi: Catechism of a Soul. nairobi: East African literature bureau. —. 1993. Swahili Origins: Swahili Culture and the Shungwaya Phenomenon. london: James Currey. Allen, Phillip. 2002–3. “The Uses of oriental Porcelain in English Houses.” TOCS 67: 121– 28. Allsen, Thomas T. 1989. “Mongolian Princes and Their Merchant Partners, 1200–1260.” Asia Major 2/2: 83–126. . 1997a. Commodity and Exchange in the Mongol Empire: A Cultural History of Islamic Textiles. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——. 1997b. “Ever Closer Encounters: The Appropriation of Culture and the Apportionment of Peoples in the Mongol Empire.” Journal of Early Modern History 1/1: 2–23. . 2001. Culture and Conquest in Mongol Eurasia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Amiran, ruth. 1965. “The beginnings of Pottery-Making in the near East.” in Matson 1965a: 240–47. Amitai-Preiss, reuven. 1999. “Mongol imperial ideology and the ilkhanid War against the Mamluks.” in The Mongol Empire and Its Legacy, edited by david o. Morgan and reuven Amitai-Preiss, 57–72. leiden: brill. Andaya, barbara Watson, and yoneo ishii. 1999. “religious development in Southeast Asia, c. 1500–1800.” in The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia, vol. 2: From c. 1500 to c. 1800, edited by nicholas Tarling, 164–227. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Andaya, leonard. 1999. “interactions with the outside World and Adaptation in Southeast Asian Society, 1500–1800.” in The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia, vol. 2: From c. 1500 to c. 1800, edited by nicholas Tarling, 1–57. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Anderson, E. n. 1988. The Food of China. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Anderson, William. 2004. “An Archaeology of late Antique Pilgrim Flasks.” Anatolian Studies 54: 79–93. Anderson, William l. 1986. “Cherokee Clay, from duché to Wedgwood: The Journal of Thomas Griffiths, 1767–1768.” North Carolina Historical Review 63/4: 477–510. Appadurai, Arjun, ed. 1986. The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Arapova, Tatyana b., and olga P. deshpande. 1999. “Sino-Thai Ceramics in the Hermitage: Contacts between Thailand and russia at the End of the nineteenth Century.” Apollo 150/11: 19–24. Armijo-Hussein, Jacqueline Misty. 1997. “Sayyid ‘Ajall Shams al-din: A Muslim from Central Asia Serving the Mongols in China and bringing ‘Civilization’ to yunnan.” Ph.d. dissertation, Harvard University. Arnold, lauren. 1999. Princely Gifts and Papal Treasures: The Franciscan Mission to China and Its Influence on the Art of the West, 1250–1350. San Francisco, CA: desiderata Press. Ashton, leigh. 1933–34. “China and Egypt.” TOCS 11: 62–72. Ashtor, Eliyahu. 1983. Levant Trade in the Later Middle Ages. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. Atterbury, Paul, ed. 1982. The History of Porcelain. new york: William Morrow. Atwell, William S. 1982. “international bullion Flows and the Chinese Economy circa 1530– 1650.” Past and Present 95/2: 68–90: . 1998. “Ming China and the Emerging World Economy, c. 1470–1650.” in The Cambridge History of China, vol. 8:2: The Ming Dynasty, 1368–1644, edited by denis Twitchett and Frederick W. Mote, 376–416. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Aubin, Françoise. 2005. “Zheng He, héros ethnique des Hui ou musulmans chinois.” in Zheng He: Images & Perceptions, edited by Claudine Salmon and roderich Ptak, 57–73. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz verlag. Aubin, Jean. 1959. “la ruine de Siraf et les routes du Golfe Persique aux xie et xiie siècles.” Cahiers de l’Histoire Médiévale 10–13: 187–99. baart, Jan M. 1990. “Ceramic Consumption and Supply in Early Modern Amsterdam: local Production and long-distance Trade.” in Work in Towns, 850–1850, edited by P. J. Corfield and derek Keene, 74–85. leicester: leicester University Press. babur, Zhahir al-din Muhammad. 1995. The Baburnama: Memoir of Babur, Prince and Emperor. Translated and edited by Wheeler M. Thackston. Washington, dC: Smithsonian institution Press. bacon, Francis. 1944. Advancement of Learning and Novum Organum. new york: Wiley. baer, Eva. 1998. Islamic Ornament. new york: new york University Press. bai, Qianshen. 1995. “The irony of Copying the Elite: A Preliminary Study of the Poetry, Calligraphy and Painting on 17th-century Jingdezhen Porcelain.” OA 41/3: 10–21. . 2002. “inscriptions, Calligraphy, and Seals on Jingdezhen Porcelains from the Shunzi Era.” in Shunzi Porcelain: Treasures from an Unknown Reign, 1644–1661, edited by Michael butler, Julia b. Curtis, and Stephen little, 56–67. Exhib. cat. Alexandria, vA: Arts Services international. bağci, Serpil, and Zeren Tanindi. 2005. “Art of the ottoman Court.” in Turks: A Journey of a Thousand Years, edited by david J. roxburgh, 260–71. Exhib. cat. london: royal Academy of the Arts. bailey, Gauvin Alexander. 1996. “The Stimulus: Chinese Porcelain Production and Trade with iran.” in Golombek 1996: 7–15. —. 1996a. “The response ii: Transformation of Chinese Motifs.” in Golombek 1996: 57–108. ——. 2004. “between religions: Christianity in a Muslim Empire.” in Flores and vassallo e Silva 2004: 148–61. baker, Chris, dhiravat na Pombejra, Alfons van der Kraan, and david Wyatt, eds. 2005. Van Vliet’s Siam. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm books. balabanlilar, lisa. 2007. “lords of the Auspicious Conjunction: Turco-Mongol imperial identity on the Subcontinent.” JWH 18/1: 1–39. barbosa, Atremio C. 1992. “Heirloom Jars in Philippine rituals.” in A Thousand Years of Stoneware Jars in the Philippines, edited by Cynthia o. valdes, 70–94. Manila: Jars Collectors. barker-benfield, G. J. 1992. The Culture of Sensibility: Sex and Society in Eighteenth-Century Britain. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. barley, nigel. 1994. Smashing Pots: Works of Clay from Africa. Washington, dC: Smithsonian institution Press. barnard, noel. 1976. “The role of the Potter in the discovery and the development of Metallurgy in Ancient China—With Particular reference to Kiln and Furnace Construction.” BOCSHK 2: 1–33. . 1983. “Further Evidence to Support the Hypothesis of indigenous origins of Metallurgy in Ancient China.” in The Origins of Chinese Civilization, edited by david n. Keightley, 237–77. berkeley: University of California Press. barnes, donna r., and Peter G. rose. 2002. Matters of Taste: Food and Drink in Seventeenth-Century Dutch Art and Life. Exhib. cat. Syracuse, ny: Albany institute of History and Art and Syracuse University Press. barry, Michael. 1996. Design and Color in Islamic Architecture: Eight Centuries of the Tile-Maker’s Art. new york: vendome Press. —, trans. 2000. La Pavillon des Sept Princesses par Nezâmî de Gandjeh. Paris: Gallimard. bartholomew, Terese Tse. 1994–97. “Chinese botanical Motifs and rebuses from the Collection of the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco.” BOCSHK 11: 41–57. batchelor, robert. 2003. “Concealing the bounds: imagining the british nation through China.” in The Global Eighteenth Century, edited by Felicity A. nussbaum, 79–92. baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press. bäumel, Jutta. 2004. “Augustus the Strong as the Sun God Apollo.” in Siebel 2004: 27–29. beach, Milo Cleveland. 1987. The New Cambridge History of India, vol. 1:3: Mughal and Rajput Painting. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. beamish, Jane. 1995. “The Significance of yuan blue and White Exported to South East Asia.” in South East Asia & China: Art, Interaction & Commerce, edited by rosemary Scott and John Guy, 225–51. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art. beauclair, inez de. 1972. “Jar burial in botel Tobago.” Asian Perspectives 15/2: 167–76. beaver, Stanley H. 1964. “The Potteries: A Study in the Evolution of a Cultural landscape.” Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 34/2: 1–31. beckwith, Christopher i. 1991. “The impact of the Horse and Silk Trade on the Economics of T’ang China and of the Uighur Empire.” JESHO 34/2: 183–98. beckwith, Martha. 1970. Hawaiian Mythology. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. begley, Wayne E. 1979. “The Myth of the Taj Mahal and a new Theory of its Symbolic Meaning.” AB 61/1: 7–37. belevitch-Stankevitch, H. 1910. Le Goüt chinois en France au temps de Louis XIV. Paris: Jean-Schemit. bellwood, Peter. 2005. First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies. oxford: blackwell. ——, and Matussin omar. 1980. “Trade Patterns and Political developments in brunei and Adjacent Areas, a.d. 700–1500.” Brunei Museum Journal 4/4: 155–79. bembo, Ambrosio. 2007. The Travels and Journals of Ambrosio Bembo. Translated by Clara bargellini and edited by Anthony Welch. berkeley: University of California Press. belozerskaya, Marina. 2002. Rethinking the Renaissance: Burgundian Arts across Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. bentley, Jerry H. 1993. Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts and Exchanges in Pre-Modern Times. new york: oxford University Press. bernier, François. 1968. Travels in the Mogul Empire, a.d. 1656–1668. Translated by Archibald Constable. new delhi: S. Chand. berry, Mary Elizabeth. 1982. Hideyoshi. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ———. 1997. The Culture of Civil War in Kyoto. berkeley: University of California Press. bertini, Giuseppe. 2000. “The Marriage of Alessandro Farnese and d. Maria of Portugal in 1565: Court life in lisbon and Parma.” in Cultural Links between Portugal and Italy in the Renaissance, edited by K. J. P. lowe, 45–74. oxford: oxford University Press. berzock, Kathleen bickford. 2005. For Hearth and Altar: African Ceramics from the Keith Achepohl Collection. Exhib. cat. Chicago: Art institute of Chicago. best, Jonathan W. 1991. “Tales of Three Paekche Monks Who Traveled Afar in Search of the law.” HJAS 51/1: 139–97. beurdeley, Cécile, and Michel beurdeley. 1971. Giuseppe Castiglione: A Jesuit Painter at the Court of the Chinese Emperors. Translated by Michael bullock. rutland, vT: Charles E. Tuttle. —. 1984. A Connoisseur’s Guide to Chinese Ceramics. Translated by Katherine Watson. new york: Alpine Fine Arts Collection. beurdeley, Michel. 1962. Porcelaine de la Compagnie des Indes. Fribourg: office du livre. bien, Gloria. 1986. “Chénier and China.” Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century 242: 363–75. bindman, david. 2003. “How the French became Frogs: English Caricature and a national Stereotype.” Apollo 158/11: 15–20. bira, Sh. 1999. “Qubilai Qa’an and ‘Phags-pa bla-ma.” in The Mongol Empire and Its Legacy, edited by david o. Morgan and reuven Amitai-Preiss, 240–49. leiden: brill. bito Masahide. 1991. “Thought and religion, 1550–1700.” in The Cambridge History of Japan, vol. 4: Early Modern Japan, edited by John Whitney Hall, 373–424. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. bjork, Katharine. 1998. “The link That Kept the Philippines Spanish: Mexican Merchant interests and the Manila Trade, 1571–1815.” JWH 9/1: 25–50. blair, E. H., and J. A. robertson, eds. 1915. The Philippine Islands, 1493–1898. 55 vols. Cleveland, oH: Arthur H. Clark. blair, Sheila S. 2003. “The Ardabil Carpets in Context.” in Society and Culture in the Early Modern Middle East, edited by Andrew J. newman, 125–43. leiden: brill. —. 1997. Islamic Art. london: Phaidon. ———, and Jonathan M. bloom. 1994. The Art and Architecture of Islam, 1250–1800. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. blake, H. 1980. “The ‘bacini’ of north italy.” in La Céramique médiévale en Méditeranée occidentale: Xe–XVe siècle, 93–111. Paris: Centre national de la recherche scientifique. bloom, Jonathan M. 2001. Paper before Print: The History and Impact of Paper in the Islamic World. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. blussé, leonard. 1996. “no boats to China: The dutch East india Company and the Changing Pattern of the China Sea Trade, 1635–1690.” Modern Asian Studies 30/1: 51–76. bodart, beatrice M. 1977. “Tea and Counsel: The Political role of Sen rikyu.” Monumenta Nipponica 32/1: 49–74. boime, Albert. 1987. Art in the Age of Revolution, 1750–1800. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. bond, donald F., ed. 1965. The Spectator. 5 vols. oxford: Clarendon Press. bordoy, Guillermo rosselló. 1992. “The Ceramics of al-Andalus.” in Al-Andalus: The Art of Islamic Spain, edited by Jerrilynn d. dodds, 191–205. new york: Metropolitan Museum of Art. borschberg, Peter. 2002. “The Seizure of the Sta. Catarina revisited: The Portuguese Empire in Asia, voC Politics and the origins of the dutch-Johor Alliance.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 33/1: 31–62. bortolotto, Angelica Alverà, and and Claire dumortier. 1990. “les majoliques anversoises ‘à la façon de venise’ de la première moitié du xvie siècle.” Revue belge d’archéologie et d’histoire de l’art 59: 55–74. bosworth, C. E. 1968. “The Political and dynastic History of the iranian World (a.d. 1000– 1217).” in boyle 1968: 1–202. bottéro, Jean. 2001. Religion in Ancient Mesopotamia. Translated by Teresa lavender Fagan. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. bouchon, Geneviève. 1988. “Un microcosme: Calicut au 16e siècle.” in lombard and Aubin 1988: 49–57. boxer, C. r., ed. 1953. South China in the Sixteenth Century. london: Hakluyt Society. —. 1965. The Dutch Seaborne Empire, 1600–1800. london: Penguin books. ———. 1968. Fidalgos in the Far East, 1550–1770. london: oxford University Press. ———. 1969. The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415–1825. london: Hutchinson. ———, ed. 1986. The Tragic History of the Sea, 1589–1622. london: Hakluyt Society. . 1986a. “Carreira and Cabotagen: Some Aspects of Portuguese Trade in the indian ocean and the China Sea, 1500–1650.” Renaissance and Modern Studies 30: 45–59. boyajian, James C. 1993. Portuguese Trade in Asia under the Habsburgs, 1580–1640. baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993. boyle, J. A., ed. 1968. The Cambridge History of Iran, vol. 5: The Saljuq and Mongol Periods. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. brady, Thomas A., Jr. 1991. “The rise of Merchant Empires, 1400–1700: A European Counterpoint.” in The Political Economy of Merchant Empires, edited by James d. Tracy, 117– 60. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. braudel, Fernand. 1973. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II. 2 vols. Translated by Siân reynolds. new york: Harper and row. ——. 1981–84. Civilization and Capitalism, 15th—18th Centuries. 3 vols. vol. 1 (1981): The Structures of Everyday Life. vol. 2 (1982): The Wheels of Commerce. vol. 3 (1984): The Perspective of the World. Translated by Siân reynolds. new york: Harper and row. britton, Frank. 1987. London Delftware. london: Jonathan Horne. brook, Timothy. 1981. “The Merchant network in Sixteenth-Century Ming China: A discussion and Translation of Chang Han’s ‘on Merchants.’ ” JESHO 24/2: 165–214. —. 1998. The Confusions of Pleasure: Commerce and Culture in Ming China. berkeley: University of California Press. brown, Jonathan. 1995. Kings & Connoisseurs: Collecting Art in Seventeenth-Century Europe. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. brown, laura. 2001. Fables of Modernity: Literature and Culture in the English Eighteenth Century. ithaca, ny: Cornell University Press. brown, Peter. 2004. “Time for Tea.” Apollo 159/4: 36–44. brown, roxanna M. 1977. The Ceramics of Southeast Asia: Their Dating and Identification. Kuala lumpur: oxford University Press. ———. 1997. “xuande-Marked Trade Wares and the ‘Ming Gap.’ ” OA 43/2: 2–6. , and Sten Sjostrand. 2000. The Turiang: A Fourteenth-Century Wreck in Southeast Asian Waters. Pasadena, CA: Pacific Asia Museum. browne, Janet. 1995. Charles Darwin: A Biography. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. browne, Thomas. 1964. The Works of Sir Thomas Browne, vol. 2: Pseudodoxia Epidemica. Edited by Geoffrey Keynes. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. burke, Peter. 1993. “Res et Verba: Conspicuous Consumption in the Early Modern World.” in Consumption and the World of Goods, edited by John brewer and roy Porter, 148–61. london: routledge. burn, lucilla. 1997. “Sir William Hamilton and the Greekness of Greek vases.” Journal of the History of Collections 9/2: 241–52. burnett, Katherine P. 2000. “A discourse of originality in late Ming Chinese Painting Criticism.” Art History 23/4: 522–58. burton, robert. 1932. The Anatomy of Melancholy (1621). 3 vols. in 1. Edited by Holbrook Jackson. reprint, new york: vintage books. burton, William. 1906. Porcelain: A Sketch of Its Nature and Manufacture. london: Cassell. bush, Susan, and Hsio-yen Shih, eds. 1985. Early Chinese Texts on Painting. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. bushell, Stephen W. 1910. Description of Chinese Pottery and Porcelain: Being a Translation of the T’ao Shuo. oxford: Clarendon Press. butler, lee. 2002. Emperor and Aristocracy in Japan, 1467–1680: Resilience and Renewal. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center. Cahill, James. 1976. Hills beyond a River: Chinese Painting of the Yüan Dynasty, 1279–1368. new york: Weatherhill. . 1982. The Compelling Image: Nature and Style in Seventeenth-Century Chinese Painting. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Caiger-Smith, Alan. 1973. Tin-Glaze Pottery in Europe and the Islamic World: The Tradition of 1000 Years in Maiolica, Faience and Delftware. london: Faber and Faber. ———. 1985. Lustre Pottery: Technique, Tradition and Innovation in Islam and the Western World. london: Faber and Faber. ———. 1993–94. “Continuity and innovation in Ceramics.” TOCS 58: 51–61. Camporesi, Piero. 1993. The Magic Harvest: Food, Folklore and Society. Translated by Joan Krakover Hall. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press. Canby, Sheila b. 1997. “islamic lustreware.” in Freestone and Gaimster 1997: 110–15. Cao xueqin. 1979. The Story of the Stone, vol 1: The Golden Days. Translated by david Hawkes. bloomington: indiana University Press. Carboni, Stefano, ed. 2007. Venice and the Islamic World, 828–1797. Exhib. cat. new york and new Haven: Metropolitan Museum of Art and yale University Press. Carletti, Francesco. 1964. My Voyage around the World. Translated by Herbert Weinstock. new york: Pantheon books. Carnegy, daphne. 1993. Tin-Glazed Earthenware from Maiolica, Faience and Delftware to the Contemporary. london: Adam and Charles black. Carswell, John. 1966. “An Early Ming Porcelain Stand from damascus.” OA 12/3: 176–82. —, ed. 1985. Blue and White: Chinese Porcelain and Its Impact on the Western World. Exhib. cat. Chicago: University of Chicago and the david and Alfred Smart Gallery. . 1985a. “blue-and-White Porcelain in China.” in Carswell 1985: 13–35. ———. 1985b. “blue-and-White in China, Asia and the islamic World.” in Carswell 1985: 27–35. —. 1993. “The Feast of the Gods: The Porcelain Trade between China, istanbul and venice.” Journal of Asian Affairs 24/2: 180–85. . 1998. Iznik Pottery. london: british Museum Press. —. 1999. “China and the Middle East.” OA 45/1: 2–14. Carter, H. b. 1988. Sir Joseph Banks, 1743–1820. london: british Museum. Carvalho, Pedro Moura. 2000. “Macao as a Source for Works of Art of Far Eastern origin.” OA 46/3: 13–21. Casanovas, María Antonia. 2003. “Ceramics in domestic life in Spain.” in Gavin et al. 2003: 49–75. Cassidy-Geiger, Maureen. 2003. “Fabled beasts: Augustus the Strong’s Meissen Menagerie.” MA 164/4: 152–61. Casson, lionel, ed. and trans. 1989. The Periplus Maris Erythraei. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. Castleden, rodney. 1990. Minoans: Life in Bronze Age Crete. new york: routledge. Cauvin, Jacques. 2000. The Birth of the Gods and the Origins of Agriculture. Translated by Trevor Watkins. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Ceballos-Escalera, i. 1968. “Porcelain from a Garden Factory.” Apollo 87/5: 363–69. Chaffee, John W. 1985. The Thorny Gates of Learning in Sung China: A Social History of Examinations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. . 2001. “The impact of the Song imperial Clan on the overseas Trade of Quanzhou.” in Schottenhammer 2001: 13–46. . 2006. “diasporic identities in the Historical development of the Maritime Muslim Communities of Song-yuan China.” JESHO 49/4: 395–420. Chai, Ch’u, and Winberg Chai, eds. 1967. Li Chi: Book of Rites: An Encyclopaedia of Ancient Ceremonial Usages, Religious Creeds, and Social Institutions. Translated by James legge. 2 vols. new Hyde Park, ny: University books. Chandler, david P. 2000. A History of Cambodia. boulder, Co: Westview Press. Chang, Kwang-chih. 1986. The Archaeology of Ancient China. 4th ed. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. ———. 1999. “China on the Eve of the Historical Period.” in loewe and Shaughnessy 1999: 37–73. Chang, T’ien-tsê. 1969. Sino-Portuguese Trade from 1514 to 1644. leiden: brill. Chardin, John. 1927. Sir John Chardin’s Travels in Persia. london: Argonaut Press Chaudhuri, K. n. 1985. Trade and Civilization in the Indian Ocean: An Economic History from the Rise of Islam to 1750. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. . 1989. “A note on ibn Taghri birdi’s description of Chinese Ships in Aden and Jedda.” JRASGBI 1: 113. —. 1990. Asia before Europe: Economy and Civilisation of the Indian Ocean from the Rise of Islam. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Chen baiquan. 1993. “The development of Song dynasty Qingbai Wares from Jingdezhen.” in Scott 1993: 13–32. Chen Ching-kuang. 1993. “Sea Creatures on Ming imperial Porcelains.” in Scott 1993: 101–22. Chen dasheng and denys lombard. 1988. “le rôle des étrangers dans le commerce maritime de Quanzhou (‘Zaitun’) aux 13e et 14e siècles.” in lombard and Aubin 1988: 23–29. Chen yaocheng, Guo yanyi, and Chen Hong. 1993–94. “Sources of Cobalt Pigment Used on yuan blue and White Porcelain Wares.” OA 40/1: 14–19. Chen yunru. 2007. “At the Emperor’s invitation: literary Gathering and the Emergence of imperial Garden Space in northern Song Painting.” O 38/1: 56–61. Chêng, Tê-k’un. 1969. Archaeology in Sarawak. Cambridge: W. Heffer and Sons. —. 1973. “The beginning of Chinese Civilization.” Antiquity 47/187: 197–209. . 1983. Studies in Chinese Art. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press. Cherniack, Susan. 1994. “book Culture and Textual Transmission in Sung China.” HJAS 54/1: 5–125. Chilton, Meredith. 2001. Harlequin Unmasked: The Commedia dell’Arte and Porcelain Sculpture. new Haven, CT: George r. Gardiner Museum of Ceramic Art with yale University Press. Chin, lucas. 1977. “Trade Pottery discovered in Sarawak from 1948 to 1976.” SMJ 25/46: 1–7. ——. 1977a. “impact of Trade Ceramic objects on Some Aspects of local Culture.” SMJ 25/46: 67–69. ———. 1980. “Chinese Ceramics in Sarawak.” O 11/8: 30–36. Chittick, H. n. 1974. Kilwa: An Islamic Trading City on the East African Coast. 2 vols. nairobi: british institute in Eastern Africa. Chou Kung-shin. 1999–2000. “French Jesuits and Chinese lacquer in the late 17th Century.” OA 45/4: 33–37. Christian, david. 2004. Maps of Time: An Introduction to Big History. berkeley: University of California Press. Christie, Jan Wisseman. 1985. “on Po-no: The Santubong Sites of Sarawak.” SMJ 24/55: 77–89. —. 1998. “Javanese Markets and the Asian Sea Trade boom of the Tenth to Thirteenth Centuries a.d.” JESHO 41/3: 344–381. Chung yang-mo. 1998. The Art of the Korean Pottery: From the Neolithic Period to the Choson Dynasty. Edited by Judith G. Smith. Exhib. cat. new york: Metropolitan Museum of Art. . 2000. “Korean Ceramics of the Choson dynasty.” in Earth, Spirit, Fire: Korean Masterpieces of the Choson Dynasty (1392–1910), edited by Claire roberts andMichael brand, 20–25. Exhib. cat. Sydney: Powerhouse Publishing. Church, Sally K. 2005. “Zheng He: An investigation into the Plausibility of 450-ft. Treasure Ships.” Monumenta Serica 53: 1–43. Clark, Garth. 1995. The Potter’s Art. london: Phaidon Press. Clark, Hugh r. 1991. Community, Trade, and Networks: Southern Fujian Province from the Third to the Thirteenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. . 1991a. “The Politics of Trade and the Establishment of the Quanzhou Trade Superintendency.” in China and the Maritime Silk Route: UNESCO Quanzhou International Seminar on China and the Maritime Routes of the Silk Roads, edited by Quanzhou international Seminar on China and the Maritime routes of the Silk roads organization, 376–94. Fuzhou: Fujian People’s Publishing House. . 1995. “Muslims and Hindus in the Culture and Morphology of Quanzhou from the Tenth to the Thirteenth Century.” JWH 6/1: 49–74. Clarke, Michael. 1996. Velázquez in Seville. Exhib. cat. Edinburgh: Trustees of the national Gallery of Scotland. Clavijo, ruy Gonzalez de. 1928. Clavejo: Embassy to Tamerlane, 1403–1406. Translated by Guy le Strange. london: routledge. Clifford, Helen. 1999. “A Commerce with Things: The value of Precious Metalwork in Early Modern England.” in Consumers and Luxury: Consumer Culture in Europe, 1650–1850, edited by Maxine berg and Helen Clifford, 147–68. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Clunas, Craig, ed. 1987. Chinese Export Art and Design. Exhib. cat. london: victoria and Albert Museum. . 1991. Superfluous Things: Material Culture and Social Status in Early Modern China. Urbana: University of illinois Press. —. 1991a. “The Art of Social Climbing in Sixteenth-Century China.” BM 133/5: 368–75. —. 1992–94. “The Cost of Ceramics and the Cost of Collecting Ceramics in the Ming Period.” BOCSHK 10: 47–53. ———. 1997. Art in China. oxford: oxford University Press. Cole, Charles Woolsey. 1943. French Mercantilism, 1683–1700. new york: Columbia University Press. Cole, Fay-Cooper. 1912. Chinese Pottery in the Philippines. Anthropological Series, vol. 12. Chicago: Field Museum of natural History. Collcutt, Martin. 1988. “daimyo and daimyo culture.” in Japan: The Shaping of Daimyo Culture, 1185–1868, edited by yoshiaki Shimizu, 1–46. Exhib. cat. Washington, dC: national Gallery of Art. ———. 1990. “Zen and the Gozan.” in yamamura 1990: 583–652. Collett, d. P. 1993. “Metaphors and representations Associated with Precolonial iron-Smelting in Eastern and Southern Africa.” in Shaw et al. 1993: 499–511. Coltman, v. 2001. “Sir William Hamilton’s vase Publications (1766–1776): A Case Study in reproduction and dissemination of Antiquity.” Journal of Design History 14/1: 1–16. Conner, Patrick. 1979. Oriental Architecture in the West. london: Thames and Hudson. Cook, daniel J., and Henry rosemount Jr. 1981. “The Pre-established Harmony between leibniz and Chinese Thought.” Journal of the History of Ideas 42/2: 253–68. Coomaraswamy, A. K., and F. S. Kershaw. 1928–29. “A Chinese buddhist Water vessel and its indian Prototype.” Artibus Asiae 3/2–3: 122–41. Cooper, Michael, ed. 1965. They Came to Japan: An Anthology of European Reports on Japan, 1543–1640. berkeley: University of California Press. ———. 1989. “The Early Europeans and Tea.” in varley and Kumakura 1989: 101–33. —, ed. and trans. 2001. João Rodrigues’s Account of Sixteenth-Century Japan. london: Hakluyt Society. Copland, robert. 1980. Spode’s Willow Pattern and Other Designs after the Chinese. london: rizzoli, 1980. Cort, louise Allison. 1986. “Korean influences in Japanese Ceramics: The impact of the Teabowl Wars of 1592–1598.” in Kingery 1986: 331–62. —. 2000. “Khmer Stoneware Ceramics.” in Asian Traditions in Clay: The Hague Gifts, edited by louise Allison Cort, Massumeh Farhad, and Ann C. Gunter, 91–145. Exhib. cat. Washington, dC: Smithsonian institution. Coutts, Howard. 2001. The Art of Ceramics: European Ceramic Design, 1500–1830. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Cowen, Pamela. 1993. “The Trianon de Porcelaine at versailles.” MA 143/1: 136–43. Crick, Monique. 1997–98. “Hongzhi (1488–1505) and Zhengde (1506–21) Ceramics Found on Shipwrecks off the Coast of the Philippines.” TOCS 62: 69–81. ———. 1999. “Trade with France.” OA 45/1: 52–59. Crowe, yolanda. 1976. “The islamic Potter and China.” Apollo 103/4: 298–301. ———. 1979–80. “Aspects of Persian blue and White and China in the Seventeenth Century.” TOCS 44: 15–30. Cruysse, dirk van der. 2002. Le noble désir de courir le monde: Voyager en Asie au XVIIe siè- cle. Paris: Fayard. Cullen, l. M. 2003. A History of Japan, 1582–1941: Internal and External Worlds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Cummins, J. S. 1993. A Question of Rites: Friar Domingo Navarette and the Jesuits in China. Aldershot: Ashgate. Curtin, Philip d. 1984. Cross-Cultural Trade in World History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Curtis, Emily byrne. 1994. “vitreous Art: Colour Materials for Qing dynasty Enamels.” Arts of Asia 24/6: 96–100 Curtis, Julia b. 1993. “Markets, Motifs and Seventeenth-Century Porcelains from Jingdezhen.” in Scott 1993: 123–50. ———. 1995. “Chinese Porcelains of the Seventeenth Century: landscapes, Scholars’ Motifs and narratives.” O 26/4: 58–62. . 1996–97. “if Pots Could Speak: The old Art History and the new.” TOCS 61: 101–19. . 1998. “ ‘Glorious dynasty Transmitting Antiquity’: Chinese Porcelain decoration and Politics, 1670–1700.” OA 44/2: 11–15. Cutler, Alan. 2003. The Seashell on the Mountaintop. new york: dutton. dam, Jan daniel van. 1984. “A Survey of dutch Tiles.” in Dutch Tiles in the Philadelphia Museum of Art, edited by Ella Schapp, 25–39. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. dames, Mansel longworth, ed. and trans. 1921. The Book of Duarte Barbosa. 2 vols. london: Hakluyt Society. dance, Peter. 1986. A History of Shell Collecting. leiden: brill. daniels, Christian. 1996. SCC, vol. 6: Biology and Biological Technology: Agro- Industries: Sugarcane Technology, edited by Joseph needham. dardess, John W. 1970. “The Transformation of Messianic revolt and the Founding of the Ming dynasty.” Journal of Asian Studies 29/3: 539–58. darwin, Charles. 1989. Voyage of the Beagle. Edited by Janet browne and Michael neve. london: Penguin books. daryaee, Touraj. 2003. “The Persian Gulf Trade in late Antiquity.” JWH 14/1: 1–16. dauterman, Carl Christian. 1973. “The Mastery of Meissen.” Apollo 98/8: 92–99. david, nicholas, Judy Sterner, and Kodzo Gavua. 1988. “Why Pots Are decorated.” Current Anthropology 29/3: 365–89. davies, d. W. 1961. A Primer of Dutch Seventeenth Century Overseas Trade. The Hague: Martinus nijhoff. day, Judith H. 1992–94. “influence and innovation: Transplanted Korean Potters and Japanese Ceramics.” BOCSHK 10: 54–58. dean, dennis r. 1992. James Hutton and the Origins of Geology. ithaca, ny: Cornell University Press. dearing, vinton A. 1974. John Gay: Poetry and Prose. 2 vols. oxford: Clarendon Press. de bellaigue, Geoffrey. 1986. The Louis XVI Service. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. defoe, daniel. 1974. The Farther Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, Being the Second and Last Part of His Life. Edited by George A. Aitken. london: J. M. dent. ——— 1977. The Life and Strange Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, of York, Mariner. london: Everyman’s library. . 1979. “A brief deduction of the original [sic], Progress, and immense Greatness of the british Woolen Manufacture.” in The Versatile Defoe: An Anthology of Uncollected Writings by Daniel Defoe, edited by laura Ann Curtis, 171–207. Totawa, nJ: rowman and littlefield. —. 1991. A Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain. Edited by P. n. Furbank and W. r. owens. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. dehergne, Joseph. 1973. Répertoire des Jésuites de Chine de 1552 à 1800. rome: institutum Historicum Societatis iesu. de Jonge, C. H. 1964. “delftware at vught: The Fentener van vlissingen Collection.” Apollo 80/11: 384–89. delacampagne, Arianne, and Christian delacampagne. 2003. Here Be Dragons: A Fantastic Bestiary. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. demel, Walter. 1991. “China in the Political Thought of Western and Central Europe, 1570– 1750.” in China and Europe: Images and Influences in the Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries, edited by Thomas H. C. lee, 45–64. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press. deng, Gang. 1995. “An Evaluation of the role of Admiral Zheng He’s voyages in Chinese Maritime History.” International Journal of Maritime History 7/2: 1–19. . 1997. Chinese Maritime Activities and Socioeconomic Development, c. 2100 b.c.– 1900 a.d. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. . 1997a. “The Foreign Staple Trade of China in the Pre-Modern Era.” International History Review 19/2: 253–83. . 1999. Maritime Sector, Institutions, and Sea Power of Premodern China. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. denny, Walter b. 1974. “blue-and-White islamic Pottery on Chinese Themes.” Boston Museum Bulletin 72/368: 76–99. desmond, Adrian, and James Moore. 1991. Darwin. london: Penguin books. desmond, ray. 1995. Kew: The History of the Royal Botanic Gardens. london: Harvill Press. de vries, Jan. 2008. The Industrious Revolution: Consumer Behavior and the Household Economy, 1650 to the Present. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. —, and Ad van der Woude. 1997. The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure, and Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500–1815. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. dewey, J. F., S. Cande, and W. C. Pitman iii. 1985. “Tectonic Evolution of the india/Eurasia Collision Zone.” Ecologae Geologiche Helvetae 82: 717–34. dias, Pedro. 2004. “The Palace of the viceroys in Goa.” in Flores and vassallo e Silva 2004: 68–97. dickson, P. G. M. 1967. The Financial Revolution in England: A Study in the Development of Public Credit, 1688–1756. new york: St. Martin’s Press. diem, Allison i. 1997. “The Pandanan Wreck, 1414: Centuries of regional interchange.” OA 43/2: 7–9. —. 1999. “Ceramics from vijaya, Central vietnam: internal Motivations and External influences (14th–late 15th Century). OA 45/3: 55–64. diffie, bailey W., and George Winius. 1977. Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. digby, Simon. 1982. “The Maritime Trade of india.” in The Cambridge Economic History of India, vol. 1: c. 1200–1750, edited by Tapan ray Chaudhuri and irfan Habib, 125–59. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. dillon, Michael. 1976. “A History of the Porcelain industry in Jingdezhen.” Ph.d. dissertation, University of leeds. ——. 1992. “Transport and Marketing in the development of the Jingdezhen Porcelain industry during the Ming and Qing dynasties.” JESHO 25/3: 278–90. divis, Jan. 1983. European Porcelain. Translated by iris Urwin. london: Peerage books. dolan, brendan. 2004. Wedgwood: The First Tycoon. new york: viking. douglas, Mary. 1966. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and Taboo. new york: routledge. dreyer, Edward. 1982. Early Ming China: A Political History, 1355–1435. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. dryden, John. 1958. The Poems of John Dryden. 4 vols. Edited by James Kinsley. oxford: Clarendon Press. dupoizat, Marie-France. 2003. “Mojopahit et la couleur: le cas des carreaux de revêtement mural.” Archipel 66: 47–61. du Halde, J.-b. 1735. Description géographique, historique, chronologique, politique, et physique de l’empire de la Chine et de la Tartarie Chinoise. 4 vols. Paris: P. G. le Mercier. —. 1738–41. A Description of the Empire of China and Chinese-Tartar containing the Geography and History (Natural as Well as Civil) of those Countries. 3 vols. Translated by T. Gardner. london: E. Cave. dursum, brian A. 1984. “Famille-rose Enamelled dish of the yongzheng Period.” O 15/7: 10–15. dyer, Christopher. 1989. Standards of Living in the Later Middle Ages: Social Change in England, c. 1200–1520. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Eiland, Murray lee. 1995–96. “Ceramics of the Silk road: Parthia and China.” TOCS 60: 105– 20. Eisenstein, Elizabeth. 1983. The Printing Press as an Agent of Change. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Elias, norbert. 1982. The Civilizing Process, vol. 1: The History of Manners. Translated by Edmund Jephcott. new york: Pantheon books. Eliot, T. S. 1963. Collected Poems, 1909–1962. new york: Harcourt brace. Elisonas, Jurgis. 1991. “The inseparable Trinity: Japan’s relations with China and Korea.” in The Cambridge History of Japan, vol. 4: Early Modern Japan, edited by John Whitney Hall, 235–300. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Elisseeff, vadime. 1963. “The Middle Empire, a distant Empire, an Empire without neighbors.” Diogenes 42: 60–64. Elman, benjamin A. 2000. A Cultural History of Civil Examinations in Late Imperial China. berkeley: University of California Press. Elvin, Mark. 1973. The Pattern of the Chinese Past: A Social and Economic Interpretation. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Emerson, Julie, Jennifer Chen, and Mimi Gardner Gates, eds. 2000. Porcelain Stories: From China to Europe. Exhib. cat. Seattle, WA: Seattle Art Museum. Endicott-West, Elizabeth. 1989. “Merchant Associations in yüan China: The ortoy.” Asia Major 2/2: 127–54. Epprecht, Katharina. 2007. “Kannon–divine Compassion: Early buddhist Art from Japan.” O 38/2: 122–27. Eriksen, Svend, and Geoffrey de bellaigue. 1987. Sèvres porcelain: Vincennes and Sèvres, 1740– 1800. Translated by r. J. Charleston. london: Faber and Faber. Erickson, Jon. 2001. Plate Tectonics. new york: Checkmark books. Espir, Helen. 2001. “Jingdezhen to Arita via delft: The Transformation of Chinese Porcelain into Japanese by dutch Enamellers in the 18th Century.” OA 47/2: 25–30. Esten, John, olof Wahlund, and rosalind Fischell. 1987. Blue and White China. boston: little, brown. Ettinghausen, richard. 1960. Medieval Near Eastern Ceramics in the Freer Gallery of Art. Washington, dC: Smithsonian institution. Evelyn, John. 1955. The Diary of John Evelyn. 6 vols. Edited by E. S. de beer. oxford: Clarendon Press. Falkenhausen, lothar von. 1993. Suspended Music: Chime-Bells in the Culture of Bronze Age China. berkeley: University of California Press. —. 1993a. “on the Historiographical orientation of Chinese Archaeology.” Antiquity 67/257: 839–49. —. 1999. “The Waning of the bronze Age: Material Culture and Social developments, 770–481 b.c.” in loewe and Shaughnessy 1999: 450–544. Fang, Karen. 2003. “Empire, Coleridge, and Charles lamb’s Consumer imagination.” Studies in English Literature 1500–1900 43/4: 815–43. Farrer, Katherine Eufemia, ed. 1903–6. Letters of Josiah Wedgwood. 3 vols. london: Women’s Printing Society. Farrington, Anthony. 2002. Trading Places: The East India Company and Asia, 1600–1834. Exhib. cat. london: british library. Fehervari, Geza. 1970. “near Eastern Wares under Chinese influence.” in Watson 1970: 27–34. Fei xin. 1996. Hsing-ch’a-sheng lan: The Overall Survey of the Star Raft. Translated by J. v. . Mills. revised and edited by roderich Ptak. Wiesbaden: Harrossowitz verlag. Feng xianming. 1987. “yongle and xuande blue-and-white Porcelain in the Palace Museum.” O 18/11: 56–71. Fernández-Armesto, Felipe. 1992. Columbus. oxford: oxford University Press. Ferrer, María Paz Soler. 2003. “The Use of Spanish Ceramics in Architecture.” in Gavin et al. 2003: 77–101. Ferrier, ronald. 1986. “Trade from the Mid-Fourteenth Century to the End of the Safavid Period.” in Jackson and lockhart 1986: 412–90. Findly, Ellison banks. 1993. Nur Jahan, Empress of India. new york: oxford University Press. ——. 1992. “Portuguese and Chinese Maritime imperialism: Camões’s Lusiads and luo Maodeng’s Voyage of the San Bao Eunuch.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 34/2: 225–41. . 1998. “The Pilgrim Art: The Culture of Porcelain in World History.” JWH 9/2: 141–87. . 2007. “Weaving the rainbow: visions of Color in World History.” JWH 18/4: 383–431. . 2008. “The voyages of Zheng He: ideology, State Power, and Maritime Trade in Ming China.” Journal of the Historical Society 8/3: 327–47. Flecker, Michael. 2000. “A ninth-Century a.d. Arab or indian Shipwreck in indonesian Waters.” International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 29/2: 199–217. ———. 2003. “The Thirteenth-Century Java Sea Wreck.” Mariner’s Mirror 89/4: 388–404. Flood, F. b. 1991–92. “The Tree of life as a decorative device in islamic Window-Fillings: The Mobility of a Motif.” OA 37/4: 209–22. Flores, Jorge, and nuno vassallo e Silva, eds. 2004. Goa and the Great Mughal. Exhib. cat. lisbon: Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation. Flynn, dennis o., and Arturo Giráldez. 1995. “born with a Silver Spoon: The origin of World Trade in 1571.” JWH 6/2: 201–21. —, and Arturo Giráldez. 2002. “Cycles of Silver: Global Economic Unity through the Mid-Eighteenth Century.” JWH 13/2: 391–428. Fok, K. C. 1987. “Early Ming images of the Portuguese.” in Portuguese Asia: Aspects in History and Economic History (Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries), edited by roderich Ptak, 143–55. Stuttgart: Steiner verlag Wiesbaden. Fong, Wen, ed. 1980. The Great Bronze Age of China. Exhib. cat. new york: Metropolitan Museum of Art. ——. 1992. Beyond Representation: Chinese Painting and Calligraphy, 8th to 14th Century. new york and new Haven, CT: Metropolitan Museum of Art and yale University Press. Fontana, Maria vittoria. 2007. “islamic influence on the Production of Ceramics in venice and Padua.” in Carboni 2007: 280–93. Ford, P. r. J. 1981. The Oriental Carpet: A History and Guide to Traditional Motifs, Patterns, and Symbols. new york: Harry n. Abrams. Fortey, richard. 2004. Earth: An Intimate History. new york: Alfred A. Knopf. Forrest, Thomas. 1969. A Voyage to New Guinea and the Moluccas, 1774–1776. Kuala lumpur: oxford University Press. Foster, George M. 1965. “The Sociology of Pottery: Questions and Hypotheses Arising from Contemporary Mexican Work.” in Matson 1965: 43–61. Foster, William, ed. 1899. The Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe to the Court of the Great Mogul, 1615–1619, as Narrated in His Journal and Correspondence. 2 vols. london: Hakluyt Society. —, ed. 1934. The Voyage of Thomas Best to the East Indies, 1612–14. london: Hackluyt Society, 1934 Fourest, H.-P. 1980. Delftware: Faience Production at Delft. Translated by Katherine Watson. new york: rizzoli. Foust, Clifford M. 1992. Rhubarb: The Wondrous Drug. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. Fox, r. b. 1959. “The Calatagan Excavations: Two 15th-Century burial Sites in batangas, Philippines.” Philippines Studies 7: 325–90. Frame, donald M., ed. and trans. 1983. Montaigne’s Travel Journal. San Francisco: north Point Press. Franits, Wayne, 2004. Dutch Seventeenth-Century Genre Painting: Its Stylistic and Thematic Evolution. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Frank, Andre Gunder, and barry K. Gills, eds. 1993. The World System: Five Hundred Years or Five Thousand? london: routledge. Frape, Chris. 1998–2001. “Some Thoughts on the origin, development and influence of Koryo Celadons.” BOCSHK 12: 50–54. Freeman, Michael. 1977. “Sung.” in Food in Chinese Culture: Anthropological and Historical Perspectives, edited by K. C. Chang, 141–92. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Freestone, ian, and david Gaimster, eds. 1997. Pottery in the Making: Ceramic Traditions. Washington, dC: Smithsonian institution Press. Furukawa, Hideaki. 2003. “The Tea Master oribe.” in Turning Point: Oribe and the Arts of Sixteenth-Century Japan, edited by Miyeko Murase, 98–101. Exhib. cat. new york and new Haven, CT: Metropolitan Museum of Art and yale University Press. Gaba-van dongen, Alexandra. 2004. “between Fantasy and reality: Utensils in Seventeenth-Century dutch Art.” in Senses and Sin: Dutch Painters of Daily Life in the Seventeenth Century, edited by Jeroen Giltaij, 30–38. Exhib. cat. ostfildern-ruit, Germany: Hatje Cantz verlag. Gabay, Elizabeth. 1991. “The Political and Social implications of Tableware for Feasting.” in Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery 1990: Feasting and Fasting, edited by Hiram Walker, 99–103. london: Prospect books. Gaimster, david. 1997. German Stoneware, 1200–1900: Archaeology and Cultural History. london: british Museum. —. 1999. “Maiolica in the north: the Shock of the new.” in Maiolica in the North: The Archaeology of Tin-Glazed Earthenware in North-West Europe, c. 1500–1600, 1–3. british Museum occasional Papers, no. 22. london: british Museum. ———, and beverley nenk. 1997. “English Households in Transition c. 1450–1550: The Ceramic Evidence.” in The Age of Transition: The Archaeology of English Culture, 1400–1600, edited by david Gaimster and Paul Stamper, 171–95. oxford: Society for Medieval Archaeology. Garlake, Peter S. 1966. The Early Islamic Architecture of the East African Coast. nairobi: oxford University Press. Garner, Harry. 1970. Oriental Blue and White. london: Faber and Faber. Gascoigne, John. 1994. Joseph Banks and the English Enlightenment: Useful Knowledge and Polite Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Gaskell, ivan. 1989. Seventeenth-Century Dutch and Flemish Painting: The Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection. london: Sotheby’s Publications. Gaur, Albertine. 1994. A History of Calligraphy. new york: Cross river Press. Gavin, robin Farwell. 2003. “introduction.” in Gavin et al. 2003: 1–23. —, donna Pierce, and Alfonso Pleguezuelo, eds. 2003. Cerámica y Cultura: The Story of Spanish and Mexican Mayólica. Exhib. cat. Alburquerque: University of new Mexico Press. Gelderblom, oscar, and Joost Jonker. 2004. “Completing a Financial revolution: The Finance of the dutch East india Trade and the rise of the Amsterdam Capital Market, 1595–1612.” Journal of Economic History 64/3: 641–72. Gernet, Jacques. 1982. A History of Chinese Civilization. Translated by J. r. Foster. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——. 1985. China and the Christian Impact: A Conflict of Cultures. Translated by Janet lloyd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Gerritsen, Anne. 2009. “Fragments of a Global Past: Ceramic Manufacture in Song-yuan-Ming.” JESHO 52/1: 117–52. Giacomotti, Jeanne. 1963. French Faience. new york: Universe books. Gibbs, Edward. 1998–99. “Mamluk Ceramics, 648–923 a.h./a.d. 1250–1517.” TOCS 63: 19–44. Gilbert, Michelle. 1989. “The Cracked Pot and the Missing Sheep.” American Ethnologist 16/2: 213–29. Giovio, Paolo. 1956–58. Lettere. Edited by Giuseppe Guido Ferrero. 2 vols. rome: istituto Poligrafico dello Stato. Glassie, Henry. 1997. Art and Life in Bangladesh. bloomington: indiana University Press. ———. 1999. Material Culture. bloomington: indiana University Press. Gleeson, Janet. 1998. The Arcanum: The Extraordinary True Story of the Invention of European Porcelain. london: bantam Press. Glick, Thomas F. 1995. From Muslim Fortress to Christian Castle: Social and Cultural Change in Medieval Spain. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Godden, Geoffrey. 1979. Oriental Export Market Porcelain and Its Influence on European Wares. london: Granada. ———. 1982. “China for the West.” in Atterbury 1982: 55–77. Golas, Peter J. 1999. SCC, vol. 5, pt. 13: Chemistry and Chemical Technology: Mining, edited by Joseph needham. Goldsmith, oliver. 1966. Collected Works of Oliver Goldsmith, vol. 2: The Citizen of the World, edited by Arthur Friedman. oxford: Clarendon Press. Goldwaithe, richard. 1989. “The Economic and Social World of renaissance Maiolica.” Renaissance Quarterly 42/1: 1–32. Golombek, lisa. 1988. “The draped Universe of islam.” in Content and Context of Visual Arts in the Islamic World, edited by Priscilla P. Soucek, 25–50. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. —, ed. 1996. Tamerlane’s Tableware: A New Approach to the Chinoiserie Ceramics of Fifteenth- and Sixteenth-Century Iran. Exhib. cat. ontario: Mazda Publishers and the royal ontario Museum. —. 1996a. “The Ceramic industry in Fifteenth-Century iran: An interpretation.” in Golombek 1996: 124–39. Goody, Jack. 1993. The Culture of Flowers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Gould, richard A. 2000. Archaeology and the Social History of the Ship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Graaf, H. J. de, and Theodore G. Th. Pigeaud. 1984. Chinese Muslims in Java in the 15th and 16th Centuries: The Malay Annals of Semerang and Cerbon. Melbourne: Monash Papers on Southeast Asia, Monash University. Grabar, oleg. 1968. “The visual Arts, 1050–1350.” in boyle 1968: 626–58. —. 1992. The Mediation of Ornament. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. . 2000. Mostly Miniatures: An Introduction to Persian Painting. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. Graça, Jorge. 1977. “The Portuguese Porcelain Trade with China.” Arts in Asia 7: 45–51. Grave, Peter, Mike barbetti, Mike Hotchkis, and roger bird. 2000. “The Stoneware Kilns of Sisatchanalai and Early Modern Thailand.” Journal of Field Archaeology 27/2: 169–182. Gray, basil. 1940–41. “The influence of near Eastern Metalwork on Chinese Ceramics.” TOCS 18: 47–60. ———. 1964–66. “The Export of Chinese Porcelain to india.” TOCS 36: 21–36. ———. 1972. “Chinese influence in Persian Painting: 14th and 15th Centuries.” in Watson 1972: 11–19. ———. 1984. Sung Porcelain and Stoneware. london: Faber and Faber. ———. 1986. “The Arts in the Safavid Period.” in Jackson and lockhart 1986: 877–912. Greensted, Mary, and Peter Hardie. 1982. Chinese Ceramics: The Indian Connection. Exhib. cat. bristol: City of bristol Museum and Art Gallery. Grigsby, leslie b. 1993. “Johan nieuhoff ’s Embassy: An inspiration for relief decoration on English Stoneware and Earthenware.” MA 143/1: 172–83. Groeneveldt, W. P. 1880. Notes on the Malay Archipelago and Malacca, Compiled from Chinese Sources. batavia, indonesia: bruining. Groslier, bernard-Philippe. 1995. “la céramique angkorienne (6e–14e siècles).” Péninsule: Étude interdisciplinaires sur l’Asie du Sud-Est Péninsulaire. 31/2: 5–60. Grube, Ernest J. 1993–94. “Timurid Ceramics: Filling a Gap in the Ceramic History of the islamic World.” TOCS 58: 77–86. Gschwend, Annemarie Jordan. 2000. “A Masterpiece of indo-Portuguese Art: The Mounted rhinoceros Cup of Maria of Portugal, Princess of Parma.” OA 46/3: 48–57. Guest, Harriet. 2000. Small Change: Women, Learning, Patriotism, 1750–1810. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Guo yanyi. 1987. “raw Materials for Making Porcelain and the Characteristics of Porcelain Wares in north and South China in Ancient Times.” A 29/1: 3–19. Gutman, Pamela. 2002. “The Martaban Trade: An Examination of the literature from the Seventh until the Eighteenth Century.” Asian Perspectives 40/1: 108–18. Guy, basil. 1963. “The French image of China before and after voltaire.“ Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century, vol. 21. Geneva: librairie E. droz. Guy, John S. 1982. “vietnamese Trade Ceramics.” in Vietnamese Ceramics, edited by Carol M. young, Marie-France dupoizat, and Elizabeth W. lane, 28–35. Exhib. cat. Singapore: oxford University Press. . 1986. Oriental Trade Ceramics in South-East Asia, Ninth to Sixteenth Centuries. Singapore: oxford University Press. —. 1989. Ceramic Traditions of South-East Asia. oxford: oxford University Press. ———. 1996–97. “A reassessment of Khmer Ceramics.” TOCS 61: 39–63. ——. 1997. “vietnamese Ceramics and Cultural identity.” in Stevenson and Guy 1997: 11–22. ———. 1997a. “vietnamese Ceramics in international Trade.” in Stevenson and Guy 1997: 47–60. ———. 2001–2. “Early Asian Ceramic Trade and the belitung (‘Tang’) Cargo.” TOCS 66–13–27. —. 2004. “Asian Trade and Exchange before 1600.” in Jackson and Jaffer 2004: 52–67. Gwynn, John. 1766. London and Westminster Improved. reprint, Farnborough, U.K.: Gregg. Haga Koshiro. 1989. “The Wabi Aesthetic through the Ages.” in varley and Kumakura 1989: 195–230. Halikowski Smith, Stefan. 2007. “demystifying a Change in Taste: Spices, Space, and Social Hierarchy in Europe, 1380–1750.” International History Review 39/2: 237–57. Hall, John Whitney. 1981. “Japan’s Sixteenth-Century revolution.” in Warlords, Artists, and Commoners: Japan in the Sixteenth Century, edited by George Elison and bardwell l. Smith, 7–21. Honolulu: University Press of Hawai‘i. Hall, Kenneth r. 1975. “Khmer Commercial development and Foreign Contacts under Suryavarman i.” JESHO 18/3: 318–36. . 1985. Maritime Trade and State Development in Early Southeast Asia. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. ——. 2004. “local and international Trade and Traders in the Straits of Melaka region: 600–1500.” JESHO 47/2: 213–60. Hallberg, Paul, and Christian Koninckx, eds. 1996. A Passage to China: Colin Campbell’s Diary of the First Swedish East India Company Expedition to Canton. Göteborg, Sweden: royal Society of Arts and Sciences in Göteborg. Haller, William b. 1967. Foxe’s Book of Martys and the Elect Nation. london: Jonathan Cape. Han Wei. 1993. “Tang dynasty Tea Utensils and Tea Culture: recent discoveries at Famen Temple.” Chanoyu Quarterly 74: 38–58. Hansen, valerie. 1990. Changing Gods in Medieval China, 1127–1276. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. ———. 2000. The Open Empire: A History of China to 1600. new york: norton. . 2003. “The Hejia village Hoard: A Snapshot of China’s Silk road Trade.” O 34/2: 14–19. Hanway, Jonas. 1756. A Journal of Eight Days’ Journey, to which is added An Essay on Tea. london: H. Woodfall. Harbsmeier, Christoph. 1998. SCC, vol. 7, pt. 1: Language and Logic, edited by Joseph needham. Harris, bob. 2002. Politics and the Nation: Britain in the Mid-Eighteenth Century. oxford: oxford University Press. Harris, Conrad. 2003–04. “Chinese Ceramic Horses and How They Changed.” TOCS 68: 75–78 Harris, Jonathan Gil. 2004. Sick Economics: Drama, Mercantilism, and Disease in Shakespeare’s England. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. Harris, Steven J. 1999. “Mapping Jesuit Science: The role of Travel in the Geography of Knowledge.” in The Jesuits: Cultures, Sciences, and the Arts, 1540–1773, edited by Gauvin Alexander bailey, Steven J. Harris, and T. Frank Kennedy, 212–40. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Harrison, Tom. 1955. “Ceramics Penetrating Central borneo.” SMJ 6: 549–60. ———. 1958. “ ‘The Ming Gap’ and Kota batu, brunei.” SMJ 8: 273–77. —. 1967. “Ceramic Crayfish and related vessels in Central borneo, the Philippines and Sweden.” SMJ 15/30–31: 1–9. Harrison-Hall, Jessica. 1997. “Chinese Porcelain from Jingdezhen.” in Freestone and Gaimster 1997: 194–99. Harrisson, barbara. 1962. “Stonewares: ‘Marco Polo Ware’ in South-East Asia.” SMJ 11/19– 20: 412–16. ———. 1986. Pusaka: Heirloom Jars of Borneo. Singapore: oxford University Press. , and P. M. Shariffuddin. 1969. “Sungai lumut: A 15th-Century burial Ground.” Brunei Museum Journal 1/1: 24–56. Hartwell, robert. 1967. “A Cycle of Economic Change in imperial China: Coal and iron in northeast China, 750–1350.” JESHO 10/1: 102–59. ———. 1982. “demographic, Political, and Social Transformations of China, 750–1550.” HJAS 42/2: 365–442. Haskell, Francis. 1987. “The baron d’Hancarville: An Adventurer and Art Historian in Eighteenth-Century Europe.” in Past and Present in Art and Taste, 30–45. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Haudrére, Philippe. 1999. “The French india Company and its Trade in the Eighteenth Century.” in Merchants, Companies and Trade: Europe and Asia in the Early Modern Era, edited by Sushil Chaudhury and Michel Morineau, 202–11. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——, and Gérard le bouëdec. 1999. Les Compagnies des Indes. rennes: Editions ouest-France. Hay, John. 1986. Kernels of Energy, Bones of Earth: The Rock in Chinese Art. Exhib. cat. new york: China institute in America. Hayden, brian. 2003. Shamans, Sorcerers, and Saints: A Prehistory of Religion. Washington, dC: Smithsonian institution Press. Hayward, Helena. 1972. “The Chinese influence on English Furniture from the 16th to the 18th Century.” in Watson 1972: 57–61. He li. 1996. Chinese Ceramics. new york: rizzoli. Headley, John M. 1995. “Spain’s Asian Presence, 1565–1590: Structures and Aspirations.” Hispanic American Historical Review 75/4: 623–46. Hearn, Maxwell K. 1980. “The Terracotta Army of the First Emperor of Qin (221–206 b.c.).” in Fong 1980: 353–68. Heesterman, Jan. 2003. “The Tides of the indian ocean, islamization and the dialectic of Coast and inland.” in Circumambulations in South Asian History: Essays in Honour of Dirk H. A. Kolff, edited by Jos Gommans and om Prakash, 29–46. leiden: brill. Hevia, James l. 1995. Cherishing Men from Afar: Qing Guest Ritual and the Macartney Embassy of 1793. durham, nC: duke University Press. Helms, Mary W. 1993. Craft and the Kingly Ideal: Art, Trade, and Power. Austin: University of Texas Press. . 1994. “Essay on objects: interpretations of distance Made Tangible.” in Implicit Understandings: Observing, Reporting, and Reflecting on the Encounters between Europeans and Other Peoples in the Early Modern Era, edited by Stuart b. Schwartz, 355–77. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hempel, rose. 1990. The Golden Age of Japan, 794–1192. Translated by Katherine Wilson. new york: rizzoli. Henderson, J., and J. raby. 1989. “The Technology of Fifteenth-Century Turkish Tiles: An interim Statement on the origins of the iznik industry.” WA 21/1: 115–32. Heng Chye Kiang. 1999. Cities of Aristocrats and Bureaucrats: The Development of Medieval Cityscapes. Singapore: Singapore University Press. Hess, Andrew. 1973. “The ottoman Conquest of Egypt (1517) and the beginning of the Sixteenth-Century World War.” International Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 4/1: 55–76. Hess, Catherine. 2002. Italian Ceramics: Catalogue of the J. Paul Getty Collection. los Angeles, CA: J. Paul Getty Museum. Higgins, roland, oliver. 1981. “Piracy and Coastal defense in the Ming Period: Government responses to Coastal disturbances, 1523–1549.” Ph.d. dissertation, University of Minnesota. Higham, Charles. 2001. The Civilization of Angkor. berkeley: University of California Press. Hill, George birkbeck, and l. F. Powell, eds. 1934–50. Boswell’s Life of Johnson. 6 vols. oxford: Clarendon Press. Hillel, daniel J. 1991. Out of the Earth: Civilization and the Life of the Soil. new york: Free Press. Hills, Paul. 1998. “venetian Glass and renaissance Self-Fashioning.” in Concepts of Beauty in Renaissance Art, edited by Francis Ames-lewis and Mary rogers, 163–77. Aldershot: Ashgate. Himanshu, P. ray. 1994. The Winds of Change: Buddhism and the Maritime Links of Early South Asia. new delhi: oxford University Press. Hirth, Friedrich, and W. W. rockhill, trans. 1966. Chau Ju-kua: On the Chinese and Arab Trade in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries, entitled “Chu-Fan-Chi.” new york: Paragon book reprint Corp. Ho, Chuimei. 1994. “The Ceramic Trade in Asia, 1602–82.” in Japanese Industrialization and the Asian Economy, edited by A. J. H. latham and Heita Kawakasu, 35–70. london: routledge. —. 2001. “The Ceramic boom in Minnan during Song and yuan Times.” in Schottenhammer 2001: 237–81. ——, and bennet bronson. 2004. Splendors of China’s Forbidden City: The Glorious Reign of Emperor Qianlong. Exhib. cat. london: Merrell. Ho, Ping-ti. 1956. “Early-ripening rice in Chinese History.” Economic History Review 9/2: 200–18. ———. 1969. “The loess and the origins of Chinese Agriculture.” American Historical Review 75/1: 1–36. Hobson, r. l. 1922–23. “The Significance of Samarra.” TOCS 5: 29–32. Hodges, Henry. 1970. “interaction between Metalworking and Ceramic Technologies in the T’ang Period.” in Watson 1970: 64–67. ———. 1972. “The Technical Problems of Copying Chinese Porcelains in Tin Glaze.” in Watson 1972: 79–87. Hochstrasser, Julie berger. 2007. Still Life and Trade in the Dutch Golden Age. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Hodges, richard, and david Whitehouse. 1983. Mohammed, Charlemagne and the Origins of Europe. ithaca, ny: Cornell University Press. Hodgson, Marshall G. S. 1974. The Venture of Islam: Conscience and History in a World Civilization. 3 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hoeniger, Cathleen S. 1991. “Cloth of Gold and Silver: Simone Martini’s Techniques for representing luxury Textiles.” Gesta: International Center of Medieval Art 30/2: 154–62. Hogendorn, Jan, and Marion Johnson. 1986. The Shell Money of the Slave Trade. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Holcombe, Charles. 2001. The Genesis of East Asia, 221 b.c.–a.d. 907. Honolulu: Association for Asian Studies and University of Hawai‘i Press. ———. 2004. “Southern integration: The Sui-Tang (581–907) reach South.” Historian 66/4: 749–71. Honour, Hugh. 1961. Chinoiserie: The Vision of Cathay. london: John Murray. . 1967. “Statuettes after the Antique: volpato’s roman Porcelain Factory.” Apollo 85/5: 371–73. Horton, Mark, and John Middleton. 2000. The Swahili: The Social Landscape of a Mercantile Society. oxford: blackwell. Hourani, George F. 1951. Arab Seafaring in the Indian Ocean in Ancient and Early Medieval Times. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. Howard, david S. 1974. Chinese Armorial Porcelain. london: Faber and Faber. ——. 1994. The Choice of the Private Trader: The Private Market in Chinese Export Porcelain Illustrated from the Hodroff Collection. london: Zwemmer. . 1997. A Tale of Three Cities: Canton, Shanghai and Hong Kong. Exhib. cat. london: Sotheby’s. ———. 2000. “The East india Company and the Pearl river.” OA 46/3: 32–36. , and John Ayers. 1980. Masterpieces of Chinese Export Porcelain from the Mottahedeh Collection in the Virginia Museum. london: Sotheby Parke bernet. Howard, deborah. 2007. “venice as an ‘Eastern City.’ ” in Carboni 2007: 58–71. Hsu Wen-chin. 1988. “Social and Economic Factors in the Chinese Porcelain industry in Jingdezhen during the late Ming and Early Qing Period.” JRASGBI 1: 135–59. Huang, Chun-Chieh. 2007. “The defining Character of Chinese Historical Thinking.” History and Theory 46/2: 180–88. Huang, H. T. 2000. SCC, vol. 6, pt. 5: Biology and Biological Technology: Fermentation and Food Science, edited by Joseph needham. Huang Shijian. 1986. “The Persian Kanguage in China during the yuan dynasty.” Papers on Far Eastern History 34: 83–95. Hulliung, Mark. 1976. Montesquieu and the Old Regime. berkeley: University of California Press. Huyler, Stephen P. 1996. Gifts of Earth: Terracottas and Clay Sculptures of India. new delhi: indira Gandhi national Centre for the Arts. ibn battuta. 1929. Travels in Asia and Africa, 1325–1354. Translated by H. A. r. Gibb. lon don: routledge & Kegan Paul. ikegami, Eiko. 2005. Bounds of Civility: Aesthetic Networks and the Political Origins of Japanese Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. impey, oliver. 1982. “Japanese Porcelain.” in Atterbury 1982: 43–53. —. 1984. “Japanese Export Art of the Edo Period and its influence on European Art.” Modern Asian Studies 18/4: 685–97. ———. 1990. “Porcelain for Palaces.” in Porcelain for Palaces: The Fashion for Japan in Europe, 1650–1750, 56–69. Exhib. cat. london: oriental Ceramic Society. ———. 1999. “Chinese Porcelain Exported to Japan.” OA 45/1: 15–21. —. 2002. Japanese Export Porcelain: Catalogue of the Collection of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. Amsterdam: Hotei Publishing. ingrassia, Catherine. 1998. Authorship, Commerce, and Gender in Early Eighteenth-Century England. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. irwin, John. 1955. “origins of the ‘oriental Style’ in English decorative Art.” bM 625/4: 106–14. ———. 1972. “The Chinese Element in indian Chintz.” in Watson 1972: 26–32. israel, Jonathan A. 1989. Dutch Primacy in World Trade, 1585–1740. oxford: Clarendon Press. ——. 1990. “Spain, the Spanish Embargoes, and the Struggle for the Mastery of World Trade, 1585–1660.” in Empires and Entrepots: The Dutch, the Spanish Monarchy and the Jews, 1585–1713, 189–212. london: Hambledon Press. . 1995. The Dutch Republic: Its Rise, Greatness, and Fall, 1477–1806. oxford: Claren don Press. israeli, raphael. 1982. “islam in the Chinese Environment.” Contributions to Asian Studies 17: 79–94. itoh, ikutaro. 1992. “Koreanization in Koryo Celadon.” O 23/12: 46–50. itoi, Kenji. 1989. Thai Ceramics from the Sosai Collection. Translated by Kaworu Uno and Carolyn nakamura. Exhib. cat. Singapore: oxford University Press. Jackson, Anna, and Amin Jaffer, eds. 2004. Encounters: The Meeting of Asia and Europe, 1500– 1800. Exhib. cat. london: v & A Publications. Jackson, Peter, and laurence lockhart, eds. 1986. The Cambridge History of Islam, vol. 6: The Timurid and Safavid Periods. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Jackson-Stops, Gervase. 1993. “Sharawadgi rediscovered: The Chinese House at Stowe.” Apollo 137/4: 217–22. Jacobson, dawn. 1993. Chinoiserie. london: Phaidon Press. Jang, Scarlett. 1999. “representations of Exemplary Scholar-officials, Past and Present.” in Arts of the Sung and Yüan: Ritual, Ethnicity, and Style in Painting, edited by Cary y. liu and dora C. y. Ching, 19–67. Princeton, nJ: Art Museum, Princeton University. Jarry, Madeleine. 1981. Chinoiserie: Chinese Influence on European Decorative Art, 17th and 18th Centuries. new york: vendome Press. Jenkins, ian. 1996. “ ‘Contemporary Minds’: Sir William Hamilton’s Affair with Antiquity.” in Jenkins and Sloan: 40–64. , and Kim Sloan, eds., 1996 Vases and Volcanoes: Sir William Hamilton and His Collection. Exhib. cat. london: british Museum. Jensen, lionel M. 1997. Manufacturing Confucianism: Chinese Traditions and Universal Civilization. durham, nC: duke University Press. Jenyns, Soame. 1951. Later Chinese Porcelain: The Ch’ing Dynasty (1644–1912). london: Faber and Faber. —. 1971. Japanese Pottery. london: Faber and Faber. Johnson, Marion. 1970. “The Cowrie Currencies of West Africa. Part i.” Journal of African History 11/1: 17–49. Johnson, Matthew. 1996. An Archaeology of Capitalism. oxford: blackwell. Jones, Colin. 2002. Madame de Pompadour: Images of a Mistress. london: national Gallery Company. Jones, robert W. 1998. Gender and the Formation of Taste in Eighteenth-Century Britain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Jörg, C. J. A. 1982. Porcelain and the Dutch China Trade. The Hague: Martinus nijhoff. ———. 1986. The Geldermalsen: History and Porcelain. Groningen: Kemper. —. 1993. “Porcelain for the dutch in the Seventeenth Century: Trading networks and Private Enterprise.” in Scott 1993: 183–205. . 1995. Oosters Porselein / Oriental Porcelain. rotterdam: Museum boymans-van beuningen. ——. 2002–3. “Treasures of the dutch Trade in Chinese Porcelain.” OA 48/5: 20–26. ———, and Jan van Campen. 1997. Chinese Ceramics in the Collection of the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam. Amsterdam: rijksmuseum. , and Michael Flecker. 2001. Porcelain from the Vung Tau Wreck: The Hallstrom Excavation. Singapore: Sun Tree Publishing. Joseph, Adrian Malcolm. 1985. “The Mongol influence on blue-and-white Porcelain.” in Jingdezhen Wares: The Yuan Evolution, 44–49. Hong Kong: oriental Ceramic Society of Hong Kong. Jourdain, Margaret, and Soame Jenyns. 1948. “Chinese Export lacquer of the 17th and 18th Century.” OA 1/3: 143–48. Jullien, François. 1995. The Propensity of Things: Toward a History of Efficacy in China. Translated by Janet lloyd. new york: Zone books. Junker, laura lee. 1994. “Trade Competition, Conflict, and Political Transformations in Sixth- to Sixteenth-Century Philippine Chiefdoms.” Asian Perspectives 33/2: 229–60. ———. 1998. “integrating History and Archaeology in the Study of Contact Period Philippine Chiefdoms.” International Journal of Historical Archaeology 2/4: 291–320. —. 1999. Raiding, Trading, and Feasting: The Political Economy of Philippine Chiefdoms. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. Kaboy, Tuton, and Eine Moore. 1967. “Ceramics and Their Uses among the Coastal Melanaus.” SMJ 15/30–31: 10–29. Kasetsiri, Charnvit. 1992. “Ayudhya: Capital-Port of Siam and its ‘Chinese Connection’ in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries.” Journal of the Siam Society 80/1: 75–79. Kawai, Masatomo. 2002. “reception room display in Medieval Japan.” in Kazari: Decoration and Display in Japan, 15th–19th Centuries, edited by nicole Coolidge rousmaniere, 32–41. Exhib. cat. london: british Museum. Kawazoe, Shoji. 1990. “Japan and East Asia.” in yamamura 1990: 396–446. Kee ii Choi Jr. 1999. “Chinese Export Porcelain for America.” OA 45/1: 90–97. Keene, donald. 2003. Yoshimasa and the Silver Pavilion: The Creation of the Soul of Japan. new york: Columbia University Press. Kelly, Jack. 2004. Gunpowder: Alchemy, Bombards, and Pyrotechnics. new york: basic books. Kemp, Martin. 1995. “ ‘Wrought by no Artist’s Hand’: The natural, the Artificial, the Exotic, and the Scientific in Some Artifacts from the renaissance.” in Reframing the Renaissance: Visual Culture in Europe and Latin America 1450–1650, edited by Claire Farago, 176–96. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Kerr, rose. 1986. “The interaction between bronzes and Ceramics in China: Song to Qing Periods, ca. a.d. 1100 to 1900.” in vickers 1986: 301–13. —. 1989. “The Chinese Porcelain at Spring Grove dairy: Sir Joseph bank’s Manuscript. Apollo 129/1: 30–34. ——. 1993. “Jun Wares and Their Qing dynasty imitation at Jingdezhen.” in Scott 1993: 151–64. ———. 1999. “Celestial Creatures: Chinese Tiles in the victoria and Albert Museum. Apollo 149/3: 3–14. . 2004. “Chinese Porcelain in Early European Collections.” in Jackson and Jaffer 2004: 44–51. —, and nigel Wood. 2004. SCC, vol. 5, pt. 12: Chemistry and Chemical Technology: Ceramic Technology. Edited by rose Kerr. Khoo, Joo Ee. 1991. Kendi: Pouring Vessels in the University of Malaya Collection. Singapore: oxford University Press. Kieschnick, John. 2003. The Impact of Buddhism on Chinese Material Culture. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. Kim, Chewon, and Won-yong Kim. 1966. Treasures of Korean Art: 2000 Years of Ceramics, Sculpture, and Jeweled Arts. new york: Harry n. Abrams. Kim Chong-tae. 1994. “A History of Korean Handicrafts.” in Son 1994: 104–09. Kim Hongnam. 1991. “China’s Earliest datable White Stonewares from the Tomb of King Muryong (d. a.d. 523), Paekche, Korea.” OA 37/1: 17–34. Kim Jae-yol. 1994. “Jade Green: Koryo Celadon.” in Son 1994: 110–117. Kim, Wondong. 1986. “Chinese Ceramics from the Wreck of a yuan Ship in Sinan, Korea— With Particular reference to Celadon Wares.” 2 vols. Ph.d. dissertation, University of Kansas. Kingery, W. d., ed. 1986. Technology and Style. Columbus, oH: American Ceramic Society. , and Pamela b. vandiver. 1986. “The Eighteenth-Century Change in Technology and Style from the Famille-verte Palette to the Famille-rose Palette.” in Kingery 1986: 363–81. ——, and Pamela b. vandiver. 1986a. Ceramic Masterpieces: Art, Structure, and Technology. new york: Free Press. Kinney, Ann r., with Marijke J. Klokke and lydia Kieven. 2003. Worshiping Siva and Buddha: The Temple Art of East Java. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. Kirkman, James. 1958. “The Great Pillars of Malindi and Mambrui.” OA 4/2: 55–67. Klein, Peter W. 1989. “The China Seas and the World Economy between the Sixteenth and nineteenth Centuries: The Changing Structures of Trade.” in Interactions in the World Economy: Perspectives on International Economic History, edited by Carl-ludwig Holtfrerich, 61–89. new york: new york University Press. Kletke, daniel. 2004. “dresden’s Princely Splendor at Home and Abroad.” MA 166/4: 124–31. Knauer, Elfriede regina. 1998. The Camel’s Load in Life and Death: Iconography and Ideology of Chinese Pottery Figurines from Han to Tang and Their Relevance to Trade along the Silk Routes. Zurich: Haeberlin and Partner. Koerner, lisbet. 1999. Linnaeus: Nature and Nation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Komaroff, linda. 2002. “The Transmission and dissemination of a new visual language.” in The Legacy of Genghis Khan: Courtly Art and Culture in Western Asia, edited by linda Komaroff and Stefano Carboni, 169–95. Exhib. cat. new york: Metropolitan Museum of Art. Kong yuan Zhi. 1987. “A Study of Chinese loanwords (from South Fujian dialects) in the Malay and indonesian languages.” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 143/4: 452–67. Kowaleski-Wallace, beth. 1995–96. “Women, China, and Consumer Culture in Eighteenth-Century England.” ECS 29/2: 153–67. Krahl, regina. 1985. “longquan Celadon of the yuan and Ming dynasties in the Topkapi Saray, istanbul.” TOCS 49: 41–57. —. 1986. “Export Porcelain Fit for the Chinese Emperor: Early Chinese blue-and-White in the Topkapi Saray, istanbul.” JRASGBI 1: 68–92. ——. 1997. “vietnamese blue-and-White and related Wares.” in Stevenson and Guy 1997: 147–57. —. 2002–3. “by Appointment to the Emperor: imperial Porcelains from Jingdezhen and Their various destinations.” OA 48/5: 27–32. —. 2004. “Famous brands and Counterfeits: Problems of Terminology and Classification in Song Ceramics.” in Song Ceramics: Art History, Archaeology and Technology, edited by Stacey Pierson, 61–79. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art and the School of oriental and African Studies, University of london. Kramer, Carol. 1997. Pottery in Rajasthan: Ethnoarcheology in Two Indian Cities. Washington, dC : Smithsonian institution Press. Kubiski, Joyce. 2001. “orientalizing Costume in Early Fifteenth-Century French Manuscript Painting (Cité des Dames, limbourg brothers, boucicaut Master, and bedford Master).” Gesta: International Center of Medieval Art 40/2: 161–80. Kuchta, david. 2002. The Three-Piece Suit and Modern Masculinity: England, 1550– 1850. berkeley: University of California Press. Kumakura isao. 1989. “Sen no rikyu: inquiries into His life and Tea.” in varley and Kumakura 1989: 33–69. Kurtz, o. 1975. “The Strange History of an Alhambra vase.” Al-Andalus 40: 205–12. Kusimba, Chapurukha M. 1999. “Material Symbols among the Precolonial Swahili of the East African Coast.” in Material Symbols: Culture and Economy in Prehistory, edited by John E. robb, 318–41. Carbondale: Southern illinois University. Kuwayama, George. 1997. Chinese Ceramics in Colonial Mexico. los Angeles: los Angeles County Museum of Art, 1997. —. 2000. “Chinese Ceramics in Colonial Peru.” OA 46/1: 2–15. Kwan, K. K. 1985. “Canton, Pulau Tioman and Southeast Asian Maritime Trade.” in A Ceramic Legacy of Asia’s Maritime Trade, edited by Peter y. K. lam, 49–63. Singapore: oxford University Press with the Southeast Asian Ceramic Society. lach, donald F. 1957. The Preface to Leibniz’ Novissima Sinica: Commentary, Translation, Text. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. —, and Edwin J. van Kley. 1993. Asia in the Making of Europe, vol. 3: A Century of Advance. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. laing, Ellen Johnston. 1975. “Chou Tan-chüan is Chou Shih-ch’en.” OA 21/3: 224–28. lal, ruby. 2005. Domesticity and Power in the Early Mughal World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. lam, Peter y. K. 1985. “northern Song Guangdong Wares.” in A Ceramic Legacy of Asia’s Maritime Trade, edited by Peter y. K. lam, 1–30. Singapore: oxford University Press with the Southeast Asian Ceramic Society. . 1998–99. “Tang ying (1682–1756): The imperial Superintendent at Jingdezhen.” TOCS 63: 65–82. lamb, Charles. 1987. Elia and the Last Essays of Elia. Edited by Jonathan bate. oxford: oxford University Press. lamb, Simon. 2004. Devil in the Mountain: A Search for the Origins of the Andes. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. lancaster, lewis r., Kikun Suh, and Chai-shin yu, eds. 1996. Buddhism in Koryo: A Royal Religion. berkeley: institute of East Asian Studies, University of California. lane, Arthur. 1961. “The Gaignières-Fonthill vase: A Chinese Porcelain of about 1300.” BM 103/8: 124–32. lane, Frederic C. 1973. Venice, a Maritime Republic. baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press. lau, Christine. 1993. “Ceremonial Monochrome Wares of the Ming dynasty.” in Scott 1993: 83–100. laurence, Janet. 1991. “royal Feasts.” in Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery 1990: Feasting and Fasting, edited by Hiram Walker, 138–51. london: Prospect books. la vaissière, Étienne de, and Éric Trombert. 2004. “des Chinois et des Hu: Migrations et intégration des iraniens orientaux en milieu chinois durant le haut Moyen Êge.” Annales 59/5–6: 931–69. le bonheur, Albert, ed. 1986. Phra Narai, roi de Siam et Louis XIV. Exhib. cat. Paris: Musée de l’orangerie. le Corbeiller, Clare. 1988. “A Medici Porcelain Pilgrim Flask.” J. Paul Getty Museum Journal 16: 119–26. —. 1990. “German Porcelain of the Eighteenth Century.” Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin 47: 4–56. ledderose, lothar. 1986. “Chinese Calligraphy: its Aesthetic dimension and Social Function.” O 17/8: 35–50. . 1991. “Chinese influence on Europe Art, Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries.” in China and Europe: Images and Influences in Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries, edited by Thomas H. C. lee, 221–37. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press. —. 2000. Ten Thousand Things: Module and Mass Production in Chinese Art. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. lee, Heekyung. 1999. “The introduction of blue-and-White Wares from Ming China to Choson Korea.” OA 45/2: 26–37. lee, Hui-shu. 1996. “Art and imperial images at the late Southern Sung Court.” in Arts of the Sung and Yüan Court, edited by Maxwell K. Hearn and Judith G. Smith, 249–69. new york: Metropolitan Museum of Art. lee, John. 1999. “Trade and Economy in Preindustrial East Asia, c. 1500–c. 1800: East Asia in the Age of Global integration.” Journal of Asian Studies 58/1: 2–26. lee, Sherman E. 1982. A History of Far Eastern Art. new york: Harry n. Abrams. leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, Freiherr von. 1970. Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe. Hrsg. von der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin. 6 vols. reprint, Hildesheim, Germany: G. olms. leites, Edmund. 1980. “Confucianism in Eighteenth-Century England: natural Morality and Social reform.” in Les Rapports entre la Chine et l’Europe au temps des lumières, 173–84. Paris: les belles lettres. lemire, beverly. 1991. Fashion’s Favorite: The Cotton Trade and the Consumer in Britain, 1660– 1800. oxford: oxford University Press. lenman, bruce P. 1990. “The English and dutch East india Companies and the birth of Consumerism in the Augustan World.” Eighteenth-Century Life 14/1: 47–65. lentz, Thomas W. lentz, and Glenn d. lowry. 1989. Timur and the Princely Vision: Persian Art and Culture in the Fifteenth Century. los Angeles: los Angeles County Museum of Art. leonard, Jane Kate. 1972. “Chinese overlordship and Western Penetration in Maritime Asia: A late Ch’ing reappraisal of Chinese Maritime relations.” Modern Asian Studies 6/2: 151–74. ———. 1984. Wei Yuan and China’s Rediscovery of the Maritime World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, Council on East Asian Studies. ———. 1988. “Geopolitical reality and the disappearance of the Maritime Frontier in Qing Times.” American Neptune 48/4: 230–36. lévi-Strauss, Claude. 1988. The Jealous Potter. Translated by bénédicte Chorier. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. lewis, Mark Edward. 1999. Writing and Authority in Early China. Albany: State University of new york Press. li Zhiyan. 1998. “The development and background of White and Qingbai Wares from Tang to Song.” in Bright as Silver, White as Snow: Chinese White Ceramics from Late Tang to Yuan Dynasty, edited by Kai-yin lo, 31–45. Hong Kong: yungmingtang. lightbown, r. W. 1969. “oriental Art and the orient in late renaissance and baroque italy.” Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 32: 228–79. lin Shimin. 1985. “Zheng He xia xiyang yu ciqi waixiao” (Zheng He’s Expeditions to the Western ocean and the Export of Chinaware). in Zhenghe xia xiyan lunwenji (Essays on Zheng He’s voyages), edited by research Association of Chinese navigational History, 42–49. beijing: Peoples’ Communication Publishing House. lindquist, Cecilia. 1991. China: Empire of Living Symbols. Translated by Joan Tate. new york: Addison-Wesley. lister, Florence, and robert H. lister. 1984. “The Potter’s Quarters of Colonial Puebla, Mexico.” Historical Archaeology 18/1: 87–115. little, Stephen. 1982. “Ko-sometsuke in the Asian Art Museum of San Franciso.” O 13/4: 12–23. . 1983. Chinese Ceramics of the Transitional Period: 1620–1683. Exhib. cat. new york: China House Gallery, China institute in America. —. 1990. “narrative Themes and Woodblock Prints in the decoration of Seventeenth-Century Chinese Porcelain.” in Seventeenth-Century Chinese Porcelain from the Butler Family Collection, edited by Michael butler, Margaret Medley, and Stephen little, 21–33. Exhib. cat. Alexandria, vA: Art Services international. ———. 1996. “Economic Change in Seventeenth-Century China and innovations at the Jingdezhen Kilns.” Ars Orientalis 26: 47–54. liu, James T. C. 1988. China Turning Inward: Intellectual-Political Changes in the Early Twelfth Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. liu, lydia. 1999. “robinson Crusoe’s Earthenware Pot.” Critical Inquiry 25/4: 729–57. liu xinru. 1996. Silk and Religion: An Exploration of Material Life and the Thought of People, a.d. 600–1200. new delhi: oxford University Press. liu xinyuan. 1989. Imperial Porcelain of the Yongle and Xuande Periods Excavated from the Site of the Ming Imperial Factory at Jingdezhen. Hong Kong: Urban Council of Hong Kong and the Jingdezhen Museum of Ceramic History. ———. 1993. “yuan dynasty official Wares from Jingdezhen.” in Scott 1993: 33–46. . 1995. “Amusing the Emperor: The discovery of xuande Period Cricket Jars from the Ming imperial Kilns.” O 26/8: 62–77. lo, Jung-pang. 1955. “The Emergence of China as a Sea Power during the late Sung and Early yuan Periods.” Far Eastern Quarterly 14/4: 489–503. ——. 1970. “Chinese Shipping and East-West Trade from the Tenth to the Fourteenth Century.” in Sociétés et compagnies de commerce en orient et dans l’Océan Indien, 167–76. Paris: SEvPEn. lo, K. S. 1986. The Stoneware of Yixing. london: Sotheby’s Publications. loehr, George. 1962–63. “Missionary Artists at the Manchu Court.” TOCS 34: 51–67. loewe, Michael, and Edward l. Shaughnessy, eds. 1999. The Cambridge History of Ancient China: From the Origins of Civilization to 221 b.c. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. lombard, denys. 1990. Le Carrefour javanais: Essai d’histoire globale, les réseaux asiatiques. 3 vols. Paris: Éditions de l’École des hautes études en sciences sociales. —, and Jean Aubin, eds. 1988. Marchands et hommes d’affaires asiatiques dan l’Océan Indien et la Mer de Chine 13e–20e siècles. Paris: Editions de l’Ecole des hautes études en sciences sociales. ———, and Claudine Salmon. 1985. “islam et sinité.” Archipel 30: 73–94. lombard-Salmon, Claudine. 1973. “A propos de quelques cultes chinois particuliers a Java.” Arts Asiatiques 26: 243–64. long, So Kee. 1994. “The Trade Ceramics industry in Southern Fukian during the Song.” Journal of Sung-Yuan Studies 24: 1–19. lopez, robert S. 1971. The Commercial Revolution of the Middle Ages. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. loureiro, rui. 1999. “Portugal em busca da China: imagens e miragens (1498–1514).” Ler História 19: 31–43. love, ronald S. 1994. “The Making of an oriental despot: louis xiv and the Siamese Embassy of 1686.” Journal of the Siam Society 82/1: 57–78. lu, Peter J., and Paul J. Steinhardt. 2007. “decagonal and Quasi-Crystalline Tilings in Medieval islamic Architecture.” Science 315/5815: 1106–10. lu yü. 1974. The Classic of Tea. Translated by Francis ross Carpenter. boston: little, brown. ludwig, Theodore M. 1989. “Chanoyu and Momoyama: Conflict and Transformation in rikyu’s $\mathrm { A r t } _ { * } ^ { * }$ in varley and Kumakura 1989: 71–100. luo Maodeng. n.d. San Bao taijian xia xiyang. Edited by Shen yunjia. Shanghai: n.p. Ma Chengyuan. 1980. “The Splendor of Ancient Chinese bronzes.” in Fong 1980: 1–19. Ma Huan. 1970. Ying-Yai Sheng-Lan: “The Overall Survey of the Ocean’s Shores” [1433]. Ed ited by J. v. G. Mills and translated by Feng Ch’eng-chün. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Macfarlane, Alan, and iris Macfarlane. 2003. Green Gold: The Empire of Tea. london: Ebury. MacGregor, Arthur. 1989. The Late King’s Goods: Collections, Possessions and Patronage of Charles I in the Light of the Commonwealth Sales Inventories. oxford: oxford University Press. Macintosh, duncan. 1973. “beloved blue and White: An introduction to the Porcelains of the yuan and Ming dynasties.” O 4/2: 27–41. ———. 2001. “Chinese blue-and-White and Europe, 1500–1800.” OA 47/2: 43–48. Mack, rosamond E. 2002. Bazaar to Piazza: Islamic Trade and Italian Art, 1300–1600. berkeley: University of California Press. —. 2004. “oriental Carpets in italian renaissance Paintings: Art objects and Status Symbols.” MA 166/6: 82–89. Magalhães-Godinho, vitorino. 1969. L’Économie de l’Empire portugais aux XVe et XVIe siè- cles. Paris: SEvPEn. Mahler, Jane Gaston. 1959. The Westerners among the Figurines of the T’ang Dynasty of China. rome: instituto italiano per il Medio ed Estremo oriente. Majul, Cesar Adib. 1966. “islamic and Arab Cultural influences in the South of the Philippines.” Journal of Southeast Asian History 7/2: 61–73. . 1966a. “Chinese relationships with the Sultanate of Sulu.” in The Chinese in the Philippines, 1:143–66. 2 vols. Manila: Solidaridad Publishing House. Mallet, J. v. G. 1974. “Wedgwood and the rococo.” Apollo 99/5: 320–31. Mancall, Mark. 1984. China at the Center: 300 Years of Foreign Policy. new york: Free Press. Manguin, Pierre-yves. 1986. “Shipshape Societies: boat Symbolism and Political Systems in insular Southeast Asia.” in Southeast Asia in the 9th to 14th Centuries, edited by d. G. Marr and A. C. Milner, 187–213. Singapore: institute of Southeast Asian Studies. —. 1991. “The Merchant and the King: Political Myths of Southeast Asian Coastal Politics.” Indonesia 52: 41–54. Mankowitz, Wolf. 1952. The Portland Vase and the Wedgwood Copies. london: Andre deutsch. Mannikka, Eleanor. 1996. Angkor Wat: Time, Space, and Kingship. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. Manz, beatrice Forbes. 1989. The Rise and Rule of Tamerlane. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Marks, robert b. 1998. Tigers, Rice, Silk and Silt: Environment and Economy in Late Imperial South China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. . 1999. “Maritime Trade and the Agro-Ecology of South China, 1685–1850.” in Pacific Centuries: Pacific and Pacific Rim History since the Sixteenth Century, edited by dennis o. Flynn, lionel Frost, and A. J. H. latham, 85–109. london: routledge. Martin, Ann Smart. 1989. “The role of Pewter as Missing Artifact: Consumer Attitudes Toward Tablewares in late 18th-Century virginia.” Historical Archaeology 23/2: 1–27. ———. 1993. “Markets, buyers, and Users: Consumerism as a Material Culture Framework.” Winterthur Portfolio 28/2–3: 141–57. Martin, Jean. 2004–05. “Chinese 16th and 17th Century Porcelain—Kraak, ‘Swatow,’ and ‘Transitional’ Styles.” TOCS 69: 49–61. Masao, F. T., and H. W. Mutoro. 1981. “The East African Coast and the Comoro islands.” in General History of Africa, vol. 3: Africa from the Seventh to the Eleventh Century, edited by M. Elfasi and i. Hrbek, 586–615. berkeley: University of California Press. Mason, r. b., and l. Golombek. 2003. “The Petrography of iranian Safavid Ceramics.” Journal of Archaeological Science 30/2: 251–61. —, and M. S. Tite. 1994. “The beginnings of islamic Stonepaste Technology.” A 36/1: 77–91. ——, and M. S. Tite. 1997. “The beginning of Tin-opacification of Pottery Glazes.” A 39/1: 41–58. Mathew, Gervase. 1956. “Chinese Porcelain in East Africa and on the Coast of South Arabia.” OA 2/2: 50–55. ———. 1963. “The East African Coast until the Coming of the Portuguese.” in History of East Africa, edited by roland oliver and Gervase Mathew, 94–127. oxford: Clarendon Press. Matson, Frederick r., ed. 1965. Ceramics and Man. Chicago: Aldine. ———. 1986. “Glazed brick from babylon—Historical Setting and Microprobe Analysis.” in Kingery 1986: 133–56. ——. 1989. “Ceramics: The Hub of Ancient Craft interplay.” in Cross-Craft and Cross-Cultural Interaction in Ceramics, edited by Patrick E. McGovern and M. d. notis, 13–28. West erville, oH: American Ceramic Society. Matthee, rudolph P. 1999. The Politics of Trade in Safavid Iran: Silk for Silver, 1600– 1730. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Mcbain, Audrey y. 1979. “Sukhothai and Swankhalok Ceramics.” Brunei Museum Journal 4/3: 78–99. McCants, Anne E. 2008. “Poor Consumers as Global Consumers: The diffusion of Tea and Coffee drinking in the Eighteenth Century.” Economic History Review 61/supplement 1: 172–200. McCracken, Grant. 1988. Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Char acter of Consumer Goods and Activities. bloomington: indiana University Press. McCullough, Helen. 1985. Brocade by Night: ‘Kokin Wakashu’ and the Court Style in Japanese Classical Poetry. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. —. 1990. “Aristocratic Culture.” in The Cambridge History of Japan, vol. 2: Heian Japan, edited by donald H. Shively and William H. McCullough, 390–448. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. McElney, brian. 1998–2000. “Chinese Tea drinking Customs and Changes over the Centuries.” BOCSHK 12: 37–42. McEwan, bonnie G. 1992. “The role of Ceramics in Spain and Spanish America during the 16th Century.” Historical Archaeology 26/1: 92–108. McKendrick, neil. 1960. “Josiah Wedgwood: An Eighteenth-Century Entrepreneur in Salesmanship and Marketing Techniques.” Economic History Review 12/3: 408–33. ———. 1961. “Josiah Wedgwood and Factory discipline.” Historical Journal 4/1: 30–55. . 1970. “Josiah Wedgwood and Cost Accounting in the industrial revolution.” Economic History Review 23/1: 45–67. ———. 1973. “The role of Science in the industrial revolution: A Study of Josiah Wedgwood as a Scientist and industrial Chemist.” in Changing Perspectives in the History of Science: Essays in Honour of Joseph Needham, edited by Mikulás Teich and robert young, 274–319. boston: d. reidel. ———. 1982. “Josiah Wedgwood and the Commercialization of the Potteries.” in McKendrick et al. 1982: 100–145. —, John brewer, and J. H. Plumb. 1982. The Birth of a Consumer Society: The Commercialization of Eighteenth-Century England. bloomington: indiana University Press. McKillop, beth. 1992. Korean Art and Design. Cambridge: victoria and Albert Museum. Mcleod, bet. 1998. “Horace Walpole and Sèvres Porcelain: The Collection at Strawberry Hill.” Apollo 140/1: 42–47. Mcneill, J. r., and William H. Mcneill. 2003. The Human Web: A Bird’s-Eye View of World History. new york: norton. Mcneill, William H. 1963. The Rise of the West: A History of the Human Community. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ———. 1982. The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since a.d. 1000. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ———. 1989. “The Historical Significance of the Way of Tea.” in varley and Kamakura 1989: 255–63. McQuade, Margaret E. Connors. 2003. “The Emergence of a Mexican Tile Tradition.” in Gavin et al. 2003: 204–25. Medley, Margaret. 1966. “Ching-tê Chên and the Problem of the ‘imperial Kilns.’ ” Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies 29: 326–38. ———. 1972. “Chinese Ceramics and islamic design.” in Watson 1972: 79–87. . 1974. Yüan Porcelain and Stoneware. london: Pitman. . 1976. The Chinese Potter: A Practical History of Chinese Ceramics. oxford: Phaidon Press. ———. 1981. T’ang Pottery and Porcelain. london: Faber and Faber. ——. 1984. “islam and Chinese Porcelain in the Fourteenth and Early Fifteenth Centuries.” BOCSHK 6: 36–47. ——. 1990. “Trade, Craftsmanship, and decoration.” in Seventeenth-Century Chinese Porcelain from the Butler Family Collection, edited by Michael butler, Margaret Medley, and Stephen little, 11–20. Exhib. cat. Alexandria, vA: Art Services international. ———. 1990–91. “imperial Patronage and Early Ming Porcelain.” TOCS 55: 29–42. Meister, Peter Wilhelm, and Horst reber. 1983. European Porcelain of the 18th Century. Translated by Ewald osers. ithaca, ny: Cornell University Press. Melikan-Chirvani, Assadullah Souren. 1970. “iranian Silver and its influence in T’ang China.” in Watson 1970: 12–18. ———. 1976. “iranian Metal-Work and the Written Word.” Apollo 103/4: 286–91. ———. 1986. “Silver in islamic iran: The Evidence from literature and Epigraphy.” in vickers 1986: 89–106. Mellott, richard l. 1990. “Ceramics of the Asuka, nara, and Heian Periods (a.d. 552–1185).” in The Rise of a Great Tradition: Japanese Archaeological Ceramics from the Jomon through Heian Periods (10,500 b.c.–a.d. 1185), 56–66. new york: Japan Society. Mennell, Stephen. 1985. All Manners of Food: Eating and Taste in England and France from the Middle Ages to the Present. oxford: blackwell. Mercier, louis-Sébastien. 1929. The Picture of Paris. Translated by Wilfred Jackson and Emilie Jackson. london: routledge and Sons. ——. 1999. Panorama of Paris: Selections from Tableau de Paris. Translated by Helen Simpson and Jeremy d. Popkin and edited by Jeremy d. Popkin. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. Meserve, ruth i. 1982. “The inhospitable land of the barbarian.” Journal of Asian History 16/1: 51–89. Metzger, Thomas. 1970. “The State and Commerce in imperial China.” Asian and African Studies 6: 23–46. Michell, George, and Mark Zebrowski. 1999. The New Cambridge History of India, vol. 1:7: Architecture and Art of the Deccan Sultanate. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Middleton, John. 1992. The World of the Swahili: An African Mercantile Civilization. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. ——. 2003. “Merchants: An Essay in Historical Ethnography.” Journal of the Royal An thropological Institute 9/3: 509–26. Mikami, Tsugio. 1980–81. “China and Egypt: Fustat.” TOCS 45: 67–89 Miller, daniel. 1985. Artefacts as Categories: A Study of Ceramic Variability in Central India. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Miller, Susan. 2001. “images of Asia in French luxury Goods: Jean-Antoine Fraisse at Chantilly, c. 1729–36.” Apollo 154/11: 3–12. Mills, barbara J., and T. J. Ferguson. 2008. “Animate objects: Shell Trumpets and ritual networks in the Greater Southwest.” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 15/4: 338–61. Mino, yutaka. 1991. “Koryo and Choson dynasty Ceramics.” in The Radiance of Jade and the Clarity of Water: Korean Ceramics from the Ataka Collection, 27–34. Exhib. cat. new york: Hudson Hills Press. , and Katherine r. Tsiang. 1986. Ice and Green Clouds: Traditions of Chinese Celadon. Exhib. cat. indianapolis: indiana University Press. Mitchell, Steven. 2004. Gilgamesh: A New English Version. new york: Free Press. Montaigne, Michel de. 1993. The Complete Essays. Translated and edited by M. A. Screech. london: Penguin. Montanari, Massimo. 1994. The Culture of Food. Translated by Carl ipsen. oxford: blackwell. Montesquieu, baron de la bréde et de. 1989. The Spirit of the Laws. Translated and edited by Anne M. Cohler, basia Carolyn Miller, and Harold Samuel Stone. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Montgomery, James M., trans. 1966. The History of Yaballaha III, Nestorian Patriarch, and of His Vicar, Bar Sauma, Mongol Ambassador to the Frankish Courts at the end of the Thirteenth Century. new york: octogon books. Montias, John Michael. 1982. Artists and Artisans in Delft: A Socio-Economic Study of the Seventeenth Century. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. Moore, A. M. T. 1995. “The inception of Potting in Western Asia and its impact on Economy and Society.” in The Emergence of Pottery: Technology and Innovation in Ancient Societies, edited by William K. barnett and John W. Hoopes, 39–53. Washington, dC: Smithsonian institution Press. Moreland, W. H., ed. 1931. Relations of Golconda in the Early Seventeenth Century. london: Hakluyt Society. ——, ed. 1934. Peter Floris: His Voyage to the East Indies in the Globe, 1611–1615. london: Hakluyt Society. Morga, Antonio de. 1971. Sucesos de las Islas filipinas. Translated and edited by J. S. Cummins. Cambridge: Hakluyt Society. Morris, ivan, trans. and ed. 1971. The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon. new york: Penguin books. Mosco, Marilena. 1999. “The Shells of the Medici: The nautiluses of the Pitti Palace in Florence.” FMR 98 (1999): 37–68. Mote, Frederick W. 1999. Imperial China, 900–1800. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. , and denis Twitchett, eds. 1988. The Cambridge History of China, vol. 7:1: The Ming Dynasty, 1368–1644. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Moura Sobral, luís de. 2007. “The Expansion and the Arts: Transfers, Contaminations, innovations.” in Portuguese Oceanic Expansion, 1400–1800, edited by Francisco bethencourt and diogo ramada Curto, 390–459. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Mudge, Jean McClure. 1985. “Hispanic blue-and-White Faience in the Chinese Style.” in Carswell 1985a: 43–54. Muldrew, Craig. 2001. “ ‘Hard Food for Midas’: Cash and its Social value in Early Modern England.” Past and Present 170/1: 78–120. Mungello, david E. 1977. Leibniz and Confucianism: The Search for Accord. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. ———, ed. 1994. The Chinese Rites Controversy: Its History and Meaning. Aldershot: Ashgate. Murai, yasuhiko. 1989. “The development of Chanoyu: before rikyu.” in varley and Kama kura 1989: 3–32. Murasaki, Shikibu. 1987. The Tale of Genji. Translated by Edward G. Seidensticker. new york: Alfred A. Knopf. Murray, dian H. 1987. Pirates of the South China Coast, 1790–1810. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Murray, Julia K. 1992. “The Hangzhou Portraits of Confucius and Seventy-Two Disciples (Sheng xian tu): Art in the Service of Politics.” AB 74/1: 7–18. . 1999. “Patterns of Evolution in Chinese illustration: Expansion or Epitomization?” in Arts of the Sung and Yüan: Ritual, Ethnicity, and Style in Painting, edited by Cary y. liu and dora C. y. Ching, 121–51. Princeton, nJ: Art Museum, Princeton University. Murris, r. 1925. La Hollande et les Hollandais au XVIIe et au XVIIIe siècles vus par les Français. Paris: Honoré Champion. Myers, ramon H., and yeh-chien Wang. 2002. “Economic developments, 1644–1800.” in The Cambridge History of China, vol. 9:1: The Ch’ing Empire to 1800, edited by denis Twitchett and John K. Fairbank, 563–645. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Myrtle, J. H. 1960. “notes on Certain Technical defects in 14th and 15th Century blue-and-White Chinese Porcelains.” Far Eastern Ceramic Bulletin 12: 39–42. nakamura, Shin’ichi. 2005. “le riz, le jade et la ville: Évolution des sociétiés néolithique du yangzi.” Annales 60/5: 1009–34. navarette, domingo. 1960. The Travels and Controversies of Friar Domingo Navarette. 2 vols. Translated and edited by J. S. Cummins. london: Hakluyt Society. necipoglu, Gülru. 1990. “From international Timurid to ottoman: A Change of Taste in Sixteenth-Century ottoman Tiles.” Muqarnas 7: 136–70. needham, Joseph. 1964. The Development of Iron and Steel Technology in China. Cambridge: W. Heffer and Sons. ———.1971. SCC, vol. 4, pt. 3: Civil Engineering and Nautics. ——. 1973. “The role of Science in the industrial revolution: A Study of Josiah Wedgwood as a Scientist and industrial Chemist.” in Changing Perspectives in the History of Science: Essays in Honour of Joseph Needham, edited by Mikulás Teich and robert young, 274–319. boston: d. reidel. . 2000. SCC, vol. 6, pt. 6: Biology and Biological Technology: Medicine. Edited by nathan Sivin. neill, Mary Gardner. 1985. “The Flowering Plum in the decorative Arts.” in Bones of Jade, Soul of Ice: The Flowering Plum in the Decorative Arts, edited by Maggie bickford, 193– 244. new Haven, CT: yale University Art Gallery. nelson, Sarah Milledge. 1993. The Archaeology of Korea. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. newitt, Malyn. 2005. A History of Portuguese Overseas Expansion, 1400–1688. new york: routledge. ng Chin-keong. 1997. “Maritime Frontiers, Territorial Expansion, and Hai-fang during the late Ming and High Ch’ing.” in China and Her Neighbors: Borders, Visions of the Other, Foreign Policy, 10th to 19th Century, edited by Sabine dabringhaus and roderich Ptak, 211–57. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. nguyen-long, Kerry. 1999. “vietnamese Ceramic Trade to the Philippines in the Seventeenth Century.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 30/1: 1–21. —. 2001. “Treasures from the Hoi An Hoard. vietnamese Ceramics and the Cham island Site: Significance and implications.” Arts of Asia 31/1: 90–97. nicholson, Colin. 1994. Writing and the Rise of Finance: Capital Satires of the Early Eighteenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. nickles, Estelle. 2002. “Further reading on Qingbai Ware: Some bibliographical notes.” in Pierson 2002: 234–40. nieuwenhuis, F. J. domela. 1986. “Terracotta Art of Majapahit.” OA 32/1: 67–78. ni yibin. 2003–4. “The Anatomy of rebus in Chinese decorative Art.” OA 49/3: 12–23. Ökte, Ertugrul Zekâi, ed. 1988. Kitabi-I Bayriye Pirî Reis. Translated by robert bragner. istanbul: Historical research Foundation, istanbul research Center. oldroyd, david r. 1996. Thinking about the Earth: A History of Ideas in Geology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. olschki, leonardo. 1944. “Asiatic Exoticism in italian Art of the Early renaissance.” AB 26/2: 95–106. origen. 1998. Homilies on Jeremiah. Translated by John Clark Smith. Washington, dC: Catholic University of America Press. ortiz, valérie Malenfer. 1999. Dreaming the Southern Song Landscape: The Power of Illusion in Chinese Painting. leiden: brill. ottomeyer, Hans. 2004. “The Metamorphosis of the neoclassical vase.” in Vasemania— Neoclassical Form and Ornament in Europe: Selections from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, edited by Stefanie Walker, 15–29. Exhib. cat. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Padfield, Peter. 2000. Maritime Supremacy & the Opening of the Western Mind. new york: overlook Press. Pagani, Catherine. 1995. “Clockmaking in China under the Kangxi and Qianlong Emperors.” Arts Asiatiques 50: 76–84. Pal, Pratapaditya. 1983. Court Paintings of India, 16th–19th Centuries. new york: navin Kumar. Palais, James b. 1995. “A Search for Korea’s Uniqueness.” HJAS 55/2: 409–25. Palliser, d. M. 1976. The Staffordshire Landscape. london: Hodder and Stoughton. Parker, Geoffrey. 1998. The Grand Strategy of Philip II. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Parmentier, Jan. 1996. Tea Time in Flanders: The Maritime Trade between the Southern Netherlands and China in the 18th Century. Exhib. cat. bruges: ludion Press. Parry, J. H. 1974. The Discovery of the Sea. berkeley: University of California Press. Paston-Williams, Sara. 1993. The Art of Dining: A History of Cooking and Eating. london: national Trust. Patterson, Jerry. 1979. Porcelain. Washington, dC: Smithsonian institution. Payne, William l., ed. 1951. The Best of Defoe’s Review. new york: Columbia University Press. Pearce, nick. 2003. “images of Guanxiu’s Sixteen luohan in Eighteenth-Century China.” Apollo 158/8: 25–31. Pearce, n. J. 1987–88. “Chinese Export Porcelain for the European Market: The years of decline, 1770–1820.” TOCS 52: 21–38. . 2001. Designs as Signs: Decoration and Chinese Ceramics. Pearson, richard, and li Min. 2002. “Quanzhou Archaeology: A brief review.” International Journal of Historical Archaeology 6/1: 23–59. Pegolotti, Francesco balducci. 1936. La Practica della Mercatura. Edited by Allan Evans. Cambridge, MA: Medieval Academy of America, no. 24. Pelliot, Paul. 1930. “des artisans Chinois à la capitale Abbasid en 751–762.” T’oung Pao 26: 110–12. Peng xinwei. 1994. A Monetary History of China. 2 vols. Translated by Edward H. Kaplan. bellingham: Center for East Asian Studies, Western Washington University. Pepys, Samuel. 1970–83. The Diary of Samuel Pepys. Edited by robert latham and William Matthews. 11 vols. berkeley: University of California Press. Perdue, Peter C. 2005. China Marches West: The Qing Conquest of Central Asia. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Peterson, C. A. 1979. “Court and Province in Mid and late T’ang.” in The Cambridge History of China, vol. 3:1: Sui and T’ang China, 589–906, edited by denis Twitchett, 464–560. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Peterson, T. Sarah. 1994. Acquired Taste: The French Origins of Modern Cooking. ithaca, ny: Cornell University Press, 1994. Petroski, Henry. 1992. The Evolution of Useful Things. new york: random House. Petrushevsky, i. P. 1968. “The Socio-Economic Conditions of iran under the il-Khans.” in boyle 1968: 483–537. Phelan, John leddy. 1959. The Hispanization of the Philippines: Spanish Aims and Filipino Responses, 1565–1700. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Piccolpasso, Cipriano. 1980. The Three Books of the Potter’s Art. 2 vols. Translated and edited by ronald lightbown and Alan Caiger-Smith. london: Scolar Press. Pierce, donna. 2003. “Mayólica in the daily life of Colonial Mexico.” in Gavin et al. 2003: 245–69. Pierson, Stacey. 1996. Earth, Fire and Water: Chinese Ceramic Technology. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art. . 2001 Designs as Signs: Decoration and Chinese Ceramics. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art and School of oriental and African Studies, University of london. ———, ed. 2002. Qingbai Ware: Chinese Porcelain of the Song and Yuan Dynasties. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art. ———. 2002–3. “Archaeology and Chinese Ceramics: Export Wares.” OA 48/5: 33–35. , and Amy barnes. 2002. A Collector’s Vision: Ceramics of the Qianlong Emperor. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art and School of oriental and African Studies, University of london. Pietsch, Ulrich. 2004. “The royal Porcelain Collection.” in Siebel 2004: 178–181. Pigafetta, Antonio. 1969. The Voyage of Magellan: The Journal of Antonio Pigafetta. Translated by Paula Spurlin Paige. Englewood Cliffs, nJ: Prentice-Hall. Pinksy, robert. 1994. The Inferno of Dante: A New Verse Translation. new york: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Pinto de Matos, Maria Antónia. 1999. “The Portuguese Trade.” OA 45/1: 22–29. —. 2002–3. “Chinese Porcelain in Portuguese Written Sources.” OA 48/5: 36–40. Pinto, Fernão Mendes. 1989. The Travels of Mendes Pinto. Translated and edited by rebecca d. Catz. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Piotrovsky, M. b., and J. M. rogers. 2004. Heaven on Earth: Art from Islamic Lands. Munich: Prestal verlag. Pirazzoli-t’Serstevens, Michèle. 2002. “From the Ear-Cup to the round-Cup: Changes in Chi nese drinking vessels (2nd to 6th Century a.d.).” OA 48/3: 17–27. Pires, Tomé. 1944. The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires. Translated and edited by Armando Cortesão. london: Hakluyt Society. Pitte, Jean-robert. 2002. French Gastronomy: The History and Geography of a Passion. Translated by Jody Gladding. new york: Columbia University Press. Pleguezuelo, Alfonso. 2002. “Jan Floris (ca. 1520–1567), a Flemish Tile Maker in Spain.” in Majolica and Glass, From Italy to Antwerp and Beyond: The Transfer of Technology in the 16th–Early 17th century, edited by John veekman and Sarah Jennings, 123–44. Antwerp: Stad Antwerpen. Plinval de Guillebon, régine de. 1999. “The Manufacture and Sale of Soft-Paste Porcelain in Paris in the Eighteenth Century.” in Discovering the Secrets of Soft-Paste Porcelain at the Saint-Cloud Manufactory, ca. 1690–1766, edited by bertrand rondot, 83–96. Exhib. cat. new Haven, CT: yale University Press and bard Graduate Center for the Studies in the decorative Arts, new york. Plumb, J. H. 1972. “The royal Porcelain Craze.” in In the Light of History, 57–68. london: Allen lane. Plutschow, Herbert. 2003. Rediscovering Rikyu and the Beginnings of the Japanese Tea Ceremony. Kent: Global oriental. Pocock, J. G. A. 1999. Barbarism and Religion, vol. 2: Narratives of Civil Government. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Pocock, Tom. 1998. Battle for Empire: The Very First World War, 1756–63. london: Michael o’Mara. Pollard, Sidney. 1965. The Genesis of Modern Management: A Study of the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Polyani, Michael. 1958. Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy. new york: Harper and row. Pomerantz, Kenneth. 2000. The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern World Economy. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. Pope, John A. 1956. Chinese Porcelains from the Ardebil Shrine. Washington, dC: Freer Gallery of Art, Smithsonian institution. Portal, Jane. 1997. “Korean Celadons of the Koryo dynasty.” in Freestone and Gaimster 1997: 98–103. Porter, david. 1999. “Chinoiserie and the Aesthetics of illegitimacy.” Studies in Eighteenth-Century Culture 28: 27–54. . 1999–2000. “A Peculiar but Uninteresting nation: China and the discourse of Commerce in Eighteenth-Century England.” ECS 33/2: 181–99. . 2001. Ideographia: The Chinese Cipher in Early Modern Europe. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ——. 2002. “Monstrous beauty: Eighteenth-Century Fashion and the Aesthetics of Chinese Taste.” ECS 35/3: 395–411. Postelthwayt, Malachy. 1774. The Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce. 2 vols. 4th ed. reprint, new york: Augustus M. Kelley. Potts, d. T. 1997. Mesopotamian Civilization: The Material Foundations. ithaca, ny: Cornell University Press. Preston, diana, and Michael Preston. 2007. Taj Mahal: Passion and Genius at the Heart of the Mughal Empire. new york: Wallace & Company. Ptak, roderich. 1986. Cheng Hos Abenteuer im Drama und Roman der Ming-Zeit. Stuttgart: Franz verlag Wiesbaden. ——. 2001. “Quanzhou: At the northern Edge of a Southeast Asian Mediterranean.” in Schottenhammer 2001: 395–427. raby, Julian, and Ünsal yücel. 1986. “Chinese Porcelain at the ottoman Court.” in Chinese Ceramics in the Topkapi Saray Museum, Istanbul, edited by John Ayers, catalogue by regina Krahl, 1:27–54. 3 vols. london: Sotheby’s Publications. raeburn, Michael. 1989. The Green Frog Service: A Portrait of 18th-Century England on Wedgwood’s Imperial Service. london: barrie and Jenkins. raffo, Pietro. 1982. “The development of European Porcelain.” in Atterbury 1982: 79–125. ramage, nancy H. 1990. “Sir William Hamilton as Collector, Exporter, and dealer: The Acquisition and dispersal of His Collections.” American Journal of Archaeology 96/3: 469–80. raphael, oscar C. 1931–32. “Chinese Porcelain Jar in the Treasury of San Marco, venice.” TOCS 10: 13–15. rapp, richard T. 1975. “The Unmaking of the Mediterranean Trade Hegemony: international Trade rivalry and the Commercial revolution.” Journal of Economic History 35/3: 499–525. raven, James. 1992. Judging New Wealth: Popular Publishing and Responses to Commerce in England, 1750–1800. oxford: Clarendon Press. rawson, Jessica. 1984. Chinese Ornament: The Lotus and the Dragon. london: british Museum. 8 . 1986. “Tombs or Hoards: The Survival of Chinese Silver of the Tang and Song Periods, Seventh to Thirteenth Centuries a.d.” in vickers 1986: 31–56. ——. 1989. “Chinese Silver and its influence on Porcelain development.” in Cross- Craft and Cross-Cultural Interaction in Ceramics, edited by Patrick E. McGovern and M. d. notis, 275–99. Westerville, oH: American Ceramic Society. ——. 1993. “Ancient Chinese ritual bronzes: The Evidence from Tombs and Hoards of the Shang (c. 1500–1050 b.c.) and Western Zhou (c. 1050–771 b.c.) Periods.” Antiquity 67/257: 805–23. , ed. 1993a. The British Museum Book of Chinese Art. new york: Thames and Hudson. —. 1993b. “Jades and bronzes for ritual.” in rawson 1993a: 44–83. ———. 1995. Chinese Jade from the Neolithic to the Qing. london: british Museum. —. 1997. “overturning Assumptions: Art and Culture in Ancient China.” Apollo 145/3: 3–9. , and Jane Portal. 1993. “luxuries for Trade.” in rawson 1993a: 256–91. ———, M. Tite, and M. J. Hughes. 1987–88. “The Export of Tang Sancai Wares: Some recent research.” TOCS 52: 39–58. rawson, Philip. 1984. Ceramics. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. ray, Anthony. 1991. “Sixteenth-Century Pottery in Castile—A documentary Study.” BM 134/4: 298–305. ray, Haraprasad. 1993. Trade and Diplomacy in India-China Relations: A Study of Bengal during the Fifteenth Century. new delhi: radiant Publishers. redford, bruce, ed. 1992. The Letters of Samuel Johnson. 5 vols. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. reid, Anthony. 1992. “The rise and Fall of Sino-Javanese Shipping.” in Looking in Odd Mirrors: The Java Sea, edited by v. J. H. Houben, H. M. J. Maier, and W. van der Molen, 177– 211. leiden: vakgroep Talen en Culturen van Zuidoost-Azië en oceanië. ——. 1996. “Flows and Seepages in the long-Term Chinese interaction with Southeast Asia.” in Soujourners and Settlers: Histories of Southeast Asia and the Chinese in Honour of Jennifer Cushman, edited by Anthony reid, 15–49. Sydney: Allen and Unwin. reilly, robin. 1992. Josiah Wedgwood, 1730–1795. london: Macmillan. ———. 1994. Wedgwood Jasper. new york: Thames and Hudson. rhodes, daniel. 1968. Kilns: Design, Construction, and Operation. radnor, PA: Chilton book Company. ricci, Matteo. 1953. China in the Sixteenth Century: The Journals of Matthew Ricci, 1583– 1610. Translated and edited by louis J. Gallagher. new york: random House. rice, Prudence M. 1999. “on the origins of Pottery.” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 6/1: 1–54. richards, dick. 1995. South-East Asian Ceramics: Thai, Vietnamese, and Khmer: From the Collection of the Arts Gallery of South Australia. Kuala lumpur: oxford University Press. richards, John. 1993. The New Cambridge History of India, vol. 1:5: The Mughal Empire. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. richards, Sarah. 1999. Eighteenth-Century Ceramics: Products for a Civilised Society. Manchester: Manchester University Press. riegel, Alois. 1992. Problems of Style: Foundations for a History of Ornament. Translated by Evelyn Kain. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. risso, Patricia. 1995. Merchants and Faith: Muslim Commerce and Culture in the Indian Ocean. boulder, Co: Westview Press. ritter, Hellmut. 2003. The Ocean of the Soul: Man, the World and God in the Stories of Farid al-Din ‘Attar. Translated by John o’Kane. leiden: brill. roberts, Gaye blake. 1990. “Patterns of Trade in the 18th Century.” English Ceramic Circle 14/1: 93–105. ———. 1997. “ ‘To Astonish the World with Wonders’: Josiah Wedgwood i 1730–1795.” English Ceramic Circle 16/2: 156–74. robertson, Maureen. 1983. “Periodization in the Arts and Patterns of Change in Traditional Chinese literary History.” in Theories of the Arts in China, edited by Susan bush and Christian Murck, 3–26. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. robinson, b. W. 1967. “Six Centuries of Persian Painting.” OA 13/3: 173–79. robinson, dwight E. 1973. “The Styling and Transmission of Fashions Historically Considered: Winckelmann, Hamilton and Wedgwood in the ‘Greek revival.’ ” in Fashion Marketing, edited by Gordon Wills and david Midgley, 25–87. london: George Allen & Unwin. robinson, John Martin. 1983. Georgian Model Farms: A Study of the Decorative and Model Farm Buildings in the Age of Improvement, 1700–1846. oxford: Clarendon Press. rocco, Fiammetta. 2003. The Miraculous Fever Tree: Malaria and the Quest for a Cure That Changed the World. new york: HarperCollins. roche, daniel. 1987. The People of Paris: An Essay in Popular Culture in the 18th Century. Translated by Marie Evans. berkeley: University of California Press. . 2000. A History of Everyday Things: The Birth of Consumption in France, 1600–1800. Translated by brian Pearce. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. rockhill, W. W. 1914–15. “notes on the relations and Trade of China with the Eastern Archipelago and the Coasts of the indian ocean during the Fourteenth Century.” T’oung Pao 15: 419–47; 16: 61–159, 236–71, 374–92, 435–67, 604–26. rogers, J. M., and r. M. Ward. 1988. Süleyman the Magnificent. Exhib. cat. london: british Museum. rogers, Mary Ann. 1990. “in Praise of Errors.” O 21/9: 62–78. —. 1992. “The Mechanics of Change: The Creation of a Song imperial Ceramic Style.” in New Perspectives on the Art of Ceramics in China, edited by George Kuwayama, 64– 79. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. —. 1988. Khubilai Khan: His Life and Times. berkeley: University of California Press. röntgen, robert E. 1984. The Book of Meissen. Exton, PA: Schiffer Publishing. rooney, dawn F. 1984. Khmer Ceramics. Singapore: oxford University Press. —. 1987. Folk Pottery in South-East Asia. Singapore: oxford University Press. ———. 1989. “The Fish Motif in Sukhothai Ceramics.” OA 35/1: 35–43. rosenthal, Franz, trans. 1989. The History of al-Tabari (Ta’rikh al-rusul wa’l-muluk), vol. 1: From the Creation to the Great Flood. Albany: State University of new york Press. rossabi, Morris. 1973. “Cheng Ho and Timur: Any relation?” Oriens Extremus 20: 129–36. ——. 1992. Voyager from Xanadu: Rabban Sauma and the First Journey from China to the West. new york: Kodansha international. rougelle, Axelle. 1991. “les importations de céramiques chinoises dans le Golfe arabopersique (8–11èmes siècles).” Archélogie Islamique 2: 5–46. —. 1996. “Medieval Trade networks in the Western indian ocean (8–14th Centuries): Some reflections from the distribution Pattern of Chinese imports in the islamic World.” in Tradition and Archaeology: Early Maritime Contacts in the Indian Ocean, edited by Himanshu Prabha ray and Jean-François Salles, 159–80. new delhi: Manohar. rousmaniere, nicole Coolidge. 1996. “defining Temmoku: Jian Ware Tea bowls imported into Japan.” in Hare’s Fur, Tortoiseshell, and Patridge Feathers: Chinese Brown- and Black-Glazed Ceramics, 400–1400, edited by robert d. Mowry, 43–58. Exhib. cat. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Art Museums. rousseau, Jean-Jacques. 1990. Julie, or the New Héloïse. in The Collected Writings of Rousseau, vol. 6, translated and edited by Philip Stewart and Jean vaché. Hanover, nH: University Press of new England. rowbotham, Arnold W. 1966. Missionary and Mandarin: The Jesuits at the Court of China. new york: russell and russell. Saint-Simon, louis de rouvroy, duc de. 1856–58. Mémoires complets et authentiques du duc de Saint-Simon sur le siècle de Louis XIV et la régence. 14 vols. Edited by M. Chéruel. Paris: Hachette. Sáiz, María Concepción García. 2003. “Mexican Ceramics in Spain.” in Gavin et al. 2003: 187–203. Salles-reese, verónica. 1997. From Viracocha to the Virgin of Copacabana: Representation of the Sacred at Lake Titicaca. Austin: University of Texas Press. Sandon, John. 1992. “Shell-decorated Worcester Porcelain.” MA 141/6: 946–55. Sasaki, Tatsuo. 1994. “Trade Patterns of Zhejiang Ware Found in West Asia.” in New Light on Chinese Yue and Longquan Wares: Archaeological Ceramics Found in Eastern and Southern Asia, a.d. 800–1400, edited by Chuimei Ho, 322–32. Hong Kong: Centre of Asian Studies. Saunders, Gill. 2002. Wallpaper in Interior Design. london: victoria and Albert Museum. Savill, rosalind. 1982. “ ‘Cameo Fever’: Six Pieces from the Sèvres Porcelain dinner Service made for Catherine ii of russia.” Apollo 116/11: 304–11. Savory, roger. 1980. Iran under the Safavids. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Sayer, Geoffrey r., trans. and ed. 1951. Ching-tê-chên t’ao-lu, or The Potteries of China. london: routledge & Kegan Paul. , trans. and ed. 1959. T’ao Ya or Pottery Refinements. london: routledge & Kegan Paul. Scammell, G. v. 1969. “The new Worlds and Europe in the Sixteenth Century.” Historical Journal 12/3: 389–412. Schafer, Edward H. 1963. The Golden Peaches of Samarkand: A Study of T’ang Exotics. berkeley: University of California Press. ——. 1967. The Vermilion Bird: T’ang Images of the South. berkeley: University of California Press. Schama, Simon. 1988. An Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of Dutch Culture in the Golden Age. berkeley: University of California Press. Schein, Sylvia. 1979. “Gesta Dei per Mongolos 1300: The Genesis of a non-Event.” English Historical Review 94/373: 805–19. Scheurleer, d. F. lunsingh. 1974. Chinese Export Porcelain / Chine de Commande. london: Pitman. Schimmel, Annemarie. 1984. Calligraphy and Islamic Culture. new york: new york University Press. —. 2005. The Empire of the Great Mughals: History, Art and Culture. Translated by Corinne Attwood and edited by burzine K. Waghmar. london: reaktion books. Schneider, laura T. 1973. “The Freer Canteen.” Ars Orientalis 9: 137–56. Scholten, Frits T. 1995. “The variety of decoration on dutch delft, 1625–1675.” MA 147/1: 194–203. Schönfeld, Martin. 1998. “Was There a Western inventor of Porcelain?” Technology and Culture 39/4: 716–27. Schottenhammer, Angela, ed. 2001. The Emporium of the World: Maritime Quanzhou, 1000– 1400. leiden: brill. —. 2006. “The Sea as barrier and Contact Zone: Maritime Space and Sea routes in Traditional Chinese books and Maps.” in The Perception of Maritime Space in Traditional Chinese Sources, edited by Angela Schottenhammer and roderich Ptak, 3–13. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz verlag. Schouten, Joost. 1671. A Description of the Mighty Kingdoms of Japan and Siam. Translated by roger Manley. london: robert boulter. Schroder, Timothy. 2004. “lord burghley’s Silver Spice dishes.” Apollo 159/2: 3–12. Schurz, William lytle. 1939. The Manila Galleon. new york: E. P. dutton. Schwartz, Selma. 1992. Sèvres Porcelain Service for Marie Antoinette’s Dairy at Rambouillet: An Exercise in Archaeological Neo-Classicism. Paris: French Porcelain Society. Scott, rosemary E. 1987. “18th-Century overglaze Enamels: the influence of Technological development on Painting Style.” in Style in the East Asian Tradition, edited by rosemary E. Scott and Graham Hutt, 149–68. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art. —. 1992. “Archaism and invention: Sources of Ceramic design in the Ming and Qing dynasties.” in New Perspectives on the Art of Ceramics in China, edited by George Kuwayama, 80–96. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. ——, ed. 1993. The Porcelains of Jingdezhen. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art. . 1993a. “Jesuit Missionaries and the Porcelains of Jingdezhen.” in Scott 1993: 233–56. . 2002. “Qingbai Porcelain and its Place in Chinese Ceramic History.” in Pierson 2002: 6–12. Sen, Tansen. 2003. Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The Realignment of Sino-Indian Relations, 600–1400. Honolulu: Association for Asian Studies and University of Hawai‘i Press. Seok Chee, Eng-lee. 1993. “Passions and Pursuits of the Chinese Scholar.” in Ceramics in Scholarly Taste, edited by Maura rinaldi, 30–40. Exhib. cat. Singapore: Southeast Asian Ceramic Society. Serruys, Henry. 1975. Trade Relations: The Horse Fairs (1400–1600). brussels: institut belge des Hautes Études Chinoises. Shackel, Paul A. 1993. Personal Discipline and Material Culture: An Archaeology of Annapolis, Maryland, 1695–1870. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press. Shakeb, M. Z. A. 1995. “Aspects of Golconda–iran Commercial Contacts.” Islamic Culture 69/2: 1–39. Shangraw, Clarence F. 1985. “Fifteenth-Century blue-and-White Porcelain in the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco.” O 16/5: 34–46. Shaw, Thurstan, Paul Sinclair, bassey Andah, and Alex okpoko, eds. 1993. The Archaeology of Africa: Food, Metals and Towns. london: routledge. Sheaf, Colin. 1993. “Chinese Ceramics and Japanese Tea Taste in the late Ming Period.” in Scott 1993: 165–82. , and richard Kilburn. 1988. The Hatcher Porcelain Cargoes: The Complete Record. oxford: Phaidon. Shelach, Gideon. 2001. “The dragon Ascends to Heaven, the dragon dives into the Abyss: Creation of the Chinese dragon Symbol.” OA 47/3: 29–40. Shiba, yoshinobu. 1970. Commerce and Society in Sung China. Translated by Mark Elvin. Ann Arbor: Center for Chinese Studies, University of Michigan. Shoemaker, nancy. 1997. “How indians Got to be red.” American Historical Review 102/3: 625–44. Shono, Masako. 1973. Japanisches Aritaporzellan im sogenannten ‘Kakiemonstil’ als Vorbild für die Meissener Porzellanmanufaktur. Translated by richard rasch and rainer rückert. Munich: Editions Schneider. Shulsky, linda rosenfeld. 1998. “Philip ii of Spain as Porcelain Collector.” OA 44/2: 51–54. Siebel, Sabine, ed. 2004. The Glory of Baroque Dresden: The State Art Collections Dresden. Exhib. cat. Jackson: Mississippi Commission for international Exchange. Sigurdsson, Haraldur. 1999. Melting the Earth: The History of Ideas on Volcanic Eruptions. oxford: oxford University Press. Simkin, C. G. F. 1968. The Traditional Trade of Asia. london: oxford University Press. Simpson, St. John. 1997. “Early Urban Ceramic industries in Mesopotamia.” in Freestone and Gaimster 1997: 50–55. Sims, Eleanor. 1992. “The illustrated Manuscripts of Firdausi’s Shahnama Commissioned by Princes of the House of Timur.” Ars Orientalis 22: 43–68. Skaff, Jonathan Karam. 2003. “The Sogdian Trade diaspora in East Turkestan during the Seventh and Eighth Centuries.” JESHO 46/4: 475–524. Smalley, ian James. 1968. “The loess deposits and neolithic Culture of northern China.” Man 3: 22–41. Smith, Adam. 1976. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. 2 vols. Edited by r. H. Campbell and A. K. Skinner. oxford: Clarendon Press. ———. 1976a. Theory of Moral Sentiments. oxford: Clarendon Press. Smith, david Kammerling. 2002. “Structuring Politics in Early Eighteenth-Century France: The Political innovations of the French Council of Commerce.” Journal of Modern History 74/3: 490–537. Smith, John Masson, Jr. 2000. “dietary decadence and dynastic decline in the Mongol Empire.” Journal of Asian History 34/1: 35–52. Smith, lawrence, victor Harris, and Timothy Clark. 1990. Japanese Art: Masterpieces in the British Museum. new york: oxford University Press. Smith, Monica. 1999. “ ‘indianization’ from the indian Point of view: Trade and Cultural Contacts with Southeast Asia in the Early First Millennium c.e.” JESHO 42/1: 1–26. Smith, robert C. 1968. The Art of Portugal, 1600–1800. new york: Meredith Press. Smollett, Tobias. 1997. Travels through France and Italy. Evanston, il: Marlboro Press and northwestern University Press. Snowdin, Michael, and Maurice Howard. 1996. Ornament: A Social History since 1450. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. So, billy K. l. 2000. Prosperity, Region, and Institutions in Maritime China: The South Fukien Pattern, 946–1368. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center. . 2006. “logiques de marché dans le Chine maritime: Espace et institutions dans deux régions préindustrielles.” Annales 61/6: 1261–88. So, Jenny F. 1980. “The Waning of the bronze Age: The Western Han Period (206 b.c.–a.d. 8).” in Fong 1980: 323–27. Solheim ii, Wilhelm G. 1965. “The Functions of Pottery in Southeast Asia: From the Present to the Past.” in Matson 1965: 254–73. Son Chu-hwan, ed. 1994. Koreana: Korean Cultural Heritage, vol. 1: Fine Arts. Seoul: Korea Foundation. Soper, Alexander C. 1942. “The rise of yamato-e.” AB 24/4: 351–79. ——. 1976. “The relationship of Early Chinese Painting to its own Past.” in Artists and Traditions: Uses of the Past in Chinese Culture, edited by Christian F. Murck, 21–47. Princeton, nJ: Princeton University Press. Souyri, Pierre François. 2001. The World Turned Upside Down: Medieval Japanese Society. new york: Columbia University Press. Souza, George bryan. 1986. The Survival of Empire: Portuguese Trade and Society in China and the South China Sea, 1630–1754. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Spallanzani, Marco. 1978. Ceramiche orientali a Firenze nel rinascimento. Florence: Cassa di risparmio. Spandounes, Theodore. 1997. On the Origin of the Ottoman Emperors. Translated and edited by donald M. nicol. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Spence, Jonathan d. 1984. The Memory Palace of Matteo Ricci. new york: Penguin books. —. 1998. The Chan’s Great Continent: China in Western Minds. new york: norton. Spuhler, F. 1986. “Carpets and Textiles.” in Jackson and lockart 1986: 698–727. Spuler, bertold. 1985. Die Mongolen in Iran: Politik, Verwaltung und Kultur der Ilchanzeit 1220–1350. leiden: brill. Staehelin, Walter A. 1966. The Book of Porcelain: The Manufacture, Transport and Sale of Export Porcelain during the Eighteenth Century, Illustrated by a Contemporary Series of Chinese Watercolors. Translated by Michael bullock. new york: Macmillan. Stein, Stanley J., and barbara H. Stein. 2000. Silver, Trade, and War: Spain and America in the Making of Early Modern Europe. baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press. Stern, S. M. 1967. “ramisht of Siraf, a Merchant Millionaire of the Twelfth Century.” JRAS-GBI 1: 10–14. Stevens, Wallace. 1982. The Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens. new york: vintage books. Stevenson, John. 1997a. “The Evolution of vietnamese Ceramics.” in Stevenson and Guy 1997c: 23–45. —. 1997b. “ivory-Glazed Wares of ly and Tran.” in Stevenson and Guy 1997c: 111–27. , and John Guy, eds. 1997c. Vietnamese Ceramics: A Separate Tradition. Chicago: Art Media resources. Stols, Eddy. 2004. “The Expansion of the Sugar Market in Western Europe.” in Tropical Babylons: Sugar and the Making of the Atlantic World, edited by Stuart b. Schwartz, 237–88. Chapel Hill: University of north Carolina Press. Ströber, Eva. 2001. ‘La maladie de porcelaine’: Ostasiatisches Porzellan aus der Sammlung Augusts des Starken. Exhib. cat. leipzig: Edition leipzig. Strong, roy. 2002. Feast: A History of Grand Eating. new york: Hartcourt. Stuart, Jan. 1993. “imperial Porcelain and Court values.” O 24/8: 24–30. ——. 1993a. “layers of Meaning.” in Joined Colors: Decoration and Meaning in Chinese Porcelain, edited by louise Allison Cort and Jan Stuart, 33–61. Washington, dC: Arthur M. Sackler Gallery and the Smithsonian institution. ——. 1995. “Unified Style in Chinese Painting and Porcelain in the 18th Century.” OA 41/2: 32–46. Styles, John. 2000. “Product innovation in Early Modern london.” Past and Present 168/3: 124–69. Sugimara, Toh. 1986. The Encounter of Persia with China: Research into Cultural Contacts Based on Fifteenth-Century Persian Pictorial Materials. Senri Ethnological Studies, no. 18. osaka: national Museum of Ethnology. ——. 1992. “Chinese influence on Persian Paintings of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries.” in Significance of Silk Roads in the History of Human Civilizations, edited by Umesao Tadao and Sugimara Toh, 135–43. Senri Ethnological Studies, no. 32. osaka: national Museum of Ethnology. Sullivan, Michael. 1960–62. “notes on Chinese Export Wares in Southeast Asia.” TOCS 33: 61–77. Sun laichen. 2003. “Military Technology Transfers from Ming China and the Emergence of northern Mainland Southeast Asia (c. 1390–1527).” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 34/3: 495–517. Sung ying-Hsing. 1966. T’ien-kung K’ai-wu: Chinese Technology in the Seventeenth Century. Translated by E-tu Zen Sun and Shiou-Chuan Sun. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. Swiderski, richard M. 1980–81. “bouvet and leibniz: A Scholarly Correspondence.” ECS 14/2:135–50. Szuppe, Maria. 2004. “Circulation des lettrés et cercles littéraires: Entre Asie centrale, iran et inde du nord (xve<sup>e</sup>–xviii<sup>e</sup> siècle).” Annales 59/5–6: 997–1018. Takeuchi, Jun’ichi. 2003. “Furata oribe and the Tea Ceremony.” in Turning Point: Oribe and the Arts of Sixteenth-Century Japan, edited by Miyeko Murase, 17–29. Exhib. cat. new york and new Haven, CT: Metropolitan Museum of Art and yale University Press. Tana, li. 2006. “A view from the Sea: Perspectives on the northern and Central vietnamese Coast.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 37/1: 83–102. Tedlock, dennis, trans. 1985. Popol Vuh: The Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life. new york: Simon and Schuster. Temple, robert. 1986. The Genius of China: 3,000 Years of Science, Discovery, and Invention. new york: Simon and Schuster. Teo, Catherine. 2002. “Qingbai Ware for Export.” in Pierson 2002: 244–51. Thackray, John. 1996. “ ‘The Modern Pliny’: William Hamilton and vesuvius.” in Jenkins and Sloan 1996: 65–74. Thomas, Elizabeth. 1743. The Metamorphoses of the Town; or A View of the Present Fashions. 4th ed. london: J. Wilford. Thomaz de bossierre, yves de. 1982. François Xavier Dentrecolles et l’apport de la Chine a l’Europe du XVIIIe siécle. Paris: les belles lettres. Thornton, dora. 1997. The Scholar in His Study: Ownership and Experience in Renaissance Italy. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Tichane, robert. 1983. Ching-te-chen: Views of a Porcelain City. new york: new york State institute for Glaze research. Tingley, nancy. 1993. “Thai Ceramics: The James and Elaine Connell Collection.” O 24/12: 38–44. Tite, M. S., i. C. Freestone, and M. bimson. 1984. “A Technological Study of Chinese Porcelain of the yuan dynasty.” A 26/2: 139–54. Torrens, H. S. 2005. “Erasmus darwin’s Contributions to the Geological Sciences.” in The Genius of Erasmus Darwin, edited by C. U. M. Smith and robert Arnott, 259–72. Aldershot: Ashgate. Totman, Conrad d. 1967. Politics in the Tokugawa Bakufu, 1600–1843. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Tregear, Mary. 1976. “Chinese Ceramic imports to Japan between the ninth and Fourteenth Centuries.” BM 118/4: 816–24. ———. 1982. Song Ceramics. london: Thames and Hudson. Treolar, F. E. 1972. “Stoneware bottles in the Sarawak Museum: vessels for the Mercury Trade.” SMJ 20/40–41: 377–84. Trocki, Carl A. 1999. Opium, Empire and the Global Political Economy: A Study of the Asian Opium Trade, 1750–1950. london: routledge. Ts’ai Mei-fen. 1996. “A discussion of Ting Ware with Unglazed rims and related Twelfth-Century official Porcelain.” in Arts of the Sung and Yüan Court, edited by Maxwell K. Hearn and Judith G. Smith, 109–31. new york: Metropolitan Museum of Art. Tsiang, Katherine r. 1981. “Chinese Jade.” Arts in Asia 11/5: 77–83. Turnbull, Stephen. 2002. Samurai Invasion: Japan’s Korean War, 1592–1598. london: Cassell. Turner, Jack. 2004. Spice: The History of a Temptation. new york: Alfred A. Knopf. Turpin, Adriana. 1999. “A Table for Queen Mary’s Water Galley at Hampton Court.” Apollo 149/1: 3–14. Twitchett, dennis, and Janice Stargardt. 2002. “Chinese Silver bullion in a Tenth-Century indonesian Wreck.” Asia Major 15/1: 23–72. Uglow, Jenny, 2002. The Lunar Men: Five Friends Whose Curiosity Changed the World. new york: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. —. 2003. “vase Mania.” in Luxury in the Eighteenth Century: Debates, Desires and Delectable Goods. Edited by Maxime berg and Elizabeth Eger, 151–62. london: Palgrave. Ukers, William H. 1935. All About Tea. 2 vols. new york: Tea and Coffee Trade Journal Company. Umehara, Kaoru. 1999. “The Context and Spirit of Song Ceramics.” in Song Ceramics, edited by the Museum of oriental Ceramics, 16–23. osaka: Asahi Shimbun. Ury, Marian. 1988. “Chinese learning and intellectual life.” in The Cambridge History of Japan, vol. 2: Heian Japan, edited by donald H. Shively and William H. McCullough, 341– 89. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. vainker, S. J. 1991. Chinese Pottery and Porcelain. london: british Museum. ———. 1993. “Ceramics for Use.” in rawson 1993a: 212–54. vandiver, Pamela b. 1990. “Ancient Glazes.” Scientific American 262/4: 106–13. , and W. d. Kingery. 1984. “variations in the Microstructure and Microcomposition of Pre-Song, Song, and yuan dynasty Ceramics.” in Ceramics and Civilization: Ancient Technology to Modern Sciences, edited by W. d. Kingery, 181–233. Columbus, oH: American Ceramic Society. varley, H. Paul. 1977. “Ashikaga yoshimitsu and the World of Kitayama: Social Change and Shogunal Patronage in Early Muromachi Japan.” in Japan in the Muromachi Age, edited by John W. Hall and Toyoda Takeshi, 183–204. berkeley: University of California Press. . 1989. “Chanoyu from the Genroku Epoch to Modern Times.” in varley and Kumakura 1989: 161–194. ———. 1990. “Cultural life in Medieval Japan.” in yamamura 1990: 447–99. ——. 1997. “Cultural life of the Warrior Elite in the Fourteenth Century.” in The Origins of Japan’s Medieval World: Courtiers, Clerics, Warriors, and Peasants in the Fourteenth Century, edited by Jeffrey P. Maas, 192–208. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ——, and George Elison. 1981. “The Culture of Tea: From its origins to Sen no rikyu.” in Warlords, Artists, and Commoners: Japan in the Sixteenth Century, edited by George Elison and bardwell l. Smith, 187–222. Honolulu: University Press of Hawai‘i. ——, and Kumakura isao, eds. 1989. Tea in Japan: Essays on the History of Chanoyu. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. vassalo e Silva, nuno. 2000. “Precious Stones, Jewels and Cameos: Jacques de Coutre’s Journey to Goa and Agra.” in Flores and vassallo e Silva 2004: 116–33. vickers, Michael, ed. 1986. Pots and Pans: Proceedings of the Colloquium on Precious Metal and Ceramics in the Muslim, Chinese and Graeco-Roman Worlds. oxford: oxford University Press. . 1987. “value and Simplicity: Eighteenth-Century Taste and the Study of Greek vases.” Past and Present 116/4: 98–137. —. 1997. “Hamilton, Geology, Stone vases, and Taste.” Journal of the History of Collections 9/2: 263–74. —, and david Gill. 1994. Artful Crafts: Ancient Greek Silverware and Pottery. oxford: Clarendon Press. vikan, Gary. 1991. “‘Guided by land and Sea’: Pilgrim Art and Pilgrim Travel in Early byzantium.” in Tesserae: Festshrift für Josef Engemann, 74–92. Jahrbbuch für Antike und Christentum, Ergänzungsband 18. Münster: Aschendorffsche verlagsbuchhandlung. viraphol, Sarasin. 1977. Tribute and Profit: Sino-Siamese Trade, 1562–1853. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. visser, Margaret. 1991. The Rituals of Dinner: The Origins, Evolution, Eccentricities, and Meaning of Table Manners. new york: Grove Press. volker, T. 1954. Porcelain and the Dutch East India Company as Recorded in the Dagh-Registers of Batavia Castle, Those of Hirada and Deshima and Other Contemporary Papers, 1602–1682. leiden: rijksmuseum voor volkenkunde. . 1959. The Japanese Porcelain Trade of the Dutch East India Company after 1683. leiden: brill. voll, John obert. 1994. “islam as a Special World-System.” JWH 5/2: 213–26. voltaire. 1947. Candide. Translated by Philip littell. new york: Modern library. von der Porten, Edward P. 1972. “drake and Cermeno in California: Sixteenth-Century Chinese Ceramics.” Historical Archaeology 6/1: 1–22. von Glahn, richard. 1996. Fountain of Fortune: Money and Monetary Policy in China, 1000– 1700. berkeley: University of California Press. Wade, Geoffrey. 2000. “The Ming shi-lu as a Source for Thai History: Fourteenth to Seventeenth Centuries.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 31/2: 249–94. Wahrman, dror. 2004. The Making of the Modern Self: Identity and Culture in Eighteenth-Century England. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Walcha, otto. 1981. Meissen Porcelain. new york: G. P. Putnam. Waley, Arthur, trans. 1931. The Travels of an Alchemist: The Journey of the Taoist Ch’ang-ch’un from China to the Hindukush at the Summons of Chingiz Khan. london: routledge & Kegan Paul. Walvin, James. 1997. Fruits of Empire: Exotic Produce and British Taste, 1660–1800. new york: new york University Press. Wan, Maggie C. K. 2003. “Motifs with intentions: reading the Eight Trigrams on official Porcelain of the Jiajing Period (1522–1566).” Artibus Asiae 63/2: 191–221. Wang, Eugene y. 2005. Shaping the Lotus Sutra: Buddhist Visual Culture in Medieval China. Seattle: University of Washington Press. Wang Gungwu. 1970. “China and South-East Asia, 1402–1424.” in Studies in the Social History of China and South-East Asia: Essays in Memory of Victor Purcell, edited by Jerome Ch’en and nicholas Tarling, 375–401. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——. 1998. “Ming Foreign relations: Southeast Asia.” in The Cambridge History of China, vol. 8:2: The Ming Dynasty, 1368–1644, edited by denis Twitchett and Frederick W. Mote, 301–32. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——. 2000. The Chinese Overseas: From Earthbound China to the Quest for Autonomy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Wang Shixin. 2000. “Capitalism in the late Ming dynasty.” in Chinese Capitalism, 1522–1840, edited by xu dixin and Wu Chengming and translated by li Zhengde, liang Miaoru, and li Siping, 23–110. new york: St. Martin’s Press. Wang yi-t’ung. 1953. Official Relations between China and Japan, 1368–1549. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Ward, Cheryl. 2001. “The Sadana island Shipwreck: An Eighteenth-Century a.d. Merchantman off the red Sea Coast of Egypt.” WA 32/3: 368–82. Wästfelt, berit, bo Gyllensvärd, and Jörgen Weibull. 1990. Porcelain from the East Indiaman “Götheburg.” Translated by Jeanne rosen. Höganäs, denmark: Wiken. Watanabe-o’Kelly, Helen. 2002. Court Culture in Dresden: From Renaissance to Baroque. new york: Palgrave. Watney, bernard. 1973. “Chinoiserie and English Porcelain of the Eighteenth Century: A Fairy-Tale World.” in Watson 1972: 94–97. Watsky, Andrew M. 1995. “Commerce, Politics, and Tea: The Career of imai Sokyu.” Monumenta Nipponica 50/1: 47–65. ——. 2004. Chikubushima: Deploying the Sacred Arts in Momoyama Japan. Seattle: University of Washington Press. Watson, Francis, and John Whitehead. 1991. “An inventory dated 1689 of the Chinese Porcelain in the Collection of the Grand dauphin, Son of louis xiv, at versailles.” Journal of the History of Collections 3/1:13–51. Watson, James l. 1985. “Standardizing the Gods: The Promotion of T’ien Hou (‘Empress of Heaven’) along the South China Coast, 960–1960.” in Popular Culture in Late Imperial China, edited by david Johnson, Andrew J. nathan, and Evelyn S. rawski, 292–324. berkeley: University of California Press. Watson, William, ed. 1970. Pottery and Metalwork in T’ang China. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art. ———. 1970a. “on T’ang Soft-Glazed Pottery.” in Watson 1970: 41–49. ———, ed. 1972. The Westward Influence of the Chinese Arts from the 14th to the 18th Century. london: Percival david Foundation of Chinese Art. —. 1973. “on Some Categories of Archaism in Chinese bronze.” Ars Orientalis 9: 1–14. —. 1974. Style in the Arts of China. Harmondsworth: Penguin books. —. 1983. “iran and China.” in The Cambridge History of Iran, vol. 3:1: The Seleucid, Parthian and Sasanian Periods, edited by Ehsan yarshater, 537–67. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ———. 1984. Tang and Liao Ceramics. new york: rizzoli. Watt, James C. y. 2002. “A note on Artistic Exchange in the Mongol Empire.” in The Legacy of Genghis Khan: Courtly Art and Culture in Western Asia, edited by linda Komaroff and Stefano Carboni, 63–73. Exhib. cat. new york: Metropolitan Museum of Art. Weatherford, Jack. 2004. Genghis Khan and the Making of the Modern World. new york: Three rivers Press. Weatherill, lorna. 1986. The Growth of the Pottery Industry in England, 1660–1815. new york: Garland. Wechsler, Howard J. 1985. Offerings of Jade and Silk: Ritual and Symbol in the Legitimation of the T’ang Dynasty. new Haven, CT: yale University Press. Weeden, richard P. 1984. Poison in the Pot: The Legacy of Lead. Carbondale: Southern illinois University Press. Weigl, Gail Capitol. 1980. “The reception of Chinese Painting Models in Muromachi Japan.” Monumenta Nipponica 35/3: 257–72. Weinberg, Saul W. 1965. “Ceramics and the Supernatural: Cult and burial Evidence in the Aegean World.” in Matson 1965: 187–201. Welch, E. 2002. “Public Magnificence and Private display: Giovanni Pontano’s De Splendore (1498) and the domestic Arts.” Journal of Design History 15/4: 211–27. Weller, dennis P. 2002. Jan Miense Molenaer: Painter of the Dutch Golden Age. Exhib. cat. raleigh: north Carolina Museum of Art. Wells, Kenneth M. 2000. “Korean Cultural values in the Choson dynasty.” in Earth, Spirit, Fire: Korean Masterpieces of the Choson Dynasty (1392–1910), edited by Claire roberts and Michael brand, 16–19. Exhib. cat. Sydney: Powerhouse Publishing. Wen, r., C. S. Wang, Z. W. Mao, y. y. Huang, and A. M. Pollard. 2007. “The Chemical Composition of blue Pigment on Chinese blue-and-White Porcelain of the yuan And Ming dynasties (a.d. 1271–1644).” A 49/1: 101–15. West, Stephen H. 1997. “Playing with Food: Performance, Food, and the Aesthetics of Artificiality in the Sung and yuan.” HJAS 57/1: 67–106. Westermann, Mariët. 1996. A Wordly Art: The Dutch Republic, 1585–1718. new york: Harry n. Abrams. Whitehead, John. 1993. “George iv: Furnishing in the French Taste: The Place of dominique daguerre in the royal Collection.” Apollo 138/7: 153–59. Whitehouse, david. 1983. “Maritime Trade in the Gulf: The 11th and 12th Centuries.” WA 14/3: 328–34. Whitfield, roderich, and Anne Farrer. 1990. Caves of the Thousand Buddhas: Chinese Art from the Silk Route. new york: George braziller. Whitman, Marina d. 1978. “Persian blue-and-White Ceramics: Cycles of Chinoiserie.” 2 vols. Ph.d. dissertation, new york University. ——. 1988. “The Scholar, the drinker, and the Ceramic Pot-Painter.” in Content and Context of Visual Arts in the Islamic World, edited by Priscilla P. Soucek, 255–61. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. Whitmore, John K. 1985. Vietnam, Hô Quy Ly, and the Ming (1371–1421). new Haven, CT: yale Southeast Asia Studies. Wiener, Philip P., ed. 1951. Leibniz: Selections. new york: Charles Scribner’s Sons. Willetts, William. 1958. Chinese Art. 2 vols. new york: George braziller. Wills, Geofffrey. 1964. Jade. london: Acro Publications. Wills, John E., Jr. 1988. “Tribute, defensiveness, and dependency: Uses and limits of Some basic ideas about Mid-Qing dynasty Foreign relations.” American Neptune 48/4: 225–29. . 1993. “European Consumption and Asian Production in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries.” in Consumption and the World of Goods, edited by John brewer and roy Porter, 133–47. london: routledge. Wilson, Joan. 1972. “A Phenomenon of Taste: The China Ware of Queen Mary ii.” Apollo 96/8: 116–23. Wilson, Kathleen. 1995. The Sense of the People: Politics, Culture and Imperialism in England, 1715–1785. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995. Wilson, richard l. 1989. “The Tea Ceremony: Art and Etiquette for the Tokugawa Era.” in The Japan of the Shoguns: The Tokugawa Collection, edited by denise l. bissonnette, 63– 73. Translated by Judith Terry and Shiro nada. Exhib. cat. Montreal: Montreal Museum of Fine Arts. Wilson, Timothy. 1987. Ceramic Art of the Renaissance. Exhib. cat. Austin: University of Texas Press. Wink, André. 1991–2004. Al-Hind: The Making of the Indo-Islamic World. 3 vols. vol. 1 (1991): Early Medieval India and the Expansion of Islam. vol. 2 (1997): The Slave Kings and the Islamic Conquest. vol. 3 (2004): Indo-Islamic Society, 14th–15th Centuries. leiden: brill. Winterbottom, Matthew. 2002. “ ‘Such Massy Pieces of Plate’: Silver Furnishings in the English royal Palaces, 1660–1702.” Apollo 156/8: 19–26. Witteveen, Joop. 1991. “of Sugar and Porcelain: Table decoration in the netherlands in the 18th Century.” in Feasting and Fasting: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food & Cookery, 212–20. london: Prospect books. Woldbye, vibek. 1984. “Shells and the decorative Arts.” Apollo 120/1: 56–61. Wolters, o. W. 1986. “restudying Some Chinese Writings on Sriwijaya.” Indonesia 42: 1–41. Wong, Anita, ed. 2006. Tea, Wine, and Poetry: Qing Dynasty Literati and Their Drinking Vessels. Exhib. cat. Hong Kong: University Art Museum and Art Gallery, University of Hong Kong. Wong, Grace. 1978. “Chinese blue-and-White Porcelain and its Place in the Maritime Trade of China.” in Chinese Blue and White Ceramics, edited by S. T. yeo and Jean Martin, 51– 92. Singapore: oxford University Press. Wong, r. bin. 2001. “Entre monde et nation: les regions braudéliennes en Asie.” Annales 66/1: 9–16. —. 2002. “The Search for European differences and domination in the Early Modern World: A view from Asia.” AHR 107/2: 447–69. Wood, nigel. 1999. Chinese Glazes: Their Origins, Chemistry, and Recreation. london and Philadelphia: A. & C. black and University of Pennsylvania Press. ———. 1999–2000. “Chinese Glazes.” TOCS 64: 93–94. ———, and rose Kerr. 1992. “Graciousness to Wild Austerity: Aesthetic dimensions of Korean Ceramics Explored through Technology.” O 23/12: 39–42. Woodside, Alexander. 2006. Lost Modernities: China, Vietnam, Korea, and the Hazards of World History. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Woodward, C. S. 1974. Oriental Ceramics at the Cape of Good Hope, 1652–1795. Cape Town: A. A. balkema. Wriggins, Sally Hovey. 1996. Xuanzang: A Buddhist Pilgrim on the Silk Road. boulder, Co: Westview Press. Wright, H. T. 1993. “Trade and Politics on the Eastern littoral of Africa, a.d. 800–1300.” in Shaw 1993: 658–72. Wright, Thomas, ed. 1854. The Travels of Marco Polo. Translated by William Marsden. london: Henry G. bohn. Wu Hung. 1995. Monumentality in Early Chinese Art and Architecture. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ———. 1996. “The Painted Screen.” Critical Inquiry 23/1: 37–79. —. 1999. “The Art and Architecture of the Warring States Period.” in loewe and Shaughnessy 1999: 651–744. xiong, victor Cunrui. 2000. Sui-Tang Chang’an: A Study in the Urban History of Medieval China. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Center for Chinese Studies. yamamura, Kozo, ed. 1990. The Cambridge History of Japan, vol. 3: Medieval Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ———. 1990a. “The Growth of Commerce in Medieval Japan.” in yamamura 1990: 344–95. yang yang. 1996. “The Chinese Jade Culture.” in Mysteries of Ancient China: New Discoveries from the Early Dynasties, edited by Jessica rawson, 225–31. Exhib. cat. new york: George braziller. yap, C. T., and younan Hua. 1994. “A Study of Chinese Porcelain raw Materials from ding, xing, Gongxian and dehua Wares.” A 36/1: 63–76. yonan, Michael E. 2004. “veneers of Authority: Chinese lacquers in Maria Theresa’s vienna.” ECS 37/4: 652–72. young, Hilary. 1995. “From the Potteries to St Petersburg: Wedgwood and the Making and Selling of Ceramics.” in The Genius of Wedgwood, edited by Hilary young, 9–20. Exhib. cat. london: victoria and Albert Museum. ——. 1999. English Porcelain, 1745–95: Its Makers, Design, Marketing and Consumption. london: victoria and Albert Museum. yü, Chün-fang. 1998. “Ming buddhism.” in Mote and Twitchett 1998: 893–952. ——. 2001. Kuan-yin: The Chinese Transformation of Avalokitesvara. new york: Columbia University Press. yu Peichin. 2007. “The imprint of Collecting: The Circulation of northern Song ru Ware in the 18th Century Qing Palace.” O 38/1: 48–55. yuan, Tsing. 1978. “The Porcelain industry at Ching-te-chen, 1500–1700.” Ming Studies 6: 45–54. yuka Kadoi. 2002. “Cloud Patterns: The Exchange of ideas between China and iran under the Mongols.” OA 48/2: 25–36. yun yong-i. 1994. “Satsuma and Arita Pottery.” in Son 1994: 126–31. Zacks, richard. 2002. The Pirate Hunter: The True Story of Captain Kidd. new york: Hyperion. Zainie, Carla M. 1979. “The Sinan Shipwreck and Early Muromachi Art Collections.” OA 25/1: 103–14. Zhang, Z. H., J. G. liou, and r. G. Coleman. 1984. “An outline of the Plate Tectonics of China.” Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 95: 295–312. Zhang Fukang. 1986. “The origin of High-Fired Glazes in China.” in Scientific and Technological Insights on Ancient Pottery and Porcelain, edited by Shanghai institute of Ceramics, 40–45. beijing: Science Press. Zhang Pusheng. 1991. “notes on Some recently discovered Glazed Tiles from the Former Ming Palace in nanjing.” O 22/3: 62–63. Zheng Hesheng and Zheng yijun, eds. 1980–83. Zheng He xia xiyang yangzi liao huibian (Collected Sources on Zheng He’s voyages). 3 vols. Jinan: Qilu Publishing House. This page intentionally left blank