# Author's note / Prologue Hello World

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History\02-Books\Alice Rawsthorn：《Hello World Where Design Meets Life》，2013\auto\Alice Rawsthorn：《Hello World Where Design Meets Life》，2013.md

## Author's note

It always strikes me as odd that as powerful a force as design should so often be misunderstood and trivialized. Design determines the quality of so many aspects of our lives, and as we cannot avoid its influence, the more fully we understand it, the likelier we are to be able to turn it to our advantage.

The more I have learnt about design, the more intrigued I have become, particularly in the seven years that I have had the pleasure of writing a weekly column about design for the International Herald Tribune. Many of the themes I have discussed there are addressed in this book, but in greater depth than a newspaper column allows.

Anyone who writes about design has to explain what they mean by it. In Hello World, as in the International Herald Tribune, I have interpreted it as broadly as possible, not only as a professional discipline, but also as an intuitive process that existed long before there was a word to describe it. This book addresses design's role in planning third-century BC military campaigns and helping eighteenth-century pirates to terrorize their victims into speedy surrender, as well as in developing new objects, information systems, and smarter ways of dealing with data deluge and recycling trash. Although architecture is an important area of design, it is addressed only fleetingly because it operates on such a different scale to other fields that I felt it might be distorting to include it.

Discovering the power and nuances of design has given me great happiness over the years. I hope that reading Hello World will help others to share my enjoyment.

It would have been impossible to write Hello World without the help and encouragement of many people, above all Simon Prosser, who has been a wonderfully empathic and inspiring publisher. I am immensely grateful to Simon and his colleagues at Hamish Hamilton and Penguin – in particular to Anna Kelly, Caroline Craig, Caroline Pretty and Marissa Chen – as well as to my literary agent Derek Johns and his team at AP Watt.

One of the pleasures of publishing this book has been the chance to work with one of my favourite designers, Irma Boom. I was delighted when she agreed to design Hello World, and am thrilled with the result. I am deeply grateful to Irma not only for designing the book so beautifully, but for being such fun to work with. I also owe special thanks to my dear friend Paola Antonelli for being so generous with her time and knowledge in reading and commenting on an early draft of the text.

I would like to thank my colleagues at the International Herald Tribune and New York Times Media Group, and all of the friends who have supported me throughout the process of researching and writing Hello World, with special thanks to the following for their contributions: Stuart Comer; Hilary Cottam; Emily King and Matthew Slotover; Michael Maharam and Sabine Steinmair; Farshid Moussavi; Aimee Mullins; Louise Neri; Hans Ulrich Obrist; and Emily Pilloton.

My thanks are due to the staff of the institutions where I conducted much of the research for the book: the Hyman Kreitman Reading Rooms of Tate Library at Tate Britain in London; the Museum Library of the Museum of Modern Art in New York; and the National Art Library at the Victoria & Albert Museum in London.

I am immensely grateful to all of the individuals and institutions who have so generously allowed us to use their images in Hello World: Matthew Barney and Gladstone Gallery; Black Mountain College Museum + Art Center and the Estate of Hazel Larsen Archer; Christoph Büchel and Hauser & Wirth; Mariana Cook; Ben Fry; Jill Greenberg; IBM Corporate Archives; Juliet Kepes Stone and the György Kepes Foundation; Mathieu Lehanneur; Tomáš Gabzdil Libertíny; The Library of the London School of Economics & Political Science; Julia Lohmann; Christien Meindertsma; Aimee Mullins; Hattula Moholy-Nagy

and the Estate of László Moholy-Nagy; Sanga Moses and Eco-fuel Africa; the Otto and Marie Neurath Isotype Collection Department of Typography & Graphic Communication, University of Reading; Participle Ltd; Project H Design; Something & Son; Stamen; Thonet Gmbh; Unfold; University of Manchester; and Z33.

Many remarkable designers, historians and commentators have inspired my thinking and writing on design, as have their colleagues in other fields. I owe them all a huge debt, especially: Ken Adam; David Adjaye; Ai Weiwei; Gail Anderson; Lisa Armstrong; Edward Barber; Paul Barnes; David Batchelor; Yves Béhar; Berg; Michael Bierut; Iwona Blazwick; Adam Bly; Achim Borchardt-Hume; Ronan and Erwan Bouroullec; Constantin and Laurene Leon Boym; Michael Braungart; Tim Brown; Eliza Brownjohn; Buckminster Fuller Institute; Margaret Calvert; Emily Campbell; Matthew Carter; Aric Chen; David and Evelyn Chipperfield; Nathaniel Corum; Michael Craig-Martin; Ilse Crawford; Eames Demetrios; Farrokh Derakhshani; Chris Dercon; Digital Forming; Anthony Dunne; Ben Evans; Helen Evenden; Rolf Fehlbaum; Jamie Fobert; Studio Formafantasma; Elena and Norman Foster; Christopher Frayling; Tobias Frere-Jones; Ben Fry; Naoto Fukasawa; Tomáš Gabzdil Libertíny; Beatrice Galilee; Martino Gamper; Piero Gandini; Nicolas Ghesquière; Graphic Thought Facility; Konstantin Grcic; Joseph Grima; Joost Grootens; Martí Guixé; Steve Haake; Pierre Hardy; Jaime Hayon; Thomas Heatherwick; Hugh Herr; Jonathan Hoefler; Richard Hollis; Gary Hustwit; Kigge Hvid; INDEX: Design to Improve Life; David James; Hella Jongerius; Frith Kerr; Eric Kindel; Kram/Weisshaar; Clémence and Didier Krzentowski; Joris Laarman; Mathieu Lehanneur; Amanda Levete; Armand Limnander; Liu Zhizhi; Emma Loades; Julia Lohmann; William McDonough; Brendan McGetrick; John Maeda; Enzo Mari; Bruce Mau; J. Mays; Christien Meindertsma; Alessandro Mendini; Andy Merritt; Metahaven; M/M (Paris); Bill Moggridge; Jasper Morrison; Murray Moss and Franklin Getchell: Nicholas Negroponte; Marc Newson; Elaine O'Hanrahan; Jay Osgerby; Oscar Peña; James Peto; Julia Peyton-Jones; Phoebe Philo; Paul Polak; Potion; Fiona Raby; Dieter Rams; Carlo Ratti; David de Rothschild; Lindy Roy; Zoë Ryan; Sanga Moses; Peter Saville and Anna Blessmann; Paula Scher; Louise Schouwenberg; Libby Sellers; Tom Shakespeare; Britte Siepenkothen; Raf Simons; Cameron Sinclair; Paul Smith;

Paul Smyth; Lisa Strausfeld; Studio Museum Achille Castiglioni; Stefano Tonchi; Edward Tufte; Suneet Śingh Tuli; Alexander von Vegesack; Wedgwood Museum; Alasdhair Willis; and those who wish to remain anonymous. Thank you.

## Prologue Hello World

1. Martin Pawley, Buckminster Fuller: How Much Does the Building Weigh? (1990; London: Trefoil Publications, 1995), p. 12.

2. Elizabeth Flock, 'Dennis Ritchie, Father of C Programming Language and Unix, Dies at 70', Washington Post, 13 October 2011, http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/ blogpost/post/dennis-ritchie-father-of-c-programming-language-and-unix-diesat-70/2011/10/13/glQADGNbhL\_blog.html; Steve Lohr, 'Dennis Ritchie, Trailblazer in Digital Era, Dies at 70', The New York Times, 13 October 2011, http://www.nytimes. com/2011/10/14/technology/dennis-ritchie-programming-trailblazer-dies-at-70.html

