# Conclusion: Classes andClassifications If I have to choose the lesset of two evils, I choose neither Karl Kraus Taste is an acquired disposition to 'differentiate' and 'appreciate',' as Kant says—in orher words, to establish and mark differences by a process of distinction which is nor (or not necessarily) a distinct knowledge, in Leibniz's sense, since it ensures recognition (in the ordinary sense) of the object withour implying knowledge of che distinctive features which define it.2 The schemes of the habitus, the primary forms of classification, owe their specific efhcacy to che fact thar they function below rhe level of consciousness and language, beyond the teach of introspective scrutiny or control by the will. Orienting practices practically, they embed what some would mistakenly call values in the most automatic gestures or the apparently most msignificant techniques of the bodyways of walking or blowing one's nose, ways of eating or calking—and engage the most fundamental principles of construction and evaluation of the social world, those which most directly express the division of labour (berween the classes, the age groups and the sexes) or the division of the work of dominarion, in divisions berwcen bodies and between relarions to rhe body which borrow more fearures than one, as if to give rhem the appearances of naturalness, from the sexual division of labour and the divisiol of sexual labour. Taste is a practical mastery ofdistributions which makes it possible to sense or intuit what is likely (or unlikely) to befall\_and therefore to befit-an individual occupying a given position in social space. Ir functions as a sort of social orientation, a 'sense of one's place', guiding the occupants of a given place in social space towards che social positions adjusred to their properties, and towards the pracrices or goods which befit the occupants of that position. It implies a practical anticiparion of what the social meaning and value of che chosen practice or thing will probably be, given cheir distribution in social space and the practical knowledge the other agenrs have of the correspondence between goods and groups. Thus, the social agents whom the sociologist classifes are producers ot only of classifable acts but also of acts of classification which are themselves classifed. Knowledge of che social world has co cake into account a practical knowledge of this worlld which pre-exists it and which ir musr not fail to include in irs object, alchough, as a firsr stage, this knowledge has to be consticuced against the partial and interested repre. sentations provided by practical knowledge. To speak of habitus is to include in che object the knowledge which the agents, who are part of the object, have of the object, and the contribution this knowledge makes to the reality of the object. But it is not only a marter of putting back inco che real world that one is endeavouring to know, a knowledge of the real world that contributes to its reality (and also to the force it exetts). It means conferring on chis knowłedge a genuinely consticutive power, che very power it is denied when, in the name of an objectivisr conception of objectivity, one makes common knowledge or theorerical knowledge a mere reflection of che real worlld. Those who suppose they are producing a materialist theory of knowledge when they make knowledge a passive recording and abandon che 'active aspect' of knowledge to idealism, as Marx complains in che Theses on Feuerbach, forget thar all knowledge, and in particular all knowledge of the social world, is an act of construction implementing schemes of thought and expression, and chat betwcen condicions of existence and praccices or represencacions there incervenes che struccuring activicy of (he agents, who, far from reacting mechanically to mechanical stimulations, respond to the invitarions or chreats of a worlld whose meaning they have helped ro produce. However, the principle of this structuring activity is not, as an intellectualist and anti-generic idealism would have it.a sysrem of universal forms and categories but a system of internalized, embodied schemes which, having been constitured in che course of collective history, are acquired in rhe course of individual history and function in their praclical scate, for practice (and not for the sake of pure knowledge). ## Embodied Social Structures 'This means, in rhe frst place, chat social science, in constructing the social worlld, cakes note of the fact char agents are, in their ordinary practice, the subjects of acts of construction of the social world; but also that it aims, among other chings, to describe che social genesis of the principles of construction and seeks the basis of these principles in che social world. Breaking with the anri-genetic prejudice which often accomrions of che use ma e of these principles according to the position occu. pied in the distributions (questions which all require the use of statistics). The cognitive structures which social agents implement in rheir prac. ticai knowledge of the social world are intemalized, 'embodied' social structures. The practical knowiedge of the social world that is presup. posed by reasonable' behaviour prithin it implements classificatory schemes (or 'forms of classihcation', 'mental structures' or 'symbolic forms'--apart from their connorations, these expressions are virtually interchangeable), hisrorical schemes of perception and appreciation which are the product of the objective division into classes (age groups, genders, social classes) and which function below the level of conscious. ness and discourse. Being the product of the incorporation of the fundamencal structures of a society, these principles of division ate common to all the agents of the sociery and make possible the production ofa common, meaningful worlld, a common-sense world. All the agents in a given social formation share a set of basic perceptual schemes, vhich reccive the beginnings of objectification in the pairs of antagonistic adjectives commonly used to classify and qualify persons or objects in the most varied areas of practice. The network of oppositions between high (sublime, elevated, pure) and low (vulgar, low, modest), spirirual and material, fne (refined, elegant) and coaise (heavy, fat, crude, brural), light (subtle, lively, shatp, adroit) and heavy (slow, chick, blunt, laborious, clumsy), free and forced, broad and narrow, or, in as). other dimension, berween unique (rare, different, distinguished, exclu sive, exceptional, smgular, novel) and common (ordinary, banal, commonplace, crivial, routine), brilliant (intelligeng) and dull (obscute, grey', mediocre), is the matrix of all the commonplaces which find such ready acceptance because behind them lies the whole social order. The network has its ultimate source in che opposition berween che élite of rhe dominant and che 'mass' of the dominated, a contingent, dis organized mulriplicity, interchangeable and innumerable, existing only statistically. These mythic roots only have to be alowed to take their oisexclusiveness. The seemingly most forınal oppositions within chis social mythology social order. the opposition berween the dominant and the dominated, which is inscribe in the division oflabour, and che opposition, rooted in the division of the labour of domination, between two principles of domination, two powers, dominant and dominated, temporal and spiritual, material and intellectual etc. It follows that the map of social space pre. vioudy Put forward can also be read as a strict cable of che historically constituted and acquired categories which organize the idea of thesocial world in the minds of all che subjects belonging to that world and shape:d by it. The same classificatory schemes (and the oppositions in which they are expressed) can function, by being specified, in fields orga. nized around polar positions, whether in the field of the dominant class, organized around an opposition homologous to the opposirion constituting the field of the socia) classes, or in the field of cultural production, which is itself organized around oppositions which reproduce the structure of the dominant class and are homologous to it (e.g., the opposition berween bourgeois and avant-garde theatre). So the fundamenral opposition constantly supports second, third or n' rank oppositions (those which underlie the 'purest' ethical or aestheric judgements, with their high or low sentiments, their facile or difficult notions of beauty, their light or heavy scyles etc.), while euphemizing irself to the point of misrecognizabilicy. Thus, the opposirion berween the heavy and the light, which, in a number of its uses, especially scholastic ones, ser es to distinguish popular or petir-bourgeois tastes from bourgeois castes, can be used by theatre ctiticis aimed at the dominant fraction of the dominant class to express the relarionship berween 'incellecrual' theatre, which is condemned for its laborjious' prerensions and 'oppressive' didacticism, and 'bourgeois' thearre, which is praised for its tact and its artof skimmmg over surfaces. By contrast, 'intellectual' criticism, by a simple inversion of values, ex-Presses che rclationship in a scarcely modified form of the same opposition, with lighoness, identified with frivolicy, being opposed to profun. dicy. Similarly, it can be shown thar the opposition berween right and left, which, in its basic form, concerns che relationship berween the dominant and che dominated, can also, by means of a first transformation, tions within the dominant class; the words right and left then meaning close to the meaning they have in expressions like theatre or 'lefr-bank' heatre. With a further degree of 'de-realizar artistic or titetary group, and so on. able. Each particular use of one of hese pairs only rakes on its full mean. usually implicitsince it is a question of the system of self-evidences and presuppositions thar are taken for granted in the feld in relation to which the speakers' straregies are defned. But each of the couples speci. fed by usage has for undertones all the other uses it might have because ofthe homologies berween the felds which allow transfers from one field to another- -and also all the other couples which are interchangeabe with iz, within a nuance or two (e.g., hne/crude for light/heavy), thar is, in slighcly different contexts. The fact char the semi-codified oppositions contained in ordinary language reappear, with very similar values, as the basis of the dominant vision of the social world, in all class-divided social formarions (consider the tendency to see the 'people' as the site of totally uncontrolled appe. tites and sexualiry) can be understood once one knows that, reduced to their formal scructure, the same fundamental relarionships, precisely those which express the major relarions of order (high/low, strong,/weak etc.) reappear in all class-divided societies. And the recurrence of the mi adic structure srudied by Georges Dumézil, which Georges Duby shows in the case of feudal society to be roored in che social strucrures it leginmates, may wel be, like the invariant oppositions in which the relation ship of domination is expressed, simply a necessary outcome of the intersection of the two principles of division which are at work in all class-divided socieries—the division berween the dominant and the dom inared, and che division berween the different fractions compering for dominance in the name of different principles, belfatores (warriors) and oratores (scholars) in feudal society, businessmen and intellectuals now. ## Knowledge without Concepts Thus, chrough che diferentiared and differentiating conditionings asso ciared with the different conditions of existence, chrough the exclu and inclusions, unions (marriages, affairs, alliances etc.) and divisions (mcompatibilities, separarions, struggles etc.) which govemn the soci strucrure and the strucruring force it exerts, through all the hierarchies linits, a practical anticipation of objective limits acquired by experience of objective limits, a 'sense of one's place' which leads one to exclude oneself from the goods, persons, places and so forth from which one is excluded. FXC The sense of limits imphes forgetting the limits. One of the most important effects of the correspondence berween real divisions and practical principles of division, berween social structures and mental strucrures, is undoubredly the fact thar primary experience of the social world is that of doxa, an adherence to relarions of order which, because they strucrure inseparably borh the real world and che thought world, are accepted as self-evident. Primary perception of the social world, far from being a simple mechanical reftection, is always an act of cognirion irivolving princi. ples of construction that are exrernal to the constructed object grasped in its immediacy; but at the same time it is an act of miscognition, implyirig the most absolute form of recognition of the social order. Domir ated agents, who assess the value of their position and theit characteristics by applying a system of schemes of perception and appreciation which is the embodiment of the objecrive laws whereby their value is objectively constituted, tend to attribure to themselves what the distribution atrcribures to chem, refusing whar they are refused (That's nor for the likes of us'), adjusting cheir expectacions to cheir chances, defining themselves as the sta.blished order defines chem, reproducing in their verdict on themselves the verdict the economy pronounces on them, in a word, condemning chemselves to what is in any case their tot, ta heausou, as Plaro put it, consenting to be whar they have to be, 'modest', 'humble' and 'obscure' Thus the conservation of the social order is decisively reir.- forced by what Durkheim called 'logical conformiry',6 i.e., the orchesrration of caregories of perceprion of the social world, which, being adjusted to the divisions of the esrablished order (and thereby to the in. rerestsof those who dominate it) and common to all minds strucrured in accordance with chose structures, present every appearance of objective necessity. The sysrem of classificarory schemes is opposed to a raxonomy based on explicit and explicitly concerted principles in the same way char the dispositions consticuring raste or erhos (which are dimensions of it) are opposed to aesthetics or ethics. The sense of social realities thar is acquired in the confrontarion with a particular form of social necessicy is what makes it possible to act as if one knew the structure of the social world, one's place within it and the distances t preme form of materialistic vulgarity, the reduction of che unique to the class, che explananon of the higher by the lower, the application to the would-be unclassifiable of explanatory models fr only for the bourgeois', the petit-bourgeois, the limited and common, scarcely inclines intllectuals to conceptualize the sense of social position, still less their own position and the perverse relation to the social worlld it forces on them. (The perfect example is Sartre, whose whole work and whole existence revolve around this afrmation of the intellectual's subversive point of honour. This is seen particularlly clearly in the passage in Being and Nothingness on the psychol. ogy of Flaubert, which can be read as a desperate effort to save the person, in the person of the intellectual, an uncreated creator, begotten by his own works, haunted by 'the project of being God', from every sort of reduction to the gencral, the rype, the class, and to affirm the transcendence of the ego against 'what Comte called morerialism, that is, explaining the higher by the lower') The practical mastety of classification has nothing in common with the reflexive mastery that is required in order to construct a taxonomy that is simultaneously coherent and adequate to social reality. The practical 'science' of positions in social space is the competence presupposed by the art of behaving comme il faut wirh persons and things that have and give 'class' ('smart' or 'unsmart'), finding the right distance, by a sort of practical calculation, neither too close ('getting familiar') nor too far ('being distant'), playing with objective distance by emphasizing it (being ‘aloof, 'stand-ofsh') or symbolically denying it (being ap proachable,''hobnobbing'). lt in no way implies the capacity to situate oncself explicitly in the classihcation (as so many surveys on social class ask people to do), still less to descrjibe this classification in any sysrematic way and state its principles. There is no better opportuniry to observe the functioning of this sense of the place one occupies than in condescension strategies, which presuppose both in the author of the strategy and in the victims a practical knowledge of the gap between the place really occupied and the place fictitiously indicated by the behaviour adopted (e.g.. in French, use of the familiar ¿u). When the person naturally' identifed with a Rolls Royce, a top hat or golt (sce appendix 4) takes the metro, sports a ßat cap (or a polo neck) or plays football, his practices take on their meaning in relation ro this attribution by status, which continues to colour the real practices, as if by superimposi tion. But one could also point to the variations chat Charlles Baly obserucd in the style of speech according to zhe social gap between rhe interlocurors. or the variarions in pronunciation according to the addressce: rhe speaker accent. the practical 'artributive judgement' whereby one puts someone in a class by speaking to him in a cerain way (chereby putting oneself in a class at the same time) has nothing to do with an intellectual operation implying conscious reference to explicit indices and the implementation of casses produced by and for the concept. The same classificatory oppo sition (rich/poor, young/old etc.) can be applied at any point in the disriburion and reproduce its whole range within any of its segments (common sense tells us that one is always richer or poorer than someone, superior or infcrior to someone, more right-wing or left-wing than someone--but this does not entail an elementary relarivism). In a scries of incerviews (n = 30) on the social classes, based on a test which involved classifying thirty occuparions (wrirren on cards), the re. spondents often first asked how many classes the set should be divided into, and chen severa) times modifed the number of classes and the criteria of claxsification, so as to take account of the different dimensions of each occuparion and therefore the diferent respects in which it could be evaluated; or they spontaneously suggested that they could carry on sub.dividing indef. nitely. (They thereby exposed the artificiality of the situarion created by a theoretical innquiry which called for the adoption of a theoretical attirude to which, as their initia) uncertainty indicated, the tespondents were quite unaccustomed.) And yet they almost always agreed on the ranks of the different occuparions when taken rwo by two. (Lenski made similar obscrvations in an experimenc in which the respondents were asked to rank the families in a small town in New England.) It is not suiprising that it is possible to faul the practical sense of so cial space which lies behind class-attributive judgement; the sociologists who use their respondents'self-conrradictions as an argument for deny. ing the existence of classes simply reveal that they understand noching of how this 'sense' works or of the artificial situation in which they are making it work. In fact, whether it is used to situate oneself in social space or to place others, the sense of social space, like every practical sense, always refers to the particular situation in which it has to orient practices. This explains, for example, the divergences betwcen surveys of the represenration of the classes in a small town ('community studies') and surveys of class on a nation-wide scale." But if, as has often been ob. served, sespondents do not agree either on the number of divisions they make within the group in question, or on the limits of the 'strara' and the criteria used to define them, this is not simply due to the fuzziness in ercnt in all practical logics. 1t is also because people's image of the classificarion is a function of their position within ir. So noching is further removed from an act of cognition, as conccived by the mtelecrualist tradition, than this sense of the social seructure, perceiving favous' and the capacity to discern aestheric values'-so bodily automarisms. Everything takes place as if the social conditionings linked to a social condition tended to inscribe the relation to the social world in a lasting, generalized relation to one's own body, a way of bear. ing one's body, present ing it to others, moving it, making space for it, which gives the body its social physiognomy. Bodily hexis, a basic di. mension of the sense of social orientation, is a practical way of experienc. ing and expressing one's own sense of social value. One's relationship to the social world and to one's proper place in it is never mote clearly expressed than in the space and rime one feels enticled o cake from others; more precisely, in the space one claims with one's body in physical space, through a bearing and gesrutes that are self -assured or reserved, expansive or constricted ('presence' or 'msignifcance') and with one's speech in rime, through the interaction time one appropriares and the self-assured or aggressive, careiess or unconscious way one appropriates it. There is no berter image of the logic of socialization, whichtrears the body as a 'memory-jogger", than those complexes of gestures, postures and words--simple interjections or favourite clichéswhich only have to be slipped into, like a theatrical costume, to awaken, by the evocative power of bodily mimesis, a universe of ready-made feelings and experiences. The elementary actions of bodily gymnastics, especially the specifcally sexual, biologically pre-constructed aspect of it, charged with social meanings and values, function as the most basic of metaphors, capable of evoking a whole relationship to the worlld, 'lofty' or 'submissive', 'expan. sive' or 'narrow', and through it a whole world. The practical choices' of the sense of social orientation no more presuppose a representation of the range of possibilities than does the choice of phonemes; these enacted choices imply no acts of choosing. The logocentrism and intellectualism of intellectuals, combined with the prejudice inherent in the science which rakes as its object the psyche, the soul, the mind, consciousness. represenrations, nor to mention the petir-bourgeois prerension to the searus of person', have prevented us from seeing thar, as Ieibniz put it, we are auromatons in three-quarters of whar we do', and thar the ulrimare values, as they are caled, are never anything other than the primary, primitive disposirions of the body, 'visceral' rastes and distastes, in which the group's most vital interests are embedded. the things on which one is prepared to stake one's own and other people's bodies. The sense of discinction, che discretio (discrimination) which demands that certain things be brought together and others kept aparr, which excludes all misalliances and all unnatural unions--i.e., all unions contrary to the common classificarion, to the diacrisis (separation) which is the basis of collective and individual identity-responds with visceral,murderous horror, absolute disgust, metaphysical fury, to everything which lies in Plato's 'hybrid zone', everything which passes understanding, that is, the embodied axonomy, which, by challenging the principles of the incarnate social order, especially the socially constituted principles of the sexual division of labour and the division of sexual labour, violares the mental order, scandalously Aouring common sense. It can be shown thar socializstion tends to constitute the body as an analogical operaror establishing alt sorts of practical equivalences berween che diferent divisions of the social world--divisions between the sexes, between the age groups and between the social classcs or, more precisely, berween the meanings and values associated with che individuals occupying practically equivalent positions in the spaces defined by these divisions. And it can be shown thar it does so by integrating the symbolism of social domi. nation and submission and the symbolism of sexual dominarion and sub. mission into the same body language—as is seen in eriquerte, which uses che opposition berween rhe straight and the curved or, which amounts to the same thing, berween raising (oneself) and lowering (oneself), as one of che generative principles of the marks (of respect, contempt etc.) used to symbolize hierarchical relations. ## Advantageous Attributions The basis of the pertinence principle which is implemented in perceiving the social world and which defines all the characteristics of persons or things which can be perceived, and perceived as positively or negatively interesting, by all chose who apply these schemes (a'nother definition of common sense), is based on nothing other than the interest the individuals or groups in question have in recognizing a fearure and in identifying the individual in question as a member of the set defined by thar feature; interest in che aspect observed is never completely independent of the advantage of observing it. This can be clearly seen in all the classihcations built around a srigmatized fearure which, like the everyday opposition between homosexuals and heterosexuals, isolare the interesring trait from all the rest (i.e., all ocher forms of sexuality), which remain indiferent and undifferentiared. It is even clearer in all 'labelling judgements', hich are in fact accusations, calegoremet in the original Aristorelian sense, and which, like insuirs, only wish to know one of the properties consrituting the social identity of an individual or group (You're just a '), regarding, for example, the married homosexual or converted Jew as a closer gucen' or covert Jew, and thereby in a sense doubly Jewish or homosexual. The logic of the stigma reminds us that social identiry is che stake in a struggle in which the stigmatized individual or group, and, more generally, any individual or group insofar as he or it is a potential objcct of categorization, can only retaliate against che partial perception which limits it to one of its characteristics by highlighting, in its self gling to impose the taxonomy most favourable to it charactristis. or least to give to the dominant taxonomy the content most fattering to what it has and what it is Those who are surprised by the paradoxes that ordinary logic and language engender when they apply their divisions to continuous magnt rudes forget the paradoxes inherent in treating language as a putely logical instrument and also forget the social situation in which such a relationship to language is possible. The contradictions or paradoxes to which ordinary language classifications lead do not derive, as all forms of positivism suppose, from some essential inadequacy of ordinary language, but from the fact that these socio-logical acts are not directed towards the pursuit of logical coherence and that, unlike philological, logical or linguistic uses of language-which ought really to be called scholastic, sinice they all presuppose schole, i.e., leisure, distance from urgency and neces sity, the absence of vital stakes, and the scholastic institution which in most social universes is the only institution capable of providing all these—they obey the logic of the parti pris, which, as im a court-room, juxtaposes not logical judgements, subject to the sole criterion of coherence, but charges and defences. Quite apart from all that is implied in the oppositions, which logicians and even linguists manage to forget, be. tween the art of convincing and the art of persuading, it is clear chat scholastic usage of language is to the orator's, advocate's or politician's usage what the classificatory systems devised by the logician or statistician concerned with coherence and empirical adequacy are to the care gorizations and categoremes of daily life. As the etymology suggests, the latter belong to the logic of the trial.'3 Every real inquiry into the divisions of the social world has to analyse the interests associated with membership or non-membership. As is shown by the attention devoted to strategic, 'frontier' groups such as the 'labour aristocracy', which hesitates between class struggle and class collaboration, or the cadres', a category of bureaucratic statistics, whose nominal, doubly negative unity conceals its real dispersion both from the interested parties' and from their opponents and most observers, the laying down of boundaries between the classes is inspired by the strategic aim of counting in' or 'being counted in', 'cataloguing' or ‘annexing', when it is not the simple recording of a legally guaranteed state of the power relation between the classified groups. Leaving aside all cases in which the statutory imposition of an arbitrary boundary (such as a 30-kilo limit on baggage or the rule that a vehicle over two tons is a van) suffices to eliminate the dificulties that arise from the sophism of the heap of grain,4 boundaries even the most fommallooking ones, such as those between age-groups--do indeed freeze a particular state of social struggrles, i.e., a given stare of the distribution of advantages and obligations, such as the right to pensions or cheap fares, compulsory schooling or military service. And if we are amused by Al. phonse Allais's stoty of the father who pulls the communication cord to srop the train at the very moment his child becomes three years old (and so needs a ticket to travel), it is because we immediarely see the socio. logical absurdity of an imaginary variation which is as impeccably logical as those on which logicians base their beloved paradoxes. Here the limits are frontiers to be attacked or defended with all one's strength, and the classifcatory systems which fx them are not so much means of know)- edge as means of power, harnessed to social functions and overtly or covertly aimed at satisfying the interests of a group. A number of ethical, aesthetic, psychiatric or forensic classifications that are produced by the institutional sciences', not to mention those produced and inculcated by the educational sysrem, are similarly subordinated to social functions, although they derive their specific efhicacy from their apparent neutrality. They are produced in accordance with the specific logic, and in the spccific language, of relatively autonomous fields, and they combine a real dependence on the classificatory schemes of the dominant habitus (and ultimately on the social structures of which these are the product) with an apparent independence. The latter enahles them to help to legitimate a particular state of the classification struggle and the class struggle. Perhaps the most typical example of these semi-autonomous systems of classifcation is the system of adjectives which underpins scholastic ‘appreciations'.' Commonplaces and classificatory systems are thus the stake of struggles between the groups they characrerize and counterpose, who fight over them while striving to turn them to their own advanrage. Georges Duby shows how the model of the three orders, which fixed a state of the social structure and aimed to make it permanent by codifying it, was able to be used simultaneously and successively by antagonistic groups: first by the bishops, who had devised it, againsr the heretics, the monks and the knights; then by the aristocracy, against the bishops and the king; and finally by the king, who, by setting himself up as the absolute subject of the classifying operation, as a principle external and superior to the classes it generated (unlike the three orders, who were subjects but also bjects, judges but als parties), assigned each group its place in the s cial order, and established himself as an unassailable vantage-point. in the same way it can be shown that the schemes and commonplaces which ptovide images of the different forms of domination, the opposition between the sexes and age-groups as well as the opposition berween the generations, are similarly manipulated. The young' can accept the dehnition that their elders offer them, take advantage of the temporary licence they are allowed in many societies ('Youth must have its Aing'), do whar is assigned to them, revel in the 'specific virtues' of youth, virtù, virility, enthusiasm, and get on with their own business-knighterrantry for le scions of the mediaeval aristocracy." love and violence for che yourh of Renaissance Florence, and every form of regulared, ludic wildness (spore rock erc.) for contemporary adolescents in short. allow themselves o be kept in the state ofyouth', that is, irresponsibiliry, enjoying the fre. dom of irresponsible behav iour in return for renouncing responsibiliry.'\* In situations of specific crisis, when che order of successions is threatened, 'young people', refusing to remain consigned ro 'youth', tend to consign the 'old' to 'old age'. Wanting to cake the responsibilities which dehne adults (in che sense of socialy complere persons), rhey must push rhe holders of responsibiliriesinto chat form of irresponsibility which defnes old age, or rather retirement. The wisdom and prudence claimed by the elders then collapse into conservarism, archaism or, quire simply, senile irresponsibiliry. The newcomers, who are likely to be also the biologically youngest, bur who bring with them many other distinctive properries, stemming from changes in the social conditions of production of the producers (i.e., principally' the family and che educational system), escape the more rapidly from youth' (irresponsibility) che readier they are ro break with the irresponsible behaviour assigned to them and, freeing themselves from the internalized limits (those which may make a 50. year-old feel 'too young reasonably to aspire' to a position or an honour), d o nothesitare to push forward, 'leap frog' and 'take the escalator'to precipirate cheir predecessors' fall inro the past, the outdared, in short, social dearh. But they have no chance of winning the struggles over the limirs which break our between the age-groups when the sense of the limits is lost, unless they manage ro impose a new definition of the socially complete person, including in it characteristics normally (i.e., in terms of the prevailing classificatory principle) associared with youth (enthusiasm, energy and so on) or chara.cteristics that can supplant the virtues normally associared with adulthood. In short, what individuals and groups invesr in the particular meaning they give ro common classificatory systems by the use they make of them is infinitely more than their 'inrerest' in the usual sensc of the term; it is their whole social being, everything which defines their own idea of rhemselves, the primordial, tacit contract whereby they define us' as op posed to 'them', 'other people', and which is rhe basis of the exclusions ('not for the likes of us') and inclusions they perform among the charac teristics produced by the common classificatory system. arhereby agents constsuct cheir perception of realicy, in particular the process of accentuating dif crences vis-à-vis 'oursiders' (dissimilation) and reinforcing similarities wirh insiders (assimilarion). Similarly, studies of racism have shown that whenever diff erent groups are juxraposed, a defnition of the approved, valorized behaviour rends to be contrasted with the despised, rejected behaviour of the other group. Social identity lies in dif. ference, and difference is asserted against whar is closest, which tepresenes the grearest threac. Analysis of stereocyping, the propensiry to assume a cortcspondence between membership of a caregory (e.g., Nordic or Mediterra. nean, Western or Oriental) and possession of a particular properry, so thar knowledge of a person's caregory strongly inftuences judgements of him, is in line sith analysis of rhar sort of social stereoryping in which alì the members of a social formation cend to concur in atcribucing cerrain properries to membets of the different social classes (see appendix 4). The fact that, in their relationship to the dominant classcs, the dominated classes attribute to themselves strength in the sense of labour power and fighting strength—physical strength and also sttength of characrer, courage, manlinessdoes not prevent the dominant groups from similarly conceiving the relationship in terms of rhe scheme strong/weak; but they reduce the strength which the dominated (or the young, or women) ascribe to themselves to brure strength, passion and instincr, a blind, unpredicrable force of nature, the unrcasoning violence of desire, and they attribure to themselves spiritual and intellectual strength, a self-control that ptedisposes them to control others, a strength of soul or spirit which allows them to conceive their relationship to the dominated—the 'masses', women, the young—as thar of the soul to rhe body, understanding to sensibility, culture to nature. ## The Classifcation Struggle Principles of division, inextricably logical and sociological, function within and for the purposes of the seruggle berwcen social groups; in producing concepts, they produce groups, the very groups which pro. duce rhe principles and the groups against which they are produced. Whar is at stake in the struggles about rhe meaning of the social world is power over the classificatory schemes and systems which are the basis of the representations of the groups and rherefore of their mobilization and demobilizarion: the evocative power of an urterance which puts things in a different light (as happens, for example, when a single word, such as 'paternalism, changes the whole experience of a social relationship) or which modifes rhe schemes of perception, shows something else, ocher properties, previously unnoticed or relegared ro the background (such as common interests hitherto masked by ethnic or national differences); a separative power, a disrinction, diacrisis, discretio, drawing discrete units out of indivisible continuity, difference out of che undifferentiared. Only in and through rhe srruggle do the internalized limits become boundaries, barriers thar have to be moved. And indeed, the system of classificatory schemes is constituted as an objectified, institutionalized system of classification only when it has ceased to function as a sense of limits so that che guardians of the established order must enunciate, sys rematize and codify the principles of production of chat order, both real and represented, so as to defend them against heresy; in short, they must constitute rhe doxa as orthodoxy. Official systems of classification, such as the theory of che three orders, do explicitly and systematically what the classificarory schemes did racirly and practically. Attribures, in the sense of predicares. thereby become altributions, powers, capaciries, privileges, prerogatives, attributed to the holder of a post, so that war is no longer what the warrior does, but the officium, the specific hunction, the raison d'êrre, of the bellator. Classificatory discretio, like law, freezes a certain srare of the power relations which ir aims to fix forever by enunciaring andcodifyingit. The classificatory system as a principle of logicał and political division only exists and functions because it reproduces, in a transhgured form, in the symbolic logic of differential gaps, i.e., of discontinuity, the generally gradual and continuous differences which strucrure the established order; but it makes its own, that is, specifically symbolic, contribution to the maintenance of thar order only because it has the specifically symbolic power to make people see and believe which is given by the imposition of mental strucrutes. Systems of classihc ation would not be such a decisive object of struggle if they did not contribute to the existence of classes by enhancing the ef. ficacy of the objective mechanisms with the reinforcement supplied by representations structured in accordance with the classification. The imposirion of a recognized name is an act of recognition of full social existence which transmutes the thing named. It no longer exists merely de facto, as a tolerated, iltegal or illegitimate practice, but becomes a social funcrion, i.e., a mandate, a mission (Beruf), a (ask, a role—all words which express rhe difference berween authorized activity, which is as signed to an individual or group by racit or explicit delegarion, and mere usurpation, which creates a 'srate of affairs' awaiting instirutionalization. But the specific effect of collective represenrations', which, contrary to what the Durkheimian connorations might suggest, may be the product of rhe applicarion of the same scheme of perception or a common system of classification white still being subject to antagonistic social uses, is most clearly scen when the word precedes the thing, as with vołuatary associations thar rurn into recognized ptofessions or corporate defence groups (such as the trade union of the cadres'), which progressively impose the representation of their existence and their unicy, both on their own members and on other groups. A group's presence or absence in the ofácial classification depends on its capacity to ger itself recognized, co get itself nociced and admitted, and so to win a place in the social order. It thus escapes from the shad. owy existence of the 'nameless crafts' of which Emile Benveniste speaks: business in antiquity and the Middle Ages, or illegitimate activities, such as those of the modern healer (formerly called an empiric'), bone-serter or prosticure. The fare of groups is bound up with the words that designare them: the power to impose recognition depends on the capacity to mobilixe around a name, 'proletariat', 'working class', 'cadres' etc., to appropriate a common name and to commune in a proper name, and so to mobilize che union that makes them strong, around the unifying power ofaword.22 In fact, the order of words never exactly reproduces the order of things. It is the relative independence of rhe structure of rhe system of classifying, classifcd words (within which the distinct value of cach par. cicular label is defined) in relarion to che stcructure of the distribution of capital, and more precisely, it is the time-lag(partly resulting from the inertia inherent in classifcation systems asquasi-legalinstitutions sanctioning a state of a power relation) berween changes in jobs, linked to changes in the productive appararus, and changes in titles, which creates the space for symbolic strategies aimed at exploiring the discrepancies between the nominal and the real, appropriating words so as to ger the things they designate, or appropriating things while waiting to get the words that sanction them; exercising responsibilities without having entitlement to do so, in order to acquire the right to claim the legitimare titles, or, conversely, declining the material advaatages associared with devalued titles so as to avoid losing the symbolic advantages bestowed by more prestigious labels or, at least, vaguer and more manipulable ones; donning the most flarrering of the available insignia, verging on impos. cure if need be-like the porters who call themselves art craftsmen', or technicians who claim to be engineers—or inventing new labels, like physiotherapists (kinésithérapeutes) who count on this new citle to separate them from mere masseurs and bring them closer to doctors. All these strategies, like all processes of competition, a paper-chase aimed at ensuring constant distinctive gaps, tend to produce a sready inflarion of rirlesrestrained by the inertia of the institutionalized taxonomies (collective agreements, salary scales etc.)—to which legal guarantees are attached. The negotiarions berween antagonistic interest groups, which arise from the establishment of cotlective agreemenrs and which concern, inseparably, the tasks entailed by a given job, the propercies required of irs occupanrs (e.g., diplomas) and the corresponding advantages, both material and symbolic (the name), are an instirucionalized, thearrical version of the incessant struggles over the classifcations which help to produce the classes, although these classifcations are the product of the struggles berween the classes and depend on the power relations berween them ## The Reality of Representation and the Representation of Reality The classifying subjects who classify the properties and practices of orhers, or cheir own, are also classifable objects which classify themselves (in che eyes of others) by appropriating practices and properries that are already classified (as vulgar or disringuished, high or low, heavy or light erc.—in orher words, in the lasr analysis, as popular or bourgeois) according ro cheir probable distriburion berween groups char are chem. selves classihed. The most classifying and besr classified of these properries are, of course, chose which are overtly designared to function as signs of distincrion or marks of infamy, stigmara, especially che names and cicles expressing class membership whose intersection defines social identity at any given rime—che name of a narion, a region, an erhnic group, a family name, the name of an occuparion, an educarional qualifcarion, honorific citles and so on. Ihose who classify chemselves or orhers, by appropriating or classifying practices or properties that are classified and classifying, cannor be unaware thar, chrough disrinctive ob jects or pracrices in which rheir 'powers' are expressed and which, being appropriared by and appropriare to classes, classify rhose who appropriare chem, they classify chemselves in the eyes of other classifying (but also classifiable) subjects, endowed with classificatoty schemes analogous co those which enable chem more or less adequately to anticipate their own classification. Social subjects comprehend the social worlld which comprehends chem. This means that rhey cannor be characterized simply in terms of marerial properties, srarting wich the body, which can be counted and measured like any other object in the physical worlld. In fact, each of rhese properties, be it the height or volume of cthe body or the exrent of landed properry, when perceived and appreciared in relarion to other properties of rhe same class by agents equipped with socially constirured schemes of perceprion and appreciation, functions as a symbolic properry. It is therefore necessary to move beyond che opposirion between a 'social physics'—which uses staristics in objectivist fashion to esrabłish distriburions (in boch che sratistical and economic senses), quantifed expres. sions of rhe diff erential appropriarion of a finite quantity of social energy by a large number of compering individuals, idenrified chrough 'objecrive indicators'—and a ‘social semiology'which seeks ro decipher meanings and bring to light the cognitive operations whereby agenrs produce and decipher them. We have to refuse the dichoromy berween, on the one hand, the aim of arriving ar an objective 'realiry', independent ofindividual consciousnesses and wills', by breaking wich common represenrations of the social world (Durkheim's 'pre-notions'), and of uncovering 'laws'--thar is, significant (in the sense of non-random) relacionships berween distriburions—and, on the other hand, the aim of grasping, nor reality', bur agents'representations of it, which are the whole 'realiry of a social world conceived 'as will and representation'. In short, social science does not have to choose berween char form of social physics, represenred by Durkheim—who agrees with social semiology in acknowledging rhat one can only know 'reality' by applying logical instruments of classification—and the idealist semiology which, underraking to construct 'an account of accounrs', as Harold Garhnkel purs it, can do no more than record che recordings of a social world which is ultimarely no more than the product of menral, i.e., linguistic, srructures. Whar we have to do is to bring into the science of scarcity, and of comperition for scarce goods, the practical knowledge which che agenrs obrain for themselves by producing—on che basis of cheir experience of che discributions, irselfdependenton cheir position in the distributionsdivisions and classificarions which are no lessobjectivethan chose of the balance-sheers of social physics. In other words, we have to move beyond theoppositionbetween objecrivist theories which identify the social classes (bur also rhe sex or age classes) with discrete groups, simple countabie popularions separated by boundaries objectively drawn in realiry, and subjectivist (or marginalist) cheories which reduce the so. cial order' to a sort of collective classification obrained by aggregaring the individual classifications or, more precisely, rhe individual strategies, classified and classif ying, through which agents class rhemselves and orhers.24 One only has to bear in mind thar goods are converted into disrinctive signs, which may be signs of disrinction but also of vulgariry, as soon as chey are perceived relationally, to see thar the representation which indi. viduals and groups inevirably project through their pracrices and proper. ties is an integral parr of social realiry. A class is defined as much by irs being- perceived as by irs being, by its consumption—which need nor be conspicuous in order to be symbolic—as much as by its position in the rela. tions of producrion (even if it is crue chat rhe latrrer governs che former). The Berkeleian--i.e., perit-bourgeois--vision which reduces social being to perceived being, ro seeming, and which, forgerting thar there is no need to give rhearrical performances (représenlalions) in order to be rhe object of mencal represencarions, reduces rhe social world to che sum of che (mencal) represenrations which the various groups have of the theatrical performances pur on by the orher groups, has che vitrue of msisring on che relarive auronomy of che logic of symbolic representarions wich respect to rhe marerial determinants of socio-economic condirion. The individual or cotlective classifcarion struggles aimed ar cransformitig the caregories of perception and appreciarion of the social world and, chrough chis, rhe social world irself, are indeed a forgorcen dimension of the class struggle. But one only has ro realize rhar che classificatory schemes which underlie agents' practical relarionship to their condition and the represencarion they have ofit are themselves the product of thar