# Acknowledgments The experience of researching and writing this book has shown me how to see the world differently. I thank everyone who has contributed to that shift of vision. Long before any of these ideas took shape my parents, Cynthia and Perry, and my sister, Jennifer, lovingly nurtured my interests. My parents also made my first visit to East Africa possible, for which I am still grateful. Kianga Ford, who shared all the experiences of that visit, supported me through every moment of researching and writing this book. I can never repay her time, intellectual energy, and care. My first East African history course with Isaria N. Kimambo, as well as the encouragement of Jamie Monson, Mary Jo Arnoldi, and Christine Mullen Kreamer, offered me the tools to seed this work. Jonathon Glassman gave far more of his time and attention to this project than should be expected of an advisor. I am deeply grateful to him, and I hope this book stands as a humble tribute to his guidance. Ned Alpers has supported every aspect of this project from start to finish. He gave selflessly when he had no obligation, and I greatly appreciate the myriad investments he has made in me. David Schoenbrun has been a mentor from his first day at Northwestern, giving his attention to this project and my incessant questions. For his advice and direction I am most grateful. Even after her last day at Northwestern, Jane Guyer enthusiastically offered her energies and ideas to this project. Indrani Chatterjee, Adam Green, Laura Hein, A. G. Hopkins, John Hunwick, and Tessie Liu all guided my intellectual trajectory. Jim Brennan has been a true friend. He has shared his home and ideas with me from Chicago to Dar es Salaam to London. Chris Hayden likewise put me up countless times and generously supplied me with important documents from French archives. Chap Kusimba not only offered endless hospitality in Chicago and Kenya, but he also introduced me to new ways of seeing the East African coast. Jake Dorman has somehow never tired of my ideas, always offered many more in return, and provided unceasing inspiration. Matt Hopper, who heard these arguments over and again, has always offered new insight and critiques, to say nothing of much-needed Arabic translations. As long as this project has existed it has benefited from the scholarship and friendship of Abdul Sheriff. Ann Biersteker refined my Swahili and supported my research even when I had only a vague sense of what I was doing. Bruce McKim showed me much about Zanzibar that I had not seen and taught me, by example, the skill of listening. Richard Roberts generously offered his time as well as incisive critiques when I most needed them. Ilham Makdisi has been a supportive colleague and an even greater friend. Anne Bang treated me as if I were family and has been equally generous with her thoughts and ideas. Without the aid of Sean O’Fahey I would have never made connections in Norway nor so many in Mombasa. Pedro Machado went far out of his way to introduce me to archives essential to my research and put a roof over my head in London. John Middleton saw the potential of this work long ago and offered constant encouragement. Engseng Ho gave his time and keen eye to this manuscript and guided it towards what I believe is a much better book. I owe a tremendous debt to all teachers, friends, and neighbors in Tanzania and Kenya. Humoud Said Seif and his family made me feel at home in Zanzibar. The staff at the National Archives, Zanzibar, gave me access to the collection and assisted me with my work at a very difficult time. On the eve of elections, Khamis S. Khamis, Hamad Hassan Omar, and many other members of the staff ensured that I completed my research in Zanzibar. None of my work in Kenya would have been possible without the intellectual and logistical assistance of Athman Lali Omar. He could have been neither more supportive nor more integral to the completion of my research. Also infinitely helpful, both before and after my arrival in Kenya, were George and Lorna Abungu. All of the staff at the Fort Jesus Museum, Mombasa, aided me in untold ways, particularly Ali Abubakr, Mohammed Mchulla, and Jimbi Katana. Sheikh Ahmed Nabahani offered his great insight into the history and complexity of the Swahili language. I benefited from the wonderful generosity of the late Sayyid Abdulrahman Ahmed Badawy Jamalilyl (Sharif Khitamy) and his extended family, Ustadh Zein l’Abdin Ahmed al Moody, and Mohamed Perryman, who always offered food, observations, and Internet access. I owe the greatest debt to Habib Kassim Habib and his family: Mwana Hawa, Muhammad, Hassan, Zakiya, Nuru, and Fatuma. They unreservedly accepted me (and all of my ways) and continually offer their unbounded generosity. This book has benefited immensely from comments by participants at scores of conferences, workshops, roundtables, and lectures. I am particularly grateful to people and institutions that offered the time and space to put these thoughts on paper and then rethink them. At UC Santa Cruz I am especially indebted to Terry Burke, Jim Clifford, Chris Connery, Gail Hershatter, Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, and fellow scholar-in-residence Liz DeLoughrey, who heard my ideas and offered their thoughtful criticism. At the Department of History and Centre for Middle East and Islamic Studies, University of Bergen, I offer a special thanks to Anders Bjørkelo, who made my stay in Bergen possible. He gave so much of his energy to create time for me to finish this manuscript that I can only hope the final product was worth his investment. This project would not have been possible without support provided by many institutions and foundations, including the Social Science Research Council with funds from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Woodrow Wilson Foundation, the Center for Cultural Studies at UC Santa Cruz through a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation, the American Historical Association, the Fulbright Institute for International Education, the Fulbright Council for the International Exchange of Scholars, Northwestern University, Northwestern’s Program of African Studies, Northeastern University, and the University of California, San Diego. A special thanks to librarians at the Fort Jesus Museum, Northwestern University, the British Library, SOAS, the Phillips Library at the Peabody-Essex Museum, UC Los Angeles, and UC San Diego. A heartfelt thanks to the director of the Africana collection at Northwestern University, David Easterbrook, for making possible the publication of so many early images of East Africa. Michael DiBlasi and anonymous readers for the American Historical Review and Journal of World History offered trenchant critiques and polished essays adapted for this book. Nick Murray further smoothed the rough edges of my thoughts and words. Finally, I could not have asked for more from UC Press. Niels Hooper, Chalon Emmons, and Rachel Lockman were patient beyond all expectation. At one hundred years my grandfather continually encourages my curiosity and empathy. With love, respect, and gratitude I dedicate this book to him.