Introduction While some boundaries seem as impassable as ever, many people feel as if the spatial divisions of the world are fast disappearing. Though these perspectives reflect different experiences, they both are predicated on presumptions of historical insularity. Attempts to describe the myriad ways that people, ideas, and objects either transcend spatial barriers or are restricted by them are important. But we should be mindful of the ways our analyses confirm the all-too-common presumption that human history has been typified by bounded geographical and cultural spheres. The aim of this book is to challenge notions of discrete sociocultural spaces and limited interactions that shape our understanding of the past and give rise to our wonder at a “globalized” present. Specifically, this book offers a reflection on the seemingly out of place, on the social lives of people and objects well beyond the boundaries of nation, continent, or sea that we regularly imagine to have been historically restrictive. Forgetting historical circumstances of interconnectivity and the reciprocity they entailed weakens our appreciation of how humans have historically affected and been affected by others, both far and near. Remembering histories of a relentlessly interdependent world can challenge contemporary fantasies of past isolation and our obsession with independent local or regional historical trajectories. Most importantly, histories of transsocietal interrelation remind us of how individual actions have often had long-term and distant consequences. ## HISTORIES AND GLOBALITY Contemporary globalization rhetoric regularly obscures pasts that never easily conformed to the distances, dichotomies, and differences that we often imagine to have constrained human relationships across space. Michel-Rolph Trouillot suggests that the wonder implicit in contemporary global reflection reveals a perceptual frame that is the result of both a forgetting and silencing of histories of interrelation. “For Muslim veils in France to seem out of place,” he contends; “we need to forget that Charles Martel stopped ‘Abd-al-Raman only 300 miles south of Paris, two reigns before Charlemagne.”<sup>1</sup> In making this observation Trouillot does not deny that things around us—cultures, economies, ideas—are changing, that capital now moves at breakneck speed, or that people acutely feel an impinging world. Instead, what Trouillot points up are the conceptual principles of a contemporary global consciousness that allow us to see the present as wholly unprecedented. The fact of a historical Muslim presence in Western Europe is perhaps more relevant than ever, and so the fiction of historical isolation and global disjuncture that appears commonly in globalization discourse and spurs the revival of such nineteenth-century abstractions as hybridity is a conceptual inheritance of modernity that deserves challenge.<sup>2</sup> Many analysts of global relationships posit that the contending forces of our world hinge on incommensurate differences bound to separate historical trajectories: Western and Sinic civilizations clash, the Lexus uproots the olive tree, jihad and McWorld battle, Islam struggles to come to terms with the influence of the West, tradition faces the modern world.<sup>3</sup> Like their nineteenth-century conceptual antecedents, these juxtapositions of difference fail to appreciate the ways in which people relentlessly incorporate seemingly conflicting ideas and forces. Only our failure to recognize people’s ability to amalgamate foreign ideas, things, and people into their everyday existence makes the picture of a veiled woman drinking a Pepsi on the cover of Benjamin Barber’s Jihad vs. McWorld seem paradoxical. The visceral sense of paradox prompted by the juxtaposition of such seemingly discordant signs as Pepsi and the veil has become a staple of popular reflections on globalization. Yet this sense of paradox is not born of simple novelty. Instead, it has blossomed in the field of repressed mutuality and inattentiveness to the bricolage of human history. Historical silences, maintained by enduring notions of difference, bind us to a sensibility in which, to use a postcard sold in Zanzibar as an example, a Zanzibari man wearing “traditional” clothes but talking on a mobile phone is ironic. What must be silenced to make the card ironic is the fact that Zanzibaris began buying telephones almost immediately after their invention well over a century ago. Reflections on globalization in the popular media as well as in academia still too commonly assume that until very recently the world was constituted by discrete spheres (continents, nations, cultures) whose minimal interactions ensured internal consistencies.<sup>4</sup> Many of these assumptions are the legacies of nineteenth-century Western analysts who reshaped and operationalized sophisticated classificatory regimes, or hierarchies of humanity, grounded in the belief that distinct types of things existed in the world, each with its essential qualities. Many scholars have traced how these concepts and categories affected human actions. The questions that drive this book are therefore somewhat different: What did these classificatory regimes obscure, and how did they silence other histories of global relation? The essentialization of difference allowed and allows views of global integration to appear as vignettes of unprecedented, even paradoxical, contrasts of traditions, religions, economies, and racial, national, or social groups. The fascination and wonder occasioned by hybridity suggests that our inherited modalities of difference have concealed profoundly entangled relationships just below the surfaces of difference. This is why I find Trouillot’s insight so appealing; he suggests that, beyond the superficiality of “encounter,” the archive of our interdependent past harbors stories that complicate modern sensibilities. Though we may create bounded identities, shore up exclusivist genealogies, and create borders that we enforce physically and discursively, our interdependent past reveals that creolization has no pure antecedents. Humanity, across its profoundly social history, has restlessly engaged in an inter-networking of networks across space, for better and for worse. One virtue of historical reflection during a time charged with the discourse of globalization is that it allows us to reconsider the myriad and conflicting processes by which the world around us has come into being. History and Foucauldian genealogy—a Nietzsche-inspired critical framing of changing human relationships that highlights the discourses that have obscured or shaped such relationships—enable us to see the worlds we have forgotten and, just as important, how they were lost to historical memory.<sup>5</sup> Historical reflection can remind us that the past does not always offer clear patterns, that it is confusing, vast, incalculable as a totality, that we are not always who we are for the reasons we assume. Genealogies of globalization, both as narratives of inter-networking and reflections on the discourses that have defined how we perceive, or fail to perceive, global interconnectivity, are vital in our times. We should be cognizant of forgotten routes of human connectivity and understand how we have come to see the world as we do.<sup>6</sup> In this book I offer vignettes of intra- and transregional relations in an attempt to resuscitate visions of globality that were eroded by silencing and forgetting—other ways of interpreting and knowing the world that, for Western analysts in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, seemed incommensurate with modern knowledge systems. Considering the world in the terms and through the ideas of actors marginalized in the historical record allows us to imagine how the world was—and can be—different than it appears from our contemporary vantage points. Forgotten histories of mutuality in global encounter can, moreover, re-member patterns of global interdependence, which, while seemingly counterintuitive in hindsight, are nevertheless our inheritance. In an attempt to re-member one section of the vast archive of our interconnected past, this book examines the complex relationships among economies, cultures, and the translocal networks they affect by considering the importance of African consumer desires to nineteenthcentury processes of global integration. This is a history of trans-societal relationships projected through the lens of eastern Africa during a period of dramatically increasing regional and transoceanic connectivity. Specifically, the book addresses the cultural rationales for East African consumer desires, the symbolic uses of imported things and people, the global repercussions of African consumer demand, and interpretations of consumerism in East Africa. I focus on consumer goods and their circulation because they are uniquely able to help us perceive routes of interrelation. They channel and expose desires, they connect, affect, are affected by people, and they transcend political and social boundaries. By focusing on the demand for globally circulating commodities, we can better perceive (1) the cumulative agency of individual choices, and (2) connections between the contingent realms of economy, social relations, cultural translation, travel, and changing perception. My aim is to offer insights into how objects, symbols, and people were remade through their movement and through the movement of others.<sup>7</sup> My plea is that the theorization of global integration should not lose sight of the predecessors of contemporary globalization, the repercussions of everyday choices, the interests in transregional integration on the part of Africans before colonialism, or the historiographic dislocation of Africa from the rest of the world. Through the narratives and the narrative method I offer in the pages ahead, I intend to demonstrate the importance and mutuality of many forgotten routes of global interconnectivity through and beyond East Africa. ## AFRICA AS PART OF THE WORLD Narratives of Africa’s relation to global processes have yet to take full account of mutuality in Africa’s global exchanges.<sup>8</sup> One of the most complicated questions analysts of African pasts have faced is how African interests figure into an equation of global interfaces historiographically weighted toward the effects of outsiders’ actions.<sup>9</sup> The slave trade, imperialism, colonialism, and neocolonialism have all severely constricted African possibilities and potentials. Since Africa’s global relationships have often been inequitable, scholars have concentrated on exploitative processes of African production for foreign markets and imbalances of trade. In the era of decolonization, such emphasis was a necessary response to assumptions of Africa’s perennial backwardness, the positivism of modernization theory, and colonial administrations’ refusals to acknowledge the long-term economic traumas wrought by their policies. But while the constraints of interaction engineered by the colonial powers affected African futures, the colonialist presumption that the interests of others have by and large steered the continent’s past, even before colonialism, leaves a crucial question insufficiently explored: What did Africans seek in precolonial global exchanges? If, as many would agree, the importation of consumer goods has been a destructive process that entailed the slave trade and ensured underdevelopment by decimating African manufacturing,<sup>10</sup> then it is critical that we understand why imports were so important to African societies.<sup>11</sup> This question has been difficult to tackle in systematic ways because African demands and corresponding sociocultural foundations of need have received relatively limited attention in analyses of Africa’s global economic relationships.<sup>12</sup> And since questions of what Africans wanted have not been thoroughly addressed, we have not seriously considered the possibility that African demands had effects on societies beyond Africa. By considering the demand for imports before colonialism, we can gain a perspective on economic relationships that complicates, as I demonstrate below, some baseline assumptions about Africa’s relationships to other parts of the world. To undermine common assumptions about Africa’s interfaces, this book addresses thorny cultural questions that have not figured prominently in analyses of precolonial global relationships, such as rationales for exchange and the complex meanings of imports in “peripheral” societies. Perhaps more important, the perspective of consumer demand offers an alternative way of considering the differing conditions that have affected Africa’s profile in the world economy. A focus on East African consumerism in the nineteenth century reveals that as East Africans became more deeply affected by contemporary movements of goods, ideas, and people, they also influenced patterns of global trade and foreign production. The mutuality inherent in this trade was not a function of equity or symmetry over the long term, but it did entail reciprocal effects that reshaped extra-African locales even as non-African images, desires, and strategies changed East Africa. I believe that by reclaiming a sense of African material interests in the field of global relations we can address why global trade came to be important to East Africans long before most were compelled to produce for the world market. Scholars have demonstrated that processes of commodification were extending deeply into African social relationships in the nineteenth century and that imported commodities and currencies at certain moments, and in many locales, became important to local social and political relations.<sup>13</sup> These processes of commodification were not only crucial to the remaking of East Africa in the nineteenth century, but they also pose challenges to the conceptual dichotomy between the cultural-symbolic emphasis in analyses of everyday experience and the economic-material focus of political economy. For instance, in order to appreciate the economic circumstances of commodification, we must be vigilant about the kinds of complicated questions anthropologists, sociologists, and cultural studies theorists frequently pose: How were imports integrated into specific social environments? What meanings did imported commodities acquire in African societies? How did these meanings converge with or diverge from those given them by their manufacturers?<sup>14</sup> I address these questions in the chapters that follow, but I wish to suggest here that histories of globality must always bear such questions in mind. East Africa’s global economic relationships, for instance, were inextricable from the cultural and social dynamics of regional societies that gave rise to the demands articulated in interregional trade. Many historians of Africa have suggested that African consumer demand deserves attention.<sup>15</sup> In fact, the potential of my approach to Africa’s global relationships has already been demonstrated. David Richardson’s work, which I consider in greater detail in chapter 3, suggests ways of thinking about the global repercussions of African consumer demand on British trade and manufacturing. He shows that during the era of the transatlantic slave trade the requirements of satisfying the tastes of West African consumers affected suppliers, prices, and even the networks on which Liverpool merchants relied. Liverpool firms were forced to depend, in part, on foreign producers of iron, beads, and textiles since British manufacturers had mixed success in producing the consumer goods that West Africans wanted. More than a third of Liverpool’s exports to West Africa in the mid-1780s had to be procured from non-English sources, primarily in the Indian Ocean region. Richardson argues that both the structure and profitability of the English slave trade were contingent, to a significant degree, on African patterns of demand and English abilities to adapt to this demand.<sup>16</sup> Philip Curtin, Joseph Inikori, Joseph Miller, John Thornton, and others have also highlighted the importance of African demand in shaping global economic relationships.<sup>17</sup> Curtin, for example, argues that at the height of the external slave trade in Senegambia the terms of trade were in West Africans’ favor. Thus, French manufacturers had to go to great lengths to appeal to the tastes of West Africans. African consumer demand has, at times, had more extreme effects on trade. For instance, whole shipments of goods sent to East Africa had to be returned if particular items did not suit African tastes (see chapter 3). African boycotts of imports affected trade as well. Igbo traders, for instance, boycotted the Lagos palm oil market for five months in 1855 to protest substandard guns brought for sale.<sup>18</sup> But the relation of African consumer demands to global exchange was not always so obvious. As we will see, manufacturers all over the world, in dialogue with people in East Africa, developed goods over time that accommodated the regularly changing consumer desires of East Africans. This attention to changing African desires points up the centrality of African cultural, social, and political dynamics to the making of Africa’s global economic relationships.<sup>19</sup> If, as Jane Guyer suggests, histories of exchange and histories of social relationships deeply permeate one another, then we can gain important insights into the dynamics of global economic systems by exploring the social lives of people—even those, like East Africans, who may seem marginal to global trends. This study proposes a simple postulation that has significant ramifications: if demand for commodities shapes commercial systems, and demand is a social product, then the minutiae of social and cultural interests are deeply intertwined with global economic systems. In order to understand the complexity of economic relationships, we need to appreciate not only patterns of trade and modes of production, but also rationales for need and the social relations that engender them. Since the late 1970s, a rich body of cross-disciplinary literature has demonstrated that consumer goods are primary mediators of human relationships and give substance to social claims.<sup>20</sup> Literature spanning the humanities and social sciences has emphasized the symbolic rhetoric of consumer goods, the ability of things to constitute personhood by representing aspirations publicly, and the importance of commodities to strategies of distinction.<sup>21</sup> Much of this literature further suggests that consumer goods often receive new social meanings beyond the cultural boundaries of their regions of production, and that these meanings can diverge dramatically from those given by their producers.<sup>22</sup> Yet accounts of historical as well as contemporary global integration still too easily discount the important ways in which people who are labeled the victims of global cultural homogenization conceptually transform imported goods and symbols.<sup>23</sup> In the chapters that follow, I draw on consumption studies to address rationales for African demand in the nineteenth century. I also build on interdisciplinary approaches to the social meanings of commodities by outlining the reception and remaking of globally circulating goods—a process that I refer to as domestication—as a strategy for understanding the deeper histories of an interconnected world.<sup>24</sup> Domestication is a particularly useful term because it carries multiple, complementary connotations: the process of making familiar or usable, controlling, and bringing into intimate spaces. Thus, in using this term I mean to imply not only the localization of foreign goods, but also something of the gendered intimacies East Africans developed with and through them. By considering East African domestications of globally circulating goods I outline the cultural logics of consumer demand that shaped Africans’ global relationships. ## ORGANIZATION This book is composed of a series of essays that address overlapping themes. Since the issues and places that concern me could easily drive a project much larger than this work, I have chosen to look at specific themes in particular temporal circumstances. The themes include consumer desire, the repercussions of demand, cosmopolitanism, the transformation of global symbols, the symbolic uses of people and things, and the interpretation of cultural change. Because of this structure, the narrative does not strive for a total history of economy, consumption, or culture. Instead, it reflects on their interface. It offers analyses of the ways that specific people in specific places, primarily Mutsamudu, Mombasa, and Zanzibar, related to each other and the larger world through imported goods. Thus, the arguments that I make for each locale must be understood as limited to those locales. Certain insights may be helpful in conceptualizing relationships elsewhere, but for the purposes of this study I only aspire to bring to light sufficient lines of connection to frame a picture of how concepts, desires, exchanges, and images all came into dynamic tension in one part of the world. The advantage of this organization is that it traces the minutiae of everyday life while remaining mindful of the larger processes that constituted them and which they, in turn, affected. The first chapter demonstrates the potency and limits of certain acts of self-representation in the spaces of global relation. It asks how the domestication of English symbols—a strategy of reflecting similarity that I call similitude—affected Mutsamudu’s (Comoros Islands) relationship with the British Empire in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Through a close reading of the adoption of English material culture, social etiquette, and the English language in Mutsamudu town, I show how some East Africans used things that signified Englishness to convince the British to provide them with special economic and military assistance. As a prelude to many of the themes discussed in later sections, the chapter focuses on the role of cultural practice in developing and maintaining material relationships. It also offers a view of East African relations with the British Empire that contrast with those I outline in later chapters. Chapter 2 looks at Mombasa, the second largest city on the East African coast, during the 1840s and 1850s, when a great variety of imported consumer goods were becoming available. It asks how people conceived of needs for imported goods in Mombasa during a period of rapid integration into changing commercial systems. To answer this question I offer an ethnography of consumer demand that stresses the social logics of economy, or the psychological creation of needs before possession and how culturally defined imported goods, when used to aid in the constitution of certain kinds of personhood, became fundamental to social relationships. The chapter seeks to anchor East Africa’s trade connections in the minutiae of local social circumstances by first examining the rhetoric and idioms of material desire in Mombasa’s public culture. It then focuses on several contemporaneous reflections that address the centrality of imports in Mombasan social relationships. These reflections on consumer demand in Mombasa offer examples of how people in one place developed relationships bound to imported goods. The third chapter moves outward from the social spaces of interaction in East Africa to consider the effects of East African consumer demand elsewhere. It asks how East Africa’s new engagements with other parts of the world changed those distant locales. The chapter begins with the supposition that the terms of trade were often in East Africa’s favor during the nineteenth century. Merchants from the United States to India competed for limited African products like ivory, cloves, hides, and gum copal. In this economic climate, East Africans had enormous liberties of choice. This meant that foreign manufacturers and traders had to be aware of and appeal to the rapidly changing consumer demands of East Africans or else founder in the Zanzibari market. East African consumer demand directly affected the region’s ties to New England and India. I argue that in the cases of both Salem, Massachusetts, and Bombay, East African demand not only shaped foreign production, since manufacturers were keenly interested in appealing to East African consumers, but also provided important stimuli to the industrialization of both cities’ textile industries. Chapter 4 develops an image of East African cosmopolitanism and its relation to Western concepts of modernity. It asks how goods from and new engagements with distant locales affected Zanzibar. I show that Zanzibaris used consumer goods such as American clocks, British handkerchiefs, and Indian umbrellas to create as well as challenge new social and material sensibilities in the second half of the nineteenth century. Zanzibari cosmopolitanism represents one form of social reconstitution stimulated by global integration in the nineteenth century. It also represents a material vision of global relations that was discounted by nineteenthcentury theorizations of Western modernity. In focusing on the rise of a new materiality in Zanzibar, I excavate precolonial visions of global relation and cultural domestications of global symbols. I argue that East African desires for goods produced all over the globe represented not simply a Westernization, Indicization, or Arabization of Zanzibar, but a configuration of a standardized set of imported materials deployed to address or contest specific local circumstances. Chapter 5 examines how slaves of African, Indian, and European origin were used to represent the self-images of Zanzibaris and how enslaved people resisted resignification. My focus is on the symbolic uses of urban slaves as well as their social value to both slave-owners and antislavery activists. Symbolic subjection—the use of people to represent the abilities of their possessors—was not only important to the construction of social personas in Zanzibari society. The notion of slaves as blank slates onto which the interests of others could be written was also taken up in a British imperial rhetoric that affected the entire region. The enslaved, however, often had very different interests. Slaves used imported goods to fashion their own social projects. Slaves and freed slaves often desired greater social mobility within Zanzibari society, and they attempted to attain such mobility by consuming imported items of personal adornment and acquiring slaves themselves, abilities that signified an ideal public persona. The final chapter examines how Anglophone analysts interpreted East Africans and their desire for imported goods, as well as the relation of these interpretations to the spirit of intervention. It asks how East African consumerism in the late nineteenth century complicated Western analyses of the region. Expanding on themes addressed in chapters 4 and 5, the chapter focuses on the efforts of Anglophone authors, illustrators, and photographers to create a coherent picture of East Africa through explicit reference to material life. Attempts to make East African sociocultural complexities understandable by bundling a variety of material and physical traits crystallized in material-racial figures such as the turbaned Arab, the richly robed Hindu, and the naked African slave. At the same time, East Africans’ consumption of European goods troubled the notions of material difference that Westerners brought to East Africa. In the second half of the nineteenth century, British analysts began to think of East Africans as “semi-civilized” because of their material engagement with Western modernity. The mixing of ostensibly bounded and distinct cultures, bloodlines, and material goods in East Africa signified to Anglophone writers an internal contradiction and East Africans’ inability to adjust to modernity. In their perception of many Western goods as incommensurate with East Africans, and their presumption of the necessity of British intervention to guide Zanzibar into the modern era, analysts discounted the meanings that East Africans gave to the objects of their domestication. This page intentionally left blank