# The Social Logics of Need Consumer Desire in Mombasa As we have seen in the case of Mutsamudu, a full appreciation of the changing dynamics of translocal relationships requires an examination of the logics that shape them on all sides. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Mutsamuduans tapped dramatically expanding global networks. Though East Africans had maintained connections across the Indian Ocean region for at least two thousand years, in the nineteenth century many cities along the East African coast accessed new interoceanic commercial circuits that linked them with more of the world than ever before. The configurations of these connections were determined both by foreign demands for East African commodities and reciprocal East African demands for imported consumer goods (as we will see in chapter 3), as well as by new patterns of migration and proselytization. Because demand was firmly rooted in local definitions of the self and social needs, an appreciation of the circumstances that generated consumer demand is essential for understanding how East Africans affected global networks. Further, since on the coast these desires were often negotiated in majority Muslim towns, outlining local definitions of self and society through relationships to goods can shed light on the confluence of two spheres of relation: the world economy and a complex moral system shaped by Islamic tenets. This chapter seeks to outline the social logics of East African consumer demand by exploring attitudes toward and rationales for demand in Mombasa—East Africa’s second most important commercial center— during a period of rapid integration into both Zanzibari and broader transoceanic commercial systems. It offers an ethnography of material needs in one locale by analyzing both their conception in and importance to its particular social environment. My focus, then, is on the symbolic rhetoric of objects and the ability of commodities to shape personhood by representing the self publicly in reference to moral norms. By studying consumption in this way we can access the social logics of economy, or the ideas about merchandise that were fashioned before purchase and the ways in which culturally defined imported goods, when used to aid in the constitution of personhood and status, were fundamental to Mombasan social relationships.<sup>1</sup> I begin by outlining the context of a rapidly changing Mombasan socioeconomic environment. I then address Swahili concepts of desire and their relation to three overarching, metaphysical agencies of the self: moyo (heart), nia (conscience), and roho (soul).<sup>2</sup> Finally, I take up the importance of objects in projecting notions of personhood as circumscribed by local and translocal moral discourses. By these means, we can perceive the ways in which economic realities, through consumer demand, were deeply embedded in social relationships. ## ANALYSES OF A NEW MOMBASA In Mombasa, the first half of the nineteenth century—particularly the years leading up to Busaidi-Zanzibari acquisition in 1837 and following into the 1850s—was an era of rapid change. It was a period of passage from sovereignty to political control of the city by Sultan Seyyid Said al-Busaidi of Zanzibar and Mombasa’s more complete integration into the Zanzibari cultural-economic zone. The Busaidi acquisition of Mombasa ended more than a decade of resistance by Mombasa’s Mazrui leaders who, after the fall of the city in 1837, found themselves in exile as their former capital became the second most important city in Seyyid Said’s East African dominion.<sup>3</sup> For many Mombasans, it was an era of an inverted world order, a sentiment that the city’s most celebrated poet, Muyaka bin Haji al-Ghassany, captured in the popular refrain, “Those who once called the assembly are those who are now called.”<sup>4</sup> Busaidi rule had great economic repercussions. The government instituted new currencies, guaranteed protection to creditors and foreign merchants, and, perhaps most important, through these measures the Busaidis bound the Mombasa market to Zanzibar.<sup>5</sup> The Busaidi government altered the conditions of business in Mombasa. They encouraged Zanzibari-based merchants to trade in Mombasa by offering lenders better enforcement of creditors’ rights. With an economic environment that was more attractive to lenders, the Busaidis were able to attract capital to Mombasa for local businesses, landowners, and the traders who brought ivory and other commodities from the interior.<sup>6</sup> The Busaidis also diversified Mombasa’s monetary system. Mombasans continued to use the widely circulating Austrian dollar (MT\$) and Spanish quarter-dollar, but after 1845 the copper East Indian pice replaced Mazrui-minted coins (which had been pegged to a measure of maize), and by the 1860s American dollars coming through Zanzibar served along with the Austrian dollar as a regional currency.<sup>7</sup> Using these flexible global currencies, the Busaidi government encouraged the greater monetization of a variety of social transactions in Mombasa—even criminal punishments. For example, under the Mazrui the punishment for murder was death, since it was thought a disgrace to take money in return for the life of a family member. The Busaidis instituted a fixed fine for murder: a kisasi, or standardized revenge-payment. A free person who killed another free person now had to pay between MT\$600 and MT\$1,200; if the murdered person was a slave, the free person paid MT\$60.<sup>8</sup> By the 1840s, increased access to credit through Zanzibari-based firms fueled the expansion of trading ventures to the interior, encouraged greater agricultural production for export, and brought more cash into circulation.<sup>9</sup> Credit enabled people to spend more immediately, regularly, and at higher levels. An expanding economy and access to credit opened for renegotiation the sign-qualities of goods by enabling some previously excluded people to engage more fully in the signifying system of public consumption.<sup>10</sup> With the greater integration of Mombasa into the Zanzibar zone and increased revenue from regional exchange circuits, by the 1840s Mombasans were consuming an increasing variety of Indian, American, and European goods, most of which came through Zanzibar.<sup>11</sup> In this new environment of cash availability and decline of the old political elite, sumptuary restrictions quickly lost their catalyst. The symbols of status, while often still limited in circulation, were becoming more accessible to a greater diversity of Mombasans.<sup>12</sup> For example, before Busaidi subjugation, viti vya enzi, or chairs of “power” and “authority,” were common physical and figurative symbols of political authority in many coastal societies. Many of the holders of such chairs were either overthrown or co-opted by Seyyid Said in the first two decades of the nineteenth century. Accordingly, by the 1840s, the term viti vya enzi, and the chairs themselves, had become something different in Mombasa. Instead of symbols of political position held by a few, they were now simply the chairs of the wealthy, symbols of “power or dignity,” imported from India, the United States, and Europe and owned by many. Viti vya enzi were no longer strictly part of the political iconography, but chairs of fashion—still exclusive, but no longer the possessions of only the most politically powerful. Much like chairs, certain items of clothing were appropriated beyond their previously limited circles of use. The mtawanda, a wooden shoe once available only to the very wealthy, was in demand by the larger public in the 1840s.<sup>13</sup> By the 1880s, two monumental projects addressing the social, cultural, and economic conditions of mid-nineteenth century Mombasa came to fruition. These were meticulous compilations of language and verse spanning the mid-century period of transformation in Mombasa. Taken together, they are the most extensive reflections on social life in any East African city before the 1860s. The first project collected the verse of Mombasa’s most celebrated poet, Muyaka bin Haji, a propagandist, satirist, and humorist remembered for his penetrating insight.<sup>14</sup> Critical of social norms, certain cultural practices, and many people, his captious verses were designed for public recital. They are moral critiques intended for vocal performance, delivered in a coded language translated by his listeners. Muyaka was a poet who, because of his social liminality as a celebrated but chronically poor public figure, was obsessed with the social and material distinctions between wealth and poverty. His work constitutes the largest surviving body of poetry by a Swahili composer in the early nineteenth century, and his reflections on the themes of wealth, poverty, and materiality were important references in Mombasan public discourse from the 1830s until at least the 1880s. His verses were so important as both art and social commentary that many East Africans committed them to memory and repeated them for decades after Muyaka’s death.<sup>15</sup> The second project was the compilation of a monumental Swahili-English dictionary in the Mombasa dialect (Kimvita) completed by a long-time resident of the city, Johann Ludwig Krapf, a missionary of the London Missionary Society. Krapf’s dictionary—whose orthography I will retain as a reminder of the particularities of nineteenth-century Kimvita—is a critical supplement to Muyaka’s poetry in its capacity as (to borrow Umberto Eco’s term) “a disguised encyclopedia” of midnineteenth century Mombasa.<sup>16</sup> Both collections are philosophical, concerned with faith and wealth;<sup>17</sup> both at once detail and critique the cultural environments of mid-century Mombasa; both are distinctly male in perspective; both reflect their authors’ religio-cultural attitudes. Taken together, these collections are unique reflections on life in Mombasa from the 1830s to the 1850s. Though these works were not published until several decades after their production, they remain the most detailed surviving interpretations of a key moment in the history of Mombasa’s integration into expanding global networks.<sup>18</sup> They are particularly useful for this study because they offer cultural and linguistic interpretations of Mombasan concepts of need and highlight the social complexity of consumer choice in Mombasa. In the changing political, cultural, and economic landscape of midnineteenth-century Mombasa, an era of greater consumption, increasing wealth from trade and production, and easier access to credit, Mombasans conceptualized desire as originating in the many overlapping agencies of the self. To understand how desire directed economy, we should begin with a consideration of Mombasan notions of desire’s psycho-social provenance. ## DESIRE AND THE AGENCIES OF THE SELF In A Dictionary of the Suahili Language (hereafter D), Johann Krapf identified several mental agencies that Mombasans believed every person to possess. Three overlapping metaphysical agencies in particular—the moyo, nia, and roho—are important for our purposes because they were imagined to mold desire and project it into the material world as needs for specific things.<sup>19</sup> These were cohesive within a person, but each agency had its own particular functions and directions. Among the three agencies, Mombasans believed that the roho and a sub-agency of the moyo—the kijoyo—gave birth to desires, while both the nia and the larger apparatus of the moyo articulated (or suppressed the articulation of) desire as needs. Only the moyo had a dual physical form and metaphysical existence: it was the actual as well as the figurative heart.<sup>20</sup> It could both articulate and control needs for objects. The moyo was the epicenter of emotional longing, of love, both for people and objects. The poetry of Muyaka bin Haji outlined the place of the moyo in Mombasan concepts of desire. In his verses, Muyaka references the moyo as a receptacle and projector of emotions, particularly of the longing for people and material things. When Muyaka spoke of emotion, he invoked the moyo. Though the larger apparatus of the moyo expressed need and was a container for emotion, one’s kijoyo produced acute wants.<sup>21</sup> The kijoyo was covetous; it identified the things it wanted and forced the moyo into an emotional bond with those things. To refuse the demands of the kijoyo (sebu sebu kijoyo kimúmo, “to refuse that which the little heart would like to have or to possess”) was difficult indeed. Yet if one denied a craving of the kijoyo, Mombasans believed that one would have a gratified heart: moyo umekunduka, an ideal state of being. The gratified heart was serene, a moyo that, if we take the phrase literally, was “unfolded, expansive, which grew large” (D, 325, 179).<sup>22</sup> Such a state, however, was only the ideal. Generally, the pressures of the kijoyo led a person to pine for and strategize about how to acquire a material thing. In common usage, moyo could also mean the “mind,” “will,” and sometimes even the “soul,” at least in a very loose sense. To entirely devote oneself to a thing, one would tia moyoni sana: “put spirit/effort into it,” or be diligent in working toward its fruition (D, 333). In the senses of mind or will, the moyo could restrict desires. It could have agency over the kijoyo’s longings. Muyaka mused about the tussling within the moyo between desire and social conscience. For Muyaka, the ironies of the moyo were that The moyo says, “[Speak out] but don’t speak of others’ business.” The moyo says, “Pray [or beg], but don’t beg for that which belongs to others.” The moyo says, “Lick, but don’t lick a spark.” The moyo desires tusks of ivory, but they are on the heads of elephants.<sup>23</sup> The heart fomented endless wants, no matter how unattainable, like the tusks of an elephant. Because of the infinity of needs and the moyo’s affinity for extremes, many Mombasans believed that the moyo should be bridled. The drives of the heart could be dangerous if acted upon carelessly. For example, the heart craved ivory—an item of great exchangevalue, a sign of wealth, prosperity, and success in trade—but taking it from the elephant was perilous. There is no solution, Muyaka contends, except the control of the moyo. Calming the self came only through action to control the moyo: ku tuza moyo, “to make the heart well [as after sickness]” (D, 388). Indicative of the relationship of the moyo to both the material world and the public realm was a kind of cloth that was in fashion in Mombasa and along several caravan routes in the 1840s: the passúa moyo, or “tearing of the heart.” Its exorbitant price of MT\$3 per piece meant that its suitor was either wealthy, in debt, or willing to forgo other needs to purchase the fabric (D, 90). Mimetically reflecting the longings of the heart, the passúa moyo brought into relief the emotional relationships among people, objects, and an agency that articulated material need. As with love for a person, people felt in the moyo emotion for an object. If a thing was agreeable, like a gift or some purchased object, it pleased the moyo (D, 301). So when the moyo expressed hunger for things, its relationship to those objects was often emotional. This hunger could be more or less motivating, depending on an individual’s self-control. The moyo was not the principal generator of desires, however. As we will see, the roho held that position. Instead, the primary role of the moyo was to continually express needs for objects and articulate the self’s emotional relationship to things and people. Like the moyo, the nia had no existence outside of the body. The nia was the mind, or more precisely, the conscience. Nia fashioned character, the qualities of a person’s self and its manifestation in behavior. A nia suafi was a clean conscience or positive character, while a nia batili was a bad—or corrupted—conscience. The nia was a person’s disposition, their interest, intention and/or diligence to undertake something (D, 280).<sup>24</sup> Thus, to change the nia was to change one’s mind.<sup>25</sup> The nia and moyo overlapped in their abilities to control behavior. The nia as conscience could, like the moyo itself, regulate longings that required restraint. The conscience could suppress desire in the sense that it could convince the self not to succumb to its urges, though even the nia was often overcome by longings. A semblance of the nia’s control was socially important because when the nia was corrupted by desire, the self could never be content; that is, when desire forced one to act against one’s conscience, the conscience became worthless and the self was no longer whole (D, 280). Because material goods were implicated in social relationships, the attempt to prescribe their appropriate, even morally right, uses was a central concern in Mombasan public rhetoric. Mombasan notions of how to affect and control the projections of desire are, moreover, instructive for the study of economy because they shed revealing light on consumer decision making. If a person constantly gave in to the cravings that desire produced, they found little satisfaction. Instead, they became socially and spiritually self-destructive as well as morally impaired. Such people of bad conscience were vehemently condemned. Muyaka satirized those whose cravings entirely dictated their actions. Of Tima, Ima, Mwaniya, and Mwanakombo—women who, spurning social norms, were notorious for their drinking—Muyaka says, If we say to them, “It’s not good [what you’re doing, as] in the grave there will be trouble,” A song of the 1840s warned against over-indulgence in attempts to satiate longings. Like Muyaka’s verse, it proclaimed that the world deceives those who follow it as palm wine deceives the drunkard. Overindulgence, like total self-reliance in place of accepting the assistance and advice of others, was a deplorable personality trait because it removed the person from the realm of normal social relations. Moreover, Krapf wrote that in Mombasan philosophy self-reliance distanced a person from God since dependence on oneself was a reliance on materiality instead of God, what Mombasans termed an act of “loving the world more than God” (D, 251, 282). Though the moyo, nia, and roho were all connected,<sup>27</sup> there were crucial differences between them. For example, the moyo and nia were not divisible from the body. On the other hand, the roho, or at least part of it, was extricable from the physical person and could continue to live after the expiration of the body. The roho was both central to the constitution of the self and potentially independent of the person. Further, the roho, unlike the other agencies, could act directly on things and people, even though it took no tactile form. It could enter into the consciousness of others and, distinct from all the other agencies of the self, it was mobile. Most important, whereas the kijoyo created some desires, the roho was the principal source for the most deeply entrenched of motivations. While roho could be translated as “soul” in the sense of its transcendence of the physical body, it was, however, more motivating than the Western-defined soul because, in producing desires, it fashioned material needs. The moyo was primarily a consolidator of thoughts and emotions, the nia acted as the agencies’ conscience, but the roho was the most significant engine of desire that dictated a person’s actions. In short, the roho created cravings and forced the person, consciously and unconsciously, to seek ways to satiate them. Where it appears in his dictionary, Krapf defines the roho variously as the “soul,” “spirit,” “essence of life,” “breath,” and “greed.” According to Krapf, the roho was desirous, voracious, covetous, greedy, and insatiable. Because of the roho’s aggressiveness, Mombasans struggled to control it. But, as evidenced by the phrase rokho ime-m-piga nia, “the roho defeated [the person’s] nia,” people were not always successful. The roho gave the conglomerate self direction (D, 316, 303). For example, to the question of where a person intended to spend the night, the answer could be “my roho directs me” to such and such place. To direct someone else’s actions was metaphorically described as acting on, or “changing,” his roho. Cash paid to a judge before a ruling was called “secret money to clean [the judge’s] roho,”<sup>28</sup> or a bribe to ensure a favorable outcome. Kimvita and its metaphors suggest that the condition of one’s roho defined the person. Figuratively speaking, to have a small roho meant that one was dissatisfied, fainthearted, hasty. To have a white roho meant that a person was honest and candid (D, 89, 169, 355, 281). A roho makíni was a mild, placid soul, one that was not, in Krapf’s words, “inordinately desirous.” The roho also had sensory capacities that went beyond the body. For example, if someone had heart palpitations with no known cause, they could assume that their roho sensed that they were the topic of someone else’s conversation (D, 197, 85). The roho stood as a signifier for the body’s material longings, exemplified by two entries from Krapf’s dictionary: rokho yangu imekaúka, nadáka maji My soul has dried up, I want water. ni-pa maji kidogo, ni stiri rokhoyangu Give me a little water so that I may take my soul out of distress. (D, 162, 345, 31) Satisfying the body’s longing for water also satiated and calmed the roho. To give the body what it craved was also to relieve the roho of figurative pain. So, while the roho and body were distinct, the satiation of the body affected the roho. The relationship between the roho and body was not balanced, however, as the roho was more strongly positioned. The roho pressed the body to do its bidding, and only the nia could limit the exertions of the roho. The desire of the roho was the most powerful force of longing, stronger, for instance, than that of the kijoyo. Mombasans said that to want with the roho, ku daka kua roho, was the greatest longing of all (D, 356). If not contained, the power of the roho could destroy a person, send them into poverty, or even kill them. Therefore, to allow the longings of the soul to direct all actions was a sin. The thief exemplified resignation to the roho’s covetousness: muivi ana-i-pa roho mbelle, kisha yuwaiba kua wazi, “the thief puts the wants of the roho in front of all other considerations,” and as a result finds no moral obstacle to stealing. Without a conscience to limit their indulgence of the roho, thieves stole with impunity.<sup>29</sup> Perhaps the most extreme, and dangerous, examples of longing were those with a kijito, or “little eye” of the roho. Not everyone had a kijito, but for those who did, it made them want all they saw, like the beautiful clothing, fine furniture, or jewelry of a neighbor (D, 143).<sup>30</sup> So intense could this longing become that without satiation the kijito might make one weep out of envy. The same phrase used to describe one weeping for grief was used to describe someone weeping out of envy upon seeing someone else receive something that they themselves were denied.<sup>31</sup> The poor were said to direct such avaricious cries toward God: mtu asie mali yuwalia uifu kua Mungu, “the person without possessions weeps with envy to God,” so that, as Krapf explained, “God may destroy the property of the rich” (D, 396). The roho was forceful and insensitive. It put its cravings before all else.<sup>32</sup> It did not consider the socio-spiritual consequences of the actions it proposed. It wanted satiation, even though such satiation was never more than temporary. Those who ate quickly or ravenously were said to follow their roho and thus have a “ravenously hungry soul” (D, 185). Mombasans believed that when the roho was not restrained, the end was dissatisfaction and social alienation: lafúka, or gluttony. The glutton was a symbol of social transgression in his or her disregard for manners. The proverb went: “He eats today, he ate yesterday, and what was it that he ate?” The answer was that for the glutton it did not matter. In their haste, gluttons only concentrated on the food in front of them or their next meal; all previous meals were long forgotten in their ravenousness.<sup>33</sup> In their extreme, the gluttons’ wants had physical effects. They could manifest, for example, in heart palpitations if a glutton concluded that the quantity of food presented at a meal would not suffice. In Mombasan formulations, the glutton’s loss of control over his roho resulted not only in social ostracism but also in physical adversity. Muyaka satirized the material glutton as a desirous son who asks his mother for more money after squandering his inheritance. Through the voice of the mother, Muyaka expressed indignation toward the person with uncontrollable longings: . . . you turned into a moth and ate all of your clothes with uncontrollable appetite, leaving nothing. Now you stink, the girls run from you. Go away, go with your wretchedness<sup>34</sup> Similarly, in his lampoon of a high-status woman whose needs were so great that she had forgotten the social consequences of insatiable desire, Muyaka explained that she found no sympathy for the pain of desire: “Even without wealth I do not long for the things of others / coveter without means, let her sit and long.”<sup>35</sup> As we might imagine from the above, people who did not harness their cravings lost respect. The records of their condemnation in contemporaneous language attest to the ubiquity of needs as well as the social and spiritual pressures to control the insatiability of desire. The verb ku niéta meant “to have all that one could wish . . . but never to be satisfied,” as well as, “to be proud or arrogant,” or “to be without good breeding” (D, 282, 84). In a searing indictment of unbridled lust for consumer objects, Muyaka again criticized the glutton of objects: You grasp for this and that, “that’s it,” “no, it’s not [that]”; you can’t leave a single thing alone, how could we know what you want? You’re not afraid of doing wrong, can’t you restrain your moyo? The bad you chose to leave is gone, and the good has deserted you.<sup>36</sup> Muyaka both elucidated and lamented the perpetuity of desire.<sup>37</sup> He often underscored the point that satiation is fleeting because there are never enough objects to satisfy people’s craving to represent and differentiate themselves publicly. In effect, more things will always be needed because they are compared to the constantly changing possessions of others. Complicating control over the roho was a component of the agency that was beyond all restraint: the kifuli (also spelled kivúli), or “shade” of the roho.<sup>38</sup> This was the essential element of consciousness. Much of the roho, like the moyo and nia, died with a person.<sup>39</sup> The shade of the roho did not. Upon death, the shade departed the body and left the remainder of the roho to rot (D, 316, 163).<sup>40</sup> In life, the larger roho remained in people while they slept. It contributed to the pulsation of the heart and enabled breathing. As long as the roho stayed in the body, pulsation continued. The kifuli, however, was free to travel during sleep. It was the agent that showed a person images while they slept, producing dreams. As a person dreamed, the kifuli went far afield and communicated with the koma (the kifuli of a dead person)<sup>41</sup> of others, with which it would exchange news and information. The kifuli could also enter into any object it liked. A woman’s kifuli, for example, once entered a kettle, and she was presumed dead since, with her shade gone, she could not regain consciousness. But when the kettle was upset, the kifuli returned to her body and the woman revived. There could be much more serious consequences to the roaming of the kifuli. Krapf offers this story of the kifuli with a horrifying end: “A husband one night trode upon a peeled bark of sugar-cane. In the morning he found his wife dead in consequence of his mistake.”<sup>42</sup> In its appetite to inhabit the sugarcane, the woman’s shade, in effect, sacrificed her body. The relation of the roho to desire and consciousness reveals the interdependency of needs and the self. The roho fashioned desires and did so relationally, creating envy, jealousy, and greed as emotions of the moyo. At the same time, the shade of the soul could both escape the body and inhabit the very objects it wanted. It could exist inside objects, though to stay within a thing was to jeopardize the body, and destruction of the object with the kifuli inside meant the death of the body and all its agencies, except for the subagency of the shade itself. The body could not exist in a conscious state without the kifuli. When the shade of the soul was gone from a person, that person was like any other object: he or she had no self-recognition. By producing desire, the roho and its shade also attempted to assert the self’s existence by projecting cravings for things that might attract the attention of others. By generating desire for things that created relationships between people, the roho constantly reassured the self of its existence. It would seem that the longing for material things was thus a critical component of personhood. To want was to imagine oneself socially, to aspire to the social position or cultural ideal that an object reflected. ## OBJECTS AND THE CALCULUS OF PERSONHOOD Wanting material things was integral to Mombasan social life because desire was always relational. “To want” was a concept with a seemingly infinite vocabulary. In everyday use, most words for want could accommodate multiple meanings.<sup>43</sup> Haja implied nonmaterial wants, like the pressing need to do something, such as to urinate or get to a place. Yet it could also mean physical property, a thing that one would like to possess. Mapenzi, a word now commonly used to reference romantic love, had material connotations in mid-nineteenth-century Mombasa. For example, mapenzi ya kupena kitu kuliko mtu or ku shiriki kitu kua ku penda kuliko mtu, meant to give one’s self over to craving a thing more than a person. The term pendo la mali meant the love of wealth, consecrated in the act of giving one’s self over to the longing for possessions (D, 93, 202).<sup>44</sup> Other words were more extreme in their connotations. Ku ipa meant to want everything that one sees, or to covet excessively. More complicated, utúmi meant wanting as well as the process of making a profit. It could even refer to the act of physically consuming food or drink. Utáshi meant both demand itself and, by extension, the object of demand. For example, before betrothal, a man would send gifts to the parents of his prospective bride (cash and clothing valued at about MT\$1.50). Asking to marry their daughter without first giving these was foolish, and such an attempt might only draw this response from her parents: “Empty hands are worthless, arrive with utáshi.” With utáshi, the very word for “wants” was metonymic, referring back to the specific objects wanted (D, 108, 416, 413).<sup>45</sup> The most emphatic verb for objectival want was ku t’amáa: “to crave or covet.”<sup>46</sup> Using the noun t’ámani, Mombasans said that t’áamani mali yegni t’áamani ku, or “the craving for wealth is that most extreme of cravings.” The word tamásha, another noun derived from t’amáa, meant an object of interest. This was, however, no regular object of demand, but a spectacle, a new, strange, or startling thing—something of great interest, like a new design of cloth or jewelry.<sup>47</sup> To have resolute longing for a thing was to crave it with the roho, which, by emphasizing desire born of the roho, stressed the gravity of the longing. To long for a thing with one’s roho was not redundant but emphatic (D, 387). Though needs were articulated through complex psychical realms, they were defused in just two manners: satisfaction or unfulfillment. As far as the latter is concerned, the loss of a certain craving was usually passive. If, for example, an anticipated object never arrived, the want for it often slackened. Resolution less regularly came through satiation. Though Mombasans usually regarded covetousness and greediness as lifelong states, there could be temporary relief. This relief, when it did come, always directly affected the mental agencies of the self. For example, in the 1840s there was a certain kind of need, the word for which seems to have fallen into disuse: kuiu, a greediness for meat, particularly after a long abstinence from it. This longing could only be extinguished when one ate enough meat that it “struck the moyo,” or pained one to eat any more.<sup>48</sup> After arriving at this threshold of saturation, the glutton might announce, sidaki tena, nimekinaisha roho: “I don’t want any more, I’ve satiated my roho” (D, 176, 149).<sup>49</sup> However, as we have seen, this satisfaction was only fleeting, since the larger infrastructure of desire remained to produce needs. The following day, as the proverb said, the glutton would not even remember what it was that satiated him. As a result of the condition of desire, need was not just the drive to possess objects in private, but the urge to incorporate things into one’s persona, to use objects to project a public self. There were enormous social stakes in having and presenting material things. In order to better appreciate this, we might consider Mombasan notions of personhood as defined between two referential axes of social division: wealth and poverty. Wealth and poverty were relational social conditions assessed in reference to material things and to each other. Since needs were always pegged to the comparative material scale of wealth-poverty, to understand the role of consumption in constructing personhood we might first consider how Mombasans imagined these poles as well as the ways in which objects related to positions on this scale of social comparison. Unbridled desire could be a person’s social downfall, but respectability and the “pleasures of the moyo” were, nonetheless, directly related to wealth and possessions. For the wealthy, the self found its greatest satisfaction in némsi, a particularly masculine ideal of good reputation or name. Though some of the “respectability” of this condition could be inherited, it was proven by its accoutrements: fine adornments for the person and his environment, servants, and slaves. With strong Orientalist overtones, Johann Krapf described what he imagined to be the némsi ideal in material terms: fine dress, money, good food, two women who fan a man, “whilst he keeps a small stick in this hand, and sits crosslegged in his chair with a fine dagger on his side” (D, 277). Wealth, whether granted by God, gained as a result of success in business, or obtained through unscrupulous means, could grant its possessor power. In Mombasan concepts of wealth, the ability to convert desires into material things was linguistically inscribed in the things themselves. For example, from the noun uwézo,<sup>50</sup> “ability,” came the concept in home furnishing, uwézo wa niumba, “the ability or power of the house.” The “ability” of the house referred to the delicate and expensive plasterwork designs carved into the walls and the imported mirrors, as well as English, Dutch, French, and Chinese porcelain fixed into the plaster of the walls.<sup>51</sup> More broadly, uwézo could mean the process of interior design or the perceptual effect produced by configuring furniture and objects in a particular fashion. Aligned with this was the notion of mapambo ya niumba, or the furniture displayed in a room as well as the variety of things placed in wall niches: objects such as European porcelain, glasses, Indian brass, and English silver vessels. Krapf wrote that, “[t]he natives like to display all their finery by putting it up in their rooms, so that people may see their plates, coffee-cups, trinkets, baskets, and many other things” (D, 152).<sup>52</sup> The uwézo of a house, by reflecting the attributes of the owner, signified a family’s ability. To say that a house “has no ornaments”—niumba hi heina kipambo—implied that its owners were poor indeed. Similarly, the abilities of the body were evidenced in its physical appearance. According to Krapf, Mombasans believed that “[t]he ability of the body is the beauty of the body” (D, 270, 417). Mombasans conceived of the exercise of power as inextricable from having wealth and possessions. For example, the word bádiri had two interdependent meanings: (1) “to spend money in order to marry” and (2) “power” (D, 18). Marriage, at least for men, was a part of acquiring full personhood, and so the marriage process was centrally focused on ability, wealth, control, and gifting. A groom would deliver a constellation of objects to the bride before the wedding, things like furniture (the malazi, or marriage bed, the most costly imported from India and Basra), clothes made of expensive Indian or American cloth, jewelry from Muscat, cash, and cooking utensils. According to Krapf, the “wealthy and honourable ladies” required MT\$60 or more for the standard jewelry set, accessories equivalent to the price of eight hundred yards of American cloth (D, 198, 78).<sup>53</sup> Weddings, while forums for displaying a groom’s ability, were also scenes of his material depletion. An entry from Krapf’s dictionary records such a complaint: mke huyu ame-ni-tia hasara nengi = ame-ni-ishia mali nengi, kua harusi kua ku pamba na kua kula, kua ku nunua manukato na godoro na mido, “This woman has caused me enormous loss. She’s finished off a lot of money/property for the wedding [in the form of] ornamentation, food, to buy the perfumes, and for the mattress and pillows” (D, 97, 390). Though marriage required a great investment, it was dangerous to let a man of increasing prosperity live unmarried. People feared that he might expend his wealth in unacceptable ways, perhaps through what Krapf calls, “illicit intercourse with women” (D, 20). While a young man might groan about the impoverishing costs of a wedding, his family could be equally uneasy with his continued bachelorhood, since this lifestyle offered few socially appropriate avenues for wealth investment. The cultural ideal of great, concentrated spending on socially acceptable objects, such as the proper outlay for a wedding, carried over into all manner of public performance. For example, there was a ceremony for announcing one’s ability and wealth that mirrored wedding rituals. As part of most wedding festivities, the bridegroom was ferried around town on his friends’ shoulders.<sup>54</sup> Likewise, when a newly enriched man wanted to show his “wealth and greatness,” he arranged to be carried around Mombasa on someone’s shoulders (D, 117).<sup>55</sup> The proper social use of wealth was to consume it, not to store it up for future use. People who had wealth were expected to spend it, ku ji-lisha, to enjoy it, or to euphemistically “feed” themselves. Kujilisha maliyakwe, “to enjoy one’s property,” or “[lit.] to feed one’s self their own wealth,” was to transform money into objects and relationships.<sup>56</sup> The practices of Hindu businesspeople in Mombasa were often stereotyped as examples of what respectable people should not do with their wealth. They were said to hoard their money. Krapf quotes Mombasans as saying, “Banians [Hindus] don’t eat good things, they don’t feed themselves their own money; they’re people of great avarice. They’re misers” (D, 117).<sup>57</sup> This contrast, one that comes up often in nineteenth-century Mombasan reflections, between the practices of Hindus (or others from the Indian subcontinent) and the Swahili community is instructive in that it sets up an opposing set of cultural norms that more clearly defines Swahili ideals. For Swahili Mombasans, “miserly” Hindu businesspeople who did not spend in public performances offered alien points of contrast that reified popular Swahili notions of normalcy—in this case the importance of expending wealth through public consumption (D, 98). According to a Mombasan aphorism, “The property of the miser (báhili) is eaten by worms.” Someone who profited from business or other ventures but did not translate his wealth into material things that signified position and reflected cultural norms was despised as a miser. The standard measures for such practice were Hindu merchants and a wealthy Swahili named Famau, “who from avarice sold the meat which he had boiled, himself only using the broth. He feasted at the table of other people, while the eatables of his own were left to rot, and then thrown into the sea” (D, 19). If someone was a miser in the extreme, Mombasans said that they were “a báhili like Famau.”<sup>58</sup> Such narcissism was an abomination, since the miser chose none of the socially appropriate means of wealth use: he neither fed himself his wealth nor spent it on clients or family. By not spending, misers did not socially represent themselves as wealthy and thus sought no more respect than the poor. To disregard these acceptable uses of wealth was to waste money and show contempt for one’s neighbors. Though the miser acted differently, Mombasans imagined him as akin to the gluttonous over-spender who became so obsessed with procuring that he too forgot about social conventions. Both were greedy, and in Mombasa there was a conflation of all forms of “excessive incorporation of value,” to borrow Alfred Gell’s phrase, whether they were evidenced in distended purses or distended bellies.<sup>59</sup> An alternative to miserliness was the spending of wealth to secure clients who might support a patron. Using wealth to attract followers who, like objects, reflected the status of their patron was a good investment, though not without complications. Investing too much in clients could destroy one’s wealth. Wealthy elites secured a client by making some person dependent: ku fathilisha. Similarly, the verb ku fuatía meant to make one follow, to bring a person under one’s patronage. Krapf used it in a sentence that gave causality to the relationship and action of client making: “Abdalla induced my servant to follow or join him by giving him property or flattering words.” Here, to gain followers, one had to make overtures to prospective clients, such as offering them gifts or promises. This practice is summed up by the phrase: ku afia mali, ku wapata watu, “to spend property/money for getting people” (D, 64, 71, 3). Those most receptive to the propositions of wealthy patrons were unmarried men without houses, often the most politically weak men in town. These clients, particularly during Ramadan, feasted at their patron’s houses, and through this, Krapf tells us, “the followers are kept attached to the interests of the chief, who gives them no fixed wages, and who reckons on their support in every case of emergency” (D, 56). Dependents were by definition weak in property, and so their actions and relationships were more easily directed by the proper deployment of gifts than were those of the wealthy. Yet to rhetorically overdetermine clients as entirely passive was dangerous. In fact, there was a very precise phrase for a situation in which a rich person was divested of his wealth by clients: ku-m-komba mtu, “to draw away all the money or property of a person by begging, and by showing apparent attachment to him, but when he has spent all his property and has become destitute, to leave him to his fate.” Krapf wrote that the demands of clients often impoverished patrons and that there were “many Suahili who were once wealthy people, but who lost all their riches by aspiring after greatness, influence, and a large retinue.” Of such people, Mombasans said, watu wame-m-komba maliyakwe pía iote, “the people got all his/her wealth” (D, 168).<sup>60</sup> Even outside of patron-client relationships, Mombasans put great emphasis on public spending and the everyday distribution of wealth as a socially correct alternative to miserliness. “To get a haul of fish is nothing,” Muyaka charged, “the real problem is dividing the catch.” To store wealth, Muyaka reminded those whom he satirized, is contemptible.<sup>61</sup> Muyaka’s sentiment is here reminiscent of the tale of the greedy scholar. As the parable goes, a particular learned man would receive a loaf of bread and a cup of water from God each day. One day, the scholar was visited by a stranger who asked to stay the night. The following morning the scholar found two loaves and two cups of water in place of his usual one loaf and one cup. Instead of giving a full loaf and one cup to the guest, he divided one loaf and one cup of water and shared it with the stranger, hiding the other serving. The stranger, as it turned out, was an angel. When it revealed its identity to the learned man he, not understanding the gravity of his deceit, asked it, “Will you greet our Lord, mkuawetu [our Provider], and ask him to make ready the pepo [“wind” in this context] to convey me to Paradise?” Promising to convey the message, the angel departed and, after meeting with others on the road, returned to heaven to relay the scholar’s words to God. Shortly thereafter, God summoned the angel and sent it back to earth with messages for all it had visited. The angel returned to the learned man. On meeting him it said, “The Lord ordered me to tell you that the pits of fire are ready for you.” Dumbfounded, the scholar listened as the angel explained how, after taking leave of him, it passed a palm-wine tapper on the road. Though perceived as morally bankrupt in Muslim Mombasa, the drunkard, unlike the scholar, invited the angel to share his drink, offering him palm-wine in profusion. On hearing of the tapper’s generosity, God sent a message to him, informing him that the pepo would bring him up to Paradise on account of his hospitality. After hearing all this, the learned man took his books, tore them apart, and left the solitude of his studies to become a palm-wine tapper. The moral: Receiving comes with the burden of sharing, regardless of one’s social standing. Distribution was God’s intent, and all things given by God were to be shared. Miserly people created the conditions of their own social and material undoing (D, 207). There is a paradox in this socioeconomic morality, at least as far as the wealthy were concerned: distribution was socially necessary but pared away those things that signified wealth, prosperity, and némsi. To distribute was to be acclaimed, but to give away all of one’s possessions was to lose the means of gaining acclaim. Thus, no matter how important clients were, to redistribute all of one’s objects in order to gain them was a zero-sum game. The answer was to give out just enough to keep “the people” from getting it all and still not incur the wrath of either God or one’s neighbors, while investing in objects that reflected the condition to which one aspired. Muyaka’s longest meditation on wealth explores this paradox of distribution and material possessions. Ai, gold and silver, such proverbial things. People don’t lend them out, not even to a friend. Those that distribute are few, and these go too far. Ai, ghee and flour, when the two meet. Ai, flour and ghee, the choicest foods, things of distant lands, Portugal and Baunagar [in northwestern India]. He who gives a little of them to a friend, God fills with joy. Ai, milk and sugar, when the two meet. Ai, sugar and milk, which give people strength, with them a sick person recovers and goes about again and walks with confident steps, flaunting his colorful garments.<sup>62</sup> God gives joy to the generous; human giving, Muyaka tells his listeners, creates more wealth. The gifts allow others—the poor in particular—to “recover,” to become social beings again, given confidence by their new clothes. Muyaka suggests that God’s gift of wealth in possessions brings elation, and possessions bring strength, as to the sick. Wealth gives confidence and puts one in the position to flaunt possessions, to curry envy. Because people were defined by what they possessed, objects given to the poor made them whole social beings. Defining wealth as confidence, strength, and the ability to publicly represent one’s self through objects is also to define poverty as a lack of these conditions. People actively lost wealth through their incorrect use of it and their own blundering. A song current in the 1840–50s encapsulates Mombasan perceptions of the impermanence of wealth, the contempt for those who lose their wealth, and the typologies of those with limited “ability”: ulimengu mdauili wasinga mbelle na niuma, ya utukuni Mguame wausa kapo kua mia, “the world is round, it turns in front and behind [i.e., all things are susceptible to change]; see there, Mgwame [who was once a wealthy and respected man] in the market, he sells baskets [receiving in return only] the strips [used to make them]” (D, 256). The story of Mgwame’s fall from affluence had enormous currency in Mombasa because it so effectively played on fears of the loss of prosperity—and with it position and respect. Before becoming poor, Mgwame was the Sultan of Vumba, a town to the south of Mombasa. Through the treachery of a friend whom he invited into his sultanate, Mgwame was forced to abdicate his throne and leave Vumba without his possessions or slaves. In desperation, he moved to Mombasa, where he was only able to sustain himself by hawking baskets in the market. Soon he was a failure even at this, since the only compensation he ever received was more of the strips used to make the baskets.<sup>63</sup> By foolishly inviting a foreigner into Vumba, Mgwame was unseated, relegated to poverty, and hopelessly trapped within its cycle. According to the story, Mgwame created this condition himself. He was rich, but he made himself poor. So potent was the Mgwame trope of property loss that Mombasans employed it to address the social condition of poverty more generally. Songs about Mgwame were used to mock the poor: “You, Mgwame, were once a man of great possessions, and good luck followed you; you sent out your people at pleasure like a king, but now you have become poor, of no use in the town” (D, 256).<sup>64</sup> The only thing worse than being born into poverty was to willfully do something to become poor. The story of Mgwame was a strong rhetorical statement because it allegorically illustrated the common notion that to have and to lose was catastrophic, since in losing things, one also lost one’s reputation and sense of self.<sup>65</sup> In the parable, Mgwame was despised for what he represented: someone who was given much but foolishly cast it away.<sup>66</sup> In common language, Mgwame did not simply become despised, but “caused himself to be despised” (D, 382).<sup>67</sup> As important as it was to “feed” oneself wealth, the common sin of entirely giving in to the whims of desire was an overdependence on objects represented in Swahili literature as ending in God’s retribution (D, 337). Indeed, so important was the overindulgence trope that it transcended the glutton and became part of historical explanation. Abdulla ibn Ali ibn Nassir’s treatise on the collapse of the city of Pate as a regional power, Al-Inkishafi, is a widely known meditation on how the overindulgence of desire led, through God’s damnation, to one city’s poverty.<sup>68</sup> Similar to Nassir’s reflection, the history of the people of Ungama, another parable repeated by Mombasans, depicted divine retribution as the result of overindulgence in material things. At Ungama people freely reveled in the abundance of things. They washed themselves with milk. They cleaned their anuses with bread. Because of these transgressions, God destroyed Ungama; the town was swallowed by the sea, and its inhabitants drowned (D, 405). Having goods and not using them brought the wrath of neighbors, but having luxuries and using them indiscriminately (cleaning oneself with bread and milk, the most expensive of foods) invoked divine retribution. Stories like those about Pate and Ungama were moving moral tales, partly because they played on the fear of losing those possessions that signified certain kinds of personhood.<sup>69</sup> Poverty, or the absence of valuable property, was the condition of a lack of respectability and its signifying objects. If objects signified personhood, their absence suggested a failed or valueless person. To be without possessions was to be without strength, without power. To be poor was to be weak. Of the mdílifu—a poor person—Mombasans said: hana kitu wala hana ngúvu, “he/she has nothing [in the material sense of no possessions], nor does he/she have strength” (D, 337, 218). In popular idiom, the poor were never free from thirst and hunger. They had no friends, and their relatives retreated from them. In their weakness, the poor never brought things to fruition. According to Krapf, the meaning of the word for poverty, uniónge, connoted both “weakness in point of property” and weakness in “influence among men.” The concept of becoming impoverished was synonymous with decay, dying away, wasting (D, 382, 337, 407, 388). Quite simply, to be poor was to want. A muhitaji, or poor person, was literally a “wanter,” someone without possessions. To make matters worse, the wanters of things, because of their weakness and social liminality, were tormented by others. To the poor person who wore tattered old clothes, children derisively sang: mtu mfifu awa mitambara yasiokua usima [or] misima, ya ku nianiuka, mikia kana ya puesa, “a lazy person wears bits of cloth, all tattered, in tails like the octopus” (D, 264, 392, 226). Clothing, while reflecting position, also signified health, wellbeing, abilities, all the conditions of the person. Being full, whole, healthy was reflected in nice clothing. To be without a constellation of objects—those attributes of the wealthy, like imported clothes and jewelry—was to be lazy, without ability. Muyaka’s verses frequently return to the theme of poverty since he was himself chronically poor. He personified many of the stereotypes of the poor: he was dirty, a bad dresser, and dependent on his patrons, relatives, and friends (whom he often ridiculed for their miserliness).<sup>70</sup> Like other nineteenth-century poets, Ali Koti and Muhammad Kijumwa among them, he was what people often called a mkó, or an unkempt person who washed neither his clothes nor his body, and who, instead of adorning his house with beautiful, imported ornaments, left it bare. In his position as a poverty-stricken public figure, Muyaka offers important reflections on the tensions between wealth and poverty and the hardships that the poor suffer, both in their lack of possessions and status. Complaining of his position, Muyaka speaks of poverty as if it were a ravenous vulture searching out its victims. When poverty went roaming and reached the island [Mombasa], that’s where it came to stay, satisfying itself. Its canopy is made of straw matting, so miserable it looks over the bed, and [yet] if you speak out against them, they accuse you of the wrong.<sup>71</sup> Through the striking metaphor of the bed, Muyaka illustrates the social stigma of being without signifiers of respectability. A respectable, comfortable bed had a canopy of imported fabric, usually red printed cloth called msudu (D, 250).<sup>72</sup> To use straw matting—the cheapest material available—was laughable. Poverty negated the social self because its objects, like straw matting over a bed, attracted negative attention to the subject; instead of drawing the positive attention of others, poverty incited scorn. To be perceived as poor was, for Muyaka, more painful than the physical state of having few possessions. In his longing for wealth, Muyaka at once resented the prosperous and envied their position of respectability and their “pleasures of the moyo” gained through possessions. I wish I could cut a smart dash so that wherever I go I’d look prosperous. I long to throw off this poverty since all the slandering against me started that my clothes are full of lice and make me scratch all over.<sup>73</sup> It is the duality of Muyaka’s moyo, on the one hand embracing the lifestyle of the prosperous, even fetishizing it, and on the other hand begrudging the wealthy, that shows the stakes in having respectable possessions. In imagining what it might be like to be among the wealthy, Muyaka made two propositions: (1) that the pain of his poverty stemmed from the castigation he suffered at the hands of those better off than him, and (2) that looking prosperous was a solution to the agony of poverty. If he could appear fashionable, he would no longer be subject to the torments of others since, after all, his poverty was perceptible in his dirty, infested clothes—a public synonym for his character. He wished to look prosperous. He longed for the signifiers of elevated personhood, particularly since he imagined these to reflect his inner self, while his dirty clothes masked the respectability he thought he deserved. These public objects could bear the social weight that the poor sought to unload. In these verses, Muyaka did not desire success to mediate his social relationships or bring elation. Instead, he looked to the signifying abilities of clothes. Muyaka cited the efficacy of clothing to project respectability, desirability, and all varieties of character traits into the social field. He also, in frustration, called this projection deceit, at least as far as many of his neighbors were concerned. About a group of women who teased him, maybe even rejected his advances, because of his old clothing, he offered this revelation: If you see them from afar with their bracelets and ringing jewelry, you would think they were real women able to satisfy men’s needs. Ah, but it’s all make-believe; they are no different from us. They are not women to concern us; it’s only that they have beautiful clothes.<sup>74</sup> Here Muyaka directs his listeners to see through the signifying qualities of clothes in order to recognize what is being figuratively obscured by them. Clothes do not signify real respectability; they do not represent the reality of the women’s characters. The women are not who they appear to be; they have only masked themselves in the signs of desirability. For Muyaka, Mombasans gave far too much credence to the signifying qualities of things. Finery was the mask for a charade of respectability. Nonetheless, Muyaka longed for the ability to wear such a mask. Using the mask of objects to conceal himself, Muyaka imagined what it might be like to occupy the position of the wealthy, to become the object of envy and admiration. By inverting his social position, he might demonstrate to the wealthy the absurdity of their pride and the deceitfulness of their clothing. If I could strut around in beautiful clothes [of] the latest fashions, you would all weep enviously as I pass, your moyos would admire me when I took up my folds [of clothing]. When you punch the wall, you only hurt your knuckles. What do I wait for, why shouldn’t I strut my fashions trailing my folds, so that they billow over the ground? So when I go out everybody knows, walking proudly at leisure with my eyes hardly open. When the fashionable of Mombasa pass by, they show their style. They come out [like they’re asleep with their eyes hardly open] not even deigning to recognize their friends. When they’re in the street, you would think the whole world belongs to them, and if the moyo were a book, I’d give it to you so that you might read.<sup>75</sup> For Muyaka, the wealthy concealed themselves in their folds of cloth, masking their characters in the signs of enviability. Muyaka believed that if he could show his audience the hearts of the affluent, this thin veneer of finery would be spoiled, because they were not better people; they only had expensive objects that, Muyaka argues, could magnify anyone. He himself could appear respectable if he only had access to objects of acclaim. To attract the envy of the rich by wearing nice clothes would be a sweet victory for Muyaka. Using finery to turn the scorn of the rich into envy would prove to the wealthy their self-deception. Ai, let me dress up in finery and strut about town. You’ll see how good I look, in my rare and wonderful attire. It’s among his own people that a person gains status/recognition. Look at the outcast today surpassing all of those around him. This sentiment appears again in other verses: All these fashionable people are of high status, and their status has corrupted them, their finery should be removed, they have overdone their fashions. How astonished might they be [to see me] that I have turned their ridicule on them.<sup>76</sup> Muyaka argues that objects are deceptive. He may masquerade in attractive clothes, but he has not changed anything other than his material appearance. Muyaka suggests that in the single act of changing clothes, he might become their social equal, even without modifying his character or genealogy. According to Muyaka, the wealthy of Mombasa had harnessed the ability to represent themselves in an ideal manner. The wealthy had objects, and with those objects came respect. Yet, in Muyaka’s eyes, the prosperous became contemptible for their pride in their possessions and so were unworthy of them. For Muyaka, clothing had become a sign without anchor, and this meant that Mombasans were continually deceived by the finery of the rich. Muyaka believed that commodities had gained such symbolic power that Mombasans accepted the visual signs of respectability as the true representation of a person’s character, putting more emphasis on the projected self than the actual character of the person. Muyaka’s critique is poignant. Mombasans had invested enormous social capital in the signifying qualities of consumer goods. Thus, items of public consumption were essential to social relationships, and social relations were dependent on the representational abilities of objects. In his reflections on the signifying abilities of clothes, Muyaka reveals the common denominator of consumer demand for many Mombasans: the ability of clothes to bring recognition and envy. What Muyaka wished for was beautiful clothing that would cause those who strutted around in the latest fashions to “weep enviously” as he passed. He imagined that with beautiful clothes he could be remade into a self-validating object of others’ respect and envy, that he might use the means of specific consumer goods to reach the end of a respectable and envied persona. Since the symbolic qualities of objects were their most important faculty in Mombasa— they needed to signify relation to or distinction from others in order to bring positive recognition to their owners—needs were regenerated when objects no longer afforded their owners distinction or character in relation to other consumers.<sup>77</sup> Perceived in this way, the economic actions of Mombasans were to a great degree shaped by the finiteness of objects’ signifying life-spans. And since Mombasans imagined that the satiation of the roho and moyo came through consumer goods that could bring positive recognition to the self, economy could not be divorced from the impulses of the soul and heart. ## CONCLUSION The consumer goods that Mombasans received through trade were neither inconsequential nor randomly chosen. Instead, they were selected to meet the social necessity of representing the self in the public realm. This chapter has outlined attitudes toward and rationales for consumer demand in Mombasa at a time when Mombasans were drawing more deeply on flows of foreign consumer goods and becoming fully integrated into Zanzibari economic, political, and cultural spheres. This reflection has taken us first to the psychical agencies that generated, regulated, and articulated desires: the moyo, nia, and roho. From there we traced needs into the spaces of the overtly relational, or the social discourses and metaphors of display to which needs were directed. In considering the social relations of consumption, I suggested ways in which concepts of personhood were configured in relation to objects. I argued that what was sought in Mombasan consumption was not any actual object by itself, but the imagined condition signified by the object (wealth, respectability, taste).<sup>78</sup> Commodity needs were thus the conscious manifestations of the longing for a certain kind of personhood, that is, respectability, némsi, “goodness.” The economy that such needs in part produced was a result of the dialectic between local social relations and the transregional circulation of consumer goods. Indeed, through demand for imported commodities, the local social environment shaped East Africa’s regional as well as global economic relationships. By the 1860s the economy of the East African region was becoming more profoundly connected to distant world regions, from China to South Asia and North America. As direct trade with distant world regions intensified between the 1860s and 1880s, not only was East Africa increasingly at the mercy of global markets, but East Africans were also affecting patterns of global trade and production in important ways. I consider this commercial dialogue, and the global repercussions of East African demand in particular, in the next chapter.