This study has attempted to shed light on a vast archive of interconnectivity and socioeconomic experience that constitutes the world in mundane ways. I began with the supposition that global relations consist of reciprocities that trouble unilinear accounts of global integration. My strategy has been to start with place-based actions and perceptions of the world and then trace the repercussions of these out to distant places and people. The overlapping scales, strategies, and meanings that I have described here suggest not only differences in the ways East Africans related to people from elsewhere but also shifting perceptions of East Africans. Mutsamuduans and Zanzibaris attempted to strategically manipulate outsiders’ perceptions of them, but changes in Western geopolitical concerns and worldviews in the latter nineteenth century made East African visions of global relationships increasingly irrelevant to the interests of the imperial powers that were rapidly colonizing much of the world. By the 1880s, East African cosmopolitanisms faced Western competitive interests and moral discourses rooted in perceptions of difference and bound to projects of global domination that East Africans could not significantly alter. Colonial imposition would shape East Africa’s global relationships in profound ways, and yet East Africa’s precolonial refashionings left legacies both in the world economy and in the self-definitions of people from Zanzibar to Buganda, eastern Congo, and Lake Malawi. Colonization created new and shifting structures of interaction, but its processes were grafted onto routes of relation forged in the nineteenth century and continually reshaped in their shadow.<sup>1</sup> I began by suggesting that the circumstances of East Africa’s global relationships can elucidate larger processes of interrelation and raise epistemological questions of import to the theorization of globality. Though each chapter has addressed particular themes in specific locales, three broad conclusions warrant additional reflection because they are relevant beyond the contexts that I have narrated. The first and most evident point is that contemporary globality has myriad forgotten antecedents. Not to be mindful of this is to dispossess “peripheries” of their global historical relevance. Tylor’s “civilized moderns” were not the only ones to travel the world, develop knowledges of it, and attempt to understand and characterize their place in it. East Africans too were cognizant of “events and their consequences far and wide over the world.” For instance, when Count Teleki and Ludwig Ritter von Höhnel had difficulties engaging porters for an ascent of Kilimanjaro, Miriali intervened, warning the men to treat Europeans well since, “all Europe watched what was going on at Kilimanjaro.”<sup>2</sup> East Africans did not simply react to global change; they affected the world in important ways. This is not to say that East African images of and actions in the world were more important than those of others—only that East Africans maintained particular visions of global relation that were lost in Western theorizations of Africa. Colonialism did not wrench East Africa from its isolation or introduce the benefits of the modern world. Instead, it superimposed a particular vision of universal interrelation over East Africa’s global relationships, while excluding Africans from many of the social, economic, and political rights championed by theorists of modernity.<sup>3</sup> The notion that contemporary globality has precedent also begs the question of comparison. It may seem futile to measure nineteenthcentury globality against the present. Configurations of relation are, after all, always unique to the moment. Yet historical comparison does offer the possibility of locating analogies to, and discontinuities from, the past in the world we have inherited. The rapidity of significant change during the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries has been astounding. Capital, people, and information move faster than ever before. There are more people on earth, material consumption is greater, and the natural environment is being altered in decisive ways. Perhaps more important, there seems to have been a discernible shift in consciousness over the last two decades. Our very way of seeing the world has changed, and this has had repercussions that transcend and shape the material and digital realities that more commonly gain our attention.<sup>4</sup> But just as the past is not always what it seems, the present is not always as unprecedented as we tend to believe. We should remain mindful of the fact that change, be it in perception or relation, is relative. Has the Internet had as much impact on the world as the telegraph did? Comparatively, the time-space compression effected by the telegraph when it reduced the amount of time to communicate between London and Zanzibar from months to minutes was greater, though less democratized, than the advent of the Internet, which came long after the telephone. Air travel has compressed time-space as well, though not always more than did the train. Much like air travel, railways reduced travel times to just fractions of what they had been. My point here is not that the Internet and the proliferation of airlines are reruns of history. My suggestion is that we must appreciate the cognitive experiences of heightened time-space compression in their real (historical) times. The telegraph and train had profound effects on consciousness that produced senses of global intermeshing similar to those in our time.<sup>5</sup> Assertions that global economic integration in the late nineteenth century was profound and that global consciousness was as acute in the early twentieth century as it is now may seem inconsequential.<sup>6</sup> But if, as Stuart Hall argues, the confidence that everything is destined to be sped up, displaced, transformed, and reshaped is a hallmark of modernity, then the shift in consciousness that has given birth to the discourse of “globalization” may represent a new manifestation of an older cognitive process rather than an epochal horizon.<sup>7</sup> Globalization consciousness, in accordance with the precepts of modernity, seems to be largely confirming many of the historical silences routinized in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. For while the lived experiences of people in the North Atlantic (though certainly not them only), according to Michel-Rolph Trouillot, have come to challenge the conceptual boundaries of human interaction, presuming the novelty of present border crossings reaffirms isolationist interpretations of human history. In the breaching of “traditional” boundaries, the historical boundedness of geographical, cultural, or biological entities is reconfirmed. Like the Swahili “mongrel” of nineteenth-century accounts— evidencing a mixing of neatly distinguished African, Arab, Indian, and European—hybridity in the present reifies the unlike types brought into dynamic tension. Perhaps as a result of new “mixtures,” modernity’s fate will be the dissolution of its categories occasioned by the collapse of the boundaries it fortified. More than likely, however, new configurations of difference will replace the particular realms of isolation we inherited from nineteenth-century theorists, as the popular reception of Samuel Huntington’s thesis that civilizations and their cultures represent the defining differences among human societies suggests. In a time of globalization, a Zanzibari using a high-tech device such as a mobile phone is still seen, from a Western photographer’s perspective, as a historical paradox. It is my hope that archaeologies of historical globality can counterbalance the contemporary experience of paradox, irony, and wonder occasioned by changing patterns of global interconnectivity. The second point I wish to make is that meaning is fragile and contingent. The meanings we give objects are relative and can easily transcend spatial, social, and gendered boundaries. British men’s handkerchiefs became part of women’s fashion in East Africa, while wealthy Parisian women wore bonnets that approximated the aesthetics of Sultan Barghash’s familial turban. Further, the divergent meanings of globally circulating consumer goods must always be considered in accounts of the global economy because these meanings affect demand and trade. The use of brass wire for personal adornment in East Africa, in contrast to its uses in the United States, was important not only for the local social relationships it addressed. East African demand for particular kinds of brass wire also determined the shape of trade, the success of Americans in the Zanzibari market, and even the production techniques and working lives of New Englanders. Having said this, I admit that I have not done justice to the multifarious and changing meanings given to globally circulating goods. The meanings ascribed to merekani cloth in Zanzibar, for instance, were often different from those given merekani in the Lake Malawi region.<sup>8</sup> Even in Mutsamudu, where the manipulation of British symbols had much to do with perceptions of British abilities, there is no evidence to suggest that the meanings Britons and Mutsamuduans gave any object were the same. In fact, Britons regularly protested that Mutsamuduans did not really understand the cultural significance of British objects. For Mutsamuduans, however, the meaning of English things was tied to political, social, and economic strategies, not to British ideals of class, status, or order. The third point that I want to make is that globality is never unidimensional or unidirectional; thus, it cannot be understood as a single process called “globalization” that spreads from the West to “the rest.” The contemporary world has inherited a genealogical tree with innumerable, overlapping branches. Like any genealogical tree, where we choose to begin and end tracing our lineages determines the lines of import and the overall image we produce. For example, tracing out the lines of interrelation that connected East Africa to wider networks before colonialism offers a picture different from that developed through a focus on the “rise of the West” or the “core” of the world-system. The other genealogies we can discern through East Africa are no less our history. No matter how counterintuitive they seem in historiographical hindsight, these other lineages of globality reveal the multi-dimensionality of translocal dialogue. To appreciate the multi-dimensionality of global integration, we must look at the interests and the repercussions of acting on these interests for everyone, even seemingly marginal people. The scenes outlined in this book reveal that the minutiae of negotiated transactions and consumer desire on the part of people considered marginal to global systems were, at times, as important to patterns of global integration as were state regulation and production. The histories we write need to be continually rethought in light of such mutuality. Global integration has offered opportunities for some, but I do not mean to suggest that it is a panacea. Contemporary globalization, like modernization, is no cure for the inequalities patently visible across the planet. My point in these pages has only been that because of their greater autonomy in setting the parameters of global relationships before colonization, East Africans developed certain advantageous positions of exchange and adjusted quickly to both new economic opportunities as well as new technologies. East Africans sought to engage transregional networks on terms that they imagined would be the most beneficial to them. Precolonial Africa was not “merrie”—as the narratives of the enslaved and those whose lives were destroyed by the conflict, disease, and famine of the nineteenth century testify—but military subjugation, direct (if only loose) control of producers, and the protection of home markets during the colonial era gave Europeans, for the first time, decisive trade advantages. Perceptions of Africa have also had long-term effects. While Africans are no longer seen as biologically incompatible with modernity, many still assume that there is something essentially different about African economies that should be altered. Indeed, it is still commonly believed that only external intervention in the everyday lives of Africans, using principles in which many economists have dogmatic faith (e.g., liberalization, privatization, and openness to short-term, speculative capital), can pull Africans into the flow of “real time” and instill in them proper economic postures. Effectively, emphasis is shifted away from Western protectionism and African producers’ inability to access large foreign markets to the liquidation of what few protections Africans have for their own economies.<sup>9</sup> Westerners, under the guise of “development,” still desire total access to African resources while allowing African producers only the most circumscribed access to Western markets.<sup>10</sup> Africans are faced with enormous difficulties in renegotiating their relationships to the world market as a result of constraints that international governing bodies seem largely unwilling, and African leaders disinterested or unable, to address adequately.<sup>11</sup> The demands for “trade, not aid” that have become the mantra of African trade representatives and their supporters seem to fall on deaf ears. The perceptual legacies of nineteenth-century Western analyses also place other burdens on contemporary East Africa, particularly in tourism-oriented Zanzibar, where the history of sultans, harems, Stanley, Livingstone, and the slave trade seems to be the only one it possesses. It is picturesque alterity, a confirming distance, that travelers seek and international organizations attempt to “conserve” in contemporary Zanzibar.<sup>12</sup> This history is, moreover, one on which Zanzibar has come to depend as a result of the economic benefits promised by tourism. Fictive pasts are reflected in the archaic Zouave jackets of hotel employees’ uniforms, the tour guide’s stories of harem intrigues, and the Anglican altar said to have been built on the site of the slave whipping post. These images both confirm and reenact nineteenth-century myths and bind Zanzibar to a history it never owned. The East African coast’s economy has, in part, come to depend on a past that it has little choice but to create in relation to the alterity that Western tourists and funding agencies expect. It is a hallmark of tourism in an age of globality that foreigners visit East Africa to experience a world subdued by its past, a world of strange difference largely disconnected from time. In 2002 Jacqueline Rance wrote that arriving at Lamu, a popular tourist destination north of Mombasa, “gives one the sense of being 500 years back in time.” “This is precisely what visitors love and want,” she continued, “to escape from the rushing Western world and its systems, and taste antiquity.”<sup>13</sup> This is the world we have inherited. What we have lost is a world never as predictable as we imagine, never as disconnected, never as isolated as we commonly believe.