## INTRODUCTION 1. Michel-Rolph Trouillot, “The Perspective of the World: Globalization Then and Now,” in Beyond Dichotomies: Histories, Identities, Cultures, and the Challenge of Globalization, ed. E. Mudimbe-Boyi (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2002), 6–7. 2. Frederick Cooper, “What Is the Concept of Globalization Good For? An African Historian’s Perspective,” African Affairs 100 (2001): 189–213. As J. Lorand Matory suggests, we should not allow descriptions of contemporary globalization “to reduce the past to a one-dimensional foil”; see Black Atlantic Religion: Tradition, Transnationalism, and Matriarchy in the Afro-Brazilian Candomblé (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005), 9. 3. Benjamin Barber, Jihad vs. McWorld: How Globalism and Tribalism Are Reshaping the World (New York: Ballantine Books, 1995); Thomas Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Globalization (New York: Anchor Books, 2000); Samuel Huntington, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997); Bernard Lewis, What Went Wrong? The Clash Between Islam and Modernity in the Middle East (New York: Harper Perennial, 2002). Mahmood Mamdani terms these reflections on incommensurate differences “culture talk”; see Good Muslim, Bad Muslim: America, the Cold War, and the Roots of Terror (New York: Random House, 2004). 4. Martin Lewis and Kären Wigen, The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1997). 5. Michel Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972–1977, ed. C. Gordon (New York: Pantheon, 1980); Michel Rolph-Trouillot, Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History (Boston: Beacon Press, 1995); Arif Dirlik, Postmodernity’s Histories: The Past as Legacy and Project (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2000). 6. Seteney Shami suggests that excavating alternative pasts is an important intellectual exercise because it allows us to challenge the “teleological certainty” of the present; see “Prehistories of Globalization: Circassian Identities in Motion,” Public Culture 12, no. 1 (2000): 177–204. For thoughtful critiques of the discourse of globalization, see Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “Cultural Talks in the Hot Peace: Revisiting the ‘Global Village,’ ” in Cosmopolitics: Thinking and Feeling Beyond the Nation, ed. Pheng Cheah and Bruce Robbins (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998), 329; and Richard Kilminster, “Globalization as an Emergent Concept,” in The Limits of Globalization, ed. Alan Scott (London: Routledge, 1997), 257–83; James Mittelman, Whither Globalization? The Vortex of Knowledge and Ideology (London: Routledge, 2005). 7. Thus, this book responds to Anna Tsing’s charge to study the landscape of circulation as well as the flow; see “The Global Situation,” Current Anthropology 15, no. 3 (2000): 346–47. 8. Maghan Keita argues that Africa’s importance to global history remains underestimated; see “Africa and the Construction of a Grand Narrative in World History,” in Across Cultural Boundaries: Historiography in Global Perspective, ed. E. Fuchs and B. Stuchtey (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2002), 285–308. 9. Steven Feierman, “African Histories and the Dissolution of World History,” in Africa and the Disciplines: Contributions of Research in Africa to the Social Sciences and the Humanities, ed. Robert H. Bates, V. Y. Mudimbe, and Jean O’Barr (University of Chicago Press, 1993), 167–212; Joseph C. Miller, “History and Africa/Africa and History,” American Historical Review 104, no.1 (1999): 1–32. 10. Walter Rodney, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa (Washington, DC: Howard University Press, 1989); Edward Alpers, Ivory and Slaves in East Central Africa (London: Heinemann, 1975); Abdul Sheriff, Slaves, Spices, and Ivory in Zanzibar (London: James Currey, 1987). 11. Nicholas Thomas frames the argument this way: “Exchange relations demand closer scrutiny if they are in fact the origins of subsequent exploitation and asymmetry.” See “The Cultural Dynamics of Peripheral Exchange,” in Barter, Exchange and Value: An Anthropological Approach, ed. C. Humphrey and S. Hugh-Jones (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 23. 12. Africa’s production for world markets has been the focus of most studies of precolonial African economic history. See, in addition to the works listed in note 10, A. G. Hopkins, An Economic History of West Africa (New York: Columbia University Press, 1973); Immanuel Wallerstein, “The Three Stages of African Involvement in the World-Economy,” in The Political Economy of Contemporary Africa, ed. Peter Gutkind and Immanuel Wallerstein (Beverly Hills: Sage, 1976), 35–63; J. Forbes Munro, Africa and the International Economy, 1800–1960 (Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1976); D. Crummey and C. Stewart, eds., Modes of Production in Africa: The Precolonial Era (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 1981); Ralph Austen, African Economic History (London: Heinemann, 1987); Juhani Koponen, People and Production in Late Precolonial Tanzania: History and Structures (Jyväskylä: Finnish Society for Development Studies, 1988). For exceptions to this trend, see below. 13. John Iliffe, A Modern History of Tanganyika (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981); Jean and John Comaroff, Of Revelation and Revolution, 2 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991–97); Jonathon Glassman, Feasts and Riot: Revelry, Rebellion, and Popular Consciousness on the Swahili Coast, 1856–1888 (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995); Jane Guyer, ed., Money Matters: Instability, Values, and Social Payments in the Modern History of West African Communities (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995); Joseph C. Miller, Way of Death: Merchant Capitalism and the Angolan Slave Trade, 1730– 1830 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988); Timothy Burke, Lifebuoy Men, Lux Women: Commodification, Consumption, and Cleanliness in Modern Zimbabwe (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996); Emmanuel Akyeampong, Drink, Power, and Cultural Change: A Social History of Alcohol in Ghana, c. 1800 to Recent Times (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1996); Justin Willis, Potent Brews: A Social History of Alcohol in East Africa, 1850–1999 (Athens: Ohio University Press, 2002). 14. See, for instance, Jean Baudrillard, The System of Objects (New York: Verso, 1996); and The Consumer Society (London: Sage, 1998); Mary Douglas and Baron Isherwood, The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption (1979; repr. London: Penguin, 1995); D. Howes, ed., Cross-Cultural Consumption: Global Markets, Local Realities (London: Routledge, 1996); Daniel Miller, Acknowledging Consumption: A Review of New Studies (New York: Routledge, 1995). 15. Joseph Miller, in his consideration of imports at Luanda, predicted that “[i]mports are likely to prove more momentous for Africa’s history than its better publicized exports.” He developed this point further in Way of Death, exemplifying the ways in which the uses of commodities reconfigured social relationships as well as relationships of production. See Miller, “Imports at Luanda, Angola 1785–1823,” in Figuring African Trade, ed. G. Liesegang, H. Pasch, and A. Jones (Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag, 1986), 164. 16. David Richardson, “West African Consumption Patterns and Their Influence on the Eighteenth-Century English Slave Trade,” in The Uncommon Market: Essays in the Economic History of the Atlantic Slave Trade, ed. A. Gemery and J. Hogendorn (New York: Academic Press, 1979), 308, 310. 17. Philip Curtin, Economic Change in Precolonial Africa: Senegambia in the Era of the Slave Trade (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1975); Joseph Inikori, Africans and the Industrial Revolution in England: A Study in International Trade and Economic Development (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002); Miller, Way of Death; John Thornton, “The Role of Africans in the Atlantic Economy, 1450–1650: Modern Africanist Historiography and the World-Systems Paradigm,” Colonial Latin American Historical Review 3, no. 2 (1994): 125–40; R. Nielsen, “The History and Development of Wax-Printed Textiles Intended for West Africa and Zaire,” in The Fabrics of Culture: The Anthropology of Clothing and Adornment, ed. J. Cordwell and R. Schwarz (The Hague: Mouton, 1979), 467–98. The situation was even more complex in the case of currency. See, for example, Guyer, Money Matters, and Jan Hogendorn and Marion Johnson’s work on the shell trade, The Shell Money of the Slave Trade (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986). 18. Daniel Headrick, Tools of Empire: Technology and European Imperialism in the Nineteenth Century (New York: Oxford University Press, 1981), 106– 7; Hopkins, Economic History. 19. See Jane Guyer, “Wealth in People, Wealth in Things: Introduction,” Journal of African History 36, no. 1 (1995): 83–88. For the intersections of things, wealth, people, and global economies, see also C. Piot’s, “Of Slaves and the Gift: Kabre Sale of Kin During the Era of the Slave Trade,” Journal of African History 37, no. 1 (1996): 31–49. For a pioneering analysis of the ways in which market factors and the politics of social relationships work in dynamic tension, see Sara Berry, No Condition Is Permanent: The Social Dynamics of Agrarian Change in Sub-Saharan Africa (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1993). 20. Douglas and Isherwood, World of Goods; Arjun Appadurai, ed., The Social Life of Things (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986); Ray Porter and John Brewer, Consumption and the World of Goods (London: Routledge, 1993); T. H. Breen, The Marketplace of Revolution: How Consumer Politics Shaped American Independence (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004). 21. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste (London: Routledge, 1984); Grant McCracken, Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988); Baudrillard, Consumer Society. 22. J. Tobin, ed., Re-made in Japan: Everyday Life and Consumer Taste in a Changing Society (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992); Benjamin Orlove, ed., The Allure of the Foreign: Imported Goods in Postcolonial Latin America (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1997); A. Raz, Riding the Black Ship: Japan and Tokyo Disneyland (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999); M. Alfino, J. Caputo, and r. Wynyard, eds., McDonaldization Revisited: Critical Essays on Consumer Culture (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1998); David Howes, ed., Cross-Cultural Consumption: Global Markets, Local Realities (London: Routledge, 1996); James Watson, ed., Golden Arches East: McDonald’s in East Asia (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997). See also Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1984). 23. George Ritzer, The McDonaldization of Society (Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge, 1995); A. Haugerud, M. P. Stone, and P. Little, eds., Commodities and Globalization: Anthropological Perspectives (Oxford: Rowman and Littlefield, 2000). 24. On the notion of domestication see Howes, Cross-Cultural Consumption. The idea of domestication is similar to what Eckhardt Fuchs terms “transcultural transfer,” or the movement of ideas and their interpolation into different cultural systems. Through the realm of historiography, he and several co-contributors show how culturally specific historical writings shape and are shaped by cultural transfers. See Fuchs, “Introduction: Provincializing Europe: Historiography and a Transcultural Concept,” in Fuchs and Stuchtey, Across Cultural Boundaries, 1–28. ## Chapter 1: Similitude and Global Relationships 1. For historical examples, see Marshal Sahlins, “Cosmologies of Capitalism: The Trans-Pacific Sector of ‘The World System,’ ” in Culture in Practice: Selected Essays (New York: Zone Books, 2000), 415–70; Benjamin Orlove, ed., The Allure of the Foreign: Imported Goods in Postcolonial Latin America (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1997); Jean Comaroff and John Comaroff, Of Revelation and Revolution, vol. 2 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997); Nicholas Thomas, Entangled Objects: Exchange, Material Culture, and Colonialism in the Pacific (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991); Richard White, The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991). For more contemporary examples, see Karen Hansen, Salaula: The World of Secondhand Clothing and Zambia (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000); A. Haugerud, P. Stone, and P. Little, eds., Commodities and Globalization: Anthropological Perspectives (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2000); A. Barker, ed., Consuming Russia: Popular Culture, Sex, and Society Since Gorbachev (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1999); G. Gemunden, Framed Visions: Popular Culture, Americanization, and the Contemporary German and Austrian Imagination (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998); David Howes, ed., Cross-Cultural Consumption: Global Markets, Local Realities (London: Routledge, 1996); J. Zha, China Pop: How Soap Operas, Tabloids, and Bestsellers Are Transforming a Culture (New York: New Press, 1995). 2. Aviad Raz, Riding the Black Ship: Japan and Tokyo Disneyland (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999); and “Domesticating Disney,” Journal of Popular Culture 33, no. 4 (1999): 73–97. 3. Anthony King, ed., Culture, Globalization and the World-System (London: Macmillan, 1991); Ulf Hannerz, “Notes on the Global Ecumene,” Public Culture 1, no. 2 (1989): 66–75; J. Nederveen Pieterse, “Globalization as Hybridization,” in Global Modernities, ed. M. Featherstone (London: Sage, 1995),45–68; Brian Larkin, “Indian Films and Nigerian Lovers: Media and the Creation of Parallel Modernities,” Africa 67, no. 3 (1997): 406–39; Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven Randall (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1984). 4. M. Alfino, J. Caputo, and R. Wynyard, eds., McDonaldization Revisited: Critical Essays on Consumer Culture (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1998); J. Tobin, ed., Re-Made in Japan: Everyday Life and Consumer Taste in a Changing Society (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992). 5. James Watson, “China’s Big Mac Attack,” Foreign Affairs (May–June 2000), 120–34; James Watson, ed., Golden Arches East: McDonald’s in East Asia (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997). For an exploratory consideration of the possibilities of cultural reinterpretation, see Ulf Hannerz, “Scenarios for Peripheral Cultures,” in King, Culture, Globalization and the World-System, 107–28. 6. Michael Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity: A Particular History of the Senses (New York: Routledge, 1993), 250. 7. “Memorandum, Political Department, Bombay, 18 May 1862,” AA12/8, Zanzibar National Archives, Zanzibar (hereafter ZNA). See also A. Bourde, “Un Comorien adventureux au XIXe siecle: L’extraordinaire voyage du Prince Abudin,” in Méditerranée et Océan Indien. Travaux de Sixième Colloque International d’Histoire Maritime (Venice: S. E. V. P. E. N., 1970), 265–92. 8. Rigby to Sunley, 5 June 1860, AA2/4, ZNA. 9. Ibid. 10. Robert L. Playfair was the first to recognize that Prince Abdullah was the “notorious” Prince Abudin. Playfair to Anderson, 15 November 1863, AA3/18, ZNA. 11. “Account of the Voyage from Johanna to London, Made by the Princes Mohammed and Abdalla,” (ca. 1863), FO 19/8, Public Record Office, London (hereafter PRO). 12. Three months after Palmerston discontinued their stipends they were still in London, though now only petitioning Palmerston for passage home. Prince Abdullah to Viscount Palmerston, London, 19 September 1863, and same to same, 10 December 1863, FO 19/8, PRO. 13. Sunley to Russell, 7 March 1866, AA1/5, ZNA; Jean Martin, Comores: Quatre îles entre pirates and planteurs, vol. 2 (Paris: l’Harmattan, 1983), 12–13. 14. The political resident at Aden identified him as “Amir Seyed Mahamed bin Sultan Abdulla, Prince of Johanna” in 1866. He had arrived from Istanbul on a French steamer. Political Resident, Aden to Secretary to Government Bombay, 2 November 1866, FO 19/8, PRO. 15. Letter from Alloue, Sultan of Johanna, to Admiral of Mauritius, 1254 Hegira [Hijra], 25 Thani (September 1838), ADM 1/5945, PRO. Sultan Alawi was deposed by the father of the then-current sultan, Salim, who was a cousin to Abdullah on his father’s side; Sunley to Russell, 7 March 1866, AA1/5, ZNA; Pelly to Kinlock, 4 October 1861, AA12/8, ZNA. According to the consul, Prince Mahmud, Abdullah’s uncle, with whom he traveled to London, was the popular choice for sultan in the 1860s; Sunley to Russell, 7 March 1866, AA1/5, ZNA. 16. Memorandum, Political Department, Bombay, 18 May 1862, AA12/8, ZNA. 17. Rigby to Sunley, 5 June 1860, AA2/4, ZNA. Rigby’s letter was one of the first to urge the Government to warn against giving money to Nzwanians “[w]hen they are not deserving of it, and do not need it.” Rigby to Secretary of the Government, Bombay, 1 June 1861, AA12/8, ZNA. 18. For an ethnographic reflection on the internal social dynamics of mimesis in Comorian societies over several centuries, see Iain Walker, “Mimetic Structuration: Or, Easy Steps to Building an Acceptable Identity,” History and Anthropology 16, no. 2 (2005): 187–210. Walker suggests that while Comorians may have initially used strategic mimicry to negotiate relationships with outsiders, it would become a “general social praxis” locally that continues to shape social relationships within Comorian society (192). 19. Homi Bhabha, “Of Mimicry and Man: The Ambivalence of Colonial Discourse,” in The Location of Culture (New York: Routledge, 1994), 85–92. Simon Gikandi has written about a similar strategy of the appropriation of the instruments of colonial rule in an attempt to partially transcend the “colonization of consciousness”; see his “The Embarrassment of Victorianism: Colonial Subjects and the Lure of Englishness,” in Victorian Afterlife, ed. J. Kucich and D. Sadoff (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000), 163. Similitude is also distinct from, but tactically akin to, what Detienne and Vernant call mètis, or the ability to manipulate hostile forces—too powerful to be confronted directly—to one’s advantage. Bayart calls this tactic “trickery” and points to its ubiquity in postcolonial African politics. See M. Detienne and J.-P. Vernant, Les ruses de l’intelligence: La mètis des Grecs (Paris: Flammarion, 1974); and Jean-François Bayart, “Africa in the World: A History of Extraversion,” African Affairs 99, no. 395 (2000): 259, n. 99. Echoing the reception literature outlined above, Iain Walker broadens the definition of mimesis to refer to a “mechanism” for incorporating foreign influences and practices into local praxis by which domesticated influences ultimately “come to have an autonomy from their object.” Walker suggests that mimesis, like the processes of cultural domestication that I outline in chapter 4, is “a strategy for the construction of social identities based on images of the Other” (“Mimetic Structuration,” 192, 204–5). 20. On the scholarly and familial networks that bound the Comoros to the East African coast, the Hadramawt, and ports across the Indian Ocean, see Anne Bang, Sufis and Scholars of the Sea: Family Networks in East Africa, 1860–1925 (London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003); and Engseng Ho, The Graves of Tarim: Genealogy and Mobility across the Indian Ocean (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2006). In a famous incident in the early nineteenth century, ten Nzwanians sailed on the hajj but wrecked off Ras Hafun, on the Horn of Africa. There they found passage to Muscat and took a vessel to Penang, Malaysia. From Penang they went to Bombay, Calcutta, and Cape Town without ever completing the hajj. See Rev. Elliot, “A Visit to the Island of Johanna,” United Service Journal 1 (1830): 144. 21. See William Jones, “Remarks on the Island of Hinzuan, or Johanna,” Asiatick Researches 5 (1807): 93; A Letter from a Gentleman on Board an Indianman to his Friend in London giving an account of the Island of Johanna in the year 1784 (London: John Stockdale, 1789), 12. 22. J. Ross Browne, Etchings of a Whaling Cruise (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1968), 279. 23. J. Richards, “A Cruize through the Mozambique Channel,” Nautical Magazine and Naval Chronicle, July 1849, 342. William Bernard’s earlier account says only the king’s house had this ornament; see his Narrative of the Voyages and Services of the Nemesis, from 1840 to 1843, (London: Henry Colburn, 1844). James Prior described the king’s house using similar terms; see his Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, to Mosambique, Johanna, and Quiloa; to St. Helena . . . in the Nisus Frigate (London: Sir Richard Phillips and Co., 1819), 48. 24. A. de Horsey, “On the Comoro Islands,” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society 34 (1864): 262. Sunley describes these visits in greater detail, putting the number at sixty-two—the majority of which were American—in 1852; see Sunley to Secretary of State, 1858, AA1/5, ZNA. See also Gary W. Clendennen and Peter M. Nottingham, William Sunley and David Livingstone: A Tale of Two Consuls (Madison: University of Wisconsin, African Studies Program, 2000). 25. John Ovington, A Voyage to Suratt in the Year 1689, in India in the Seventeenth Century, vol. 1., ed. J. P. Guha (New Delhi: Associated Publishing House, 1976), 51–52. On Comorian economic and political connections to Mozambique Island, see Edward Alpers, “A Complex Relationship: Mozambique and the Comoro Islands in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries,” Cahiers d’Études Africaines 161 (2001): 73–95. 26. Cornwall, Observations on Several Voyages to India, in A New General Collection of Voyages and Travels, vol. 3, ed. Thomas Astley (London: Printed for Thomas Astley, 1750), 392. 27. Théophile Frappaz, Les Voyages du Lieutenant de vaisseau Frappaz dans les mers des Indies, ed. Raymond Decary (Tananarive, Madagascar: Pitot de la Beaujardiére, 1939), 86. 28. Ovington, Voyage to Suratt, 52. 29. Jones, “Island of Hinzuan,” 78. 30. Richards, “Mozambique Channel,” 340. 31. Letter to a Gentleman, 10–11. W. Owen, Narrative of Voyages to Explore the Shores of Africa, Arabia, and Madagascar, vol. 1 (New York: J. & J. Harper, 1833), 115. On the uses and commonness of engraved breastplates and badges, see Elliot, “Island of Johanna,” 145–47. While the uses of engraved gorgets in places like early colonial Australia signified the restrictions placed on native people, gorgets operated much more ambiguously in Mutsamudu. See Chris Healy’s cogent analysis of the repressive uses of breastplates in colonial Australia, “Chained to Their Signs: Remembering Breastplates,” in Body Trade: Captivity, Cannibalism and Colonialism in the Pacific, ed. B. Creed and J. Hoorn (New York: Routledge, 2001), 24–35. 32. Letter to a Gentleman, 10–11. Owen reported that a Lord Rodney was a captain of the port, interpreter, and master of ceremonies. See Owen, Narrative of Voyages, 115. 33. Henry Rooke, Travels to the Coast of Arabia Felix; and from thence by the Red-Sea and Egypt, to Europe (London: Printed for R. Blamire, 1784), 45. 34. Jones, “Island of Hinzuan,” 87–88, 95. 35. Anton P. Hove, Tours for Scientific and Economical Research made in Guzerat, Kattiawar, and the Conkuns, in 1787–88 (Bombay: Bombay Education Society Press, 1855), 1. 36. Council of Chiefs of Johanna, 1862, Letter to Lord Russell from the Below, Johanna, 17 October 1862, FO19/8, fol. 73, PRO. Since this letter was drafted in relation to Prince Abdullah’s visit to England, it is possible that he forged it. Alternatively, the undersigned might have backed Abdullah’s uncle’s claim to the throne and thus were willing to sign their names to an appeal to the British for intervention. Unfortunately, the intention of the mission is not clear from the remaining documentation. 37. Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 55; personal communication, Martin Ottenheimer, March 1997. 38. H. Plumer, “Journal of a Voyage from London to Madras [ca. 1769],” MS, Bell Library, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. 39. Jones, “Island of Hinzuan,” 78; “Bishop Tozer’s Journals and Letters,” bk. 3, 15 August 1864, Johanna, CB1/1B, ZNA; Rooke, Travels to the Coast of Arabia Felix, 50. On completing his conversation with the English surveyors, the sultan offered them coconut milk in English tumblers with which to drink “healths”; see Owen, Narrative of Voyages, 117. Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 47–48; Pelly to Klinlock, 4 October 1861, AA12/8, ZNA; Pelly, “Miscellaneous Observations upon the Comoro Islands,” Transactions of the Bombay Geographical Society (1860–62): 91. Shinzwani was also written in Arabic characters. Richards, “Mozambique Channel,” 344; Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 47–48. 40. Owen, Narrative of Voyages, 119. 41. Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 47–48. 42. Browne, Etchings of a Whaling Cruise, 251–53. 43. Henry Grose, A Voyage to the East Indies (London: Printed for S. Hooper, 1772), 21. 44. Jones, “Island of Hinzuan,” 90. 45. Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 47–48. 46. Elliot, “Island of Johanna,” 149. 47. Jones, “Island of Hinzuan,” 101. 48. Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 49–50. 49. William Bernard, Narrative of the Voyages and Services of the Nemesis, from 1840 to 1843 (London: Henry Colburn, 1844), 141. 50. Ibid. 51. Grose, Voyage to the East Indies, 21. 52. Ovington, Voyage to Suratt, 50. 53. Grose, Voyage to the East Indies, 25. 54. Letter to a Gentleman, 11–12. 55. Much of this shipment was pillaged en route by a French cruiser. Capt. Thomlinson, June 1809, quoted in H. Salt, A Voyage to Abyssinia (London: F. C. and J. Rivington, 1814), 77–78. 56. Bernard, Narrative of the Voyages, 130. 57. Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 54. 58. Thomlinson, in Salt, Voyage to Abyssinia, 78. 59. Bernard, Narrative of the Voyages, 134–35. The Malagasy rebel Ramanetaka was reported to have received assistance from the French. His primary base of support, however, was Mwali (138). 60. Ibid., 140. 61. Ibid., 148. 62. When the English flag was run up, the sultan smiled, “and appeared to take far greater pride in that unstained ensign, than in his own independent flag, or his own precarious authority,” or so Hall believed. “Great,” Bernard wrote, “were the rejoicings of the whole people of the town; in fact, the day had been one of continued excitement to all parties.” The excitement was no doubt less for the British flag itself than for what it symbolized in this instance: repelling an impending invasion. See Bernard, Narrative of the Voyages, 147–49. 63. Rooke, Travels to the Coast of Arabia Felix, 40–41. 64. Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 63. 65. Browne, Etchings of a Whaling Cruise, 274–75. 66. Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 47–48. 67. Owen, Narrative of Voyages, 117; Rooke, Travels to the Coast of Arabia Felix, 50. 68. Elliot, “Island of Johanna,” 148. 69. Ibid., 152. 70. Browne, Etchings of a Whaling Cruise, 251–53. 71. Owen, Narrative of Voyages, 118. 72. Jones, “Island of Hinzuan,” 100. 73. “Sales at Johanna,” 21 March 1838, MSS 24, Emmerton Family Papers, Peabody-Essex Museum, Salem, MA (hereafter PE). . 74. Sunley to Earl of Clarendon, 15 June 1858, AA1/5, ZNA; Pelly to Kinlock, 4 October 1861, AA12/8, ZNA. 75. Rooke, Travels to the Coast of Arabia Felix, 47. It is doubtful that the crew intended to sell the girl in India, as it seems they were simply teasing with the would-be purchaser by offering the girl at a price beyond his means. It was more common for Nzwanians to buy concubines in the Ottoman realm or in Zanzibar. 76. Prior, Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, 55. 77. Sultan Alloue of Johanna to Sir William Nicolay, Governor of Mauritius, September 1839, ADM 1/5945, PRO. 78. In this vein, see Jonathan Friedman’s discussion of early nineteenthcentury Hawaiian self-renaming and consumption of diverse imported European goods. He describes Hawaiian consumer strategies as the “accumulation of western identity via acts of consumption of both goods and names.” I would add that perhaps such “western identity” might have been used for multiple ends. See Jonathan Friedman, “Being in the World: Globalization and Localization,” Theory, Culture, and Society 7, nos. 2–3 (1990): 326. 79. Bernard, Narrative of the Voyages, 147–49. 80. Though all four of the Comoros Islands were colonized by the French, Comorians played important roles as cultural brokers across East Africa in the years immediately preceding and following European colonial intervention. In the late 1860s, David Livingstone, impressed with a group of Nzwanians he had traveled with on an earlier trip, hired several Nzwanians on his last journey across eastern Africa. See Donald Simpson, Dark Companions: The African Contribution to the European Exploration of East Africa. (London: Paul Elek, 1975). In 1888, Comorians took leading roles in the Bushiri Rebellion on the Mrima (mainland coast opposite Zanzibar Island). The most prominent among the Comorians was a man by the name of Jahazi, who spoke English and had served under Stanley in the Congo. According to Jonathon Glassman, Jahazi’s experience as a cultural broker for Europeans and the knowledge of ordinance gained during his time with Stanley would prove useful to Bushiri. See his Feasts and Riot: Revelry, Rebellion, and Popular Consciousness on the Swahili Coast, 1856–1888 (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995), 232. 81. As Robert Young has reminded us, globalization has not always entailed “irresistible totalization”; see Postcolonialism: An Historical Introduction (London: Blackwell, 2001), 2. ## Chapter 2: The Social Logics of Need 1. I follow Jean Baudrillard’s definition of consumption throughout: “the virtual totality of all objects and messages ready-constituted as a more or less coherent discourse. If it has any meaning at all, consumption means an activity consisting of the systematic manipulation of signs.” For Baudrillard, consumption’s motivational force is more psychical than physical. To become an object of consumption, an object must first become a sign, usually external, “to a relationship that it now merely signifies.” In deriving consistency and meaning from an abstract and systematic relationship to all other sign-objects, the object of consumption becomes part of a series in which it is given value. See Jean Baudrillard, The System of Objects (New York: Verso, 1996), 199–200. 2. Economists tend to speak of “preference” in place of “desire,” and this, as both J. Marks and J. Troyer suggest, often ends in a reification of physical utility in the valuation of goods. See J. Marks, ed., The Ways of Desire: New Essays in Philosophical Psychology on the Concept of Wanting (Chicago: Precedent, 1986), 7–8; J. Troyer, “Rationality and Maximization,” in Ethics: Foundations, Problems, and Applications, ed. E. Morscher and R. Stranzinger (Vienna: Verlag Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 1981), 211–15; E. Sternberg, The Economy of Icons: How Business Manufactures Meaning (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1999), 4. For Baudrillard, the needs that desire produces are very rarely the utilitarian objects of classical economics. Likewise, he suggests that commodities are more than Marxian containers of hidden relationships. Instead, objects are signifiers employed in creating and recreating differing relationships among people. See Jean Baudrillard, The Consumer Society (London: Sage, 1998); Arjun Appadurai, “Commodities and the Politics of Value,” in The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, ed. Arjun Appadurai (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 3–63. To paraphrase Alfred Gell, consumption is thus a process of converting purchasing power (exchange-value) into a “socially coherent definition of the self” in relation to others; see his “Newcomers to the World of Goods: Consumption among the Muria Gonds,” in Appadurai, ed., The Social Life of Things, 113. 3. The second largest city on the coast, Mombasa had a permanent population of about ten thousand people. The estimates diverge radically between visitors, but among those who lived in Mombasa, the numbers do not range much beyond ten thousand in the first half of the century. After mid-century, however, the population grew exponentially. See F. Berg, “Mombasa Under the Busaidi Sultanate” (Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin, 1971); J. Krapf, Travel, Researches and Missionary Labours During Eighteen Years Residence in East Africa (Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1860); Richard Burton, The Lake Regions of Central Africa, 2 vols. (London: Longman, 1860); Charles Guillain, Documents sur l’histoire, la geographie et le commerce de la Afrique Orientale, vols. 2–3 (Paris: A. Bertrand, 1856). 4. Muhammad Abdulaziz, ed. and trans., Muyaka: Nineteenth-Century Swahili Popular Poetry (Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau, 1994), 153–54. See also Berg, “Mombasa”; Guillain, Documents 3:262–63; Burton, Lake Regions 2:78. 5. According to Berg, the name Mombasa even began to replace the local term for the city—Mvita—in popular use under Busaidi rule (“Mombasa,” 33). 6. Demanding the repayment of debts was not always easy in Mazrui Mombasa. The records of the short-lived English Consulate in the mid-1820s are replete with accounts of creditors being harangued, jailed, or otherwise molested when they attempted to call in their debts. See Lt. J. Emery, “A Journal of British Establishment at Mombasa from 1824 to 1826,” ADM 52/3940, Public Record Office, London (hereafter PRO). The formation of a body of rights for merchants that was enforced by the Busaidi Liwali (governor) changed this situation. Krapf argues that “Banians” (Hindus, generally from the northwestern Indian subcontinent) were allowed much more freedom in the realms of brokerage and investment under the Busaidis as the enforcement of debt laws made it easier for lenders to collect, thus making investments much less risky. The Busaidi government also curtailed practices like the throwing of Indians into the sea on siku ya mwaka (solar new year’s day), as well as other crimes that were previously allowed against Indians. See Charles New, Life, Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern Africa (1873; repr., London: Frank Cass, 1971), 65. See also Owen’s discussion of the rights of “Banyans” in the 1820s–30s. W. F. W. Owen, Narrative of Voyages to Explore the Shores of Africa, Arabia, and Madagascar, vol. 2 (London: Richard Bentley, 1833), 150–51. 7. This also gave Mombasa at least three currencies in common with Zanzibar and western India. In 1861, Robert Thornton exchanged rubles in Mombasa. He wrote that a ruble, plus three pice, could be exchanged for MT\$1; see the entry for 16 June 1861, Journal of Robert Thornton, Thornton Papers, Rhodes House, Oxford University; Abdul Sheriff, Slaves, Spices, and Ivory in Zanzibar (London: Heinemann, 1987), xix; Richard Burton, Zanzibar; City, Island, and Coast, vol. 2 (London: Tinsley Brothers, 1872), 46; Krapf, “Letter to Captain Graham, Mombas, 1 May 1845,” in “Krapf of East Africa,” East and West Review 3 (1937): 267–68; Krapf, A Dictionary of the Suahili Language (London: Trubner, 1882), 271, 113. 8. If a slave killed another slave, the owner of the offender was fined only MT\$50. Krapf, Dictionary, 66, 155. 9. Frederick Cooper, Plantation Slavery on the East Coast of Africa (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1972). 10. Note the accord here with Glassman’s argument that new outlets for agricultural produce—the demand for cash crops, specifically—gave greater opportunities for previously excluded people, like small-scale farmers, to engage a larger system of commodification and signs. See Jonathon Glassman, Feasts and Riot: Revelry, Rebellion, and Popular Consciousness on the Swahili Coast, 1856–1888 (Portsmouth: Heinemann, 1995), chap. 1; Jean Baudrillard, Jean Baudrillard: Selected Writings, ed., M. Poster (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 1988), 49. 11. The wealthy of Mombasa also invested heavily in mosque construction and renovation under the Busaidis. According to Berg, twenty-eight mosques were built or restored by Arabs in the Busaidi era, and ten were either built or repaired by Swahili (Berg, “Mombasa,” 154). Mosques offer further examples of the extension of the person into the realm of the symbolic and the desire for recognition. According to Berg, while the means by which wealth was acquired was, over time, forgotten, the mosque—sometimes even its name—continued to reflect the wealth and generosity of the social group with which it was associated; see Berg, “Mombasa,” 164; and F. Berg, “The Swahili Community of Mombasa, 1500–1900,” Journal of African History 9, no. 1 (1968): 35–56. My research confirms that, of the mosques renovated or built under the Busaidis, most are identified with the groups that built them, even if they no longer exist as coherent social units in Mombasa (interviews with Said Muhammad Antar, August 1998 and December 1999, Mombasa Old Town; Abdullah Muhammad, January 2000, Mombasa Old Town). 12. A good example of both the material changes and rapid increase in wealth in nineteenth-century Mombasa is the increase in imported European porcelain evident in the archaeological record. George Abungu’s archaeological analysis of the Ndia Kuu Mosque in Mombasa Old Town revealed wares from China, India, the Persian Gulf, and Portugal at the earliest levels (from the midsixteenth century). In the nineteenth century, however, English, Dutch, and other Western European wares began to supersede not only their Asian counterparts, but also all local ceramics. Abungu shows that local ceramics predominated up to the nineteenth century, but, by the end of the century, very few locally made ceramics were found in the middens. The only local shards were those from cooking pots and water jars; all bowls, plates, and cups were imported. See George Abungu, “Islam on the Kenyan Coast: An Archaeological Study of Mosques” (Master’s thesis, University of Cambridge, 1986), 27–28. See also Richard Wilding, “Ceramics of the Lamu Archipelago” (Ph.D. diss., University of Nairobi, 1977); Judy Aldrick, “The Painted Plates of Zanzibar,” Kenya Past and Present 12 (1997): 26–28. 13. Krapf, Dictionary, 3, 59, 253 (subsequent citations of this work are given parenthetically in the text and notes by the abbreviation D and the page number). This ability of the previously excluded to engage in local signifying practices would become an even more pervasive social phenomenon during the later part of the nineteenth century as the patron-client and master-slave relationships that defined much of earlier Mombasan social intercourse were reconfigured because of new methods of accumulation and the abolition of slavery. See Frederick Cooper, From Slaves to Squatters: Plantation Labour and Agriculture in Zanzibar and Coastal Kenya, 1890–1925 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1980). See also chapter 5. 14. Shaykh al-Amin bin ‘Ali al Mazrui, The History of the Mazru‘i Dynasty of Mombasa, ed. and trans., James M. Ritchie (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), 80. Some of Muyaka’s most famous verses were political propaganda, particularly his exchanges with Zahidi Mngumi and other Lamuans in the early nineteenth century; see Ann Biersteker and Ibrahim Noor Shariff, eds., Mashairi ya Vita vya Kuduhu: War Poetry in Kiswahili Exchanged at the Time of the Battle of Kuduhu (East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1995). Throughout this chapter I depend on Mohamed Abdulaziz’s compilation of Muyaka’s work instead of the less comprehensive collection of William Hichens and Mbarak Hinawy, Diwani ya Muyaka (Johannesburg: University of Witswatersrand Press, 1940). 15. On Muyaka’s verse in Zanzibar, see Edward Steere, Swahili Tales, as Told by the Natives of Zanzibar (London: Bell and Daldy, 1870), xiii. In the example given by Steere, Muyaka’s verses on the vita vya kiduhu (Lamu-Mombasa/Pate battle) were recalled in Zanzibar nearly fifty years after their composition. 16. To standardize Krapf’s spellings—that is, translate them into modern, standard Swahili—would obscure both their dialectical provenance and Krapf’s interpretations. As far as Muyaka’s work is concerned, I have used Abdulaziz’s meticulous translations as a guide, but the final interpretations are my own. 17. In his collection of Swahili words, ideas, songs, and poetry, Krapf was particularly interested in Swahili metaphysical definitions of the self. While ironically never evangelizing to the people whose language he studied most closely, he believed that his research into Mombasan notions of the mind, soul, and body offered a springboard to address the belief systems of the non-Muslim populations of the mainland. 18. Krapf completed his dictionary in the early 1850s, but it was not published until after his death in 1882. The dictionary reflects translation work he began in the mid-1840s. Krapf’s letter to Richard Waters (2 September 1844, Mombas [sic]) is one of the few documents in which Krapf speaks of his work in compiling the dictionary, though only in passing. Even in his introduction to the dictionary Krapf says very little about its compilation. See Personal Papers, Journals, Richard Waters Papers, MH 14 Peabody-Essex Museum, Salem, MA. Muyaka’s verses, by the time they were collected by Mwalimu Sikujua bin Abdullah (a younger contemporary of Muyaka’s), and transliterated by Rev. W. E. Taylor of the East African Christian Missionary Society, were also several decades old. For a full treatment of W. E. Taylor and the verses he transliterated, see Ann Biersteker, Kujibizana: Questions of Language and Power in Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Poetry in Kiswahili (East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1996). 19. According to Krapf, there had been other agencies, like the mtima. By the mid-nineteenth century, these had been superseded by the three dominant agencies that I outline here. We might also include thámiri: “thought,” “conscience.” But, since thámiri refers to functions that can be duplicated by the other agencies discussed here, I leave it aside (D, 370). The older agencies could still be found in specialized language, like poetic verse, which accented the classical. On mtima, which could mean self, spirit, or heart in “old Kisuahili” as well as in “Kisegua, Kiniassa, and Kisamb,” see D, 255; and Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 181, 226. More recently, dhati (borrowed from Arabic), has taken on a meaning that is more primary than any of the agencies I discuss here. Johnson defined it in the 1930s as “essence,” the “innermost self.” See F. Johnson, A Standard Swahili-English Dictionary (Nairobi: Oxford University Press, 1939), 74. The Kamusi ya Kiswahili Sanifu offers a similar contemporary definition, though more akin to what Krapf calls the nafsi. The Kamusi also defines dhati as asili, which implies an over-arching “essence” closer to Johnson’s definition. See Taasisi ya Uchunguzi wa Kiswahili, Kamusi ya Kiswahili Sanifu (Dar es Salaam: Oxford University Press, 1997), 44; Kamusi Project: Internet Living Swahili Dictionary (2001; http:// www.yale.edu/swahili/). The word dhati does not appear in Krapf’s work or in Steere’s dictionary of nineteenth-century Zanzibar Swahili, which suggests that it might not have come into general usage until the end of the nineteenth or the early twentieth century. See Edward Steere, A Handbook of the Swahili Language, as Spoken at Zanzibar (1870; repr., London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1894). 20. It could likewise be the core or center of a thing: the heart of a coconut, or the heart of a kanzu (i.e., the slit that reaches from the neck to the mid-chest of a man’s long shirt). Roho might also mean the pit of the throat, but it doesn’t seem to have this connotation in its surviving literary uses. 21. Joyo meant both “heart” and “avarice” (D, 120). 22. Sayyid Abdulla ibn Ali ibn Nassir, Al-Inkishafi: Catechism of a Soul, ed. and trans., J. de Vere Allen (Nairobi: East African Literature Bureau, 1977); S. Partington, Animation of the Soul: A Translation of the KiSwahili, Islamic Epic Al-Inkishafi (Mombasa: Mombasa Academy, 1999). 23. Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 188–89. 24. Ibid., 192–93. 25. Ibid., 268–69. 26. Ibid., 244–45. 27. The collective self was termed the nafsi, taken from the Arabic for “self” or “soul” (D, 272); cf. Johnson, Standard Swahili-English Dictionary, 328. 28. An mbéko, or present given to a person who may become useful in the future, could also affect the roho and through it bodily actions or decisions. To “put a good mbéko” on a person meant to leave them with a good memory that the giver hoped would translate into some advantage in the future (D, 214, 75, 310). 29. The punishment for thieves (and adulterers) was a public affair that allowed all Mombasans the opportunity to chastise the criminal. Accused persons were stripped nearly naked, led through the streets of the town with their hands tied behind their backs, and beaten along the way (D, 108, 273). Getting away with theft, however, could be easy for those with the power of kilimato, or the ability to see in all directions and cause people to fall asleep before robbing them (D, 146). 30. In contemporary Mombasa, the person with “the eye” (mato/macho, literally “the eyes,” but translated in the singular) is not only desirous, but also has the power to destroy anyone who possesses the object of the eye’s longing. For example, if someone with the eye sees somebody else carrying a loaf of bread that the eye wants, the power of the eye makes the bread poisonous to its possessor. The person takes the bread home, never knowing that it has been infected with the poison of the eye, and those who eat the bread become ill or die. 31. “To cry avariciously”: ku lia joyo (D, 187, 279). 32. Roho ku-i-pa mbelle (D, 185). 33. Because of their overindulgence, both gluttons and drunkards were not respectable: they had no shame. Without shame to regulate desire and longings, they became outcasts and objects of satire and ridicule (D, 236,382). But even among gluttons, a social distinction was made between the mláfi and the mlaji. Whereas both were insatiable and ate too much food at once, the mlaji did not go about asking for food from others. They may both kúla kua pupa—have eaten quickly so that they may consume more than others—but the mláfi was despicable for his begging, while the mlaji was only reviled for his buba, or undue haste, what Krapf called a “morbid anxiety to finish a business” (D, 401, 331 [pupa], 29). 34. Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 108–9. 35. Ibid., 332–33. 36. Ibid., 258–59. 37. In Lacanian formulations, a central element of the definition of desire as a condition is that it cannot be satiated because the object of desire is not any material thing, but the state represented by certain object—wealth, respectability, or cultural refinement, for example. See Jacques Lacan, Freud’s Papers on Technique, trans. John Forrester (New York: W. W. Norton, 1988); P. Fuery, Theories of Desire (Carlton: Melbourne University Press, 1995). 38. In contemporary, standard Swahili the word kifuli means a “lock.” Krapf, who may have gotten the orthography wrong, only uses this word for “shade,” which would be kivule in contemporary, standard Swahili. Krapf does not give a definition for the English word lock. 39. When a roho was killed, it was euphemistically said to be “dug” (D, 372). 40. Krapf says that physicians were powerless to change the fate of the roho: “When the roho is called, there is no recourse” (D, 258). 41. Mijikenda people (whom Krapf calls Nyika) in the Mombasa area shared the concept of the koma. Burton, Zanzibar, 2: 87. Playfair describes the koma of Mijikenda as the “shade” of an ancestor to whom one can appeal in times of trouble. Playfair to Havelock, 9 April 1864, L/P&S/9/41, British Library, India Office Library, London (hereafter IOL). In Mombasa, a horrible fate awaited the koma of the wicked. An angel, mukari wanakirri, could torment the koma in its grave by keeping it conscious of itself. This was called the “punishment of the grave” (D, 266). 42. “Hence the Suahilis carefully remove the peeled bark of sugar-cane [from their houses] before they go to bed. The natives are also much afraid of large black cats, because, in their superstitious opinion, they are very apt to fetch the kifuli ja rokho” (D, 276). Even once it became a koma, the kifuli had means. If a woman became sexually involved during the mourning months after her husband’s death, upon being washed in the sea at the end of mourning—along with her bed, plates, pots, and mats—the koma of her dead husband could attack and kill her (412). 43. In Krapf’s dictionary, only sháuku appears as a term for “want,” and its implication was exclusively romantic (Krapf alternatively defines it as “lust” [329]). 44. Most other terms, like u’ju, dáka, madáka, makhtaji, ngóa (ku timiza ngoayakwe, “to satisfy one’s desire”) connoted mild longings in senses that were not entirely limited to material objects. See also 398, 354, 191, 197, 279. 45. It follows that an mtashi was a desirous person, someone who wants a thing (Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 332). 46. As a reflection of aspiration, if a person saw his possessions as insufficient—not “large” enough—one might say: mtu huyu adaka kitu kikuba, kituchakwe ni kidogo; “This person wants something big, their thing [now] is [too] small” (D, 355). In contemporary usage, the noun and verb are reversed: that is, kutamani is the verb and tamaa is the noun. It is unclear if this reversal has happened over time or if this inversion was an error on Krapf’s part in compiling his dictionary. 47. A European ship was considered a tamásha, spectacular in itself and for what it brought. It was a curiosity, an oddity (D, 356). 48. Hatta ku ona vibaya moyonimoyoni, “until one experiences pains in one’s heart” (D, 176). 49. Chakúla hiki kina-ni-kináisha rohoni (D, 149). Another example is nadaka nefasi, “I desire according to my own wishes.” When combined with maritháwa—“abundance,” “plenty,” “according to one’s wish”—we get kulla kitu kua nefasiyakwe, “delight or wish of the spirit”; nimekúla marithawa, “I have eaten to my fill and with delight” (203). It is this satiation which Muyaka, in a famous refrain, satirically idealizes as satisfaction: ai, things and the one who receives them, when the two meet (Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 1992). 50. Ku eza: v.; “to be able, to have power over, to be equal” (D, 60). 51. European porcelain was often called sahani ya Mris or Moris: “the Maurician plate,” since it initially came from Mauritius. Ibid., 320. 52. See also, L. Donley, “House Power: Swahili Space and Symbolic Markers,” in Structural and Symbolic Archaeology, ed. Ian Hodder (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 63–73; “The Social Uses of Swahili Space and Objects” (PhD diss., Cambridge University, 1984). 53. This jewelry consisted of silver rings on the feet (MT\$10 each), a kekee ya mkono on each hand (MT\$2 each), the shamili la shikio in each ear (MT\$2), a mkuffu (necklace, from MT\$1 to MT\$2). This might be augmented by a koa la fetha, a silver ring adorning the upper arms at MT\$15 each (D, 87). 54. Emery described similar practices twenty years earlier. See Emery, “A Journal of British Establishment at Mombasa.” 55. This ceremony, the yongóa, was reportedly specific to the Thelatha Twaifa of Mombasa. Across the bay at Jomvu, people represented their wealth in a similar public display, punctuated by piling up fifty to sixty bags of corn and dancing on them (D, 430). 56. Likewise, ku la ngoa yakwe meant to “[lit.] ‘eat’ [i.e., satisfy] one’s desires” (D, 187). 57. Mabaniani hawali vitu vema, hawajilishi maliyao, ni wegni joyo, ni mabáhili. 58. Even more indicative of the repercussions of the miser’s breaking of social norms is the punishment of a defaulting member of a kikóa, or rotating dinner party among friends. To save the expense and trouble of cooking, Mombasans, particularly in times of famine or before the rainy season, organized parties. If one defaulted, that is, feasted like Famau at the tables of others and offered them nothing in return, s/he could be offered the proverb, “He who eats at the banquet, but doesn’t repay [the host] has his/her head shaved clean.” Partners who shied from duty had their heads shaved, making them recognizable for their failings and open to public ridicule (D, 144). 59. Gell, “Newcomers to the World of Goods,” 113. There was a distinction between people who had real wealth, and those who were fáhari, or wanton. To be fahari was to live “above one’s position”; ku ji-fania fáhari was like ku-ji-fania utágiri, to live “like the wealthy but without their means” (D, 61). To live richly and yet to be of meager means was to be reckless, unruly, and careless. 60. One did not have to be a patron to lose possessions and the respect they brought to their owners. One might lose cash, possessions, food, slaves, and so on through gambling. The people of Jomvu, just across the bay from Mombasa, were “said to have been passionately fond of gambling,” according to Krapf. It was through gambling (playing dice) that they, by Krapf’s reckoning, “ruined themselves” (D, 297). 61. Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 274–75. We might also read Muyaka to mean that, as suggested earlier, distribution is a delicate social process. 62. Ibid., 162–65. 63. William Taylor, African Aphorisms; or Saws from Swahililand (London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1891), 16; cf. Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 85. 64. Mguame kale ulikua na jaha ( = witu wingi) na Nasibu ika endeme, ulipo ukituma raha kua makamo ya mfalume, sasa unabeha mujinimuetu, kuheme ( = kuhami). 65. In figurative speech, if one was said to have “[formerly] eaten wheat”— that most costly and ostentatious of foods—the implication was that they were disgraced by a fall from wealth. One who “ate wheat” was once rich, but now must be content with little (D, 278). 66. Playing on the Mgwame trope, Muyaka uses the fallen man as a metaphorical device to publicly condemn the actions of Maalam bin Mwinyi Shafi al-Kilindini, the Kilindini sheikh who struck a compromise with Sayyid Said to give Mombasa over to the Busaidis. “The destroyer of the country is a child of the land, always assess the foreigner well; Mngwame is at the market; he sells matting bags for slips of palm-leaf” (Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 151–52). According to several sources, Maalam al-Kilindini facilitated Sayyid’s invasion of 1837 by distributing gifts to key Swahili and Mijikenda in return for their capitulation. As a result, Said’s forces landed at Kilindini and took Mombasa with little resistance. (See Berg, “Mombasa,” 78; Krapf, Travels, 435–36; Guillain, Documents, 2:602–5.) Steere offered a commonly heard perspective on the Kilindini actions: Wakilindini si watu ni punda milia,Walikuza nti yao kwa reali mia; “Kilindini people are not human, they are zebras, They sold their country for 100 dollars” (Swahili Tales, xi). Whereas, of the defeated Mazrui, Mombasans said: Masrúe ni kikondo, wafa kiunguana: “the Mazrui were like sheep, they died nobly in the fashion of gentlemen [when they were expelled by Seyyid Said]” (D, 163). Though the sentence is in the present tense, Krapf interpreted it as a direct reference to the Busaidi invasion. 67. Ji-tukánisha kua watu. Richly symbolic in its use to describe Mgwame’s actions, the phrase, “to cause oneself to be despised,” was commonly used to refer to the act of going naked in public. 68. Nassir, Al-Inkishafi. 69. Lacan terms this anxiety amphanisis: the fear of losing the signifiers of being; see Fuery, Theories of Desire, 24. This—what Lacan calls the “fading” of the subject when those things that reflect their personhood back onto them are taken away—was the psychological terror of poverty. 70. Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 308–9. 71. Ibid., 284–85. 72. Burton, Lake Regions, 2:398. 73. Abdulaziz, Muyaka,180–81. 74. Ibid., 172–73. Many of Muyaka’s verses were replies to disparaging comments made by women. He was self-conscious about his appearance, and thus his public addresses to women focused on the themes of (1) their inability to see beneath his outward appearance and (2) what he called their use of clothing to deceive men (173, fn. 2). 75. Abdulaziz, Muyaka, 252–53. 76. Ibid., 109–10, 252–53. 77. See Roland Barthes, The Fashion System (New York: Hill and Wang, 1983); P. Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste (London: Routledge, 1984); G. Faurschou, “Obsolescence and Desire: Fashion and the Commodity Form,” in Postmodernism—Philosophy and the Arts, ed., H. Silverman (New York: Routledge, 1990), 234–59; Grant McCracken, Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988). In extreme cases, as in the contemporary United States, objects can lose sign-value so quickly that they must be replaced soon after their purchase; vide the American advertising tropes, “This Year’s Model” or “Fall Fashions.” 78. See Fuery, Theories of Desire, 186. ## Chapter 3: The Global Repercussions of Consumerism 1. In using the phrase “world-system theory,” I do not mean to imply that there is unity among theorists of world-systems beyond a concentration on systemic interaction and a belief that systems exist. Christopher Chase-Dunn and Thomas Hall sum up the field as a concern with systemness: how events in one locale have consequences for social structures in another. See Chase-Dunn and Hall, Rise and Demise: Comparing World-Systems (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,1997), 17. According to Immanuel Wallerstein, the general “claim to strength” of the world-systems perspective is that it makes sense out of seeming coincidences that in fact link far corners of the globe; see his “Feudalism, Capitalism, and the World-System in the Perspective of Latin America and the Caribbean: Comments on Stern’s Critical Tests,” American Historical Review 94, no. 4 (October 1988): 884–85. 2. See especially Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World-System, 3 vols. (New York: Academic Press, 1974–1989); Historical Capitalism; with Capitalist Civilization (New York: Verso, 1995), and “The Three Stages of African Involvement in the World-Economy,” in The Political Economy of Contemporary Africa, ed. Peter Gutkind and Immanuel Wallerstein (Beverly Hills, CA: 1976), 30–57. 3. The language of core/periphery categorization has become so normalized that its genesis and assumptions are rarely acknowledged in globalization literature. See, for instance, Kevin Cox’s introduction to a recent anthology on economic globalization, Spaces of Globalization: Reasserting the Power of the Local, ed. Kevin Cox (New York: Guilford Press, 1997), 1. Other social scientists working in a historical vein, such as Andre Gunder Frank, have attacked the conclusions of world-system analysts but have not challenged the idea of “cores” as the determining features of global systems; see his ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1998). At the same time, some world-systems theorists, such as Chase-Dunn and Hall, have argued that it is a mistake to assume that all relations among “less” and “more developed” societies entail exploitation or processes of underdevelopment (Rise and Demise, 36). 4. Many historians and anthropologists have criticized the monocausal, analytical logic at the heart of Immanuel Wallerstein’s model of the world-system, a logic that only explains change in the “periphery” by reference to the system’s center, or “core.” See Steve Stern, “Feudalism, Capitalism, and the World-System in the Perspective of Latin America and the Caribbean,” American Historical Review, 93, no. 4 (October 1988): 829–72, and the ensuing debate between Stern and Wallerstein in the same volume. Over two decades ago, R. Robertson and F. Lechner suggested that contemporary theory must account for the trajectories of global integration in a “multidimensional fashion”; see their “Modernization, Globalization and the Problem of Culture in World-Systems Theory,” Theory, Culture, and Society 2, no. 3 (1985): 113. Peter Geschiere, Richard Kilminster, and Arif Dirlik have recently extended this critique to contemporary globalization studies, arguing that the ability of the local to shape global relationships is still too easily overlooked. Geschiere suggests that only detailed analysis of exchanges “may effectively debunk a terminology, still coming so easily to many colleagues, that serves to depict people in the ‘periphery’ as only receivers or as re-actors”; see Peter Geschiere, “Historical Anthropology: Questions of Time, Method and Scale,” Interventions 3, no. 1 (2001): 37; Richard Kilminster, “Globalization as an Emergent Concept,” in The Limits of Globalization, ed. Alan Scott (London: Routledge, 1997), 269; Arif Dirlik, Postmodernity’s Histories: The Past as Legacy and Project (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2000). 160. Good examples of how global systems can look from local perspectives include Marshal Sahlins’ imaginative essay, “Cosmologies of Capitalism: The Trans-Pacific Sector of ‘The World System,’ ” in Culture in Practice: Selected Essays (New York: Zone Books, 2000), 415–70; April Lee Hatfield, Atlantic Virginia: Intercolonial Relations in the Seventeenth Century (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004); and Donald Wright, The World and a Very Small Place in Africa. (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1997). 5. Wallerstein, “Three Stages,” 35. Wallerstein recognized that linkages between regions in the world economy are reciprocal, but he argued that in these linkages we find the “underlying determinants of social actions at a more local level” (35). I suggest that linkages, because of the reciprocities they convey, reveal both the negotiation of various social actions and the imposition of economic constraints. Also working through a sociological optic, Anthony Giddens and Roland Robertson moved in a somewhat different direction by stressing the dialogic processes and multicausality inherent in global integration. See Anthony Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1990), and Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Mod ern Age (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1991); Roland Robertson, Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture (London: Sage, 1992). 6. C. A. Bayly, in The Birth of the Modern World, 1780–1914 (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004), takes a multicausal approach to a diversity of global transformations. Frederick Cooper offers a sharp critique of the tendency among globalization theorists to derive historical conclusions from “idealized versions of the ‘globalized present’ ” in ways that occlude past contingencies, choices, decisions, and constraints. Cooper argues that globalization models, like modernization theory (we might add dependency, world-systems, and neoliberal approaches), reduce great diversities of phenomena to singular conceptual frames that may reveal important constants but at the same time obscure myriad historical processes. This “singular notion of change” has undermined the utility of most social science theories of global integration. See Frederick Cooper, “What Is the Concept of Globalization Good for? An African Historian’s Perspective,” African Affairs 100, no. 399 (2001): 205, 212. For other important efforts to bring historiography into dialog with globalization studies, see Barry K. Gills and William R. Thompson, eds., Globalization and Global History (New York: Routledge, 2006); A. G. Hopkins, Global History: Interactions Between the Universal and the Local (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006); A. G. Hopkins, ed., Globalization in World History (New York: W. W. Norton, 2002); Bruce Mazlish and Akira Iriye, eds., The Global History Reader (New York: Routledge, 2005); Patrick Manning, Navigating World History: Historians Create a Global Past (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003); Philip Pomper, Richard H. Elphick, and Richard T. Vann, World History: Ideologies, Structures, and Identities (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1998). 7. Perhaps more than any other field, economic anthropology has directly addressed the cultures and social meanings of exchange. See, for instance, Jane Guyer, ed., Money Matters: Instability, Values, and Social Payments in the Modern History of West African Communities (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995); Caroline Humphrey and Stephen Hugh-Jones, eds., Barter, Exchange, and Value: An Anthropological Approach (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992); Nicholas Thomas, Entangled Objects (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991); Parker Shipton, Bitter Money: Cultural Economy and Some African Meanings of Forbidden Commodities (Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association, 1989). 8. David Richardson, “West African Consumption Patterns and Their Influence on the Eighteenth-Century English Slave Trade,” in The Uncommon Market: Essays in the Economic History of the Atlantic Slave Trade, ed. Henry Gemery and Jan Hogendorn (New York: Academic Press, 1979), 303–30; see also Emmanuel Akyeampong, Drink, Power, and Cultural Change: A Social History of Alcohol in Ghana, c. 1800 to Recent Times (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1996); Stanley Alpern, “What Africans Got for Their Slaves,” History in Africa 22 (1995): 5–43; George Metcalf, “A Microcosm of Why Africans Sold Slaves: Akan Consumption Patterns in the 1770s,” Journal of African History 28, no. 3 (1987): 377–94. 9. Richardson, “West African Consumption Patterns,” 308. Philip Curtin’s work on the Senegambia in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries argued a similar point. French industries were unable to copy Indian manufactured cloth—even though they attempted to counterfeit the Indian textiles, stamping them with look-alike marks—and were thus dependent on Indian manufacturers until the 1830s. Moreover, Curtin argued that the economy of slave supply in the Western Sudan did not respond to external market conditions, and even at the height of the slave trade, the external market did not fully determine the economic orientation of Senegambian states. He concluded that until the end of the slave trade, the terms of trade favored Africans. See Curtin, Economic Change in Precolonial Africa: Senegambia in the Era of the Slave Trade (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1975), 312–13. 10. Richardson, “West African Consumption Patterns.” Joseph Miller’s work has also demonstrated that a focus on African imports can shed valuable light on the changing dynamics of Africa’s regional and global economic relationships as well as shifting social and productive relationships within many African societies. See, in particular, “Imports at Luanda, Angola 1785–1823,” in Figuring African Trade, eds. Gerhard Liesegang, Helma Pasch, and Adam Jones (Berlin: D. Reimer, 1986), 163–246, and Way of Death: Merchant Capitalism and the Angolan Slave Trade, 1730–1830 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988). 11. Richard Roberts, “West Africa and the Pondicherry Textile Industry,” in Cloth and Commerce: Textiles in Colonial India, ed. Tirthankar Roy (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996), 142–74. Roberts also notes that colonial conquest in the Western Sahel depended on French abilities to adapt to West African economies. 12. Miller, “Imports at Luanda,” 196–97. Marion Johnson argued that before colonialism, global trade not only did not destroy local industry in West Africa, but it actually spurred local production in some areas. West African weavers imported large amounts of British-spun cotton yarn in the late nineteenth century and even exported cloth to Brazil and Barbados. See Marion Johnson, “Technology, Competition, and African Crafts,” in The Imperial Impact: Studies in the Economic History of Africa and India, ed. C. Dewey and Anthony G. Hopkins (London: Athlone Press, 1978), 259–69; See also, Jean and John Comaroff, Of Revelation and Revolution, 2 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991–1997), 2:ch.5, esp. fn. 59; Ruth Nielsen, “The History and Development of Wax-Printed Textiles Intended for West Africa and Zaire,” in The Fabrics of Culture: The Anthropology of Clothing and Adornment, ed. Justine Cordwell and Ronald Schwarz (The Hague: Mouton, 1979), 467–98. 13. The notion of mutual effect is, of course, not unique to this analysis; it has become a central concern of colonial historiography. Frederick Cooper summarizes this stance: “Recognition of the much greater power of the Europeans in the colonial encounter does not negate the importance of African agency in determining the shape the encounter took.” See his “Conflict and Connection: Rethinking Colonial African History,” American Historical Review 99, no. 5 (1994): 1529. Micro-focused accounts of the dynamics of colonial interfaces have begun to reveal how seemingly marginal actors can, at times, significantly affect more powerful ones. For instance, Jean and John Comaroff have explored the cultural complexities of what has been termed “reciprocal determination” in Tswana-European encounters. Though reciprocity does not amount to equity, the Comaroffs and others demonstrate that inequity does not arrest the possibilities of mutual determination and adaptation within a variety of constraining circumstances. See Jean and John Comaroff, Revelation and Revolution; and A. Gupta, “History, Rule, Representation: Scattered Speculations on Of Revelation and Revolution, Volume II,” Interventions 3, no. 1 (2001): 40–46. See also, Timothy Mitchell, ed. Questions of Modernity (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000), 2; Frederick Cooper and Laura Stoler, eds., Tensions of Empire: Colonial Cultures in a Bourgeois World (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1997); Stuart Hall, “The West and the Rest: Discourse and Power,” in Modernity: An Introduction to Modern Societies, ed. Stuart Hall (Oxford: 1997), 184–227; Edward Said, Culture and Imperialism (New York: Vintage, 1993). For a fascinating example of the colonizer’s domestication of the tastes and values of the colonized see Marcy Norton, “Tasting Empire: Chocolate and the Internalization of Mesoamerican Aesthetics,” American Historical Review 111, no. 3 (2006), 660–91. 14. See Frederick Cooper, “Africa in a Capitalist World,” in Crossing Boundaries: Comparative History of Black People in Diaspora, ed. D. Clark Hine and J. McLeod (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999), 394, and “Africa and the World Economy,” in Confronting Historical Paradigms: Peasants. Labor, and the Capitalist World System in Africa and Latin America, ed. Frederick Cooper et al. (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1993), 84–201. 15. Richard White, The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991). On institutional analysis, see Lauren Benton, “From the World-Systems Perspective to Institutional World History: Culture and Economy in Global Theory,” Journal of World History 7, no. 2 (1996): 261–95; and Law and Colonial Cultures: Legal Regimes in World History, 1400–1900 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002); Douglas North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990). On the encounter approach, see Alfred Crosby, The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492 (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1972); Jerry Bentley, Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts in Pre-Modern Times (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993). 16. “The Copal Trade at Zanzibar,” Journal of the Society of Arts 22 (July 1874): 752–53. On the relation of caravan traffic to planting seasons, see Stephen J. Rockel, “‘A Nation of Porters’: The Nyamwezi and the Labour Market in Nineteenth-Century Tanzania,” Journal of African History 41, no. 2 (2000): 173–95, and Carriers of Culture: Labor on the Road in Nineteenth-Century East Africa (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2006). 17. Joseph Thomson, To the Central African Lakes and Back: The Narrative of the Royal Geographical Society’s East Central African Expedition, 1878–80 (London: S. Low, Marston, Searle & Rivington, 1881), 35–36. 18. Richard Burton, The Lake Regions of Central Africa: A Picture Exploration, vol. 2 (London: Longman, 1860), 400. 19. Thomson, Central African Lakes, 35–6. 20. Harry Johnston, The Kilima-njaro Expedition: A Record of Scientific Exploration in Eastern Equatorial Africa (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, 1886), 45. 21. Burton, Lake Regions, 2:396. 22. Henry M. Stanley, How I Found Livingstone: Travels, Adventures, and Discoveries in Central Africa (New York: Charles Scribner’s’ Sons, $\mathbf { I } 8 8 7 )$ , 24; J. R. Harding, “Nineteenth-Century Trade Beads in Tanganyika,” Man (July 1962): 104–6. 23. Stanley, How I Found Livingstone, 473. 24. For instance, B. Frank Fabens had to send two hundred bales of drills back to Salem when he could find no buyers for them. At seven hundred to eight hundred yards per bale, this was a very large consignment of cloth. See Fabens to Michael Shepard, August 16, 1844, MH 23, Shipping Papers, Correspondence $\left( \mathrm { \bf T } 8 4 3 - 4 6 \right)$ , box 12, fol. 3, Peabody-Essex Museum, Salem, MA (hereafter PE). 25. Invoice of Merchandise shipped on board the Brig Cherokee, Salem, 24 February $\mathrm { \bf ~ I } 8 4 0 ,$ MH 23, Michael Shepard Papers, box 2, fol. 6, PE; Ward to Shepard, 25 March $\mathbf { I } 8 5 \circ ,$ Consular Papers, vol. B, Letter Book, MSS $4 7 { \cdot }$ Charles Ward Papers, PE; Bombay Gazette, pt. 1, January to December $\mathrm { ~ \tt ~ I 8 7 5 ~ }$ , V/11/2200, India Office Library, British Museum, London (hereafter IOL). 26. Ward to Shepard, 25 March 1850, MSS 47, Charles Ward Papers, Consular Papers, vol. B, Letter Book, PE; Ward to Shepard, 16 May 1846, MH 23, Shipping Papers, Correspondence $\left( \mathrm { \bf T } 8 4 3 - 4 6 \right)$ , PE. 27. A few years later, Richard Burton, the only European traveler to publish a detailed description of East African consumer interests, wrote that the muskets exported to East Africa had to have a black butt and an elephant on the lock, otherwise they would never survive in the market. He also wrote that they had to be inexpensive, not exceeding three or four shillings. See Burton, Zanzibar: City, Island, and Coast vol. 2 (London: Tinsley Brothers, 1872), 412; Jelly to [obscure], 17 April 1845, MS MH 14, Richard Waters Papers, PE. East Africans had very specific demands for gunpowder as well. When Americans tried to sell glazed powder in Zanzibar, they incurred significant losses when it was refused on the mainland; Fabens to Shepard, 27 September $\mathbf { I } 8 4 6 ,$ and Ward to Shepard, 16 May 1846, MH 23, Shipping Papers, Correspondence $\left( \mathrm { \bf T } 8 4 3 - 4 6 \right)$ , PE. 28. Ward to Shepard, 24 September 1849, MSS 47, Charles Ward Papers, Consular Papers, vol. B, PE. 29. Ward to Shepard, 25 March 1850, MSS 47, Charles Ward Papers, Consular Papers, vol. B, PE. Another American wrote that a consignment of wire received in Zanzibar was about one-third too thick and as a result could find no buyers in town. Fabens to Shepard, 16 August $\mathrm { \Delta T 8 4 4 }$ , MH 23, Shipping Papers, Correspondence $\left( \mathrm { \bf T } 8 4 3 - 4 6 \right)$ , box 12, fol. 3, PE. 30. Moreover, the coils had to weigh between nine and ten pounds or else they were very difficult to sell. Ward to Shepard, 5 February 1849, MSS 47, Charles Ward Papers, Consular Papers, vol. B, PE; Fabens to Shepard, 29 August 1844, MH 23, Shipping Papers, Correspondence $\left( \mathbf { I } 8 4 3 - 4 6 \right)$ , PE; Ward to Shepard, 3 December 1850, PE MSS 47, Charles Ward Papers, Consular Papers, vol. B, PE. 31. Jelly to West, August 30, 1837, MH 235, J. A. West Papers, box 1, fol. 3, PE. 32. Burton, Lake Regions, 2:397. 33. “Report by Lewis Pelly on the tribes, trade and resources of the Gulf littoral, 1863,” 18, IOL Mss Eur/F126/48, reprinted as “Remarks on the Tribes and Resources around the Shoreline of the Persian Gulf,” Transactions of the Bombay Geographical Society, 17 (1863–64): 32–103. Many thanks to Edward Alpers for locating the original version of this report. For detailed descriptions of these turban cloths, see “Marchandises d’importation propres au Commerce de la Côte de Zanguébar [ca. 1860],” Océan Indien 5/23, no.7, Centre des Archives d’Outre-Mer, Aix-en-Provence (hereafter CAOM). I am grateful to Chris Hayden for locating this and other French archival material. 34. Hamerton to Malet [ca. 1852], A3/11, Zanzibar National Archives, Zanzibar, Tanzania (hereafter ZNA). At the end of the decade, Burton called for further British attempts to replicate the American cloth (Lake Regions, 2:388). Despite its unpopularity elsewhere, Usambara consumers apparently preferred the Manchester cloth in the late 1870s. See Keith Johnston, “Notes of a Trip from Zanzibar to Usambara, in February and March, 1879,” Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society and Monthly Record of Geography, 1, no. 9 (1879): 545. 35. Rigby, “Return of the Imports at the Port of Zanzibar in the Year 1859,” AA2/4, ZNA. 36. Burton, Lake Regions 2:398. 37. Richard Thornton, Letters, 3 June 1861, MSS. Afr. s. 27, Rhodes House, Oxford; Charles New, Life, Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern Africa (1873; rprt., London: Frank Cass, 1971), 452. For more on caravan leaders, see Rockel, Carriers of Culture. 38. Burton, Lake Regions, 2:390. 39. James Grant, A Walk Across Africa, or Domestic Scenes from My Nile Journey (Edinburgh: William Blackwood and Sons, 1864), 87. 40. Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 46. 41. See Jonathon Glassman, Feasts and Riot: Revelry, Rebellion, and Popular Consciousness on the Swahili Coast, 1856–1888 (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995), 49–51; May French-Sheldon, Sultan to Sultan: Adventures among the Masai and Other Tribes of East Africa (London: Saxon, 1892), 194. 42. Lt. Ludwig Ritter von Höhnel, Discovery of Lakes Rudolf and Stefanie, vol. 1 (London: Longmans, Green, 1894), 104–5. 43. Thomson, Central African Lakes, 56. 44. Here I second Christopher Chase-Dunn’s critique of the notion that worldsystems are necessarily constituted by a division of labor in which a core exports manufactured goods and a periphery exports raw materials; see his Global Formation: Structures of the World-Economy (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1989). 45. Burton, Lake Regions, 2:396. 46. Ibid., 2:410. Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 45; Charles Pickering, The Races of Man and the Geographical Distribution (London: George Bell and Sons, 1876), 202. 47. Burton, Lake Regions, 2:418. Additionally, Zanzibari smiths made brass and copper bracelets for export to Ugogo; see Vernon Cameron, Across Africa (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1877), 78. For an important overview of the southern Somalia cloth industry, see Edward Alpers, “Futa Benaadir: Continuity and Change in the Traditional Cotton Textile Industry of Southern Somalia, c. 1840–1980,” in Actes du Colloque Entreprises et Entrepreneurs en Afrique (XIXe et XXe siècles), ed. Catherine Coquery-Vidrovitch and Alain Forest (Paris: L’Harmattan, 1983), 1:77–98. 48. Burton, Zanzibar, 1:224. 49. Burton, Lake Regions, 2:399. 50. Ibid., 2:397–99. 51. W. S. W. Ruschenberger, A Voyage Round the World; Including an Embassy to Muscat and Siam, in 1835, 1836, and 1837 (Philadelphia: Carey, Lea & Blanchard, 1839), 38; Colonel Sykes, “Notes on the Possessions of the Imaum of Muskat, on the Climate and Productions of Zanzibar,” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society 23 (1853): 108; Burton, Zanzibar, 1:350. 52. New, Life, Wanderings, and Labours, 63, 270. Zanzibaris imported raw, uncleaned cotton from western India for use in the weaving industry, while they exported local bombax to Nyamwezi, where it was used as a substitute for cotton. At Ujiji, weavers used bombax to spin a kind of yarn that Burton described as of a better quality than that spun from Unyanyembe cotton (Lake Regions, 2:418). 53. A sample of this local indigo cloth was sent to Bombay in 1862 to ascertain its value. It was later sent on to the Chamber of Commerce, Calcutta. See Brooke to Stewart, Bombay, 16 June 1862, AA12/8, ZNA. American merchants sent samples of Zanzibari indigo to Lowell mills, but the mills never used it. 54. Much of this discussion is taken from P. H. Northway, “Salem and the Zanzibar-East African Trade, 1825–1845,” Essex Institute Historical Collections 90 (1954): 123–53, 261–73, 361–88; and Cyrus Brady, Commerce and Conquest in East Africa (Salem: Essex Institute, 1950). 55. P. L. Simmonds, “The Gums and Resins of Commerce,” American Journal of Pharmacy, (March 1857): 80, 134. 56. Burton, Zanzibar, 1:266. 57. Northway, “Salem and the Zanzibar-East African Trade,” 128–31, 153. 58. This kind of global consciousness was not out of the ordinary in Salem. Salemites prided themselves on their knowledge of places like Canton and Zanzibar. See Winifred Barr Rothenberg, “The Invention of American Capitalism: The Economy of New England in the Federal Period,” in Engines of Enterprise: An Economic History of New England, ed. Peter Temin (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000), 69–108; Northway, “Salem and the Zanzibar-East African Trade,” 372. 59. Mansfield, “Navigation and Commerce of the United States at this port of Zanzibar during the quarter ending June 30, 1858,” roll 2, vols. 4–5, United States Consulate Records, Zanzibar, National Archives, Washington, DC (microfilm; hereafter USCZ). 60. “Invoice of goods shipped on board the Brig Rolla, 1843,” MH 14, Richard P. Waters Papers: Ships Papers (Rolla), box 1 fol. 4, PE. 61. Ruschenberger, Voyage Round the World, 47. In southern Somalia, merekani counterfeits could even be detected by smell (personal communication, Edward Alpers, May 2006). 62. Hamerton to [obscure], 26 March 1847, AA1/3, ZNA. British firms, like that of Newman, Hunt, and Christopher, operated in Zanzibar in the 1820s and 30s, but the entrance of American cloths pushed them out of the market. 63. Speer to Seward, 25 June 1862, roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ. 64. Brady, Commerce and Conquest in East Africa, 116. 65. Abbott to Webster, 12 March 1851, roll 1, vols. 1–3, USCZ. 66. Burton, Zanzibar, 1:72, 382–3; J. T. Last, “A Voyage to the Masai People Living Beyond the Borders of Nguru Country,” Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society and Monthly Record of Geography, 5, no. 7 (1883): 518. Merekani was even used as a form of tributary payment. The Governor of Pangani, according to Krapf, paid tribute to Kimweri ye Nyumbai of Shambaa in the form of two hundred yards of Lowell sheeting (Krapf, Travel, Researches and Missionary Labours During Eighteen Years Residence in East Africa [Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1860], 375). 67. Grant, Walk Across Africa, 87. 68. For a thorough discussion of the importance of commodification processes to the political economy of nineteenth-century East Africa, see Glassman, Feasts and Riot, ch. 1; see also Edward Alpers, Ivory and Slaves: Changing Patterns of International Trade in East Central Africa to the Later Nineteenth Century (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1975); Abdul Sheriff, Slaves, Spices and Ivory in Zanzibar: Integration of an East African Commercial Empire into the World Economy, 1770–1873 (London: James Currey, 1991); Juhani Koponen, People and Production in Late Precolonial Tanzania: History and Structures (Helsinki: Finnish Society for Development Studies, 1988); Philip Curtin et al., African History (New York: Longman, 1995), ch. 13. 69. Pingree to Waters, 13 May 1843, MH 14, Waters Papers, box 1, fol. 2, PE. 70. Northway, “Salem and the Zanzibar-East African Trade,” 367. 71. Ibid. 375. 72. The mill boasted a board of directors that included many of Salem’s most prominent Zanzibar exporters. Waters would later become the director of the Naumkeag Bank as well; see Northway, “Salem and the Zanzibar-East African Trade,” 273. 73. Annual Report of the Engineer to the Naumkeag Steam Cotton Company, Salem (Mass.) (Salem: Tri-Weekly Gazette Press, 1848), 7. 74. Rudolph Dick, Nathaniel Griffin (1796–1876) of Salem—and His Naumkeag Steam Cotton Company (New York: The Newcomen Society in North America, 1951), 11–13, and “Pequot Mills: The Naumkeag Steam Cotton Company of Salem, Mass.,” Cotton History Review 1, no. 4 (1960): 109–17; Peter Temin, “The Industrialization of New England, 1830–1880,” in Temin, ed., Engines of Enterprise, 109–52. 75. Northway, “Salem and the Zanzibar-East African Trade,” 128–31. 76. On the details of this trade see, “Marchandises d’importation propres au Commerce de la Côte de Zanguébar, [ca.1860]” Océan Indien 5/23, no. 7, CAOM; and “Lois & coutumes de Douaner Commerce sous les divers pavillons, [ca.1860]” Océan Indien 5/23, no.2, CAOM. 77. Rigby, “Return of Merchant Shipping arrivals at the Port of Zanzibar during the last five years,” AA2/4, ZNA. All of this was direct trade between the United States and Zanzibar, not ships involved in the “carrying trade,” or intra-Indian Ocean exchange. 78. Ibid. For purposes of comparison, the amount of cloth imported into more than two million yards of other unbleached cloth (28.8 percent of the total), as well as the majority of drills, jeans, and chadders exported from Bombay. Zanzibar also imported nearly nine million yards of British-manufactured colored cloth from Bombay, bringing the total annual Bombay export trade in textiles to East Africa up to twenty-two million yards. Zanzibar was the single largest market for Bombay-exported umbrellas, glassware, and furniture as well. Zanzibar in 1859 was more than the total projected annual production of the Naumkeag Mill during its first year of operation $\left( \mathbf { I } 8 4 8 \right)$ ; see Annual Report of the Engineer, 7. 79. Rigby, “Return of the Imports at the Port of Zanzibar in the year 1859,” $\mathrm { A A } 2 / 4 .$ , ZNA; “New England’s Cotton Trade,” New York Times, August 29, $\mathrm { ~ ~ { ~ \cal ~ I ~ } ~ } 8 7 5 , \ 5 .$ 80. FO 54/22, Public Record Office, Kew (hereafter PRO). 81. Ropes, “Report on the Commerce of Zanzibar, 5 October 1865, roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ. 82. Ropes, “Report [on Zanzibar], 1865,” roll 2, vol. 5, USCZ. 83. For the dramatic increase in Bombay textile exports to East Africa beginning in 1861, see Abdul Sheriff’s table (appendix A) in Slaves, Spices, and Ivory, $2 4 9 - 5 2$ . Of course, the increase in cotton production in India would further spur this trade. On the globalization of cotton production during and after the U.S. Civil War, see Sven Beckert, “Emancipation and Empire: Reconstructing the Worldwide Web of Cotton Production in the Age of the American Civil War,” American Historical Review 109, no. 5 (2004): 1405–38. 84. Webb, “Report on the Trade of the Zanzibar Coast for the two years, ending this day [30 September $\mathbf { \Delta I 8 7 3 } ] ,$ ” roll 3, vols. 6–7, USCZ. 85. Bachelder, “Report on the Trade of Zanzibar for the year ending June 30, 1880,” roll 3, vols. 6–7, USCZ. 86. Edward Ropes Jr. “Trade Report on Zanzibar June 30th $^ { , } 8 3 - \mathrm { J }$ une 30th $" 8 4 , "$ in The Zanzibar Letters of Edward D. Ropes, Jr., $\scriptstyle { \cal I } 8 8 2 - { \cal I } 8 9 2 ,$ , ed. Norman Bennett (Boston: Boston University Press, 1973), 121. This was taken from the American Consul Cheney’s report, “Trade in Zanzibar for the year $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 8 3 - 4 , \mathrm { ~ } ^ { \mathrm { ~ \scriptsize ~ > ~ } }$ roll 3, vols. 6–7, USCZ. 87. Pratt, “Trade Report of Zanzibar, July 1, 1886 to June 30, 1887,” roll 4, vol. 8, USCZ. 88. Edward Alpers, “Gujarat and the Trade of East Africa, 1500–1800,” International Journal of African Historical Studies 9, no. 1 (1976): 22 – 44. Gujarati traders’ concentration had largely shifted to Mozambique by the turn of the nineteenth century. See Pedro Machado, “Gujarati Indian Merchant Networks in Mozambique, $\mathbf { I } 7 7 7 - \mathbf { c . I 8 3 0 } ^ { , 3 }$ (PhD diss., University of London, School of Oriental and African Studies, 2005). For earlier examples of the relationships between Indian cloth manufacturing and East African consumers, see also Michael Pearson, Port Cities and Intruders: the Swahili Coast, India, and Portugal in the Early Modern Era (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998); and Jeremy Prestholdt, “As Artistry Permits and Custom May Ordain: The Social Fabric of Material Consumption in the Swahili World,” Northwestern University Program for African Studies Working Paper no. 3 (Evanston, IL: Program of African Studies, Northwestern University, 1998). 89. Frere to Granville, 7 May 1873, FO 84/1391, PRO; T. Postans, “Some account of the present state of the trade between the port of Mandvie in Cutch, and the East Coast of Africa,” Transactions of the Bombay Geographical Society 3 (1839–40): 170, 174. 90. Marianne Young, Cutch, or Random Sketches of Western India (London: Smith, Elder, 1838), 12, 14. 91. M. Reda Bhacker, Trade and Empire in Muscat and Zanzibar: Roots of British Domination (New York: Routledge, 1992), 160. 92. James Christie, Cholera Epidemics in East Africa: An account of the several diffusions of the disease in that country from 1821 till 1872, with an outline of the geography, ethnology, and trade connections of the regions through which the epidemics passed (London: Macmillan, 1876), 356. 93. Playfair to Earl Russell, 20 December 1863, AA3/21, ZNA. 94. Playfair to Earl Russell, 1 January 1865, FO 54/22, PRO. 95. “Report on the External Commerce of the Presidency of Bombay for the Year 1863–64,” V/17/290, IOL. In saying “export destination” I mean to distinguish between Indian and non-Indian reported destinations. The annual reports on trade do not do so. Instead, they simply list the port to which a cargo was sent. Many Bombay textiles sent to Surat or Kutch might have found their way to East Africa, but I have chosen not to speculate on this indirect trade. 96. “Report on the External Commerce of the Presidency of Bombay for the Year 1866–67,” V/17/293, IOL. This was not always constant, however, since by 1870 these percentages had fallen somewhat. 97. “Report on the External Commerce of the Presidency of Bombay for the Year 1863–64,” V/17/290, IOL. 98. “Annual Report on the Trade and Navigation of the Presidency of Bombay for the Year 1874–75,” V/17/301, IOL. 99. Though the first mechanized mills in India were founded in Pondicherry, these employed European, not Indian, capital. See Roberts, “West Africa and the Pondicherry Textile Industry”; Rajnarayan Chandavarkar, The Origins of Industrial Capital in India: Business Strategies and the Working Classes in Bombay, 1900–1940 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 26, 247. 100. Chandavarkar, Origins of Industrial Capital in India, 56. 101. Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 34, fn.113; Holmans to MacKinnon, 1 June 1879, MacKinnon Papers, PPMS1/Corr 1, box 22, fol. 88, School of Oriental and African Studies Library, University of London. 102. Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 20. 103. Cheney, “Trade in Zanzibar for the Year 1883–84,” roll 3, vols. 6–7, USCZ. Steamers were only one sector of the trans–Indian Ocean trade. On the all-important dhow trade of the western Indian Ocean, see Erik Gilbert, Dhows and Colonial Economy in Zanzibar, 1860–1970 (Columbus: Ohio University Press, 2005). 104. “Annual Statement of Trade and Navigation for the Bombay Presidency for the Year 1881–82,” V/17/311, IOL. At this time, the total exports of Indian manufactured goods were increasing, but the increases in the textile trade were particularly marked. 105. “Annual Statement of Trade and Navigation for the Bombay Presidency for the Year 1887–88,” V/17/317, IOL. 106. See, for example, the “Annual Statement of Trade and Navigation for the Bombay Presidency for the Year 1881–82,” V/17/311, IOL. 107. Ibid. Again, I have excluded Bombay exports to other Indian ports in this tabulation. This number includes almost ten million yards of unbleached sheetings (52.6 percent of the total Indian-produced sheetings exported from Bombay), 108. “Annual Report of the Trade and Navigation of the Bombay Presidency for the Year 1889–90,” V/17/319, IOL. 109. Ibid. Mozambique imported nearly 25 percent of Bombay’s unbleached cloth exports. This made eastern Africa the single largest market by far for the Bombay textile industry’s export trade. 110. French-Sheldon, Sultan to Sultan, 225. Merekani, in particular, was still popular in Maasai country in the 1880s (Last, “A Voyage to the Masai People,” 531). 111. Chandavarkar, Origins of Industrial Capital in India, 239; D. Mazumdar, “Labor Supply in Early Industrialization: The Case of the Bombay Textile Industry,” Economic History Review 26, no. 3 (1973): 477–96. 112. Even colonial conquest did not negate the effects Africans could have on economic systems through consumer demand. See, in particular, Christopher Steiner’s analysis of European textile production for West African consumers under colonialism, “Another Image of Africa: Toward an Ethnohistory of European Cloth Marketed in West Africa, 1873–1960,” Ethnohistory 32, no. 2 (1985): 91–110. See also Timothy Burke’s groundbreaking study, Lifebuoy Men, Lux Women: Commodification, Consumption, and Cleanliness in Modern Zimbabwe (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996). 113. For important interventions that challenge discrete historical trajectories, be they national, regional, or continental, in contemporary globalization discourse, see J. Lorand Matory, Black Atlantic Religion: Tradition, Transnationalism, and Matriarchy in the Afro-Brazilian Candomblé (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005); Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World; Michel-Rolph Trouillot, Global Transformations: Anthropology and the Modern World (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003); Martin Lewis and Kären Wigen, The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1997); and Michael Geyer and Charles Bright, “World History in a Global Age,” American Historical Review 100, no. 4 (1995): 1034–60. Of course, building an archive of human interrelation beyond the categories of nation-state and continent lies at the heart of the world/global/transnational history project. 114. Vinay Lal, Empire of Knowledge: Culture and Plurality in the Global Economy (London: Pluto Press, 2002). ## Chapter 4: Cosmopolitanism and Cultural DOMESTICATION 1. Johannes Fabian, Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002). 2. Edward Tylor, Anthropology: An Introduction to the Study of Man and Civilization (1880; repr., London: D. Appleton, 1913), 439. 3. Enrique Dussel, The Invention of the Americas: Eclipse of “the Other” and the Myth of Modernity (New York: Continuum, 1995); and The Underside of Modernity, ed. and trans. E. Mendieta (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1997). 4. Stuart Hall describes modernity’s “others” as its “constitutive outside.” See Stuart Hall and Sarat Maharaj, Modernity and Difference, ed. Sarah Campbell and Gilane Tawadros (London: Institute of International Visual Arts, 2001). Susan Friedman offers a particularly rich reading of the history of binary definitions of modernity in “Definitional Excursions: The Meanings of Modern/ Modernity/Modernism,” Modernism/Modernity 8, no. 3 (2001): 503. See also Michel-Rolph Trouillot, “The Otherwise Modern: Caribbean Lessons from the Savage Slot,” in Bruce M. Knauft, ed., Critically Modern: Alternatives, Alterities, Anthropologies (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2002), 220–40; John Jervis, Transgressing the Modern: Explorations in the Western Experience of Otherness (Oxford: Blackwell, 1999); Peter J. Taylor, Modernities: A Geohistorical Interpretation (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999). 5. Mary Louise Pratt, Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation (New York: Routledge, 1992). See also Jean and John Comaroff, Of Revelation and Revolution, vol. 2 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997); Frederick Cooper and Laura Stoler, Tensions of Empire: Colonial Cultures in a Bourgeois World (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1997); Timothy Mitchell, “The Stage of Modernity,” in Questions of Modernity, ed. Timothy Mitchell (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000), 1–34; Stuart Hall, “The West and the Rest: Discourse and Power,” in Modernity: An Introduction to Modern Societies, ed. Stuart Hall et al. (Oxford: Blackwell, 1997), 184–227; V. Erlmann, Music, Modernity, and the Global Imagination: South Africa and the West (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999). 6. Timothy Mitchell has summarized this operation succinctly: staging the modern has always required the nonmodern. Modernity, he argues, is not possible without those defined against it (Mitchell, Questions of Modernity, xxvi). Whereas the English word modern previously meant simply “contemporary,” in the early nineteenth century it began to take on connotations of both time and value: modern meant “improved,” something that had progressed beyond an earlier time. See Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (London: Fontana, 1976), 174. 7. See Mitchell, Questions of Modernity; Carol A. Breckenridge, ed., Consuming Modernity: Public Culture in a South Asian World (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995). 8. Arjun Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998). See also Mike Featherstone, Scott M. Lash, and Roland Robertson, eds., Global Modernities (London: Sage, 1995); Sanjay Subrahmanyam, “Hearing Voices: Vignettes of Early Modernity in South Asia, 1400–1750,” Daedalus 127, no. 3 (1998): 75–104; Dilip Gaonkar, “On Alternative Modernities,” and L. Lee, “Shanghai Modern: Reflections on Urban Culture in China in the 1930s,” in Public Culture 11, no. 1 (1999) 75–108; Charles Piot, Remotely Global: Village Modernity in West Africa (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999); “Special Issue: Multiple Modernities,” Daedalus 129, no. 1 (2000), especially N. Göle, “Snapshots of Islamic Modernities,” 91–115. For recent descriptions of East African modernities, see Pat Caplan and Farouk Topan, eds., Swahili Modernities: Culture, Politics, and Identity on the East Coast of Africa (Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 2004); and Stephen J. Rockel, Carriers of Culture: Labor on the Road in Nineteenth-Century East Africa (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2006), 23. 9. John Comaroff, “Governmentality, Materality, Legality, Modernity,” in Jan-Georg Deutsch, Peter Probst, and Heike Schmidt, eds., African Modernities (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2002), 130, fn. 40. Arif Dirlik draws a similar critique of Gunder Frank’s five-thousand-year world-system. By universalizing capitalist development, Gunder Frank poses it as the fate of humankind rather than the product of a particular history. See Arif Dirlik, “Is There History After Eurocentrism? Globalism, Postcolonialism, and the Disavowal of History,” Cultural Critique 42 (Spring 1999): 15. Mitchell is perhaps the most direct in his assessment. For him, the vocabulary of “alternative modernities” reinforces a fundamentally singular modernity, only modified by certain local circumstances (Questions of Modernity, xiii). See also Jonathan Friedman, “Modernity and Other Traditions,” in Bruce M. Knauft, ed., Critically Modern: Alternatives, Alterities, Anthropologies (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2002), 287–314. 10. Dirlik, “Is There History After Eurocentrism?” 15; Jan-Georg Deutsch, Peter Probst, and Heike Schmidt, “Cherished Visions and Entangled Meanings,” in Jan-Georg Deutsch, Peter Probst, and Heike Schmidt, eds., African Modernities (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2002), 1–17. 11. As Dipesh Chakrabarty suggests, Victorian elite discourses created and enforced the circumstances by which knowledge and perception either came through or referred back to them. Modernity is among the most powerful of these discourses; see Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000). 12. Michael Geyer and Charles Bright, “World History in a Global Age,” American Historical Review 100, no. 4 (1995): 1047; C. A. Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, 1780–1914 (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004). 13. Carol Breckenridge, Sheldon Pollock, Homi Bhabha, and Dipesh Chakrabarty, “Cosmopolitanisms,” in Cosmopolitanism, ed. Carol Breckenridge, Sheldon Pollock, Homi Bhabha, and Dipesh Chakrabarty (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002), 11. Scott Malcomson has similarly defined cosmopolitanisms as involving “individuals with limited choices deciding to enter into something larger than their immediate cultures.” See “The Varieties of Cosmopolitan Experience,” in Cosmopolitics: Thinking and Feeling Beyond the Nation (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998), 40. 14. Zanzibar imported several tons of sugar every year from the United States, France, India, and Singapore, both in loaf and refined granule form. See, for example, Christopher Rigby, “Return of the Imports at the Port of Zanzibar for the Year 1859,” AA2/4, Zanzibar National Archives (hereafter ZNA). On the Manila project, see Capt. Sandwith Drinker in H. Eilts, “Ahmad bin Na\`aman’s Mission to the United States in 1840, The Voyage of Al-Sultanah to New York City,” Essex Institute Historical Collections 98 (October 1962): 272. 15. Ward to Buchanan, 13 March 1847, U.S. Consulate, Zanzibar (hereafter USCZ), roll 1, vols. 1–3. American and European merchants alike in Zanzibar developed a “deep concern” about the Sultan’s mercantile pursuits, particularly his direct trade with the West, because he imported all goods duty-free. See Peters and Pollock to Sultan Sayyid Said, 20 February 1847, AA1/3, ZNA; Hamerton to [obscure], 3 January 1847, AA1/3, ZNA. 16. Eilts, “Ahmad bin Na\`aman’s Mission,” 271. 17. A. Jiddawi, “Extracts from an Arab Account Book, 1840–1854,” Tanganyika Notes and Records 31 (1951): 27. ## 18. Ibid., 29. 19. Eilts, “Ahmad bin Na\`aman’s Mission,” 252; Jiddawi, “Arab Account Book,” 29; Letter from William H. Feely, 14 March 1845, MH-14, Richard P. Waters Papers, PE. 20. For recent definitions of consumerism in varying contexts see C. Carson, “The Consumer Revolution in Colonial British America: Why Demand?” in Of Consuming Interests: The Style of Life in the Eighteenth Century, ed. Cary Carson, Ronald Hoffman, and Peter J. Albert (Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1994), 486, fn. 5; Peter Stearns, Consumerism in World History: The Global Transformation of Desire (New York: Routledge, 2001), ix. 21. Rigby to Wood, 1 May 1860, L/P&S/9/37, India Office Library, British Library (hereafter IOL). 22. Jean and John Comaroff, Of Revelation and Revolution, 2:89. 23. This kind of transatlantic travel was common in the early to midnineteenth century. For example, American merchant ships often employed Zanzibaris and Comorians for multiple journeys. See, for example, the contracts of “Malbruke, Hammadee, & Oulede,” to work on the bark Arthur Pickering in Consular Certificate, Mansfield, 14 December 1858, MH 23, West Papers, PE. 24. Possibly Michael Shepard, a Salem businessman whose firm had agents at Zanzibar, or a member of his family. 25. J. Ross Browne, Etchings of a Whaling Cruise (1846; repr., Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1968), 412–13, 345. 26. M. Guillain, Documents sur l’histoire, la géographie et le commerce de l’Afrique Orientale, illustrated volume (Paris: Bertrand, 1856). By 1891, the sultan was handing out autographed photographs to visitors. See M. French-Sheldon, Sultan to Sultan: Adventures among the Masai and other Tribes of East Africa (London: Saxon, 1892). 27. Clelia Weeks, “Zanzibar,” Harper’s New Monthly Magazine 38 (December–May, 1868–1869), 313. 28. Rebecca Wakefield, Memoirs of Mrs. Rebecca Wakefield, Wife of the Rev. T. Wakefield, ed. R. Brewin (London: Hamilton, Adams, 1879), 112–13. 29. Bhabha, quoted in a question addressed to James Clifford, in Lawrence Grossberg, Cary Nelson, and Paula A. Treichler, eds., Cultural Studies (New York: Routledge, 1992), 114. 30. Joseph Osgood, Notes of Travel (Salem, MA: George Creamer, 1854), 29–30; Judy Aldrick, “The Painted Plates of Zanzibar,” Kenya Past and Present 12 (1997): 26–28. 31. Wakefield, Memoirs, 93–94, 108; Weeks, “Zanzibar,” 307. 32. Emily Ruete [Sayyida Salme], Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, reprinted in An Arabian Princess Between Two Worlds: Memoirs, Letters Home, Sequels to the Memoirs, Syrian Customs and Usages, ed. E. Van Donzel (New York: E. J. Brill, 1993), 164–65. 33. Jean Baudrillard, Jean Baudrillard: Selected Writings, ed. Mark Poster (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1988), 44. 34. The consumer’s “need” for the vase is often directly related to its essential place within a standard assortment of goods. We can think of contemporary American homes in similar terms. A “complete set” for the living room often includes a couch or sofa, easy chair, television, coffee table, entertainment center, bookcase, and pictures on the wall. The absence of any one of these can seem disorienting, and thus each is desired for its importance in completing the culturally defined set; see Baudrillard, Selected Writings, 196. 35. Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 164–65. 36. Elizabeth and Henry Jacob, A Quaker Family in India and Zanzibar, 1863–1865, ed. Y. Bird (York, UK: William Sessions, 2000), 165. 37. Edward Steere, “On East African Tribes and Languages,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 1 (1872): cxlvi. 38. Waters Journal, 14 April 1837, MH 14, Richard P. Waters Papers, PE. 39. Browne, Whaling Cruise, 441. 40. Jacob and Jacob, Quaker Family, 165. 41. On Captain Hassan, see Captain Henry Hart to the Vice Admiral Sir John Gore, 10 February 1834, F/4/1475, Board’s Collections, vol. 1475, IOL; W. Ruschenberger, A Voyage Round the World: Including an Embassy to Muscat and Siam, in 1835, 1836, and 1837 (Philadelphia: Carey, Lea & Blanchard, 1839), 37. 42. Ruschenberger, Voyage Round the World, 28–29. 43. James Clifford, Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth Century (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997); Ulf Hannerz, “The World in Creolization,” Africa 57, no. 4 (1987): 546–59. 44. See, for instance, the story of Juma Nasibu, one of the porters in Dodgshun’s caravan to Ujiji in 1877–79, who had been in England for three years, where he had spent several months in school. He used this experience to his advantage and found employment with the Cameron expedition and later worked at the British Consulate. See Norman Bennett, ed., From Zanzibar to Ujiji: The Journal of Arthur W. Dodgshun, 1877–1879 (Boston: Boston University Press, 1969), 35, 55, fn. 113. Charles Pickering wrote that he met many “Soahili” in Bombay who came to India as free sailors; see The Races of Man and Their Geographical Distribution (London: George Bell and Sons, 1876), 192. See also Sultan Majid’s protest of the constant English harassment of Zanzibari shipping under the pretense that the African crews must be slaves; Saeed bin Majid to Chuchill, December 1868, L/P&S/9/48, IOL; and “Return of Slaves emancipated by Lieut. Col. Playfair, from the date of his assuming charge of British Consulate Zanzibar [n.d.],” A12/3, ZNA. 45. Ship’s Register, British Consulate: Free African Register, AA12/13, ZNA; Janet Ewald, “Crossers of the Sea: Slaves, Freedmen, and Other Migrants in the Northwestern Indian Ocean, c. 1750–1914,” American Historical Review 105, no. 1 (2000): 69–91. 46. Kirk to Secretary of the India Office, 23 April 1869, L/P&S/9/48, IOL. 47. Ludwig Ritter von Höhnel, Discovery of Lakes Rudolf and Stefanie, vol. 1 (London: Longmans, Green, 1894), 11–12. 48. Browne, Whaling Cruise, 350. 49. For Wainwright’s journal, see Jacob Wainwright, “Tagebuch von Jacob Wainwright über den Transport von Dr. Livingston’s Leiche, 4 Mai 1873–18, Februar 1874,” Petermann’s Mittheilungen 20 (1874): 187–93. 50. Joseph Thomson, To the Central African Lakes and Back: The Narrative of the Royal Geographical Society’s East Central African Expedition, 1878–80 (London: S. Low, Marsten, Searle & Rivington, 1881), 34. Hugh Peter Kayamba, son of Sultan Kimweri of Wakilindi, likewise studied in England before returning to Zanzibar to teach at St. Andrew’s College (Universities Mission to Central Africa). Kayamba was a Muslim, but converted to Christianity and studied at UMCA schools before traveling to England. See M. Kayamba, “The Story of Martin Kayamba Mdumi, M. B. E. of the Bondei Tribe,” in Ten Africans, ed. Marjory Perham (London: Faber and Faber, 1936), 173–99. 51. Muhammad bin Khamis accompanied the sultan’s envoy to England in 1842 and had been previously “taken to England to be educated” by one “Mr. Hunt”; Hamerton to Secret Committee, 9 February 1842, L/P&S/9/12, IOL. The renowned geographer William Cooley depended on Muhammad bin Khamis’s information for his Inner Africa Laid Open, in an Attempt to Trace the Chief Lines of Communication Across That Continent South of the Equator (London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1852). Browne, Whaling Cruise, 344– 45; cf. J. Osgood, Notes of Travel, 45; Richard Burton, Zanzibar: City, Island, and Coast (London: Tinsley Brothers, 1872), 1:286. 52. Burton later wrote of Muhammad’s proposal and dismissed it as if the very prospect of an African leading an exploration party were richly ironic (Zanzibar 2:287). 53. W. Ruschenberger, Voyage Round the World, 37. 54. Even new spirits, or pepo, came into existence. Grant wrote that the Zanzibari freed slaves in his employ described a great variety of pepo, including several of English and Ethiopian provenance. See James Grant, A Walk Across Africa, or Domestic Scenes from My Nile Journey (Edinburgh: William Blackwood and Sons, 1864), 259. Alpers has analyzed a mid-nineteenth century pepo of which a detailed description exists. Gongoni binti Gongoni was a female pepo whose genealogy linked her to Pemba, Tumbatu (on Zanzibar Island), and southern Arabia. See Edward Alpers, “ ‘Ordinary Household Chores’: Ritual and Power in a Nineteenth-Century Swahili Women’s Spirit Possession Cult,” International Journal of African Historical Studies 17, no. 4 (1984): 695. 55. See Anne McClintock, Imperial Leather: Race, Gender and Sexuality in the Colonial Conquest (New York: Routledge, 1995); and T. Richards, The Commodity Culture of Victorian England: Advertising and Spectacle, 1851– 1914 (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1990). 56. James Clifford, “Traveling Cultures,” in Grossberg, Nelson, and Treichler, eds., Cultural Studies, 114–15. 57. Swahili was the language of communication in most environments throughout the nineteenth century—with some exceptions, such as among Indian businessmen, in state correspondence, or in some religious matters. 58. Grant McCracken fleshes out this distinction between systems of fashion and patina in Culture and Consumption (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988), 16. 59. Glassman argues that the ever-wider distribution of what were previously “prestige” goods gave relatively poor people an opportunity to, “contest the precise meanings of what had once been exclusive markers of status and political power.” See Jonathon Glassman, Feasts and Riot: Revelry, Rebellion, and Popular Consciousness on the Swahili Coast, 1856–1888 (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995), 37. 60. Ruete [Salme], Memoirs of an Arabian Princess. His sons would follow this tradition. See Kirk to Gonne, 13 April 1869, and Letter from Suliman bin Ali Secretary to His Highness Seyd Majid Sultan of Zanzibar to Churchill, April 1869, L/P&S/9/48, IOL. 61. Laura Fair gives a particularly rich account of changes in fashion among non-elites in Pastimes and Politics in Zanzibar: Culture, Community and Identity in Post-Abolition Urban Zanzibar. (Athens: Ohio University Press, 2001), and “Remaking Fashion in the Paris of the Indian Ocean: Dress, Performance, and the Cultural Construction of a Cosmopolitan Zanzibari Identity,” in Fashioning Africa: Power and the Politics of Dress, ed. Jean Allman (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004), 13–30. 62. See A. Coombes and A. Brah, “Introduction: The Conundrum of ‘Mixing’”; and Nicholas Thomas, “Technologies of Conversion: Cloth and Christianity in Polynesia,” in Hybridity and Its Discontents: Politics, Science, Culture, ed. A. Coombes and A. Brah (New York: Routledge, 2000), 1–16 and 198–215. Jean and John Comaroff argue that Western clothes offered an “experimental language” for the creation of new identities (Of Revelation and Revolution, 2:235). 63. Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 259. 64. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984). Bourdieu challenges the Veblenian notion of consumer demand as engaging in competition with one’s neighbors in an attempt to either keep up with or outdo them. Since there are elements of competitiveness in much inter- as well as intragroup consumer demand, we might think of demand as addressing inclusion, differentiation, and uniqueness alternately. 65. For the role of actual and metaphorical clothing in the discourses of slave-making and unmaking, see Jonathon Glassman, “The Bondsman’s New Clothes: The Contradictory Consciousness of Slave Resistance on the Swahili Coast,” Journal of African History 32, no. 2 (1991): 277–312; and Fair, Pastimes and Politics. On the idea of consumption as constituting of “social citizenship,” see Don Slater, Consumer Culture and Modernity (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1997), 4–5. 66. Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 157. 67. On the Mrima, many Shirazi sought to affect an “Arab” identity in the latter nineteenth century in order to, as Glassman suggests, not only equate themselves with Omanis from overseas but also distinguish themselves from newcomers (Glassman, Feasts and Riot, 63). 68. Playfair, “Administration Report of the Zanzibar Political Agency, for the Year Ending 31 May, 1864,” L/P&S/9/41, IOL. Of these, 62.5 percent were French imports, 31 percent were British re-exports from Bombay, and 6.5 percent were German (from Hamburg). 69. Baudrillard suggests that the advent of mirrors as central features of home decor in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe reflects an expansion of consumers’ consciousnesses, a new obsession with self-replication. See Jean Baudrillard, The System of Objects (New York: Verso, 1996), 22–23. 70. Burton, Lake Regions 2:400; Hines to Secretary of State, 25 October 1864, roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ; Sykes, “Notes on the Possessions of the Imaum of Muskat, on the Climate and Productions of Zanzibar, and on the Prospects of African Discovery from Mombas,” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society 23 (1853): 107–8. 71. Edward Ropes, The Zanzibar Letters of Edward D. Ropes, Jr., 1882– 1892, ed. Norman Bennett (Boston: Boston University Press, 1973), 18. 72. H. Cotterill, ed., Travels and Researches among the Lakes and Mountains of Eastern and Central Africa: From the Journals of the Late J. Frederic Elton (London: John Murray, 1879), 66. 73. Barghash sat for several photographic portraits and, according to Harry Johnston, he sent one of these to Paris with instructions for it to be enlarged, doubled, and converted from an image of him in sitting position to him standing. H. Johnston, The Kilima-njaro Expedition: A Record of Scientific Exploration in Eastern Equatorial Africa (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, 1886), 31–32. 74. Thomson, Central African Lakes, 22–23. 75. Capt. Atkins Hamerton, quoted in John M. Gray, History of Zanzibar, from the Middle Ages to 1856 (London: Oxford University Press, 1962), 205; C. Devereux, A Cruise on the “Gorgon”; or, Eighteen Months on H. M. S. “Gorgon,” Engaged in the Suppression of the Slave Trade on the East Coast of Africa (London: Bell and Daldy, 1869), 296–97. 76. On the changing relation of the Barghash state to its subjects, see Randall Pouwels, “Islam and Islamic Leadership in the Coastal Communities of Eastern Africa, 1700 to 1914” (PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1979), part 3. 77. Barghash imported a printing press and began publishing Ibadhi jurisprudence volumes in 1880. Valerie J. Hoffman, “Muslim-Christian Encounters in Nineteenth-Century Zanzibar,” MIT Electronic Journal of Middle Eastern Studies. Special Issue: Islam and Arabs in East Africa (Fall 2005, http://web.mit.edu/ cis/www/mitejmes/intro.htm, accessed July 19, 2007), 63; Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 33–34. 78. Kirk to Wedderburn, 1 January 1872, L/P&S/9/49, IOL. 79. Henry M. Stanley, Through the Dark Continent, vol. 1 (New York: Harper Brothers, 1878), 43. 80. Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 29. 81. Henry M. Stanley, In Darkest Africa (London: Sampson Low, 1890), 60. 82. Speer, Report on Zanzibar, 1862, roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ. 83. Playfair justified Barghash’s banishment by arguing that he was “most intolerant of anything like civilizing influences and in his communications with Europeans he was habitually haughty even as to insolence.” Playfair to Gonne, 19 April 1865,L/P&S/9/42, IOL. 84. Abdul Sheriff and Javed Jafferji, Zanzibar Town: An Architectural Exploration (Zanzibar: Gallery Publications, 1998), 76. 85. “On the Track of the Germans in East Africa,” Pall Mall Gazette, 6182, vol. 41, 3 June 1885. 86. Beehler, The Cruise of the Brooklyn (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1885), 174. 87. According to oral tradition, the doors were carved by Indian artisans brought to Zanzibar specifically for this purpose; interview with Muhammad Rashid, Beit al Ajaib, August 2000; Abdul Sheriff, ed., The History and Conservation of Zanzibar Stone Town (Athens: Ohio University Press, 1995), 52. 88. Battle has suggested that Barghash’s House of Wonders was, “an expression of domination, the city is the arena of display.” See S. Battle, “The Old Dispensary: An Apogee of Zanzibari Architecture,” in Sheriff, ed., Zanzibar Stone Town, 94–96. 89. Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 31–32; John Willoughby, East Africa and Its Big Game: The Narrative of a Sporting Trip from Zanzibar to the Borders of the Masai (London: Longmans, Green, 1889), 15–16. 90. On the sultan’s visit to the Crystal Palace, see the Times (London), 18 June 1875, as well as thirty other articles in the same paper covering his entire stay in England. See also the New York Times, multiple articles from 10 June to 9 August 1875; L. Sabunji, Tanzih al-absar wa-al-afkar fi rihlat Sultan Zanjabar, jama‘ahu Zahir ibn Sa‘id (Muscat: Wizarat al-Turath al-Qawmi wa-al-Thaqafah, 1988); Kirk to Earl of Derby, 17 May 1875, L/P&S/9/51, IOL. 91. “Queen’s Jubilee—Mr. T. Tohan [sic] of Zanzibar, Gift of an Hospital and £15,000 to Celebrate in Zanzibar,” Times (London), 2 March 1887, 11, col. F. 92. Battle, “Old Dispensary,” 95. 93. Ibid., 91. 94. Ibid., 96. 95. See especially F. Siravo, Zanzibar: A Plan for the Historic Stone Town (Zanzibar: Gallery Publications, 1996). 96. Frere to Granville, 14 January 1873, AA1/10, ZNA. 97. Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 30. 98. Thomson, Central African Lakes, 28. 99. “The Sultan of Zanzibar,” New York Times (reprinted from the Standard), 17 July 1875, 2. 100. Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 15; P. Le Charmetant, D’Alger à Zanzibar (Paris: Libr. Tardieu, 1882), 131–37. 101. See Robert Lyne, An Apostle of Empire, being the Life of Sir Lloyd William Matthews (London: G. Allen & Unwin, 1936), 46; Reginald Coupland, The Exploitation of East Africa, 1856–1890 (London: Faber and Faber, 1939), 241–42; Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 15, fn. 51. 102. Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 15. 103. Willoughby, East Africa and Its Big Game, 16; Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 31, 35; Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 10, 13, 31. 104. Thomson, Central African Lakes, 26. 105. Beehler, Cruise of the Brooklyn, 178–79. 106. Burton wrote of coastal elites “priding themselves” on the public use of umbrellas (Lake Regions 1:34). See Glassman’s discussion of the use of umbrellas at Saadani in Feasts and Riot, 157. 107. Burton, Zanzibar 1:109; Burton, Lake Regions 1:386–87. 108. “Annual Statement of Trade and Navigation of the Presidency of Bombay for the Year 1881–82,” V/17/311, IOL. 109. This notion of a cultural code that is “more than the sum of its parts” is borrowed from Jean and John Comaroff’s reflections in Of Revelation and Revolution 2:245. 110. “Introduction,” and Dipesh Chakrabarty, “Witness to Suffering: Domestic Cruelty and the Birth of the Modern Subject in Bengal,” in Mitchell, Questions of Modernity, xv and 49–86. 111. Robert Young has argued that the resurrection of another Victorian idea—hybridity—as a means of postcolonial critique has severe limitations because it necessarily conjoins divisive bio-categories to contemporary theory. Young writes, “[Hybridity] may be used in different ways, given different inflections and apparently discrete references, but it always reiterates and reinforces the dynamics of the same conflictual economy whose tensions and divisions it reenacts in its own antithetical structure.” See Robert Young, Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture and Race (New York: Routledge, 1995), 27. 112. Michael Geyer and Charles Bright argue that contests over the terms of global integration and how the identities of individuals, social groups, and societies should be defined was a hallmark of the twentieth-century world. See their “World History in a Global Age,” American Historical Review, 100, no. 4 (1995): 1058. 113. As Jonathon Glassman demonstrates, imported concepts such as race and nation—much like the objects described above—were domesticated to speak to specific, twentieth-century Zanzibari concerns; see “Slower Than a Massacre: The Multiple Sources of Racial Thought in Colonial Africa,” American Historical Review, 109, no. 3 (2004): 720–54. ## Chapter 5: Symbolic Subjection and Social Rebirth 1. Jonathon Glassman, “The Bondsman’s New Clothes: The Contradictory Consciousness of Slave Resistance on the Swahili Coast,” Journal of African History 32, no. 2 (1991): 277–312. 2. On the relation of the ending of the overseas slave trade to the prices and availability of slaves in Zanzibar, see Frederick Cooper, Plantation Slavery on the East Coast of Africa (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1977); Abdul Sheriff, Slaves, Spices, and Ivory in Zanzibar (London: Heinemann, 1990); Jonathon Glassman, Feasts and Riot: Revelry, Rebellion, and Popular Consciousness on the Swahili Coast, 1856–1888 (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995). 3. The percentage of slaves born on the African mainland was probably lower for the larger population, though people born on the mainland were undoubtedly in the majority. See “List of Slaves unlawfully held in slavery by British Indian Subjects at Zanzibar and its dependencies, who have been emancipated at the Consulate [1860],” A12/3, ZNA. Of the 259 additional slaves emancipated by the British consul between 1863 and 1874, only three were born in Zanzibar; see “Return of Slaves emancipated by Lieut. Col. Playfair, from the date of his assuming charge of British Consulate Zanzibar [n.d.],” A12/3, ZNA. See also James Christie, “Slavery in Zanzibar as It Is,” in The East African Slave Trade, ed. Edward Steere (London: Harrison, 1871); and Sheriff, Slaves, Spices, and Ivory, 230. 4. Edward Steere, Swahili Tales, as Told by the Natives of Zanzibar (London: Bell and Daldy, 1870), 497. The place of the enslaved in regimes of consumption is conspicuously absent in studies of both consumption and slavery. Jane Guyer has suggested a rethinking of the boundaries between personhood and “thingness”; see “Wealth in People, Wealth in Things,” Journal of African History 36, no. 1 (1995): 83–88. Rey Chow poignantly highlighted consumer studies’ neglect of commodified people in her critique of Appadurai’s The Social Life of Things: “By centering the politics of commoditization of things in exchange, [Appadurai] anthropomorphizes things but avoids blurring the line between things and people, and thus preserves the safe boundaries of an old, respectable humanism. However, the most critical implication of his theory begins precisely where he stops . . . persons, like things, have commodified lives.” Chow, “Where Have All the Natives Gone?” in Displacements: Cultural Identities in Question, ed. A. Bammer (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994), 125–51. See also Appadurai, “The Thing Itself,” Public Culture 18, no. 1 (2006): 15–21. 5. R. Thornton, “Notes Towards a Theory of Objects and Persons,” African Anthropology 4, no. 1 (1997): 41. 6. Homi Bhabha calls slavery a place of “not there,” following Toni Morrison’s assertion of a “stressed, dislocatory absence” integral to narratives of slavery. See Bhabha, “Fireflies Caught in Molasses: Questions of Cultural Translation,” in October: The Second Decade, 1986–1996, ed. Rosalind Krauss (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997), 222; S. Miers and I. Kopytoff, “African ‘Slavery’ as an Institution of Marginality,” in Slavery in Africa: Historical and Anthropological Approaches, ed. S. Miers and I. Kopytoff (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1977), 3–81. 7. Speer, “Report on Zanzibar, 1862,” roll 2, vols. 4–5, United States Consulate Records, Zanzibar (hereafter USCZ). Gissing’s report from Mombasa, claimed that the Chagga sold each other “very freely”: Gissing to Kirk, 10 May 1884, AA10/1, ZNA. See also C. Piot’s survey of the blurred categories between people, even members of a kin group, and exchangeable things: “Of Slaves and the Gift: Kabre Sale of Kin During the Era of the Slave Trade,” Journal of African History 37, no. 1 (1996): 31–49. 8. See, in particular, Marcia Wright, Strategies of Slaves and Women in East Central Africa (Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1989), passim; see also Case No. 3 of 1875, in the Vice-Admiralty Court at Zanzibar, L/P&S/9/51, British Library, India Office Library, London (hereafter IOL); W. J. Rampley, Matthew Wellington: Sole Surviving Link with Dr. Livingstone (London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, [ca. 1930]); Edward Alpers, “The Story of Swema: Female Vulnerability in Nineteenth-Century East Africa,” in Women and Slavery in Africa, ed. Claire Robertson and Martin Klein (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1983), 185–219; and “Representations of Children in the East African Slave Trade,” paper presented at the Avignon Conference on Slavery and Forced Labour, “Children in Slavery,” Avignon, France, May 2004; Rebecca Wakefield, Memoirs of Mrs. Rebecca Wakefield, Wife of the Rev. T. Wakefield, ed R. Brewin (London: Hamilton, Adams, 1879), 203. 9. Rigby, Consular Court, Zanzibar, A3/11, ZNA. As in most of such British consular court cases, the slave was asked to testify. In the Kadhi’s court, a slave was allowed to testify against another slave, but not against his master. Speer, “Report on Zanzibar, 1862,” roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ. 10. The myth that slaves were better off in slavery than in their home societies was likewise common in slave societies in the Western Hemisphere. 11. This notion of slaves as childlike subordinates was common in many African societies. See, for example, Miers and Kopytoff, Slavery in Africa, on the concept of slaves as kin/children and the social absorption of enslaved people. 12. Karl Schmidt, Sansibar: Ein ostafrikaniches Culturbild (Leipzig: Brodhaus, 1888), 46, quoted in Cooper, Plantation Slavery, 78. 13. In the agricultural sector, as Cooper notes, the increasing economic importance of slaves did not entirely dissolve their social value or political salience. “Whether the clove industry prospered or stagnated,” Cooper argued in his study of plantation slavery in East Africa, “the slaves’ labor helped provide subsistence while their presence conveyed prestige” (Plantation Slavery, 78). As evidence of the kind of social capital slave-owners commanded, Glassman suggests that owners’ prestige and wealth could be further enhanced when slaves achieved renown in the caravan trade or in local dance societies. Even among concubines, for whom bearing the son of their owner brought the prestige and protection of birthing a free-born child, the status of slavery meant a necessary social reliance on the graces of their master (Feasts and Riot, 80, 90); see also Margaret Strobel, Muslim Women in Mombasa, 1890–1975 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1979), 49–50; Claire Robertson and Martin Klein, eds., Women and Slavery in Africa (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1983). 14. Emily Ruete [Sayyida Salme], Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, reprinted in An Arabian Princess between Two Worlds: Memoirs, Letters Home, Sequels to the Memoirs, Syrian Customs and Usages, ed. E. Van Donzel (New York: E. J. Brill, 1993), 150. On the symbolic uses of slaves elsewhere, see S. Marmon, “Domestic Slavery in the Mamluk Empire: A Preliminary Sketch,” in Slavery in the Islamic Middle East, ed. S. Marmon (Princeton, NJ: Markus Weiner, 1999), 1–24; M. Ennaji, Serving the Master: Slavery and Society in Nineteenth Century Morocco (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998). 15. James Christie, Cholera Epidemics in Africa (London: Macmillan, 1876), 382; “The Story of Rashid bin Hassani of the Bisa tribe, Northern Rhodesia,” recorded by W. F. Baldock, in Ten Africans, by Margery F. Perham (London: Faber and Faber, 1936), 81–120. 16. Hamerton to Secret Department, 2 January 1842, L/P&S/9/12, IOL; Christie, Cholera Epidemics, 328. 17. Great Britain, Foreign Office, Correspondence Respecting Sir Bartle Frere’s Mission (London: Harrison and Sons, 1873), 49. 18. Clelia Weeks, “Zanzibar,” Harper’s New Monthly Magazine 38 (December–May, 1868–69): 312. When the sultan introduced his eldest daughter to French-Sheldon, he remarked, “See how a Sultan dresses his daughter!” See May French-Sheldon, Sultan to Sultan: Adventures among the Masai and Other Tribes of East Africa (London: Saxon, 1892), 93. As further evidence of the analogies between slavery, childhood, and the status of wife, all three addressed the male head of the household in the same fashion: shikamoo, “I grasp your ankles” (Glassman, Feasts and Riot, 94). 19. See, for example, New’s description of women dressed up with expensive jewelry and clothing in order to “meet the taste and take the eye of the purchaser!” Charles New, Life, Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern Africa (1873; repr. London: Frank Cass, 1971), 29–30. Traders also often shaved parts of the enslaveds’ heads to mark their condition; see “Translations of two papers found . . . dated 20 Rabia il Akher 1282, Zanzibar,” AA3/25, ZNA. This strategy of subjection and presentation for sale was common in many other slave societies. See, for example, Saidiya Hartman’s Scenes of Subjection (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), and Walter Johnson’s ethnography of the Southern slave market, Soul By Soul: Life in the Antebellum Slave Market (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), chaps. 4–5. 20. J. Holman, Travels in Madras, Ceylon, Maurutius, Cormoro Islands, Calcutta, Etc. (London: Routledge, 1840), 50. 21. Joseph Osgood, Notes of Travel (Salem, MA: George Creamer, 1854), 50. 22. On slave names, see “List of slaves unlawfully held in slavery by British Indian Subjects,” A12/3, ZNA. 23. Hamerton to Secret Department, Zanzibar, 2 January 1842, L/P&S/9/12, IOL; Speer, “Report on Zanzibar, 1862,” roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ. For a further discussion of wapambe, see Glassman, Feasts and Riot, 130, 132–33. 24. Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 157. 25. Ibid., 315. See also C. Devereux, A Cruise in the “Gorgon” or Eighteen Months on H. M. S. “Gorgon,” Engaged in the Suppression of the Slave Trade on the East Coast of Africa (London: Bell and Daldy, 1869), 70. 26. Devereux, Cruise in the “Gorgon,” 414. 27. Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 251–52; see also Ennaji, Serving the Master. 28. In slave-holding ideology, slaves had no “words,” no political voice apart from that of their masters. Krapf recorded a phrase that sums up this ideology succinctly: Watuma hawana kalima wa nafsizao: lit., “slaves have no words for their interests”; that is, “slaves cannot speak for themselves.” See Johann Krapf, A Dictionary of the Suahili Language (London: Trubner, 1882), 269. 29. Cooper also writes of an Ethiopian slave of the sultan at Zanzibar, Feruzi, who resettled in Malindi after manumission and enhanced his public standing by building a mosque (Plantation Slavery, 250); see also W. Ruschenberger, A Voyage Round the World (Philadelphia, PA: Carey, Lea and Blanchard, 1839), 49. 30. Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 287. 31. Orlando Patterson, Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982). On social death as part of a process of slavery, see Frederick Cooper, “The Problem of Slavery in African Studies,” Journal of African History 20, no. 1 (1979): 103–25. 32. Johann Krapf, Travel, Researches and Missionary Labours During Eighteen Years Residence in East Africa (Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1860), 229. 33. The metaphor of Africa as diseased found particular currency, given the older notion of Africa as “the white man’s grave.” See “My First Slaver: A Tale of the Zanzibar Coast,” Colburn’s United Service Magazine (July 1880): 356. The association of Africa with sickness and affliction is still salient. A Wall Street Journal reviewer of Ryszard Kapuscinki’s The Shadow of the Sun (2001) touted the book as a “highly detailed . . . introduction to Africa’s afflictions.” The quotation appears above the title on the front cover of the paperback edition. 34. These final written words of Livingstone are emblazoned on his tombstone in Westminster Abbey. See H. Waller, The Last Journals of David Livingstone, in Central Africa, from 1865 to His Death (Hartford, CT: R. W. Bliss, 1875), 447. 35. “My First Slaver,” 356. 36. On the role of missionary societies in disseminating information about Africa to a mass audience, see S. Thorne, “‘The Conversion of Englishmen and the Conversion of the World Inseparable’: Missionary Imperialism and the Language of Class in Early Industrial Britain,” in Tensions of Empire, ed. Frederick Cooper and Laura Stoler (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1997), 238–62. On Queen Victoria’s speech addressing the East African slave trade, see E. Hutchinson, The Slave Trade of East Africa (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Low, and Searle, 1874), 78. 37. Katrin Bromer, ed. and trans., The Jurisdiction of the Sultan of Zanzibar and the Subjects of Foreign Nations (Würzburg: Ergon Verlag, 2001), 20–21. Mateka were alternatively called “slaves of the [British] Consul,” watumwa wa balozi. See Ludwig Ritter von Höhnel, Discovery of Lakes Rudolph and Stefanie (London: Longmans, Green, 1894), 1:15; Glassman, Feasts and Riot, 108; R. Githige, “The Issue of Slavery: Relations between the CMS and the State on the East African Coast Prior to 1895,” Journal of Religion in Africa 16, no. 3 (1986): 209–25. 38. Frederick Cooper, Thomas Holt, and Rebecca Scott, “Introduction,” in Beyond Slavery: Explorations of Race, Labor, and Citizenship in Postemancipation Societies, ed. Cooper, Holt, and Scott (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000), 7. 39. The function of popular anti–slave trade rhetoric in Britain as a foil for the inhumanities of the factory system was first recognized by David Brion Davis and was later taken up in Frederick Cooper’s analyses of East African slavery. Abolitionism existed before industrialization, but it took on new urgency at the end of the eighteenth century. See Cooper, Plantation Slavery; and, “Conditions Analogous to Slavery: Imperialism and Free Labor Ideology in Africa,” in Cooper, Holt, and Scott, eds., Beyond Slavery, 107–51. 40. Frederick Cooper, From Slaves to Squatters (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1980), 26; see also E. P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (London: Gollancz, 1963). 41. Speer wrote that he frequently visited the slave market because it was the place “of most animation in this city (always excepting the nigger dances)”; see Speer, “Report on Zanzibar, 1862,” roll 2, vol. 4–5, USCZ. Some, like Charles Pickering, closely studied the slave market in an attempt to create a detailed taxonomy of African physiognomies; see his The Races of Man and Their Geographical Distribution (London: George Bell and Sons, 1876), 198–206. In Brazil, the United States, and elsewhere, visits to the slave market were common features of travel narratives. See Hartman, Scenes of Subjection; Johnson, Soul By Soul. 42. J. Cotterill, ed., Travels and Researches among the Lakes and Mountains of Eastern and Central Africa: From the Journals of the Late J. Frederic Elton (London: John Murray, 1879), 42–44. 43. “The Slave Market at Zanzibar,” The Illustrated London News, 8 June 1872. 44. Ibid. While in Zanzibar, J. Holman visited the slave market every day and wrote almost exclusively about the women he encountered there; see his Travels in Madras; James Kirkman, ed., “The Zanzibar Diary of John Studdy Leigh, Part 1,” International Journal of African Historical Studies 13, no. 2 (1980): 285–86. 45. Much as in the United States, the body of the enslaved woman in the Zanzibari market became the singular icon of abolitionist literature; see Gwen Bergner, “Myths of Masculinity: The Oedipus Complex and Douglass’s 1845 Narrative,” in The Psychoanalysis of Race, ed. Christopher Lane (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998), 255. 46. Cotterill, Travels and Researches, 38–39. 47. Weeks, “Zanzibar,” 311. Richard Burton called slaves in the market “hardly human”; see his Zanzibar: City, Island, and Coast, 2 vols. (London: Tinsley Brothers, 1872), 1:351–52. 48. Waller, Last Journals of David Livingstone, 25. 49. Kirk, “Memorandum [ca. 1869],” L/P&S/9/48, IOL. 50. Kirk to Gonne, 21 September 1869, L/P&S/9/48, IOL. Compare this with Kingsley’s account of a visit to Ireland, where he meditated on the “human chimpanzees” he saw there. “To see white chimpanzees is dreadful; if they were black, one would not feel it so much”; quoted in M. Biddiss, “Introduction,” in Images of Race, ed. M. Biddiss (Surrey: Leicester University Press, 1979), 30. 51. Kirk to Gonne, 4 October 1869, L/P&S/9/48, IOL. 52. Weeks wrote of a white slave woman owned by Bibi Aisha using similar terms (“Zanzibar,” 312). Kirk freed an additional three Circassian women in 1869; see “Return of Slaves emancipated by Lieut. Col. Playfair, from the date of his assuming charge of British Consulate Zanzibar [n.d.],” A12/3, ZNA. 53. On Persian slaves exported from Bundar Abbas, see Hamerton to Palmerston, 10 February 1848, AA1/3, ZNA. 54. On the trade of Indian women to Zanzibar, see Hennell to the Secretary of the Bombay Government, 31 August 1841, FO 54/5, Public Record Office, London. 55. Kirk to Wedderburn, 8 April 1871, L/P&S/9/49, IOL. 56. Devereux, Cruise in the “Gorgon,” 121. 57. George L. Sulivan, Dhow Chasing in Zanzibar Waters on the Eastern Coast of Africa (London: S. Low, Marsten, Low & Searle, 1873), 178–79. 58. Devereux, Cruise in the “Gorgon,” 121. 59. Captain Philip Colomb, Slave-Catching in the Indian Ocean: A Record of Naval Experiences (1873; repr. London: Dawsons of Pall Mall, 1968), 438. 60. Seward to Gonne, 15 October 1866, L/P&S/9/43, IOL. 61. Ibid. 62. Frere to Earl Granville, 7 May 1873 (Enclosure in no. 53, Memorandum on Disposal of Liberated Slaves); Great Britain, Foreign Office, Correspondence Respecting Sir Bartle Frere’s Mission, 119. 63. G. Ward, ed., Letters of Bishop Tozer and his Sister together with some other records of the Universities’ Mission from 1863–1873 (London: Office of the Universities’ Mission to Central Africa, 1902), 229–31; Joseph Thomson, To the Central African Lakes and Back (London: S. Low, Marsten, Searle & Rivington, 1881), 21. This predisposition to dress “houseboys” in kanzus and fezzes became common in the early years of British colonial rule in Kenya. See Margaret Jean Hay, “Changes in Clothing and Struggles over Identity in Colonial Western Kenya,” in Fashioning Africa: Power and the Politics of Dress, ed. Jean Allman (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004), 67–83. 64. Ward, Letters of Bishop Tozer, 136–37; Captain Prideaux to the Earl of Derby, 2 January 1875, L/P&S/9/51, IOL. 65. While this redressing would mark the redeemed as “superior” to some raw slaves, it was not uncommon to see men for sale in the slave market wearing fezzes given them on arrival. Moreover, though the kanzu was worn by freed people as a sign of their status, the slaves of the elite also wore kanzus. Ward, Letters of Bishop Tozer, 82–83. 66. Ibid., 103–4. 67. As the missionaries gained more slaves, they continued to dress them uniformly. Girls were given pink frocks, and the consul sent cloth jackets for the boys (ibid., 120). 68. Wakefield, Memoirs of Mrs. Rebecca Wakefield, 127. 69. Ward, Letters of Bishop Tozer, 132. 70. The practice of “buying” children through African missions continued long after the end of the slave trade. See J. Nederveen Pieterse, White on Black: Images of Africa and Blacks in Western Popular Culture (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992), 72–73; Wakefield, Memoirs of Mrs. Rebecca Wakefield, 122–23. 71. Willoughby, East Africa and Its Big Game (London: Longmans, Green, 1889), 33. A testament to the enduring paternalism of redeemers toward freed slaves is Rampley’s c. 1930 reference to Livingstone as the “great master” of the freed slaves who worked for him and their becoming orphans after his death; see Rigby to Stewart, 22 February 1862, AA12/8, ZNA; Rampley, Matthew Wellington, 30, 33. 72. Miers and Kopytoff, Slavery in Africa; Marcia Wright, Strategies of Slaves and Women in East Central Africa (Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1989). Glassman argues that on the nineteenth-century East African coast the ideas of slavery and freedom (uhuru) were not necessarily discrete categories in peoples’ minds. “Uhuru was not a status one was born with,” Glassman suggests, “but was rather a condition bestowed on a slave, by the master or some other powerful patron.” Thus, when one “was granted uhuru, one exchanged bonds with the master for a new type of bond with one’s benefactor” (Feasts and Riot, 113). 73. Glassman, Feasts and Riot; Cooper, Holt, and Scott, “Introduction,” 5. 74. Burton, Zanzibar 1:179–80. 75. Political Agent of Zanzibar to Secretary of the Government, Bombay, 17 March 1866, AA3/25, ZNA. AA3/25 contains a considerable amount of information about Mabruki’s case. 76. Simmel, quoted in Jean and John Comaroff, Of Revelation and Revolution 2:273. 77. Devereux, Cruise in the “Gorgon,” 107–8. 78. “Depositions of various male and female African slaves found in possession of Kanoo Munjee a Banian, British Subject, residing at Zanzibar,” 5 February 1860, AA3/11, ZNA. 79. Burton, The Lake Regions of Central Africa, 2 vols. (London: Longman, 1860), 1:34; and Zanzibar 1:109, 386–87. 80. Laura Fair, Pastimes and Politics: Culture, Community, and Identity in Post-Abolition Urban Zanzibar, 1890–1945 (Athens: Ohio University Press, 2001), chap. 2. 81. On slaves’ conviction that return was impossible, see Sulivan, Dhow Chasing in Zanzibar Waters, 186. 82. On theft, see, for example, Consular Court Zanzibar, Criminal case no.7, 18 December 1867, AA7/1, ZNA. 83. Burton, Zanzibar 1:343–44. 84. Devereux, Cruise in the “Gorgon,” 107; New, Life, Wanderings, and Labours, 59. 85. Rashid was only officially freed on the death of his master, Bibi Zem Zem, Sultan Barghash’s sister. See “Story of Rashid bin Hassani” (also discussed in Cooper, Plantation Slavery, 232). J. Willoughby’s gunbearer, “Faas,” turned down an offer of manumission when Willoughby sought to buy his freedom. He told Willoughby that he preferred to remain a slave because he would always be assured of a home when unable to find employment as a porter. See Willoughby, East Africa and Its Big Game, 259. Glassman records several similar circumstances that confirm the centrality of social dependence to slavery on the East African coast. He goes so far as to suggest that even slave rebels did not seek “independence” but community and the ability to determine their place within it (Feasts and Riot, 107). 86. Ruete [Salme] wrote that the Circassian concubines in her household were well aware of their social value and therefore refused to eat with Ethiopian or East African concubines. This refusal to eat with others of differing social standing was common in Zanzibar: adults did not eat with children, men often only ate with other men, and the elite did not share meals with those they deemed less respectable. In response to their haughtiness, the children of Ethiopian concubines derisively called the children of Circassian mothers “Highness” (Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 174, 176). 87. Ward, Letters of Bishop Tozer, 117–18. 88. Livingstone was impressed with Wainwright and requested his company in his subsequent travels. Wainright later escorted Livingstone’s body to London and was invited to Livingstone’s funeral in Westminster Abbey as a “representative of Africa.” Thereafter he toured England, speaking to various congregations with the support of the CMS. Matthew Wellington, whose birth name was Chengwimbe, also took on a new name at the Nasik mission. Though missionaries gave him the name “Matthew,” he chose “Wellington” (Rampley, Matthew Wellington). 89. Fred Morton, Children of Ham: Freed Slaves and Fugitive Slaves on the Kenya Coast, 1873 to 1907 (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990), 52–55. 90. Ibid., 59. 91. Ibid., 57, fn. 24. 92. See August Nimtz, Islam and Politics in East Africa (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1980); Cooper, Plantation Slavery; Glassman, Feasts and Riot; Mohamed el Zein, The Sacred Meadows (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1974). 93. Glassman argues that the appropriation of the title mwungwana (the singular of waungwana) was common among porters and other free-born, upcountry people in coastal East Africa. The term implied an urbaneness, an association with coastal culture (Feasts and Riot, 62). 94. Edward Steere, Handbook of the Swahili Language as Spoken at Zanzibar (1870; repr., London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1894), 406. 95. Krapf, Dictionary, 269, 406. Steere’s dictionary of the Zanzibari dialect reiterates Krapf’s definition, emphasizing that uungwana meant civilized (“as opposed to -shinzi”) and free (“as opposed to -tumwa”). See Steere, Handbook of the Swahili Language, 406. 96. Krapf, Dictionary, 259, 269, 390. Elsewhere Krapf wrote that Europeans, Arabs, and Indians were called “Unguana,” “in opposition to the Blacks and slaves, or Watoto wa Hami [children of Ham].” See Johann Krapf, “The East Africa Mission,” Church Missionary Record 1, no. 17 (1846): 38. 97. Krapf, Dictionary, 312. Krapf’s explanation is as follows: “huyu Muarabu ni punguani si Muarabu kamili, this man is only a half-caste Arab, not a full Arab; that is, his father is an Arab, but his mother is or was a slave. Mtu huyu ni punguani, or yuna punguani kua mamai si muunguana kamili anatangamana na maji ya kitumoa, aliepunguka uunguana, this man is free but his freedom is defective on account of his mother who was a slave, and was liberated.” 98. John H. Speke, Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1868), xxvi. 99. Thomson, Central African Lakes, 91–92; Glassman, Feasts and Riot. Waungwana was such a common self-identifying term for Swahili-speaking porters that a variant of Swahili spoken in eastern Congo was popularly known as Kiungwana. 100. Consular Court Proceeding, 13 January 1860, AA3/11, ZNA. 101. Much like uungwana, these terms were also deployed by ex-slaves and the poor to further their own social interests. 102. For a discussion of the cultural and semantic transition among elites from uungwana to ustaarabu, see Randall Pouwels, Horn and Crescent (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), passim. 103. Glassman suggests that even ustaarabu was quickly appropriated by slaves and others, which gave rise to the term mtumwa mstaarabu (Feasts and Riot, 92). 104. Strobel, Muslim Women in Mombasa; and Glassman, Feasts and Riot; David Sperling, “The Frontiers of Prophecy: Healing, the Cosmos and Islam on the East African Coast in the Nineteenth Century,” in Revealing Prophets, ed. D. Anderson and D. Johnson (London: James Currey, 1995), 83–101; Edward Alpers, “ ‘Ordinary Household Chores,’ ” International Journal of African Historical Studies 17, no. 4 (1984): 677–702. 105. Cooper, Plantation Slavery, 229; Garth Myers, “The Early History of the ‘Other Side’ of Zanzibar Town,” in The History and Conservation of Stone Town Zanzibar, ed. Abdul Sheriff (Athens: Ohio University Press, 1995), 30–45; “Reconstructing Ng’ambo: Town Planning and Development on the Other Side of Zanzibar” (PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1993); and Johann Ludwig Krapf, ‘Memoir on the East African Slave Trade’: Ein unveröffentlichtes Dokument aus dem Jahr 1853 (Vienna: Afro-Pub, 2002). When Rigby emancipated more than four thousand slaves owned by Indians in Zanzibar, almost all moved to Ng’ambo and took jobs such as water-carriers and producesellers (Grant, A Walk Across Africa, 12). 106. Osgood, Notes of Travel, 50–51; Colomb, Slave-Catching, 371. 107. New, Life, Wanderings, and Labours, 64. 108. Ibid. 109. “Return of Slaves emancipated by Lieut. Col. Playfair, from the date of his assuming charge of British Consulate Zanzibar [n.d.],” A12/3, ZNA. 110. Glassman, “Bondsman’s New Clothes.” 111. Burton, Zanzibar 2:111. 112. P. J. Cain and A. G. Hopkins, British Imperialism, 1688–2000 (London: Longman, 2000). “Moral purpose” is D. Hammond and A. Jablow’s phrase, taken from The Africa That Never Was (New York: Twayne, 1970), 50. 113. This notion of Africans as a tabula rasa carried over into colonial discourse. The African character, was, according to one colonialist, “a blank sheet whereon we may write at will, without the necessity of first deleting old impressions”; see Pieterse, White on Black, 88. 114. Krapf, who was prescient in many ways, articulated in 1845 what would become the popular ideology of colonialism: “The great question . . . is whether the moral Government of God will at this period bring the African mankind into closer connection with the rest of the world, or whether he will postpone it until the occidental Christendom is more aroused to a sense of the great duties which Christians have to fulfill”; see Johann Krapf, “Letter to Capt. Graham, Mombas, 1st May, $\mathrm { ~ \tt ~ { ~ I ~ } 8 4 5 , \mathrm { ~ \tt ~ { ~ \vec ~ { ~ \psi ~ } ~ } ~ } }$ in “Krapf of East Africa,” East and West Review 3 (1937): 263, 265, 268. On the history of antislavery rhetoric and images of Africa, see Philip Curtin, The Image of Africa: British Ideas and Actions, $_ { I 7 } 8 o - \tau 8 5 o$ (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1973); Patrick Brantlinger, “Victorians and Africans: The Genealogy of the Myth of the Dark Continent,” Critical Inquiry 12, no. 1 (1985): 166–203; R. Austen and W. Smith, “Images of Africa and British Slave-Trade Abolition: The Transition to an Imperialist Ideology, $\scriptstyle { \mathrm { \scriptscriptstyle { I 7 8 7 - I 8 0 7 } } } ,$ ” African Historical Studies 2, no. 1 (1969): $6 9 - 8 3$ 115. “Administration Report of the Political Agent and Consul-General at Zanzibar for the Year 1873 and $\mathrm { \Delta I 8 7 4 , } ^ { \mathrm { \scriptsize ~ > } }$ L/P&S/9/51, IOL; Churchill to H. M. Secretary to the Secretary of State for India, India Office, London, 22 August 1868, L/P&S/9/48, IOL. The correspondence between British Consul John Kirk and William Mackinnon—the commercial magnate who would receive coastal Kenya as a semi-private trusteeship—is likewise steeped in an idealistic rhetoric based on encouraging trade and achieving greater British control for the express goal of liberating Africans from slavery and a host of other vices. While Mackinnon had more economic interests in East Africa than any Briton, he was a devout Christian and believed deeply in the moral necessity of intervention as the only means to the humanitarian ends of abolition and civilization. PPMS1/Corr 1, Mackinnon Papers, School of Oriental and African Studies Library, University of London. See also John S. Galbraith, Mackinnon and East Africa, 1878–1895: A Study in the “New Imperialism.” (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972). 116. Samuel Baker, The Albert N’yanza, Great Basin of the Nile, and Explorations of the Nile Sources (London: Macmillan, 1866), 445. Consul John Kirk, was more direct: “It is an uphill work keeping orientals straight. I would far sooner govern the country offhand and have done with it”; quoted in E. Ropes Jr., The Zanzibar Letters of Edward D. Ropes, Jr., 1882–1892, ed. Norman Bennett (Boston: Boston University Press, 1973), 30, fn. 101. 117. For the ideology of colonization as the moral answer to the slave trade/slavery, see Cooper, “Conditions Analogous to Slavery,” 116; Frere, in a letter to the British Parliament, wrote that “as far as physical comfort, security, and chance of rising in the world goes, [being a slave in Zanzibar] is better than anything to which he could have aspired in his own country”; see Great Britain, Foreign Office, Correspondence Respecting Sir Bartle Frere’s Mission, 148–9; Speke, Journal of the Discovery, xxvi; Weeks, “Zanzibar,” 311; Ward, Letters of Bishop Tozer, $\mathbf { I } 3 6 - 3 7$ 118. Ronald Robinson, John Gallagher, and Alice Denny, Africa and the Victorians: The Climax of Imperialism (Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1968), 47. 119. Ibid, 24. 120. Ward, Letters of Bishop Tozer, 226. 121. Sultan Barghash’s 1875 European tour and the autobiography of Sayyida Salme binti Said/Emily Ruete (Barghash’s half sister), Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, were the most significant attempts by East Africans to shape European images of the region. ## Chapter 6: Picturesque Contradictions 1. John C. Willoughby, East Africa and Its Big Game: The Narrative of a Sporting Trip from Zanzibar to the Borders of the Masai (London: Longmans, Green, 1889), 11–12. 2. William Bissell, “Engaging Colonial Nostalgia,” Cultural Anthropology, 20, no. 2 (2005): 215–48. 3. Michael Adas, Machines as the Measure of Man: Science, Technology, and Ideologies of Western Dominance (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989), 3–4. 4. Breckenridge et. al. call this desire to separate and purify neverautonomous realms a core concern of modern Western consciousness. See Carol Breckenridge, Sheldon Pollock, Homi Bhabha, and Dipesh Chakrabarty, eds. Cosmopolitanism (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002), 12. India has a similar history of being described as essentially contradictory: its ancient temples paradoxically stand next to modern factories. See Dipesh Chakrabarty, Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000), 49. 5. As Disraeli famously declared before the House of Commons in 1849, “Race implies difference, difference implies superiority, and superiority leads to dominance.” Quoted in Biddiss, “Introduction,” in Images of Race, ed. M. Biddiss (Surrey: Leicester University Press, 1979), 16. On the correlation of civilization and race, see, for example, L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society: Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from Savagery through Barbarism to Civilization (New York: H. Holt, 1878); Philip Curtin, The Image of Africa (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1973). 6. Ronald Robinson, John Gallagher, and Alice Denny, Africa and the Victorians: The Climax of Imperialism (Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1968), 18. 7. Johannes Fabian, “Remembering the Other: Knowledge and Recognition in the Exploration of Central Africa,” Critical Inquiry 26, no. 1 (1999): 49–69. 8. Bernard McGrane develops this distinction between hierarchies of knowledge and temporality in Beyond Anthropology (New York: Columbia University Press, 1989). See also H. Alan C. Cairns, Prelude to Imperialism: British Reactions to Central African Society, 1840–1890 (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965). 9. Hegel is quoted in Anne McClintock, Imperial Leather: Race, Gender and Sexuality in the Colonial Conquest (New York: Routledge, 1995), 40; Tylor, Anthropology: An Introduction to the Study of Man and Civilization (1880; repr., London: D. Appleton, 1913), 401; see also Nicholas Thomas, Out of Time: History and Evolution in Anthropological Discourses (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1989); Curtis Keim, Mistaking Africa: Curiosities and Inventions of the American Mind (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1999). Western authors applied this notion that societies traveled along varying evolutionary time-lines to much of the world in the latter nineteenth century. The Americo-Hawaiian biographer William Armstrong wrote in his reflections on King David Kalakua’s life that Hawaiians could not simply adopt the “self-rule of the Anglo-Saxons,” for it was an “evolution” of political habits and customs that Anglo-Saxons had slowly developed over time; see his Around the World with a King: The Circumnavigation of His Majesty King David Kalakua (1903; repr., Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle, 1977), 11. For a valuable genealogy of “civilization” discourse, see Bruce Mazlish, Civilization and Its Contents (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2004). 10. This interpretation of non-Westerners as temporally distinct in anthropological discourse is more fully considered in Fabian’s, Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002). Such temporal designations of difference still find their way into our vocabulary of alterity. The recourse to ideas like “intrinsic ansynchrony” as a hallmark of the Third World is just one example that closely resembles nineteenth-century definitions of cultural dissimilarity. See J. Nederveen Pieterse, “Globalization as Hybridization,” in Global Modernities, ed. Mike Featherstone et. al. (London: Sage, 1995), 69–90. Thomas Friedman rehashed this concept of a place out-oftime in his reference to Iraq as a nation that has been, “on a vacation from history” (Charlie Rose, June 3, 2004). Even more absurdly, Tim Butcher of the BBC, reporting from the Democratic Republic of Congo, recently wrote that, “the hands of the Congolese clock are not just standing still, they are spinning backwards”; see “Re-Charting the Mighty Congo,” BBC, 1 January, 2005, http:// news.bbc.co.uk. 11. In Hammond and Jablow’s words, Africa became a “reservoir” of antiquity in the nineteenth century. See D. Hammond and A. Jablow, The Africa That Never Was: Four Centuries of British Writing about Africa (New York: Twayne, 1970), 90. Some analysts were explicit in their regard of Africans as unchanging through centuries. Charles Mackay wrote that “in all the record of history, from Moses downwards, the negro has been the same”; see “The Negro and Negrophilists,” Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine 99 (1866): 587. Emblematic of the legacies of this way of seeing, a recent CNN International report on the lives of Botswanan “Bushman” removed from their ancestral homes in the Kalahari referred to one of the interviewees, Maswe Gkiiwe, as a “throwback to a bygone era” (12 December 2006). 12. Charles Pickering, The Races of Man and Their Geographical Distribution (London: George Bell and Sons, 1876), 196. 13. W. Ruschenberger, A Voyage Round the World (Philadelphia, PA: Carey, Lea, and Blanchard, 1839), 29. 14. Richard Burton, Zanzibar: City, Island, and Coast, 2 vols. (London: Tinsley Brothers, 1872), 1:118. 15. H. Cotterill, ed., Travels and Researches among the Lakes and Mountains of Eastern and Central Africa: From the Journals of the Late J. Frederic Elton (London: John Murray, 1879), 23. 16. Harry Johnston, The Kilima-njaro Expedition. A Record of Scientific Exploration in Eastern Equatorial Africa (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, 1886), 550. 17. “Zanzibar, A Commercial Power,” MacMillan’s Magazine, 32 (May– October 1875): 288. 18. It is an extraordinary fact that between 1848 and 1877 the number of subscribers to the Royal Geographical Society of Britain grew from about six hundred to three and a half thousand. It is also telling of East Africa’s relation to the new field of geography that Sir H. Bartle Frere became the president of the Royal Geographical Society after serving as British consul in Zanzibar. See R. C. Bridges, “Europeans and East Africans in the Age of Exploration,” Geographical Journal 139, no. 2 (1973): 220–32; Timothy Young, Travellers in Africa: British Travelogues, 1850–1900 (New York: Manchester University Press, 1988); Frere, also spur a new patriotic spirit in Britain in the second half of the nineteenth century. See John MacKenzie, Propaganda and Empire: The Manipulation of British Public Opinion, 1880–1960 (London: Manchester University Press, 1984). Their narratives continue to influence perceptions of and engagements with Africans. For instance, Kelly James, author of Dancing with the Witchdoctor: One Woman’s Stories of Mystery and Adventure in Africa (New York: William Morrow, 2001), credits Burton with stirring in her a burning desire to see Africa. “A Few Remarks on Zanzibar and the East Coast of Africa,” Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society of London, 17, no. 5 (1872–73): 343–54. 19. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (New York: Vantage, 1994), chaps. 5 and 10; Pratt, Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation (New York: Routledge, 1992); J. Sheehan, “Culture,” in The Nineteenth Century, ed. T. C. W. Blanning (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 126–57. 20. Alan Moorhead, quoted in Hammond and Jablow, Africa That Never Was, 51–52. 21. Edward Ropes, The Zanzibar Letters of Edward D. Ropes, Jr., 1882– 1892, ed. Norman Bennett (Boston: Boston University, 1973), 6. 22. Quoted in T. Richards, The Commodity Culture of Victorian England (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1990), 136. See also Felix Driver, “Henry Morton Stanley and His Critics: Geography, Exploration, and Empire,” Past and Present 133 (November 1991): 134–66. Zanzibar now also hosted the embassies of not only the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany, but also Portugal, Italy, Belgium, and Austria. See Pratt, “Trade Report of Zanzibar, July 1 1886 to June 30, 1887,” roll 4, vol. 8, USCZ. 23. Changes in the French popular press were very similar to those in the British and U.S. presses. According to W. Schneider, before 1870 information about Africa was available to a small elite in France, but thereafter events made it into the popular press and information about Africa was widely consumed; see An Empire for the Masses: The French Popular Image of Africa, 1870–1900 (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1982), 5. 24. During Barghash’s European tour, H. Bartle Frere described East Africa as “almost a blank in the [British] commercial map of the world” (“Zanzibar A Commercial Power,” 288). Interest in East Africa and the new science of discovery had, at least before the 1880s, very little relation to metropolitan mercantilism. Bridges claims, in fact, that membership in an organization like the Royal Geographical Society, which financed Burton and Speke among others, was made up mostly of the bureaucratic bourgeoisie, not the commercial middle class (Bridges, “Europeans and East Africans,” 220–32). 25. The Academy even published a piece on the sultan’s piano-playing abilities: “Sultan of Zanzibar a Good Pianist,” Academy 8 (July–December 1875): 181. 26. Messrs. Ballard and Halley, “New York Fashions,” Harper’s Bazaar, 11 September 1875. 27. Richard Burton, “Zanzibar, and Two Months in East Africa,” Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine (February, March, and May 1858): 200–224, 276– 90, 572–89. The only extensive travelogue of East Africa published in the West before Burton’s Lake Regions, was Guillain’s detailed, three-volume Documents. It came complete with a supplementary volume made up of maps and images reproduced from photographs (see chap. 4). In the 1860s, Carl Claus von der Decken’s Reisen in Ost Afrika offered an extensive treatise on the East African coastal region, including a great number of images, many adapted from Guillain’s photographs. 28. The writings of explorers or explorer-missionaries like Livingstone would 29. Richard Thornton, for example, read Burton’s work during his stay in Mombasa; see the entry for 22 June 1861, Richard Thornton Journals, MSS. Afr. s. 49, Rhodes House Library, Oxford. 30. In the blending of diverse narrative traditions with the verve of the “discovery” of the Nile’s source, Hammond and Jablow suggest that East African exploration narratives represent the apogee of nineteenth-century travel literature. On the standardization of regional genres, see Hammond and Jablow, Africa That Never Was, 51. 31. McGrane, Beyond Anthropology, 115. 32. The relation of geography and political economy to definitions of civilization is still strikingly present. Though analyses like F. Fernández-Armesto’s Civilizations: Culture, Ambition, and the Transformation of Nature (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2001) attempt to pluralize the idea of civilization, they are often bound to a nineteenth-century concept of civilization that defines it as an essential bundle of characteristics held by a particular population and, presumably, absent in other peoples. In Fernández-Armesto’s narrative, geography and economy determine civilization in ways similar to Victorian analysts’ parameters for definitions of civilized populations. Fernández-Armesto offers both a “Checklist of Civilization” and a section explicating “The Civilizing Ingredient.” 33. For instance, John Stuart Mill’s seminal reflection on civilization in 1836 (reprinted in 1859) was explicit in its methodology for defining the idea of civilization: civilization, he argued, was the “direct converse or contrary” of barbarism. At its core, Mill believed civilization to entail improvement and advancement; see Dissertations and Discussions: Political, Philosophical, and Historical. vol. 1 (1859; repr. New York: Haskell House, 1973), 160–205. Mill concludes that civilization is what is necessarily accepted when a people throws off the bonds of savagery. Mill was one of contemporary Britain’s most liberal thinkers, arguing against the grain that diversity in character had nothing to do with inherent natural, differences. See also Mill, Principles of Political Economy (London: Longmans, 1871); Robert Young, Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture and Race (New York: Routledge, 1995), 83 34. In this regard, see P. Landau and D. Kaspin, Images and Empires: Visuality and Colonial and Postcolonial Africa (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2002); J. Ryan, Picturing Empire: Photography and the Visualization of the British Empire (London: Reacktion, 1997). 35. On the concept of the “world-as-picture,” see Timothy Mitchell, Questions of Modernity (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000); and Colonising Egypt (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1991). 36. A poignant example of this is “The Slave Trade and Those Interested,” published in the Phrenological Journal and Science of Health, January 1874, 38– 39, which juxtaposed the politics of British interests in East Africa with sketches of physical types, drawn by H. Bartle Frere’s son. See also MacKenzie, Propaganda and Empire; V. G. Kiernan, The Lords of Human Kind: European Attitudes towards the Outside World in the Imperial Age (London: Serif, 1995); R. Hallet, “Changing European Attitudes to Africa,” in Cambridge History of Africa, vol. 5, ed. J. Flint (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976), 458–96. 37. The article added that “[a]mong the Arabian tribes there are several which cannot be distinguished from the fairest Indo-Germanic, with the exception, of course, of the clothing and customs”; Harper’s Weekly, 16 December 1871, 1175. 38. See, in particular, Robert Hartmann, Die Völker Afrikas (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1879); and Abyssinien und die übrigen Gebiete de Ostküste Afrikas (Leipzig: G. Freytag, 1883). 39. Rider Haggard, King Solomon’s Mines [1885], quoted in McClintock, Imperial Leather, 241. 40. Frederic Farrar, “Aptitudes of Races,” Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London 5 (1867): 116. 41. I use the term race here in its broader, nineteenth-century sense, encompassing nation and place of birth: vide the Irish race, English race, African race. For the larger context of purity and race in Victorian discourse, see J. DeVere Brody, Impossible Purities: Blackness, Femininity, and Victorian Culture (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998). 42. Robert Young suggests that the word hybrid first came into the discourse of classificatory human types sometime between 1843 and 1861; see Young, Colonial Desire, 6. 43. John Jackson, “Race in Legislation and Political Economy,” Anthropological Review 4 (1866): 125. For Jackson, half-castes, whom he believed became fully degenerate after four generations, were the clear proof of the existence of discrete races. Other theorists, like J. Prichard, entirely rejected the application of hybridity to humanity, suggesting instead that race was the mislabeling of variety within a unitary human species. See Young, Colonial Desire, 10. 44. Lauren Benton and John Muth typify representations of hybridity as “a collection of conflicting traits and impulses” in “On Cultural Hybridity: Interpreting Colonial Authority and Performance,” Journal of Colonialism and Colonial History 1, no. 1 (2000): 17. 45. Steere claimed that mixed-race Zanzibaris had “limited progeny.” This notion of mixed-race peoples being sterile was common in Anglophone theorizations of hybridity in the nineteenth century. See, for example, Paul Broca’s influential, On the Phenomena of Hybridity in the Genus Homo (London: Longman, Green, Longman and Roberts, 1864). 46. G. F. Scott Eliot, A Naturalist in Mid-Africa (London: A. D. Innes, 1896), 353–54. 47. “East African Slave Trade,” Quarterly Review 133 (July and October 1872): 541–42. E. C. Hore, in an article published in the Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute less than a year before the first German attempts at colonizing East Africa, wrote of “real samples” of the “native African” in the deep interior. These were isolated tribes who, because of their insulation from the semi-civilized coast, maintained a “certain amount of social order and tranquility.” These pure Africans, Hore believed, should be the focus of British efforts. “There is an opportunity,” he concluded, “in these comparably undisturbed tribes . . . to test the effects upon the African race of Christian civilization— before the disturbing influences of fortune-hunters overwhelm such germs of civilization as they possess.” In their purity, isolated tribes were imagined to contain the seeds of civilization which, without proper cultivation, would soon be spoiled by the mongrel nature of the coastal traders. See E. C. Hore, “On the Twelve Tribes of Tanganyika,” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 12 (1883): 3, 4, 20. 48. Hammond and Jablow, Africa That Never Was, 64. 49. Speer, “Report on Zanzibar, 1862,” roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ. 50. W. Cope Devereux, A Cruise in the “Gorgon” (London: Bell and Daldy, 1869), 103. 51. Rebecca Wakefield, Memoirs of Mrs. Rebecca Wakefield, ed. R. Brewin (London: Hamilton, Adams, 1879), 102–3. 52. J. Ross Browne, Etchings of a Whaling Cruise (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1968), 421–22. 53. Kutch had for centuries been an important player in the trans–Indian Ocean trade. It absorbed populations, goods, and ideas from across the entire Indian Ocean and, as a result, the notion that Kutchis were “pure” in the sense of biological boundedness is particularly problematic. Pickering’s description exemplifies not just the fiction of purity, but its malleability as a hierarchical category; see Pickering, Races of Man, 271; Ruschenberger, Voyage Round the World, 35. 54. Devereux, Cruise in the “Gorgon,” 63–64. 55. Charles New, Life, Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern Africa (1873; repr. London: Frank Cass, 1971), 56. 56. New’s account provides strong support for Robert Young’s claim that by the end of the 1860s race was not only a determining factor in human difference, but it no longer required empirical evidence (Young, Colonial Desire, 140). Philip Curtin has likewise suggested that new racial doctrines of the mid–nineteenth century were positively received by the educated public since they accorded well with national xenophobias. See Curtin, Image of Africa; D. Lorimer, Colour, Class, and the Victorians: English Attitudes to the Negro in the Mid-Nineteenth Century (Leicester, UK: Leicester University Press, 1978). 57. A. Fox, “Report on Anthropology, at the Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science for 1872 at Brighton,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 2 (1873): 360–61. 58. New, Life, Wanderings, and Labours, 34. 59. G. Ward, ed., Letters of Bishop Tozer and his Sister (London: Office of the Universities’ Mission to Central Africa, 1902), 225. 60. Burton, Zanzibar 1:81. 61. Hammond and Jablow, Africa That Never Was, 99. The case of the West African “half-caste” was, according to Hammond and Jablow, roughly the same in British conception before colonization: “The half-caste was as difficult and uncomfortable a by-product of empire as the Westernized African, and the novelists were as censorious of him. There is neither humor nor sympathy in the portrayals, rather a shuddering withdrawal as from something repulsive and disquieting. The ‘taint of the tar-brush’ was a stigma, eliciting the same reaction of hostility as the Westernized African, and for the same reasons. In regard to the half-caste there was an additional factor involving the racist imperative to maintain the purity of blood lines” (110). 62. Joseph Osgood, Notes of Travel (Salem, MA: George Creamer, 1854), 41. 63. Clelia Weeks, “Zanzibar,” Harper’s New Monthly Magazine 38 (December–May, 1868–69): 317. 64. Vernon Cameron, Across Africa (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1877), 151. 65. Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 14. 66. Ibid., 36–37. 67. Willoughby, East Africa and Its Big Game, 18. 68. “On the Track of the Germans in East Africa,” Pall Mall Gazette 6182, vol. 41, 3 June 1885. 69. We are also reminded here of Hammond and Jablow’s observation that British imperialists “had vested political, economic, and psychological interests in maintaining . . . contrasts” (Africa That Never Was, 99); see also Pickering, Races of Man, 197; Hore, “Twelve Tribes of Tanganyika,” 4. 70. On the process of what Patrick Brantlinger calls “imperialization,” or the formation of a popular imperialist consciousness, see “Victorians and Africans: The Genealogy of the Myth of the Dark Continent,” Critical Inquiry 12, no. 1 (1985): 167. 71. Ludwig Ritter von Höhnel, Discovery of Lakes Rudolf and Stefanie, vol. 1 (London: Longmans, Green, 1894), 1:180–81. 72. May French-Sheldon, Sultan to Sultan: Adventures among the Masai and Other Tribes of East Africa (London: Saxon, 1892), 356–58. 73. Ibid., 358. 74. Ibid., 359–60. 75. Stanley, How I Found Livingstone: Travels, Adventures, and Discoveries in Central Africa (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1887), 19–20. 76. Ward to Department of State, 13 July 1850, roll 1, vols. 1–3; Ward to Seyyid Said, 5 July 1850, roll 1, vols. 1–3; Jelly, Masury, and McMullan to Ward, 8 July 1850, roll 1, vols. 1–3, all in USCZ. 77. Abbott to Webster, 12 March 1851, roll 1, vol. 1–3, USCZ. 78. Ward to Webster, 14 June 1852, roll 1, vols. 1–3, USCZ; Mansfield to Cass, 18 April 1859, roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ; Ropes to Cass, 20 October 1859, roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ; same to same, 25 December 1859, roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ. 79. Playfair continued, “I would show him railways, roads and irrigational [sic] works; I would point out the difference between the cleanliness of Indian towns and the hideous filth of Zanzibar; I would show him what the introduction of European capital and skill has done in India—and having done this, surely there is reason to hope for some good result”; Playfair to Gonne, 19 April 1865, L/P&S/9/42, IOL. 80. Ward, Letters of Bishop Tozer, 194. 81. Captain Prideaux to the Earl of Derby, 2 January 1875, L/P&S/9/51, IOL. 82. Patrick Brantlinger, Rule of Darkness: British Literature and Imperialism, 1830–1914 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988), x. Edward Said first argued that while economic and political factors were essential to colonization, the creation of a canon of particular knowledge about the Orient culturally enabled Western expansion; see his Orientalism (New York: Vintage Books, 1979). 83. Joseph Thomson, “East Africa as It Was and Is,” Contemporary Review 55 (January 1889): 46. See also Mill, Dissertations and Discussions, 170. 84. Holmwood, “Administration Report of the Political Agent and Consul-General at Zanzibar for the Years 1873 and 1874,” L/P&S/9/51, IOL. 85. Thomson, “East Africa,” 46. On hearing of Barghash’s death in April of 1888, Ropes wrote to his father—the former American consul—using the harshest of terms: “like the case of our American Indians . . . it is best that he & they be exterminated” (Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 94). 86. “The Sultan of Zanzibar,” New York Times (reprinted from the Standard), 17 July 1875, 2. ## Conclusion 1. Histories of interconnectivity in the Indian Ocean cast a particularly long shadow over the courses of colonialism in the region. For examples of this in the spheres of economy and social relations, see Gilbert’s study of the longevity of the regional dhow trade and Mazrui and Shariff’s survey of contests over Swahili as an identity marker: Erik Gilbert, Dhows and Colonial Economy in Zanzibar: 1860–1970 (Columbus: Ohio University Press, 2005); Alamin Mazrui and Ibrahim Noor Shariff, The Swahili: Idiom and Identity of an African People (Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1994). 2. Ludwig Ritter von Höhnel, Discovery of Lakes Rudolf and Stefanie, vol. 1 (London: Longmans, Green, 1894), 182–83. 3. On the colonial propensity to claim a universal modernity while denying it to Africans, see, for instance, Simon Gikandi, “Reason, Modernity, and the African Crisis,” and Jan-Georg Deutsch, Peter Probst, and Heike Schmidt, “Cherished Visions and Entangled Meanings,” in African Modernities: Entangled Meanings in Current Debate, ed. Jan-Georg Deutsch, Peter Probst, and Heike Schmidt (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2002), 135–57 and 1–17 respectively. 4. Arjun Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998). 5. Stephen Kern, The Culture of Time and Space, 1880–1918 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003). In J. Lorand Matory’s words, “Gross quantitative increase does not a qualitative difference make”; see Black Atlantic Religion: Tradition, Transnationalism, and Matriarchy in the Afro-Brazilian Candomblé (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005), 270. For an interesting example of analogous Roman experiences of heightened global consciousness see Roland Robertson and David Inglis, “The Global Animus: In the Tracks of World Consciousness,” in Barry K. Gills and William R. Thompson, eds., Globalization and Global History (New York: Routledge, 2006), 33–47. 6. See M. Yahuda, “China’s Win-Win Globalization,” YaleGlobal Online, 19 February 2003, www.yaleglobal.yale.edu; Jo-Anne Pemberton, Global Metaphors: Modernity and the Quest for One World (London: Pluto Press, 2001); K. O’Rourke and J. Williamson, “When Did Globalization Begin?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7632 (2000), and Globalization and History: The Evolution of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999). For a comparison of the movement of capital in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, see M. Clemens and J. Williamson, “Where Did British Capital Go? Fundamentals, Failures, and the Lucas Paradox: 1870–1913,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8028 (2000), http://papers.nber.org/papers/w8028. For concerted efforts to bring historiographies of global relationships to bear on contemporary debates, see especially Michael Geyer and Charles Bright, “World History in a Global Age,” American Historical Review 100, no. 4 (1995): 1034–60; A. G. Hopkins, Globalization in World History (New York: W. W. Norton, 2002), and Global History: Interactions Between the Universal and the Local (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006), as well as Michael D. Bordo, Alan Taylor, and Jeffrey G. Williamason, eds., Globalization in Historical Perspective (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003); Jürgen Osterhammel and Niels P. Petersson, Globalization: A Short History, trans. Dona Geyer (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005); Bruce Mazlish and Akira Iriye eds., The Global History Reader (New York: Routledge, 2005); and Gills and Thompson, Globalization and Global History. 7. Stuart Hall, “Introduction,” in Modernity: An Introduction to Modern Societies, ed. Stuart Hall et al. (Oxford: Blackwell, 1996), 17. Frederick Cooper reminds us that the “annihilation of space by time” is a nineteenth-century idea born of the expansion of capitalism; see “What Is the Concept of Globalization Good For? An African Historian’s Perspective,” African Affairs 100 (2001): 189–213. If anything, the profound change in the recent past has been the global internalization and manipulation of certain precepts of modernity—for example, that “modern things” and “a modern time” exist. As Arjun Appadurai suggests in Modernity at Large, though the meanings and manifestations of the modern may be diverse, the notion of the modern has become nearly universal. See also James Ferguson, Expectations of Modernity: Myths and Meanings of Urban Life on the Zambian Copperbelt (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1999); Bruce M. Knauft, “Critically Modern: An Introduction,” in Bruce M. Knauft, ed., Critically Modern: Alternatives, Alterities, Anthropologies (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2002), 1–56. 8. The traders who delivered such goods affected these meanings, as did consumers’ ideas about foreign or regional locales. See the example of “Zanzibari” guns as the designation of lower-quality muskets in contrast to guns associated with specific European nations in Jonathon Glassman, Feasts and Riot (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995), 50–1. 9. According to a recent Oxfam report, a one percent increase in Africa’s share of world exports would equal approximately five times the amount of aid and debt relief annually provided to the continent. Kevin Watkins and Penny Fowler, “Rigged Rules and Double Standards: Trade, Globalisation, and the Fight against Poverty,” http://www.maketradefair.com/assets/english/report\_english.pdf, 8. The difficulties that African producers face thus do not stem from dependency in its strictest sense but from a deep inequality of market access. John Lonsdale, “Globalization, Ethnicity and Democracy: A View from ‘the Hopeless Continent,’” in Hopkins, Globalization in World History, 194–219. 10. In response to these imbalances of trade, Samir Amin argues for greater freedom on the part of each society or nation to negotiate its own relationships— or “terms of interdependence”—with world markets. Only then, he suggests, will “peripheral” economies have a greater opportunity for “growth”; see Capitalism in an Age of Globalization (New York: New Press, 2001). For a cogent Foucauldian analysis of postwar development discourse, see Arturo Escobar, Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995). See also J. Nederveen Pieterse, “Dilemmas of Development Discourse: The Crisis of Developmentalism and the Comparative Method,” Development and Change 22, no. 1 (1991): 5–29. 11. Joseph Stiglitz, Globalization and Its Discontents (New York: W. W. Norton, 2002). Where Africans have loosened constraints on trade—in the informal sector, for instance—they have succeeded in exploiting certain comparative advantages. The enormous success of Meruans (Kenya) in the interstate qat (Swahili: miraa, marungi) trade is a telling example of African initiatives in creating and maintaining global production and supply chains reaching from Kenya to Somalia, the Middle East, Europe, and North America. See Jean-François Bayart, “Africa in the World: A History of Extraversion,” African Affairs 99, no. 395 (2000): 240. 12. William C. Bissell, “Engaging Colonial Nostalgia,” Cultural Anthropology 20, no. 2 (2005): 215–48, and “City of Stone, Space of Contestation: Urban Conservation and the Colonial Past in Zanzibar,” 2 vols. (PhD diss., University of Chicago, 1999). 13. Rance, “Letter from Lamu,” Coast Express (Kenya), 6 December 2002. This page intentionally left blank