# Selected Bibliography Many contributions to larger works (chapters) are cited in the notes only, but entries are included here for most of those larger works. Some journal articles that are infrequently cited are not included here but cited only in the notes. ## Manuscript Sources ## France Centre des Archives d’Outre-Mer, Aix-en-Provence Océan Indien 5/23, nos. 2 and 7; Océan Indien 15/64 ## Tanzania Zanzibar National Archives, Zanzibar A3/11, A12/3, AA1/3, AA1/5, AA1/10, AA2/4, AA3/11, AA3/18, AA3/21, AA3/25, AA7/1, AA10/1, AA12/1A, AA12/8, AA12/13, CB1/1B ## United Kingdom British Library, India Office Library, London F/4/1475, L/P&S/9/12, L/P&S/9/37, L/P&S/9/41, L/P&S/9/42, L/P&S/9/43, L/P&S/9/48, L/P&S/9/49, L/P&S/9/51, V/11/2200, V/17/290 to V/17/320 Public Records Office, London ADM 52/3940, ADM 1/5945, FO 19/8, FO 54/5, FO 54/22, FO 84/1391 Rhodes House, Oxford University Thornton Papers, MSS. Afr. s. 27 School of Oriental and African Studies Library, University of London MacKinnon Papers, PPMS1 ## United States Bell Library, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis Plumer, K. “Journal of a Voyage from London to Madras” [ca. 1769] National Archives, Washington, DC United States Consulate Records, Zanzibar, (microfilm) Rolls 1 to 4, Vols. 1–8 Peabody-Essex Museum, Salem, MA MSS 24, Emmerton Family Papers; MSS 47, Charles Ward Papers; MH 14, Richard P. Waters Papers; MH 23, Michael Shepard Papers; MH 235 J. A. West Papers ## PUBLISHED MATERIAL AND THESES Abdulaziz, Muhammad., ed. and trans. Muyaka: Nineteenth Century Swahili Popular Poetry. Nairobi: Kenya Literature Bureau, 1994. Abu-Lughod, Janet. “The World-System Perspective in the Construction of Economic History.” History and Theory 34, no. 2 (1995): 86–98. Abungu, George. “Islam on the Kenyan Coast: An Archaeological Study of Mosques.” Master’s thesis, University of Cambridge, 1986. Adas, Michael. Machines as the Measure of Man: Science, Technology, and Ideologies of Western Dominance. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989. Akyeampong, Emmanuel. Drink, Power, and Cultural Change: A Social History of Alcohol in Ghana, c.1800 to Recent Times. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1996. Aldrick, Judy. “The Painted Plates of Zanzibar.” Kenya Past and Present 12 (1997): 26–28. Alfino, M., J. Caputo, and R. Wynyard, eds. McDonaldization Revisited: Critical Essays on Consumer Culture. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1998. Allman, Jean, ed. Fashioning Africa: Power and the Politics of Dress. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004. Alpern, S. “What Africans Got for Their Slaves.” History in Africa 22 (1995): 5–43. Alpers, Edward A. “Representations of Children in the East African Slave Trade.” Paper presented at the Avignon Conference on Slavery and Forced Labour, “Children in Slavery,” Avignon, France, May 2004. . “A Complex Relationship: Mozambique and the Comoro Islands in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries.” Cahiers d’Études Africaines 161 (2001): 73–95. . “Indian Ocean Africa: The Island Factor.” Emergences: Journal for the Study of Media and Composite Cultures 10, no. 2 (2000): 373–86. ——. “ ‘Ordinary Household Chores’: Ritual and Power in a Nineteenth- Century Swahili Women’s Spirit Possession Cult.” International Journal of African Historical Studies 17, no. 4 (1984): 677–702. . “The Story of Swema: Female Vulnerability in Nineteenth-Century East Africa,” in Women and Slavery in Africa, ed. Claire Robertson and Martin Klein. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1983, 185–219. . “Futa Benaadir: Continuity and Change in the Traditional Cotton Textile Industry of Southern Somalia, c. 1840–1980,” in Actes du Colloque Entreprises et Entrepreneurs en Afrique (XIXe et XXe siècles), ed. Catherine Coquery-Vidrovitch and Alain Forest. Tome 1. Paris: L’Harmattan, 1983, 77–98. —. “Gujarat and the Trade of East Africa, 1500–1800.” International Journal of African Historical Studies 9, no. 1 (1976): 22–44. . Ivory and Slaves: Changing Patterns of International Trade in East Central Africa to the Later Nineteenth Century. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1975. Amin, Samir. Capitalism in an Age of Globalization. New York: New Press, 2001. Annual Report of the Engineer to the Naumkeag Steam Cotton Company, Salem (Mass.). Salem, MA: Tri-Weekly Gazette Press, 1848. Appadurai, Arjun. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998. —. “Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy.” Public Culture 2, no. 2 (1990): 1–24. , ed. The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986. Arnoldi, Mary Jo, Christraud M. Gear, and Kris Hardin, eds. African Material Culture. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996. Atkins, Keletso. The Moon Is Dead! Give Us Our Money! The Cultural Origins of an African Work Ethic, Natal, South Africa, 1843–1900. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1993. Audi, R. “The Concept of Wanting.” Philosophical Studies 24, no. 1 (1973): 1–21. Austen, Ralph. African Economic History. London: Heinemann, 1987. , and W. Smith. “Images of Africa and British Slave-Trade Abolition: The Transition to an Imperialist Ideology, 1787–1807.” African Historical Studies 2, no. 1 (1969): 69–83. Baker, Samuel. The Albert N’yanza, Great Basin of the Nile, and Explorations of the Nile Sources. London: Macmillan, 1866. Bammer, A. Displacements: Cultural Identities in Question. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994. Bang, Anne. Sufis and Scholars of the Sea: Family Networks in East Africa, 1860–1925. London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003. Barber, Benjamin. Jihad vs. McWorld: How Globalism and Tribalism Are Reshaping the World. New York: Ballantine Books, 1995. Barker, A., ed. Consuming Russia: Popular Culture, Sex, and Society Since Gorbachev. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1999. Barnard, Lieut. Frederick Lamport. A Three Years Cruise in the Mozambique Channel. 1848; repr., London: Dawsons of Pall Mall, 1969. Barnes, Ruth, ed. Textiles in Indian Ocean Societies. London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2005. Barth, Fredrik. Models of Social Organization. Royal Anthropological Institute Occasional Paper No. 23. London: Royal Anthropological Institute, 1966. Barthes, Roland. The Fashion System. New York: Hill and Wang, 1983. ———. Empire of Signs. New York: Hill and Wang, 1982. Baudrillard, Jean. The Consumer Society. London: Sage, 1998. ———. The System of Objects. New York: Verso, 1996. . Jean Baudrillard: Selected Writings. Ed. Mark Poster. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1988. —. For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign. St. Louis: Telos Press, 1981. ——. The Mirror of Production. St. Louis: Telos Press, 1975. Bayly, C. A. The Birth of the Modern World, 1780–1914. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004. Beckert, Sven. “Emancipation and Empire: Reconstructing the Worldwide Web of Cotton Production in the Age of the American Civil War.” American Historical Review 109, no. 5 (2004): 1405–38. Beehler, W. The Cruise of the Brooklyn. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1885. Bennett, Norman, ed. From Zanzibar to Ujiji. The Journal of Arthur W. Dodgshun, 1877–1879. Boston: Boston University Press, 1969. , and George Brooks, eds. New England Merchants in Africa: A History Through Documents, 1802 to 1865. Boston: Boston University Press, 1965. Bentley, Jerry. Old World Encounters: Cross-cultural Contacts in Pre-modern Times. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993. Benton, Lauren. Law and Colonial Cultures: Legal Regimes in World History, 1400–1900. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002. . “From the World-Systems Perspective to Institutional World History: Culture and Economy in Global Theory.” Journal of World History 7, no. 2 (1996): 261–95. Berg, Frederick. “Mombasa Under the Busaidi Sultanate.” PhD diss., University of Wisconsin, 1971. . “The Swahili Community of Mombasa, 1500–1900.” Journal of African History 9, no. 1 (1968): 35–56. Bermingham, A., and J. Brewer, eds. The Consumption of Culture, 1600–1800. New York: Routledge, 1995. Bernard, William D. Narrative of the Voyages and Services of the Nemesis, from 1840 to 1843. London: Henry Colburn, 1844. Berry, Sara. No Condition Is Permanent: The Social Dynamics of Agrarian Change in Sub-Saharan Africa. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1993. Bhabha, Homi. “Fireflies Caught in Molasses: Questions of Cultural Translation.” In October: The Second Decade, 1986–1996. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997. ———. The Location of Culture. New York: Routledge, 1994. Biddiss, M., ed. Images of Race. Surrey: Leicester University Press, 1979. Biersteker, Ann. Kujibizana: Questions of Language and Power in Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Poetry in Kiswahili. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1996. , and Ibrahim Noor Shariff, eds. Mashairi ya Vita vya Kuduhu: War Poetry in Kiswahili Exchanged at the Time of the Battle of Kuduhu. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1995. Bissell, William C. “Engaging Colonial Nostalgia.” Cultural Anthropology 20, no. 2 (2005): 215–48. . “City of Stone, Space of Contestation: Urban Conservation and the Colonial Past in Zanzibar.” 2 vols. PhD diss., University of Chicago, 1999. Blanning, T. C. W., ed. The Nineteenth Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. Blaut, James. The Colonizer’s Model of the World: Geographical Diffusionism and Eurocentric History. New York: Guilford Press, 1993. Bordo, Michael D., Alan Taylor, and Jeffrey G. Williamason, eds. Globalization in Historical Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003. Boteler, Thomas. Narrative of a Voyage of Discovery to Africa and Arabia. 2 vols. London: R. Bentley, 1835. Bourde, A. “Un Comorien adventureux au XIXe siecle: L’extraordinaire voyage du Prince Abudin.” In Méditerranée et Océan Indien. Travaux de Sixième Colloque International d’Histoire Maritime. Venice: S. E. V. P. E. N., 1970. Bourdieu, Pierre. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984. Brady, Cyrus. Commerce and Conquest in East Africa. Salem: Essex Institute, 1950. Brah, Avtar, and Annie E. Coombes, eds. Hybridity and Its Discontents: Politics, Science, Culture. New York: Routledge, 2000. Brantlinger, Patrick. Rule of Darkness: British Literature and Imperialism, 1830– 1914. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988. . “Victorians and Africans: The Genealogy of the Myth of the Dark Continent.” Critical Inquiry 12, no. 1 (1985): 166–203. Braudel, Fernand. Civilization and Capitalism, Fifteenth–Eighteenth Century. 3 vols. New York: Harper and Row, 1979–85. Breckenridge, Carol A., ed. Consuming Modernity: Public Culture in a South Asian World. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995. Breckenridge, Carol A., Sheldon Pollock, Homi Bhabha, and Dipesh Chakrabarty, eds. Cosmopolitanism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002. Breen, Timothy H. The Marketplace of Revolution: How Consumer Politics Shaped American Independence. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. . “‘Baubles of Britain’: The American and Consumer Revolutions of the Eighteenth Century.” In Of Consuming Interests: The Style of Life in the Eighteenth Century, ed. C. Carson. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1994. —. “An Empire of Goods: The Anglicization of Colonial America, 1690– 1776.” Journal of British Studies 25, no. 4 (1986): 467–99. Brewer, John, and Roy Porter, eds. Consumption and the World of Goods. London: Routledge, 1993. Bridges, R. C. “Europeans and East Africans in the age of exploration.” Geographical Journal 139, no. 2 (1973): 220–32. Broca, Paul. On the Phenomena of Hybridity in the Genus Homo. London: Longman, Green, Longman, and Roberts, 1864. Brody, J. DeVere. Impossible Purities: Blackness, Femininity, and Victorian Culture. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998. Bromer, Katrin, ed. and trans. The Jurisdiction of the Sultan of Zanzibar and the Subjects of Foreign Nations. Würzburg: Ergon Verlag, 2001. Browne, J. Ross. Etchings of a Whaling Cruise. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1968. Burke, Timothy. Lifebuoy Men, Lux Women: Commodification, Consumption, and Cleanliness in Modern Zimbabwe. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996. Burton, Richard. Zanzibar: City, Island, and Coast. 2 vols. London: Tinsley Brothers, 1872. . The Lake Regions of Central Africa: A Picture Exploration. 2 vols. London: Longman, 1860. . “The Lake Regions of Central Equatorial Africa.” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society 29 (1859): 1–464. . “Zanzibar, and Two Months in East Africa.” Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine (February, March, and May 1858). Cairns, H. Alan C. Prelude to Imperialism: British Reactions to Central African Society, 1840–1890. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965. Cameron, Vernon. Across Africa. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1877. Caplan, Pat, and Farouk Topan, eds. Swahili Modernities: Culture, Politics, and Identity on the East Coast of Africa. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 2004. Castell, Manuel. The Rise of the Network Society. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1997. Certeau, Michel de. The Practice of Everyday Life. Trans. Steven Randall. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1984. Chakrabarty, Dipesh. Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000. Chandavarkar, Rajnarayan. The Origins of Industrial Capital in India: Business Strategies and the Working Classes in Bombay, 1900–1940. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994. Charmetant, P. D’Alger à Zanzibar. Paris: Libr. Tardieu, 1882. Chase-Dunn, Christopher, and Thomas Hall. Rise and Demise: Comparing World-Systems. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997. . Global Formation: Structures of the World-Economy. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1989. Chaudhuri, K. N. Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean: An Economic History from the Rise of Islam to 1750. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985. Cheah, Pheng, and Bruce Robbins. Cosmopolitics: Thinking and Feeling Beyond the Nation. Ed. Pheng Cheah and Bruce Robbins. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998. Christie, James. Cholera Epidemics in East Africa. An account of the several diffusions of the disease in that country from 1821 till 1872, with an outline of the geography, ethnology, and trade connections of the regions through which the epidemics passed. London: Macmillan, 1876. Clendennen, Gary W., and Peter M. Nottingham. William Sunley and David Livingstone: A Tale of Two Consuls. African Studies Program. Madison: University of Wisconsin, 2000. Clifford, James. Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997. . “Traveling Cultures.” In Cultural Studies, ed. Lawrence Grossberg, Carrie Nelson, and Paula Treichler, 96–116. New York: Routledge, 1992. Clunas, Craig. “Modernity Global and Local: Consumption and the Rise of the West.” American Historical Review 104, no. 5 (1999): 1497–1511. Colomb, Captain Philip. Slave-Catching in the Indian Ocean: A Record of Naval Experiences. 1873; repr., London: Dawsons of Pall Mall, 1968. Comaroff, Jean, and John Comaroff. “Revelations upon Revelation: After Shocks, Afterthoughts.” Interventions 3, no. 1 (2001): 100–26. —. Of Revelation and Revolution. 2 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991–97. Cooley, William. Inner Africa Laid Open, in an Attempt to Trace the Chief Lines of Communication Across that Continent South of the Equator. London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1852. Coombes, Annie E. Reinventing Africa: Museums, Material Culture and Popular Imagination in Late Victorian and Edwardian England. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994. Cooper, Frederick. “What Is the Concept of Globalization Good For? An African Historian’s Perspective,” African Affairs 100 (2001): 189–213. —. “Africa in a Capitalist World.” In Crossing Boundaries: Comparative History of Black People in Diaspora, ed. Darlene Clark Hine and Jacqueline McLeod. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999. —. “Conflict and Connection: Rethinking Colonial African History.” American Historical Review 99, no. 5 (1994): 1516–45. . “Africa and the World Economy.” In Confronting Historical Paradigms: Peasants, Labor, and the Capitalist World System in Africa and Latin America, ed. Frederick Cooper, Allen Isaacman, and Florencia E. Mallon. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1993. . From Slaves to Squatters: Plantation Labour and Agriculture in Zanzibar and Coastal Kenya, 1890–1925. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1980. —. “The Problem of Slavery in African Studies.” Journal of African History 20, no. 1 (1979): 103–25. —. Plantation Slavery on the East Coast of Africa. New Haven. CT: Yale University Press, 1977. Cooper, Frederick, Thomas Holt, and Rebecca Scott, eds. Beyond Slavery: Explorations of Race, Labor, and Citizenship in Postemancipation Societies. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000. Cooper, Frederick, and Ann Laura Stoler. “Introduction.” In Tensions of Empire: Colonial Cultures in a Bourgeois World, 1–56. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1997. Cornwall. Observations on Several Voyages to India. In A New General Collection of Voyages and Travels, vol. 3, ed. T. Astley. London: Printed for Thomas Astley, 1750. Cotterill, H., ed. Travels and Researches among the Lakes and Mountains of Eastern and Central Africa. From the Journals of the Late J. Frederic Elton. London: John Murray, 1879. Coupland, Reginald. East Africa and Its Invaders. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961. . The Exploitation of East Africa, 1856–1890. London: Faber and Faber, 1939. Creed, B., and J. Hoorn, eds. Body Trade: Captivity, Cannibalism and Colonialism in the Pacific. New York: Routledge, 2001. Crosby, Alfred, The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1972. Crummey, D., and C. Stewart, eds. Modes of Production in Africa: The Precolonial Era. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 1981. Curtin, Philip. Economic Change in Precolonial Africa: Senegambia in the Era of the Slave Trade. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1975. —. The Image of Africa: British Ideas and Actions, 1780–1850. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1973. Curtin, Philip, Steven Feierman, Leonard Thompson, and Jan Vansina. African History: From Earliest Times to Independence. New York: Longmans, 1995. Deutsch, Jan-Georg, Peter Probst, and Heike Schmidt, eds. African Modernities: Entangled Meanings in Current Debate. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2002. Deutsch, Jan-Georg, and Brigitte Reinwald, eds. Space on the Move: Transformations of the Indian Ocean Seascape in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Century. Berlin: Klaus Schwarz Verlag, 2002. Devereux, W. Cope. A Cruise in the “Gorgon”; or Eighteen Months on H. M. S. “Gorgon,” Engaged in the Suppression of the Slave Trade on the East Coast of Africa. London: Bell and Daldy, 1869. Dick, Rudolph. “Pequot Mills: The Naumkeag Steam Cotton Company of Salem, Mass.” Cotton History Review 1, no. 4 (1960): 109–17. . Nathaniel Griffin (1796–1876) of Salem—and His Naumkeag Steam Cotton Company. New York: The Newcomen Society in North America, 1951. Dirlik, Arif. Postmodernity’s Histories: The Past as Legacy and Project. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2000. . “Is There History After Eurocentrism? Globalism, Postcolonialism, and the Disavowal of History.” Cultural Critique 42 (Spring 1999): 1–34. Donley, Linda. “Life in the Swahili Town Reveals the Symbolic Meanings of Spaces and Artifact Assemblages.” African Archaeological Review 5 (1986): 181–92. . “The Social Uses of Swahili Space and Objects.” PhD diss., Cambridge University, 1984. . “House Power: Swahili Space and Symbolic Markers.” In Structural and Symbolic Archaeology, ed. Ian Hodder, 63–73. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Douglas, Mary, and Baron Isherwood. The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption. 1979; repr. London: Penguin, 1995. Driver, Felix. “Henry Morton Stanley and His Critics: Geography, Exploration, and Empire.” Past and Present 133 (November 1991): 134–66. Dussel, Enrique. The Underside of Modernity. Ed. and trans. E. Mendieta. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1997. . The Invention of the Americas: Eclipse of “the Other” and the Myth of Modernity. New York: Continuum, 1995. “East African Slave Trade.” Quarterly Review 133 (July and October 1872): 521–57. Eilts, H. “Ahmad bin Na\`aman’s Mission to the United States in 1840: The Voyage of Al-Sultanah to New York City.” Essex Institute Historical Collections 98 (April–July 1962): 219–279. Eliot, G. F. Scott. A Naturalist in Mid-Africa. London: A. D. Innes, 1896. Elliot, Rev. “A Visit to the Island of Johanna.” United Service Journal and Naval Military Magazine pt. 1 (1830): 144–52. Ennaji, Mohammed. Serving the Master: Slavery and Society in Nineteenth Century Morocco. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998. Erlmann, Veit. Music, Modernity, and the Global Imagination: South Africa and the West. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. Escobar, Arturo. Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995. Evans, D. An Introductory Dictionary of Lacanian Psychoanalysis. New York: Routledge, 1997. Ewald, Janet. “Crossers of the Sea: Slaves, Freedmen, and other Migrants in the Northwestern Indian Ocean, c. 1750–1914.” American Historical Review 105, no. 1 (2000): 69–91. Fabian, Johannes. Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object. New York: Columbia University Press, 2002. —. “Remembering the Other: Knowledge and Recognition in the Exploration of Central Africa.” Critical Inquiry 26 (1999): 49–69. Fair, Laura. Pastimes and Politics: Culture, Community, and Identity in Post-Abolition Urban Zanzibar, 1890–1945. Athens: Ohio University Press, 2001. Faurschou, G. “Obsolescence and Desire: Fashion and the Commodity Form.” In Postmodernism—Philosophy and the Arts. Ed. H. Silverman, 234–59. New York: Routledge, 1990. Featherstone, Mike, ed. Cultural Theory and Cultural Change. London: Sage, 1992. , ed. Global Culture: Nationalism, Globalization and Modernity. London: Sage, 1990. Featherstone, Mike, Scott Lash, and Ronald Robertson, eds. Global Modernities. London: Sage, 1995. Feierman, Steven. “African Histories and the Dissolution of World History.” In Africa and the Disciplines: Contributions of Research in Africa to the Social Sciences and the Humanities, ed. Robert H. Bates, V. Y. Mudimbe, and Jean O’Barr. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993, 167–212. Ferguson, James. Expectations of Modernity: Myths and Meanings of Urban Life on the Zambian Copperbelt. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1999. Fernández-Armesto, F. Civilizations: Culture, Ambition, and the Transformation of Nature. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2001. Fine, B., and E. Leopold. The World of Consumption. London: Routledge, 1993. Forty, A. Objects of Desire: Design and Society since 1750. London: Thames and Hudson, 1986. Foster, Helen Bradley. New Raiments of Self: African-American Clothing in the Antebellum South. Routledge: New York, 1997. Foucault, Michel. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. New York: Vantage, 1994. —. Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972–1977. Ed. C. Gordon. New York: Pantheon, 1980. Frappaz, Théophile. Les Voyages du Lieutenant de vaisseau Frappaz dans les mers des Indies. Ed. R. Decary. Tananarive: Pitot de la Beaujardiére, 1939. French-Sheldon, May. Sultan to Sultan: Adventures among the Masai and Other Tribes of East Africa. London: Saxon, 1892. Friedman, Jonathan. Cultural Identity and Global Process. London: Sage, 1994. . “Being in the World: Globalization and Localization.” Theory, Culture, and Society 7, no. 2 (1990): 311–28. Friedman, Susan. “Definitional Excursions: The Meanings of Modern/Modernity/Modernism.” Modernism/Modernity 8, no. 3 (2001): 493–513. Friedman, Thomas. The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Globalization. New York: Anchor Books, 2000. Fuchs, Eckhardt, and Benedikt Stuchtey, eds. Across Cultural Boundaries: Historiography in Global Perspective. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2002. Fuery, P. Theories of Desire. Carlton: Melbourne University Press, 1995. Gaonkar, Dilip P. “On Alternative Modernities.” Public Culture 11, no. 1 (1999): 1–18. Gemunden, G. Framed Visions: Popular Culture, Americanization, and the Contemporary German and Austrian Imagination. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998. Geschiere, Peter. “Historical Anthropology: Questions of Time, Method and Scale.” Interventions 3, no. 1 (2001): 31–39. Geyer, Michael, and Charles Bright. “World History in a Global Age.” American Historical Review 100 no. 4 (1995): 1034–60. Giddens, Anthony. Modernity and Self-identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1991. Gilbert, Erik. Dhows and Colonial Economy in Zanzibar: 1860–1970. Columbus: Ohio University Press, 2005. Gills, Barry K., and William R. Thompson. Globalization and Global History. New York: Routledge, 2006. Githige, R. “The Issue of Slavery: Relations between the CMS and the State on the East African Coast Prior to 1895.” Journal of Religion in Africa 16, no. 3 (1986): 209–25. Glassman, Jonathon. “Slower Than a Massacre: The Multiple Sources of Racial Thought in Colonial Africa,” American Historical Review 109, no. 3 (2004): 720–54. . Feasts and Riot: Revelry, Rebellion, and Popular Consciousness on the Swahili Coast, 1856–1888. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995. . “The Bondsman’s New Clothes: The Contradictory Consciousness of Slave Resistance on the Swahili Coast.” Journal of African History 32, no. 2 (1991): 277–312. Goldberg, David T. Racist Culture: Philosophy and the Politics of Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1994. Grant, James. A Walk Across Africa, or Domestic Scenes from My Nile Journey. Edinburgh: William Blackwood and Sons, 1864. Grose, Henry. A Voyage to the East Indies. London: Printed for S. Hooper, 1772. Guillain, Charles. Documents sur l’histoire, la geographie et le commerce de la Afrique Orientale. 3 vols. Paris: Bertrand, 1856. Gundara, J. “Aspects of Indian Culture in Nineteenth Century Zanzibar.” South Asia, n.s., 3, no. 1 (1980): 14–27. Gupta, Akhil. “History, Rule, Representation: Scattered Speculations on Of Revelation and Revolution, Volume II.” interventions 3, no. 1 (2001): 40–46. Guyer, Jane, ed. Money Matters: Instability, Values, and Social Payments in the Modern History of West African Communities. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995. . “Wealth in People, Wealth in Things.” Journal of African History 36, no. 1 (1995): 83–88. Hall, Stuart, et al., eds. Modernity: An Introduction to Modern Societies. Oxford: Blackwell, 1996. Hallet, R. “Changing European Attitudes to Africa.” In Cambridge History of Africa, vol. 5, ed. J. Flint, 458–96. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976. Hammond, Dorothy, and Alta Jablow, The Africa That Never Was: Four Centuries of British Writing about Africa. New York: Twayne, 1970. Hannerz, Ulf. Transnational Connections. London: Routledge, 1996. . “Notes on the Global Ecumene.” Public Culture 1, no. 2 (1989): 66–75. . “The World in Creolization.” Africa 57, no. 4 (1987): 546–59. Harding, J. R. “Nineteenth-Century Trade Beads in Tanganyika.” Man, July 1962, 104–6. Hartman, Saidiya. Scenes of Subjection. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997. Hartmann, Robert. Abyssinien und die übrigen Gebiete de Ostküste Afrikas. Leipzig: G. Freytag, 1883. Hatfield, April Lee. Atlantic Virginia: Intercolonial Relations in the Seventeenth Century. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004. Haugerud, Angelique, Margaret Priscilla Stone, and Peter D. Little, eds. Commodities and Globalization: Anthropological Perspectives. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2000. Hayman, Philip, “My First Slaver: A Tale of the Zanzibar Coast.” Colburn’s United Service Magazine (July 1880). Headrick, Daniel. Tools of Empire: Technology and European Imperialism in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Oxford University Press, 1981. Hichens, William, and Mbarak Hinawy, eds. Diwani ya Muyaka. Johannesburg: University of Witswatersrand Press, 1940. Ho, Engseng. The Graves of Tarim: Genealogy and Mobility across the Indian Ocean. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2006. . “Empire through Diasporic Eyes: A View from the Other Boat,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 46, no. 2 (2004): 210–46. Hogendorn, Jan, and Marion Johnson. The Shell Money of the Slave Trade. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986. Höhnel, Ludwig Ritter von. Discovery of Lakes Rudolf and Stefanie. vol. 1. London: Longmans, Green, 1894. Holman, J. Travels in Madras, Ceylon, Maurutius, Comoro Islands, Calcutta, Etc. London: Routledge, 1840. Hopkins, A. G. Global History: Interactions Between the Universal and the Local. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006. , ed. Globalization in World History. New York: W. W. Norton, 2002. . An Economic History of West Africa. New York: Columbia University Press, 1973. Hore, E. C. “On the Twelve Tribes of Tanganyika.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 12 (1883): 2–21. Horsey, A. de. “On the Comoro Islands.” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society 34 (1864): 258–63. Hove, Anton P. Tours for Scientific and Economical Research Made in Guzerat, Kattiawar, and the Conkuns, in $\tau 7 8 7 \mathrm { - } 8 8$ . Bombay: Bombay Education Society Press, 1855. Howes, David, ed. Cross-Cultural Consumption: Global Markets, Local Realities. London: Routledge, 1996. Humphrey, Caroline, and S. Hugh-Jones, eds. Barter, Exchange, and Value: An Anthropological Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. Huntington, Samuel. The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997. —. The Clash of Civilizations? The Debate. New York: Foreign Affairs, 1993. Hutchinson, E. The Slave Trade of East Africa. London: Sampson Low, Marston, Low, and Searle, 1874. Iliffe, John. A Modern History of Tanganyika. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981. Jackson, John. “Race in Legislation and Political Economy.” Anthropological Review 4 (1866): 113–35. Jacob, Elizabeth, and Henry Jacob. A Quaker Family in India and Zanzibar, 1863–1865. Ed. Y. Bird. York: Ebor Press, 2000. Jameson, Fredric, and Masao Miyoshi, eds. The Cultures of Globalization. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998. Jenkins, Keith, ed. The Postmodern History Reader. New York: Routledge, 1997. Jiddawi, A. “Extracts from an Arab Account Book, 1840–1854.” Tanganyika Notes and Records 31 (July 1951): 25–31. Johnson, F. A Standard Swahili-English Dictionary. Nairobi: Oxford University Press, 1939. Johnson, Marion. “Technology, Competition, and African Crafts.” In The Imperial Impact: Studies in the Economic History of Africa and India, ed. C. Dewey and Anthony G. Hopkins, 259–69. London: Athlone Press, 1978. Johnson, Walter. Soul By Soul: Life in the Antebellum Slave Market. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999. Johnston, Harry. The Kilima-njaro Expedition. A Record of Scientific Exploration in Eastern Equatorial Africa. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, 1886. Jones, William. “Remarks on the Island of Hinzuan, or Johanna.” Asiatick Researches 5 (1807): 77–107. Kamusi Project: Internet Living Swahili Dictionary. http://www.yale.edu/swahili/. Kapferer, Bruce, ed. Transaction and Meaning: Directions in the Anthropology of Exchange and Symbolic Behavior. Philadelphia, PA: Institute for the Study of Human Issues, 1976. Keim, Curtis. Mistaking Africa: Curiosities and Inventions of the American Mind. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1999. King, Anthony, ed. Culture, Globalization and the World-System. London: Macmillan, 1991. Kirkman, James, ed. “The Zanzibar Diary of John Studdy Leigh, Part 1.” International Journal of African Historical Studies 13, no. 2 (1980): 281–312. Knauft, Bruce M., ed. Critically Modern: Alternatives, Alterities, Anthropologies. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2002. Koponen, Juhani. People and Production in Late Precolonial Tanzania: History and Structures. Jyväskylä: Finnish Society for Development Studies, 1988. Krapf, Johann Ludwig. ‘Memoir on the East African Slave Trade’: Ein unveröffentlichtes Dokument aus dem Jahr 1853. Vienna: Afro-Pub, 2002. . “Letter to Captain Graham, Mombas, 1st May, 1845.” In “Krapf of East Africa.” East and West Review 3 (1937): 259–69. ———. A Dictionary of the Suahili Language. London: Trubner, 1882. . Travel, Researches and Missionary Labours During Eighteen Years Residence in East Africa. Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1860. . “The East Africa Mission.” Church Missionary Record 1, no. 17 (1846): 38. Kristeva, Julia. Revolution in Poetic Language. New York: Columbia University Press, 1984. Kucich, J., and D. Sadoff, eds. Victorian Afterlife. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000. Lacan, Jacques. Freud’s Papers on Technique. Trans. John Forrester. New York: W. W. Norton, 1988. Landau, Paul, and Deborah Kaspin. Images and Empires: Visuality and Colonial and Postcolonial Africa. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2002. Larkin, Brian. “Indian Films and Nigerian Lovers: Media and the Creation of Parallel Modernities.” Africa 67, no. 3 (1997): 406–39. Law, Robin, ed. From Slave Trade to “Legitimate” Commerce: The Commercial Transition in Nineteenth-Century West Africa. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995. Lee, L. O. “Shanghai Modern: Reflections on Urban Culture in China in the 1930s.” Public Culture 11, no. 1 (1999): 75–108. Lee, M. Consumer Culture Reborn: The Cultural Politics of Consumption. London: Routledge, 1993. A Letter to a Gentleman on Board an Indiaman to his Friend in London giving an account of the Island of Johanna in the year $\scriptstyle { \tau 7 8 4 }$ . London: John Stockdale, 1789. Lewis, Bernard. What Went Wrong? The Clash Between Islam and Modernity in the Middle East. New York: Perennial, 2002. Lewis, Martin, and Kären Wigen. The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1997. Liesegang, Gerhard, Helma Pasch, and Adam Jones, eds. Figuring African Trade. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag, 1986. LiPuma, E. Encompassing Others: The Magic of Modernity in Melanesia. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2000. Loeb, Lori Anne. Consuming Angels: Advertising and Victorian Women. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. Lorimer, Douglas A. Colour, Class, and the Victorians: English Attitudes to the Negro in the Mid-Nineteenth Century. Leicester, UK: Leicester University Press, 1978. Lyne, Robert. An Apostle of Empire, Being the Life of Sir Lloyd William Matthews. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1936. Machado, Pedro. “Gujarati Indian Merchant Networks in Mozambique, 1777– c. 1830.” PhD diss., University of London, School of Oriental and African Studies, 2005. Mackay, Charles. “The Negro and Negrophilists.” Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine 99 (1866): 581–97. MacKenzie, John. Propaganda and Empire: The Manipulation of British Public Opinion,1880–1960. London: Manchester University Press, 1984. Maier, C. “Consigning the Twentieth Century to History: Alternative Narratives for the Modern Era.” American Historical Review 105, no. 3 (2000): 1–46. Marks, J., ed. The Ways of Desire: New Essays in Philosophical Psychology on the Concept of Wanting. Chicago: Precedent, 1986. Marmon, S. “Domestic Slavery in the Mamluk Empire: A Preliminary Sketch.” In Slavery in the Islamic Middle East, ed. S. Marmon, 1–24. Princeton, NJ: Markus Weiner, 1999. Martin, Jean. Comores: Quatre îles entre pirates and planteurs. Tome 2. Paris: l’Harmattan, 1983. Marx, Karl. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy. 3 vols. Trans. B. Fowkes. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977. Matory, J. Lorand. Black Atlantic Religion: Tradition, Transnationalism, and Matriarchy in the Afro-Brazilian Candomblé. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005. ———. “The English Professors of Brazil: On the Diasporic Roots of the Yorùbá Nation.” Comparative Studies of Society and History 41, no. 1 (1999): 72– 103. Mazlish, Bruce. Civilization and Its Contents. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2004. Mazlish, Bruce, and Akira Iriye, eds. The Global History Reader. New York: Routledge, 2005. Mazlish, Bruce, and Ralph Buultjens, eds. Conceptualizing Global History. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1993. Mazrui, Alamin, and Ibrahim Noor Shariff. The Swahili: Idiom and Identity of an African People. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1994. Mazru\`i, Shaykh al-Amin bin ‘Ali al. The History of the Mazru\`i Dynasty of Mombasa. Ed. and trans. James M. Ritchie. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. Mazumdar, D. “Labor Supply in Early Industrialization: The Case of the Bombay Textile Industry.” Economic History Review 26, no. 3 (1973): 477–96. Mbembe, Achille. On the Postcolony. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2001. McClintock, Anne. Imperial Leather: Race, Gender and Sexuality in the Colonial Conquest. New York: Routledge, 1995. McCracken, Grant. Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988. McGrane, Bernard. Beyond Anthropology. New York: Columbia University Press, 1989. McKendrick, Neil, John Brewer, and J. H. Plumb, eds. The Birth of a Consumer Society. London: Europa Press, 1982. Metcalf, George. “A Microcosm of Why Africans Sold Slaves: Akan Consumption Patterns in the 1770s.” Journal of African History 28, no. 3 (1987): 377–94. Middleton, John. The World of the Swahili: An African Mercantile Civilization. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992. Miers, Suzanne, and Igor Kopytoff, eds. Slavery in Africa: Historical and Anthropological Approaches. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1977. Mill, John Stuart. Dissertations and Discussions: Political, Philosophical, and Historical. Vol. 1. 1859; repr., New York: Haskell House, 1973. Miller, Daniel, ed. Worlds Apart: Modernity through the Prism of the Local. New York: Routledge, 1995. , ed. Acknowledging Consumption: A Review of New Studies. New York: Routledge, 1995. ——. Material Culture and Mass Consumption. London: Routledge, 1987. Miller, Joseph C. “History and Africa/Africa and History.” American Historical Review 104, no. 1 (1999): 1–32. —. Way of Death: Merchant Capitalism and the Angolan Slave Trade, 1730–1830. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988. Minturn, R. From New York to Delhi, by way of Rio de Janeiro, Australia, and China. New York: D. Appleton, 1858. Mitchell, Timothy, ed. Questions of Modernity. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000. . Colonising Egypt. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1991. Mittelman, James. Whither Globalization? The Vortex of Knowledge and Ideology. London: Routledge, 2005. , ed. Globalization: Critical Reflections. London, 1996. Morgan, L. H. Ancient Society: Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from Savagery through Barbarism to Civilization. New York: H. Holt, 1878. Morton, Fred. Children of Ham: Freed Slaves and Fugitive Slaves on the Kenya Coast, 1873 to 1907. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990. Mudimbe, Valentin. The Invention of Africa. Bloomington: Indian University Press, 1988. Mudimbe-Boyi, Elisabeth, ed. Beyond Dichotomies: Histories, Identities, Cultures, and the Challenge of Globalization. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2002. Munro, J. Forbes. Africa and the International Economy, 1800–1960. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1976. Myers, Garth. “Reconstructing Ng’ambo: Town Planning and Development on the Other Side of Zanzibar.” PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1993. Nassir, Sayyid Abdulla ibn Ali ibn. Al-Inkishafi: Catechism of a Soul, ed. and trans., J. de Vere Allen. Nairobi: East African Literature Bureau, 1977. Neubauer, D. “Assaying the Frontiers of Globalization: Explorations in the New Economy.” American Studies 41, nos. 2–3 (2000): 13–31. New, Charles. Life, Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern Africa. 1873; repr., London: Frank Cass, 1971. Nielsen, Ruth. “The History and Development of Wax-Printed Textiles Intended for West Africa and Zaire.” In The Fabrics of Culture: The Anthropology of Clothing and Adornment, ed. J. Cordwell and R. Schwarz, 467–98. The Hague: Mouton, 1979. Nimtz, August. Islam and Politics in East Africa. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1980. North, Douglas. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990. Northrup, David. The African Discovery of Europe, 1450–1850. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. Northway, P. H. “Salem and the Zanzibar-East African Trade, 1825–1845.” Essex Institute Historical Collections 90 (1954): 123–53, 261–73, and 361–88. Norton, Marcy. “Tasting Empire: Chocolate and the Internalization of Mesoamerican Aesthetics.” American Historical Review 111, no. 3 (2006): 660–91. Orlove, Benjamin, ed. The Allure of the Foreign: Imported Goods in Postcolonial Latin America. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1997. O’Rourke, K., and J. Williamson. “When Did Globalization Begin?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7632, 2000. Online at http:// papers.nber.org/papers/w7632.pdf. —. Globalization and History: The Evolution of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999. Osgood, Joseph. Notes of Travel; or, Recollections of Majunga, Zanzibar, Muscat, Aden, Mocha, and Other Eastern Ports. Salem, MA: George Creamer, 1854. Ovington, John. A Voyage to Suratt in the Year 1689. Vol. 1 of India in the Seventeenth Century, ed. J. P. Guha. New Delhi: Associated Publishing House, 1976. Owen, W. F. W. Narrative of Voyages to Explore the Shores of Africa, Arabia, and Madagascar. 2 vols. New York: J. & J. Harper, 1833. Parry, J., and M. Bloch, eds. Money and the Morality of Exchange. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. Partington, S. Animation of the Soul: A Translation of the KiSwahili, Islamic Epic Al-Inkishafi. Mombasa: Mombasa Academy, 1999. Patterson, Orlando. Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study. Cambridge, MA: Harvard, 1982. Pelly, Lewis. “Remarks on the Tribes and Resources around the Shoreline of the Persian Gulf.” Transactions of the Bombay Geographical Society 17 (1863– 64): 32–103. —. “Miscellaneous Observations upon the Comoro Islands.” Transactions of the Bombay Geographical Society 16 (June 1860–December 1862): 88–98. Pemberton, Jo-Anne. Global Metaphors: Modernity and the Quest for One World. London: Pluto Press, 2001. Perham, Margery F. Ten Africans. London: Faber and Faber, 1936. Pickering, Charles. The Races of Man and Their Geographical Distribution. London: George Bell and Sons, 1876. Pieterse, J. Nederveen. White on Black: Images of Africa and Blacks in Western Popular Culture. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992. —. “Dilemmas of Development Discourse: The Crisis of Developmentalism and the Comparative Method.” Development and Change 22, no. 1 (1991): 5–29. Piot, Charles. “Of Hybridity, Modernity, and Their Malcontents.” interventions 3, no. 1 (2001). . “Of Slaves and the Gift: Kabre Sale of Kin During the Era of the Slave Trade.” Journal of African History 37, no. 1 (1996): 31–49. Pomper, Philip, Richard H. Elphick, and Richard T. Vann. World History: Ideologies, Structures, and Identities. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1998. Postans, T. “Some account of the present state of the trade between the port of Mandvie in Cutch, and the East Coast of Africa.” Transactions of the Bombay Geographical Society 3 (1839/40): 169–76. Pouwels, Randall. Horn and Crescent: Traditional Islam on the East African Coast, 800–1900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987. —. “Islam and Islamic Leadership in the Coastal Communities of Eastern Africa, 1700 to 1914.” PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1979. Pramar, V. “Wooden Architecture of Gujerat.” PhD diss., University of Baroda, 1980. Pratt, Mary Louise. Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation. New York: Routledge, 1992. Prior, James. Voyage along the Eastern Coast of Africa, to Mosambique, Johanna, and Quiloa; to St. Helena . . . in the Nisus Frigate. London: Sir Richard Phillips, 1819. Rampley, W. J. Matthew Wellington: Sole Surviving Link with Dr. Livingstone. London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, [ca. 1930]. Rance, J. “Letter from Lamu.” Coast Express (Kenya), 6 December 2002. Raz, Aviad. Riding the Black Ship: Japan and Tokyo Disneyland. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999. Richards, J. “A Cruize through the Mozambique Channel.” Nautical Magazine and Naval Chronicle, July 1849, 337–44. Richards, T. The Commodity Culture of Victorian England: Advertising and Spectacle,1851–1914. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1990. Richardson, David. “West African Consumption Patterns and Their Influence on the Eighteenth-Century English Slave Trade.” In The Uncommon Market: Essays in the Economic History of the Atlantic Slave Trade. Ed. A. Gemery and J. Hogendorn. New York: Academic Press, 1979. Riggins, Stephen Harold, ed. The Socialness of Things: Essays in the Socio-Semiotics of Objects. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1994. Ritzer, George. The McDonaldization of Society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge, 1995. Roberts, Richard. “West Africa and the Pondicherry Textile Industry.” In Cloth and Commerce: Textiles in Colonial India, ed. Tirthankar Roy, 142–74. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996. —. Two Worlds of Cotton: Colonialism and the Regional Economy in the French Soudan, 1800–1946. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1996. . Warriors, Merchants, and Slaves: The State and the Economy in the Middle Niger Valley, 1700–1914. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1987. Robertson, Claire, and Martin Klein, eds. Women and Slavery in Africa. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1983. Robertson, Roland. Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture. London: Sage, 1992. , and F. Lechner. “Modernization, Globalization and the Problem of Culture in World-Systems Theory.” Theory, Culture & Society 2, no. 3 (1985): 103–18. Robinson, Ronald, John Gallagher, and Alice Denny. Africa and the Victorians: The Climax of Imperialism. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1968. Rockel, Stephen J. Carriers of Culture: Labor on the Road in Nineteenth-Century East Africa. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2006. . “ ‘A Nation of Porters’: The Nyamwezi and the Labour Market in Nineteenth-Century Tanzania.” Journal of African History 41, no. 2 (2000): 173–95. Rodney, Walter. How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Washington, DC: Howard University Press, 1989. Rooke, Henry. Travels to the Coast of Arabia Felix; and from thence by the Red-Sea and Egypt, to Europe. London: Printed for R. Blamire, 1784. Ropes, Edward D., Jr. The Zanzibar Letters of Edward D. Ropes, Jr., 1882– 1892. Ed. Norman Bennett. Boston: Boston University Press, 1973. Ruete, Emily [Sayyida Salme]. Memoirs of an Arabian Princess. In An Arabian Princess between Two Worlds: Memoirs, Letters Home, Sequels to the Memoirs, Syrian Customs and Usages, ed. E. Van Donzel, 143–406. New York: E. J. Brill, 1993. Ruschenberger, W. A Voyage Round the World; Including an Embassy to Muscat and Siam, in 1835, 1836, and 1837. Philadelphia, PA: Carey, Lea, and Blanchard, 1839. Rutz, Henry, and Benjamin Orlove, eds. The Social Economy of Consumption. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1989. Ryan, J. Picturing Empire: Photography and the Visualization of the British Empire. London: Reacktion, 1997. Sabunji, L. Tanzih al-absar wa-al-afkar fi rihlat Sultan Zanjabar, jama‘ahu Zahir ibn Sa‘id. Muscat: Wizarat al-Turath al-Qawmi wa-al-Thaqafah, 1988. Sacleux, Charles. Dictionnaire Swahili-Français. Paris: Institut d’ethnologie, 1939. Sahlins, Marshal. “Cosmologies of Capitalism: The Trans-Pacific Sector of ‘The World System.’ ” In Culture in Practice: Selected Essays, 415–70. New York: Zone Books, 2000. Said, Edward. Covering Islam. New York: Vintage, 1999. . Culture and Imperialism. New York: Vintage, 1993. ———. Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books, 1979. Salt, Henry. A Voyage to Abyssinia. London: F. C. and J. Rivington, 1814. Schmidt, Karl. Sansibar: Ein ostafrikaniches Culturbild. Leipzig: Brodhaus, 1888. Schneider, William H. An Empire for the Masses: The French Popular Image of Africa, 1870–1900. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1982. Scott, Alan, ed. The Limits of Globalization. London: Routledge, 1997. Shami, Seteney. “Prehistories of Globalization: Circassian Identity in Motion.” Public Culture 12, no. 1 (2000): 177–204. Sheriff, Abdul, ed. The History and Conservation of Zanzibar Stone Town. Athens: Ohio University Press, 1995. . Slaves, Spices, and Ivory in Zanzibar: Integration of an East African Commercial Empire into the World Economy, 1770–1873. London: James Currey, 1987. Sheriff, Abdul, and Javed Jafferji. Zanzibar Town: An Architectural Exploration. Zanzibar: Gallery Publications, 1998. Siravo, F. Zanzibar: A Plan for the Historic Stone Town. Zanzibar: Gallery Publications, 1996. Smith, Woodruff D. Consumption and the Making of Respectability, 1600– 1800. New York: Routledge, 2002. Speke, John H. Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1868. Sperling, David. “The Frontiers of Prophecy: Healing, the Cosmos and Islam on the East African Coast in the Nineteenth Century.” In Revealing Prophets, ed. D. Anderson and D. Johnson, 83–101. London: James Currey, 1995. Stanley, Henry M. In Darkest Africa. London: Sampson Low, 1890. —. How I Found Livingstone: Travels, Adventures, and Discoveries in Central Africa. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1887. . Through the Dark Continent. 2 vols. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1878. Stearns, Peter. Consumerism in World History: The Global Transformation of Desire. Routledge: New York, 2001. Steere, Edward. A Handbook of the Swahili Language, as Spoken at Zanzibar. 1870; repr., London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1894. . “On East African Tribes and Languages.” Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 1 (1872): 143–54. , ed. The East African Slave Trade. London: Harrison, 1871. . Swahili Tales, as Told by the Natives of Zanzibar. London: Bell and Daldy, 1870. Sternberg, E. The Economy of Icons: How Business Manufactures Meaning. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1999. Stiglitz, Joseph. Globalization and Its Discontents. New York: W. W. Norton, 2002. Strobel, Margaret. Muslim Women in Mombasa, 1890–1975. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1979. Subrahmanyam, Sanjay. “Hearing Voices: Vignettes of Early Modernity in South Asia, 1400–1750.” Daedalus 127, no. 3 (1998): 75–104. “Sultan of Zanzibar a Good Pianist.” Academy 8 (July–December 1875): 181. Sykes, Colonel. “Notes on the Possessions of the Imaum of Muskat, on the Climate and Productions of Zanzibar, and on the Prospects of African Discovery from Mombas.” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society 23 (1853). Taasisi ya Uchunguzi wa Kiswahili (Chuo Kikuu cha Dar es Salaam). Kamusi ya Kiswahili Sanifu. Dar es Salaam: Oxford University Press, 1997. Taussig, Michael. Mimesis and Alterity: A Particular History of the Senses. New York: Routledge, 1993. —. “History as Commodity in Some Recent American (Anthropological) Literature.” Critique of Anthropology 9, no. 1 (1989): 7–23. Taylor, Peter J. Modernities: A Geohistorical Interpretation. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999. Taylor, William. African Aphorisms; or Saws from Swahililand. London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1891. Temin, Peter, ed. Engines of Enterprise: An Economic History of New England. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000. Thomas, Nicholas. Entangled Objects: Exchange, Material Culture, and Colonialism in the Pacific. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991. —. Out of Time: History and Evolution in Anthropological Discourses. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1989. Thompson, E. P. The Making of the English Working Class. London: Gollancz, 1963. Thomson, Joseph. “East Africa as It Was and Is.” The Contemporary Review 55 (January–June 1889): 41–51. . To the Central African Lakes and Back: The Narrative of the Royal Geographical Society’s East Central African Expedition, 1878–80. London: S. Low, Marston, Searle & Rivington, 1881. Thornton, John. “The Role of Africans in the Atlantic Economy, 1450–1650: Modern Africanist Historiography and the World-Systems Paradigm.” Colonial Latin American Historical Review 3, no. 2 (1994): 125–40. Thornton, R. “Notes Towards a Theory of Objects and Persons.” African Anthropology 4, no. 1 (1997): 36–51. Tobin, Joseph J., ed. Re-Made in Japan: Everyday Life and Consumer Taste in a Changing Society. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992. Tomlinson, Alan, ed. Consumption, Identity, and Style. London: Routledge, 1990. Tomlinson, John. Globalization and Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999. Trouillot, Michel-Rolph. Global Transformations: Anthropology and the Modern World. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. . Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History. Boston: Beacon Press, 1995. Troyer, J. “Rationality and Maximization.” In Ethics: Foundations, Problems, and Applications, ed. E. Morscher and R. Stranzinger, 211–15. Vienna: Verlag Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 1981. Tsing, Anna. “The Global Situation.” Cultural Anthropology 15, no. 3 (2000): 327–60. Tylor, Edward. Anthropology: An Introduction to the Study of Man and Civilization. 1880; repr., London: D. Appleton, 1913. Veblen, Thorstein. The Theory of the Leisure Class. London: Allen and Unwin, 1924. Wagnleitner, Reinhold. Coca-Colonization and the Cold War: The Cultural Mission of the United States in Austria after the Second World War. Trans. Diana M. Wolf. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1994. Wainwright, Jacob. “Tagebuch von Jacob Wainwright über den Transport von Dr. Livingston’s Leiche, 4. Mai 1873–18, Februar 1874.” Petermanns Mittheilungen 20 (1874): 187–93. Wakefield, Rebecca. Memoirs of Mrs. Rebecca Wakefield, Wife of the Rev. T. Wakefield. Ed. R. Brewin. London: Hamilton, Adams, 1879. Walker, Iain. “Mimetic Structuration: Or, Easy Steps to Building and Acceptable Identity.” History and Anthropology 16, no. 2 (2005): 187–210. Waller, Horace. “Two Ends of the Slave Stick.” Contemporary Review, April 1889, 532–33. ——. The Last Journals of David Livingstone, in Central Africa, from 1865 to His Death. Hartford, CT: R.W. Bliss, 1875. Wallerstein, Immanuel. Historical Capitalism; with Capitalist Civilization. New York: Verso, 1995. . The Modern World-System. 3 vols. New York: Academic Press, 1974–89. . “The Three Stages of African Involvement in the World-Economy.” In The Political Economy of Contemporary Africa, ed. Peter Gutkind and Immanuel Wallerstein, 30–57. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 1976. Ward, G., ed., Letters of Bishop Tozer and His Sister together with Some Other Records of the Universities’ Mission from 1863–1873. London: Office of the Universities’ Mission to Central Africa, 1902. Waters, Malcolm. Globalization. London: Routledge, 2001. Watson, James. “China’s Big Mac Attack.” Foreign Affairs 79 (May–June 2000): 120–34. , ed. Golden Arches East: McDonald’s in East Asia. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997. Weeks, Clelia. “Zanzibar.” Harper’s New Monthly Magazine 38 (December– May, 1868–1869): 306–18. White, Shane. “A Question of Style: Blacks in and around New York City in the Late Eighteenth Century.” Journal of American Folklore 102, no. 403 (1989): 23–44. Wilding, Richard. “Ceramics of the Lamu Archipelago.” PhD diss., University of Nairobi, 1977. Williams, Raymond. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. London: Fontana, 1976. Willis, Justin. Potent Brews: A Social History of Alcohol in East Africa, 1850– 1999. Athens: Ohio University Press, 2002. . Mombasa, the Swahili and the Making of the Mijikenda. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993. Willoughby, John. East Africa and Its Big Game: The Narrative of a Sporting Trip from Zanzibar to the Borders of the Masai. London: Longmans, Green, 1889. Wilson, Rob, and Wimal Dissanayake, eds. Global/Local: Cultural Production and the Transnational Imagery. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996. Wright, Marcia. Strategies of Slaves and Women in East Central Africa. Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1989. Xiao bin Tang, ed. Chinese Modern: The Heroic and the Quotidian. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000. Young, Marianne. Cutch, or Random Sketches of Western India. London: Smith, Elder, 1838. Young, Robert. Postcolonialism: An Historical Introduction. London: Blackwell, 2001. . Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture and Race. New York: Routledge, 1995. Young, Timothy. Travellers in Africa: British Travelogues, 1850–1900. New York: Manchester University Press, 1988. Zein, Mohamed el. The Sacred Meadows. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1974. Zha, J. China Pop: How Soap Operas, Tabloids, and Bestsellers Are Transforming a Culture. New York: New Press, 1995.