# Graphic literacies for a digital age11

## The survival of layout

## Robert Waller

Page layout is dominant in many genres of physical documents, but it is frequently overlooked when texts are digitized. Its presence is largely determined by available technologies and skills: if no provision is made for creating, preserving, or describing layout, then it tends not to be created, preserved or described. However, I argue, the significance and utility of layout for readers is such that it will survive or re-emerge.

I review how layout has been treated in the literature of graphic design and linguistics, and consider its role as a memory tool. I distinguish between fixed, flowed, fugitive and fragmented pages, determined not only by authorial intent but also by technical constraints. Finally, I describe graphic literacy as a component of functional literacy and suggest that corresponding graphic literacies are needed not only by readers, but by creators of documents and by the information management technologies that produce, deliver, and store them.

This chapter is about page layout – the arrangement of diferent text elements (for example, chunks of prose, illustrations, and headlines) within a physical frame such as a book page or a screen. It is an aspect of text that has not been as widely studied as some others and that is easy to overlook. It is largely (but not entirely) absent from literature, and it is therefore correspondingly absent from literary studies of text, and absent from theories of text that originate in literary studies. Instead, it is associated with non-literary genres such as children’s books, user manuals, catalogues, and newspapers, which have been less intensely studied. Because layout is a nonlinear, holistic quality of text, it is hard to define and to quantify. And it tends to get forgotten when new technologies for creating, storing, and retrieving text are developed.

In this chapter I want to position layout as a less peripheral feature of text than it has often been considered – as an important infrastructure for reading and writing in an age when few make time to engage with long linear texts.1 I demonstrate its function and the key role that technology has played in enabling or suppressing layout in diferent eras. I then discuss its role in enabling efective reading, and I review some of the theoretical approaches that have been proposed within diferent disciplines. Then, looking forward, I discuss future types of digital text, arguing for the continuing requirement for graphic layout even in digital text, and for its incorporation in our definition of communication competence and literacy.

Traditionally, readers have almost always encountered text in the context of a  document: an object with borders, with a  declared aim, with a defined authorship, and within a recognized genre – with all the conventions, rules, authority, and audience expectations that are implied by that. Text (language string) has usually been situated in a text (document).

In the new digital culture, though, text is frequently encountered as search results – fragments detached from their document context, alongside fragments of the vast unmediated mass conversation that is social media. And similarly when scholars discuss language and information as an abstract concept, it is often in the form of strings of text that we can easily store (for example, in language corpora), search, and analyse, rather than contexualized in physical documents.

There is general agreement that through technological change we are experiencing a very major shift in the way we communicate, and what we communicate – perhaps equal to the development of printing. There are well-known arguments that the way in which we frame our thoughts for the communication and preservation of knowledge has a profound efect on how we think.2 In our own era we face the loss of authority, as knowledge becomes crowd-sourced through social networks, and with the loss of coherence as we experience information in fragments via a search engine. Both of these are reasons why layout might be going out of style – representing, as it does, a carefully considered, editorially mediated, and designer-crafted presentation of a complete message.

Paradigm shifts (and some would claim that is what is represented by digital communications) are traditionally carried out to the sound of exaggerated debate between old and new, which can be dificult for those who appreciate aspects of both positions. In Plato’s Phaedrus, Socrates famously remarks to Phaedrus that writing would ‘create forgetfulness’. He was right – we no longer memorize very much by rote, but we use writing as a memory tool instead. Like any physical tool it extends our reach, gives us focused functionality, and multiplies our strength through leverage.

Experience shows that new communication technologies rarely render old ones completely extinct. Instead, they more typically occupy a new niche that was not previously possible, with the old technologies often surviving but in a less dominant position than before. Theatre, cinema, TV, DVD, and YouTube happily coexist. While the devices that deliver them might converge, it appears that there will still be distinct audiences and occasions for live performances as well as stored ones, shared experiences as well as private ones. People still memorize the alphabet, mathematical tables, songs, poems, and speeches. And even parchment scrolls still exist for ceremonial functions such as academic degree ceremonies, in which a document plays an important performative role.

That having been said, there is an inevitable moment during a communications revolution when a traditional channel or technique seems to be doomed to extinction, and this is a good time to assess its usefulness. Page layout is a little-discussed aspect of text, but it connects closely to a range of fundamental issues concerning the nature of text, documents, writing, and reading. Do we still need it, what are at the apparent threats to it, and are there any reasons to suppose it might survive or re-emerge?

A book reviewer of this area remarked that

one problem besetting the theorization of multimodal discourse is that most senior scholars entering the field have been monomodally educated: they are linguists, or musicologists, or art historians. Inevitably, they are thereby biased by their original field of study, and limited by their restricted knowledge of other disciplines. (Forceville 2007, 1236)

To declare my own focus and bias: my field of study (and practice) is typography and graphic communication, a  relatively immature field largely focused on professional practice rather than theory.

## What layout does

Let me first use a practical example to establish what I mean by layout, and to explore what layout adds to a text, and what is lost if it is absent.

Consider this double-page spread from The Guardian newspaper (Figure 1, overleaf ). The long dark bar at the top groups the whole spread under its wing. It says this is all one story. The bar is dark red in the original – it is worth noting that once we reproduce an actual, material text as an image, especially in black and white, we lose key aspects of its reality: colour, size, depth, and texture. And feel, sound, and smell – often remarked on by readers of paper documents.3

The larger heading, on the left, dominates the spread, and, reinforced by the dominant image, sets up the metaphor that defines the editorial direction for the spread. The image communicates on an emotional level – both in setting up the atmosphere of discomfort, and in reducing the word count on the page to make it more inviting for readers who might be daunted by two pages of solid text. The charts (bottom left) and glossary (column 2) add an authoritative tone that backs a view that might otherwise be seen as just editorial comment (signalled by the author being identified not only by name but with a photo). The evidence about the human