# Directors'Foreword xactly a century ago, the Victoria and Albert Museum made the decision—controversial at the time—to purchase a body of Art Nouveau works from the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1900. Many of those works, now considered masterpieces, are included in this exhibition and catalogue. These vibrant explorations of materials and techniques were also deliberate attempts to transform the urban, industrial world. The V&A, or South Kensington Museum as it was known, was a key resource for Art Nouveau designers. Émile Gallé, Victor Horta, and Ödön Lechner, for example, visited the Museum and were inspired by its collections. The Museum's numerous publications on the principles of ornament and the resources of the National Art Library also had a great impact on the style. Like museums and public galleries, mass publications on art and design were just becoming established features of cultural life. Art Nouveau was thus quintessentially modern in that it was informed by and created through contemporary means. The Art Nouveau style was also self-consciously international, drawing upon sources throughout Europe and the rest of the world. American artists, architects, and artisans in New York, Buffalo, Boston, Cincinnati, and Chicago readily adopted the new style. Some Amèrican practitioners, notably Louis Comfort Tiffany, were commercially successful abroad, and Americans garnered their share of medals at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1900. As interpreted by architects and artists such as Frank Lloyd Wright, the movement in America set the stage for a modernism that in turn had a great influence on progressive art and architecture in the United States, Europe, and Japan. Art Nouveau, 1890-1914, the exhibition accompanying this book, will travel from the V&A in London to the National Gallery of Art in Washington. The exhibition is made possible at the National Gallery by the generous support of DaimlerChrysler Corporation Fund. Additional support is provided by the Terra Foundation for the Arts, Robert P. and Arlene R. Kogod, Eleanor and Donald 'Taffner, and The Fund for the International Exchange of Art. Although the core of the exhibition comes from the V&A's own vast collections, numerous international lenders, public and private, have provided works. We are grateful to all who have helped create this publication and exhibition, celebrating the astonishing creative achievements of the last fin de siècle. ALAN BORG EARL A. POWELL III Director Director Victoria and Albert Museum National Gallery of Art