# List of Contributors PAUL GREENHALGH is Head of Research at the V&A, and curator of the major exhibition Art Nouveau 1890–1914, in Spring 2000. Formerly Head of Art History at Camberwell College of Art and tutor at The Royal College of Art, his publications include Ephemeral Vistas (1988), Modernism in Design (1990), Quotations and Sources from Design and the Decorative Arts 1800–1900 (1993). FRANÇOISE AUBRY has been the director of the Musée Horta, Brussels since 1981. Publications include Bruxelles, Saint-Gilles, Musée Horta (1990) and Victor Horta à Bruxelles (1996). She is co-author of Art Nouveau en Belgique: Architecture et intérieurs (1991), Bruxelles fin-de-siècle (1994) and Le XIXe siècle en Belgique: architecture et intérieurs (1994). HELEN CLIFFORD is a member of the V&A's Research Department, teaching on the joint V&A/RCA MA in the History of Design. She has curated major exhibitions on historic and contemporary silver, as well as contributing articles on aspects of design history to the Burlington Magazine, Apollo, Studies in the Decorative Arts and the Fournal of Design History. DAVID CROWLEY is tutor in history of design at the Royal College of Art, London. His publications include National Style and Nation-State (1992), Design and Culture in Poland and Hungary, 1890 1990 (1993) and ‘The Propaganda Poster The Power of the Poster (V&A Publications, 1998). His most recent published work was as editor of Socialism and Style: The Material Culture of Post-War Eastern Europe (1999). ALICE FRELINGHUYSEN is curator of American Decorative Art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. Her published work includes American Porcelain 1770–1920 (1989) and the catalogue for Louis Comfort Tiffany at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (1999). This was the most recent of many exhibitions and installations that she has curated. She has also contributed to Tiffany's Chapel for the 1893 Worlds Exposition (2000). PHILIPPE HAMON studied Literary Theory and 19th-Century Historical Literature at the Sorbonne Nouvelle (Paris III). Publishing chiefly on French naturalist and realist authors, his recent publications include: Expositions, littérature et architecture au XIXes (1989) and L’ironie littéraire, essai sur les forms de l’écriture oblique (1996) ANNA JACKsON is a curator in the V&A's Far Eastern Department. Her research interests include the cultural relationship between Japan and Europe in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Publications include Japanese Country Téxtiles (V&A Publications, 1997). She also edited the museum guide: V&A: A Hundred Highlights (V&A Publications, 1996) MILENA LAMAROVÁ studied at Charles University, Prague and the Royal College of Art, London. She is a curator of the Museum of Decorative Arts in Prague. Publications include A History of Czech Modern Art 1890–1938 (1998). Awarded the Prize of Czech Academy of Science. She has contributed to many exhibition catalogues, including Czech Cubism – Design and Architecture (1991–92). ALEXANDER KADER is Head of the European Sculpture and Works of Art Department at Sotheby's, London. A graduate of the Courtauld Institute and formerly a curatorial assistant in the Sculpture Collection of the V&A, his publications include articles and essays on English Neo-classical and Pre-Raphaelite sculpture, and on Frederic Leighton. WENDY KAPLAN is associate director of exhibitions and cultural affairs at The Wolfsonian-Florida International University. She is co-author or editor of many titles on nineteenth- and twentieth-century design including The Arts and Crafts Movement (1991), Designing Modernity: The Arts of Reform and Persuasion (1995), Charles Renee Mackintosh (1996) and The Art that is Life’: The Arts and Crafts Movement in America (1998). JULIET KINCHIN is Honorary Reader at the University of Glasgow and lecturer at the Glasgow School of Art. She established the Christie's Decorative Arts Programme, University of Glasgow, and in 1999 was Visiting Professor at the Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts. Pußlications include Glasgow's Great Exhibitions (1988); chapters in Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1996) and E.W.Godwin: Aesthetic Designer and Architect (1999). GILLIAN NAYLOR is Visiting Professor in the History of Design at the Royal College of Art, London. She has published books on the Arts and Crafts movement, Hector Guimard, the Bauhaus and William Morris, as well as many articles on nineteenth- and twentiethcentury design, including Domesticity and Design Reform’ in Carl and Karin Larsson: Creators of the Swedish Style (V&A Publications, 1997). JENNIFER HAWKINs OpIE is Deputy Curator in the V&A's Ceramics & Glass Department. Specialising in 19th- and 20th-century studies, publications include Art & Design in Europe and America 1800–1900 (1987) and Scandinavia: Ceramics & Glass in the 20th Century (V&A Publications 1989). She was a contributor to William Morris 1834–1896 (1996) and A Grand Design: the Art of the V&A (V&A Publications 1999). LINDA PARRY is Deputy Curator of the V&A's Textile and Dress Department. A leading authority on British nineteenthcentury design, she edited William Morris (1996), the comprehensive catalogue accompanying the V&A's major William Morris retrospective. Her other books include William Morris Textiles (1983) and Textiles of the Arts and Crafts Movement (1988). CLARE PHILLIPS studied at Birmingham University and the Royal College of Art in London. Her publications include Fewelry (1996), as well as contributions to The Illustrated History of Textiles (1991) and Silver (ed. Philippa Glanville, V&A Publications 1996). She is a curator in the Department of Metalwork, Silver and Jewellery at the V&A, and lectures regularly. WENDY SALMOND is Associate Professor in the Art Department at Chapman University, Orange CA. Her publications include Arts and Crafts in Late Imperial Russia (1996) and Russian Icons at Hillwood (1998). She is co-editor of the forthcoming The Uncommon Vision of Sergei Konenkov, Russian Sculptor and editor of a special style moderne issue of Experiment (Spring 2000). IGNASI DE SOLÀ-MORALES I RUBIÓ is Professor at the Architectural School of Barcelona. Publications include Rubió y Bellver y la Fortuna del Gaudinismo (1975), Eclecticismo y Vanguardia. El caso de la arquitectura moderna en Cataluña (1980), Gaudí (1983), L’Exposició Internacional de Barcelona 1914–1929: Arquitectura y Ciutat (1985), Fin de Siecle Architecture in Barcelona (1992) and Architecture Guide: Spain 1920–2000 (1998) ERIC TuRNER is a curator in the Department of Metalwork, Silver and Jewellery at the V&A. His particular expertise concerns the collections of post-1880 metalwork and Sheffield plate. He has contributed to many publications on these subjects, including Art and Design in Europe and America, 1800–1900 (1987), Silver of a New Era (1992), Liberty of London (1992), Silver (V&A Publications 1996) and Pewter (V&A Publications 1999). FRANCESCA VANKE has recently completed her PhD thesis on nineteenth-century British cultural and aesthetic responses to Islam and its decorative arts. She is now undertaking postdoctoral research, working at Camberwell College of Arts, London. LAUREN S. WEINGARDEN is Associate Professor of Art History, Florida State University. Her published work includes Louis H. Sullivan: The Banks (1987), Louis H. Sullivan: A System of Architectural Ornament (1990), and numerous contributions to conference proceedings and exhibition catalogues, including Chicago Architecture 1872–1922: Birth of a Metropolis (1987). GABRIEL P. WEISBERG is Professor of Art History at the University of Minnesota. He has published widely in the area of Art Nouveau, including Art Nouveau Bing, Paris Style 1900 (1986) and Art Nouveau, A Research Guide for Design Reform in France, Belgium, England, and the United States (1998). GHIsLAINE WoOD is assistant curator of the major exhibition on Art Nouveau (Spring 2000) curated by Paul Greenhalgh. She is author of Art Nouveau and the Erotic (V&A Publications, 2000), published to coincide with the Art Nouveau exhibition. ## Art Nouveau,1890—1914 Victoria and Albert Museum 6 April—30 July 2000 National Gallery of Art 8 October 2000–28 January 2001 The Art Institute of Chicago Mr Victor Arwas Collection Barlow Widmann Bibliothèque Forney, Paris Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery Brighton Museum and Art Gallery Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art, Winter Park Chicago Historical Society The Chrysler Museum, Norfolk Cincinnati Art Museum Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, New York Cornell University, Ithica Dalva Brothers David and Alfred Smart Museum of Art, University of Chicago Delaware Art Museum, Wilmington Martin Eidelberg Everson Museum of Art, Syracuse Frye Art Museum, Seattle Mrs Patricia Gebhard Glasgow Museums Glasgow School of Art The Hearn Family Trust The State Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg High Museum of Art, Atlanta Joseph Holtzman, New York Houghton Library, Harvard University, Cambridge Hungarian National Gallery, Budapest Mr and Mrs Herbert Irving Kunstindustrimuseet, Oslo Mr and Mrs Jean-Louis Lamot Mr Michael Levitin The Library of Congress, Washington Lillian Nassau Gallery, New York Los Angeles County Museum of Art The Menil Collection, Houston The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York The Minneapolis Institute of Arts Mucha Trust Munch Museet, Oslo Münchner Stadtmuseum Musée d’Orsay, Paris Musée de l’Ecole de Nancy Musée de la Mode et du Textile, Paris Musée des Beaux-Arts, Nancy Musee des Beaux-Arts, Reims Musée Gustave Moreau, Paris Musée Horta, Brussels Musée National de Céramique, Sèvres Musées Royaux d’Art et d’Histoire, Brussels Musées Royaux des Beaux-Arts de Belgique, Brussels Museo Municipale di Treviso Museu Calouste Gulbenkian, Lisbon Museum für Kunst und Gewerbe, Hamburg Museum of Applied Arts, Budapest Museum of Fine Arts, Boston The Museum of Modern Art, New York National Gallery of Art, Washington The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, Kansas City The Newark Museum Norwegian Folk Museum, Oslo Osterreichisches Museum für angewandte Kunst, Vienna Mr and Mrs Sam G. Perkins Seymour H. Persky The Art Museum, Princeton University Jack Rennert Mr and Mrs Joel B. Ruby The Saint Louis Art Museum Steven Schmidt The Birkenhead Collection Smithsonian Institution Libraries, Washington Mr Eric Streiner Donald and Eleanor Taffner The Toledo Museum of Art Town of Clarence, NY Unity Temple Unitarian Universalist Congregation University Museum, Southern Illinois University University of East Anglia Victoria and Albert Museum, London Villa Stuck, Munich Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, Richmond The Wolfsonian-Florida International University, Miami Beach Private Collections