## References Abdelnour-Nocéra, J., Clemmensen, T., and Kurosu, M. (2013b) Reframing HCI Through Local and Indigenous Perspectives. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 29: 201–204. Abdul, A., Vermeulen, J., Wang, D., Lim, B.Y., and Kankanhalli, M. (2018) Trends and Trajectories for Explainable, Accountable and Intelligible Systems: An HCI Research Agenda. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 582, 18 pages. Abelein, U., Sharp, H., and Paech, B. (2013) Does Involving Users in Software Development Really Influence System Success?, IEEE Software, Nov/Dec 2013, 13– 19. Abowd, G., and Mynatt, E. (2000) Charting Past, Present, and Future Research in Ubiquitous Computing. ACM Transactions on Computer–Human Interaction, 7(1), 29–58. Abowd, G. D. (2012) What Next, Ubicomp?: Celebrating an Intellectual Disappearing Act. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp'12). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 31–40. Abowd, G. D., Atkeson, C. G., Bobick, A. F., Essa, I. A., MacIntyre, B., Mynatt, E. D., and Starner, T. E. (2000) Living Laboratories: The Future Computing Environments Group at the Georgia Institute of Technology. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '00). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 215–216. Adams, A., and Sasses, M.A. (1999) Users Are Not The Enemy. Communications of the ACM, 42(12), 41–46. Adib, F., Mao, H., KabelacZ., Katabi, D., and Miller, R. C. (2015) Smart Homes That Monitor Breathing and Heart Rate. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 837–846. Adlin, T., and Pruitt, J. (2010) The Essential Persona Lifecycle: Your Guide to Building and Using Personas. Morgan Kaufmann. Alavi, H.S., Churchill, E.F., Wiberg, M., Lalanne, D., Dalsgaard, P., Schieck, A.F., and Rogers, Y. (2019) Introduction to Human-Building Interaction (HBI)—Interfacing HCI with Architecture and Urban Design. To appear in ACM ToCHI. AlexanderI., and Robertson, S. (2004) Understanding Project Sociology by Modeling Stakeholders, IEEE Software, 21(1), 23–27. Alexander, C. (1979) A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction. Oxford Al-Humairi, A., Al-Kindi, O., and Jabeur, N. (2018) Automated Musical Instruments. In Proceedings of ICMRE 2018 Proceedings of the 2018 4th International Conference on Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering, pp. 163–169. Ali, R., Arden-Close, E., and McAlaney, J. (2018) Digital Addiction: How Technology Keeps Us Hooked. The Conversation. Downloaded from http://theconversation.com/digital-addiction-how-technology-keeps-us-hooked-97499. Allanwood, G., and Beare, P. (2014) User Experience Design. Fairchild Books. Allison, D., Wills, B., Bowman, D., Wineman, J., and Hodges, L. (1997) The Virtual Reality Gorilla Exhibit, IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 30–38. Ambler, S. (2002) Agile modeling. John Wiley. Also at http://www.agilemodeling.com/essays/agileDocumentationBestPractices.htm. Anderson, C. (2013) Makers. Random House Business Books. Anderson, D.J. (2010) Kanban: Successful Evolutionary Change for Your Technology Business. Blue Hole Press. Antle, A. N., Corness, G., and Droumeva, M. (2009) Human–Computer-Intuition? Exploring the Cognitive Basis for Intuition in Embodied Interaction. International Journal of Arts and Technology, 2, 3, 235–254. Ardito, C., Buono, P., Costabile, D. C. M. F., and Lanzilotti, R. (2014) Investigating and Promoting UX Practice in Industry: An Experimental Study. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 72, 542–551. Armitage, U. (2004) Navigation and Learning in Electronic Texts. PhD thesis, Centre for HCI Design, City University London. Aronson-Rath, R., Milward, J., Owen, T., and Pitt, F. (2016). Virtual Reality Journalism. New York, NY: Columbia Journalism School. Ayobi, A., Sonne, T., Marshall, P., and Cox, A. L. (2018) Flexible and Mindful Self-Tracking: Design Implications from Paper Bullet Journals. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 28, 14 pages. Babich, N. (2016) Designing Card-Based User Interfaces. Downloaded from https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2016/10/designing-card-based-userinterfaces/. Babich, N. (2018) The Do's and Don'ts of Mobile UX Design. Downloaded from https://theblog.adobe.com/10-dos-donts-mobile-ux-design/. Bachour, K., Kaplan, F., and Dillenbourg, P. (2008) Reflect: An Interactive Table for Regulating Face-to-Face Collaborative Learning. In Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning: Times of Convergence: Technologies Across Learning Contexts. In P.Dillenbourg and M.Specht (eds) Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 5192. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 39–48. Bachour, K., Seiied Alavi, H., Kaplan, F., and Dillenbourg, P. (2010) Low-Resolution Ambient Awareness Tools for Educational Support. In Proceedings of CHI 2010 Workshop: The Future of HCI and Education. Bailey, B. (2000) How to Improve Design Decisions by Reducing Reliance on Superstition. Let's Start with Miller's ‘Magic 7.' Human Factors International, Inc. www.humanfactors.com (accessed December 16, 2010). Bailey, R. W. (2001) Insights from Human Factors International Inc. (HFI). Providing Consulting and Training in Software Ergonomics. January (www.humanfactors.com/home). Bainbridge, D. (2014) Information Technology and Intellectual Property Law (6th edn). Bloomsbury Professional. Baker, K., Greenberg, S., and Gutwin, C. (2002) Empirical Development of a Heuristic Evaluation Methodology for Shared Workspace Groupware. In ACM Proceedings of CSCW'02 Conference. Baker, M., Casey, R., Keyes, B., and Yanco, H. A. (2004) Improved Interfaces for Human–Robot Interaction in Urban Search and Rescue. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, October. Balakrishnan, A. D., Kiesler, S., Cummings, J. N., and Zadeh, Reza. (2011) Research Team Integration: What it is and Why it Matters. In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, ACM Press, pp. 523–532. Balestrini, M., Diez, T., Marshall, P., Gluhak, A., and Rogers. Y. (2015) IoT Community Technologies: Leaving Users to Their Own Devices or Orchestration of Engagement? In Endorsed Transactions on Internet of Things, EAI, Vol. 15 (1). Bano, M., and Zowghi, D. (2015) A Systematic Review on the Relationship Between User Involvement and System Success, Information and Software Technology, 58, pp.148–169. Bano, M., Zowghi, D., and Rimini, F. (2017) User Satisfaction and System Success: An Empirical Exploration of User Involvement in Software Development. Empirical Software Engineering, 22, pp. 2339–2372. Banzi, M. (2009) Getting Started with Arduino. O'Reilly Media Inc. Barnard, P. J., Hammond, N., Maclean, A., and Morten, J. (1982) Learning and Remembering Interactive Commands in a Text Editing Task, Behavior and Information Technology, 1, 347–358. Baskinger, M. (2008) Pencils Before Pixels: A Primer in Hand-Generated Sketching, Interactions, March–April, 28–36. Bastos, J. A. D. M., Afonso, L. M., and de Souza, C.S. (2017) Metacommunication Between Programmers Through an Application Programming Interface: A Semiotic Analysis of Date and Time APIs, in IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC), 213–221. Baum, F. L., and Denslow, W. (1900) The Wizard of Oz. Random House, New York. Baumeister, R.F.Vohs, K.D., DeWall, C.N., and Zhang, L. (2007) How Emotion Shapes Behavior: Feedback, Anticipation, and Reflection, Rather than Direct Causation. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11(2), 167–203. Baumer, E. P.S., Berrill, T., Botwinick, S.C., Gonzales, J.L., Ho, K., Kundrik, A., Kwon, L., LaRowe, T., Nguyen, C.P.Ramirez, F., Schaedler, P., Ulrich, W., Wallace, A., Wan, Y., and Weinfeld, B. (2018) What Would You Do? Design Fiction and Ethics. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Supporting Groupwork (GROUP '18). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 244–256. Baumer, E. P. S., and Thomlinson, B. (2011) Comparing Activity Theory with Distributed Cognition for Video Analysis: Beyond Kicking the Tyres. In ACM Proceedings of CHI '11, 133–142. Bauwens, V., and Genoud, P. (2014) Lessons Learned: Online Ethnography. A Tool for Creative Dialogue Between State and Citizens, Interactions, 60–65. Baxter, G., and Sommerville, I. (2011) Socio-Technical Systems: From Design Methods to Systems Engineering, Interacting with Computers, 23, (1) 4–17. Beck, K., and Andres, C. (2005) Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change (2nd edn). Addison-Wesley. Bell, G., Blythe, M., and Sengers, P. (2005) Making by Making Strange: Defamiliarization and the Design of Domestic Technologies, ACM Transactions on Computer–Human Interaction, 12(2), 149–173. Bergman, E., and Haitani, R. (2000) Designing the PalmPilot: A Conversation with Rob Haitani. In Information Appliances. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. Bergman, O., and Whittaker, S. (2016) The Science of Managing Our Digital Stuf . MIT Press. Bernard, H. R. (2017) Direct and Indirect Observation. Chapter 14 in Research Methods in Anthropology: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches. 6th edition. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. Beyer, H., and Holtzblatt, K. (1998) Contextual Design: Defining Customer-Centered Systems. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. Bias, R. G. (1994) The Pluralistic Usability Walk-Through – Coordinated Empathoes. In J.Nielsen and R. L.Mack (eds) Usability Inspection Methods. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York. Bird, J., and Rogers, Y. (2010) The Pulse of Tidy Street: Measuring and Publicly Displaying Domestic Electricity Consumption. Workshop on Energy Awareness and Conservation through Pervasive Applications, Pervasive 2010 Conference. Downloaded from http://www.changeproject.info/projects.html (retrieved September 2014). Blandford, A., and Furniss, D. (2006) DiCoT: A Methodology for Applying Distributed Cognition to the Design of Team Working Systems. In S. W.Gilroy and M. D.Harrison (eds) Interactive Systems: 12th International Workshop, DSVIS 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3941 Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 26–38. Blandford, A., Furniss, D., and Makri, S. (2017) Qualitative HCI Research: Going Behind the Scenes. Morgan Claypool Publishers. Blazevski, B., and Hallewell Haslwanter, J.D. (2017) User-Centered Development of a System to Support Assembly Line Worker. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI '17). ACM, New York, NY, Article 57, 7 pages. BlytheM., and Cairns, P. (2009) Critical Methods and User Generated Content: The iPhone on YouTube. In Proceedings of CHI 2009. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1467– 1476. Blythe, M. (2017) Research Fiction: Storytelling, Plot and Design. In Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'17). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 5400–5411. Bødker, S. (2000) Scenarios in User-Centered Design—Setting the Stage for Reflection and Action, Interacting with Computers, 13(1), 61–76. Boehm, B., and Basili, V.R. (2001) Software Defect Reduction Top 10 List, IEEE Computer, 34(1), 135–137. Boehner, K.Vertesi, J., Sengers, P.Dourish, P. (2007) How HCI Interprets the Probes. In Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'07). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1077–1086. Borchers, J. (2001) A Pattern Approach to Interaction Design. Wiley. Bornschein, J., and Weber, G. (2017) Digital Drawing Tools for Blind Users: A State-ofthe-Art and Requirement Analysis. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA'17), ACM, New York, NY, pp. 21–28. Bostock, M., Ogievetsky, V., and Heer, J. (2011) D3: Data-Driven Documents. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17, 12, 2301–2309. Bouchet, J., and Nigay, L. (2004) ICARE: A Component-Based Approach for the Design and Development of Multimodal Interfaces. In Proceedings of CHI 2004. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1325–1328. Bowman, L.L., Levine, L.E., Waite, B.M., and Gendron, M. (2010) Can Students Really Multitask? An Experimental Study of Instant Messaging while Reading. Computers and Education54, 4, 927–931. Bowser, A., Shilton, K., Preece, J., and Warrick, E. (2017) Accounting for Privacy in Citizen Science: Ethical Research in a Context of Openness. In Proceedings of CSCW'17, ACM, New York, NY, pp. 2124–2136. Boyd, D. (2014) It's Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens. Yale. Braun, V., and Clarke, V. (2006) Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2). pp. 77–101, ISSN1478-0887. Brendon, G. (2017) Forget “Best” or “Sincerely,” This Email Closing Gets the Most Replies. Downloaded from https://blog.boomerangapp.com/author/brendan/. Brereton, M., and McGarry, B. (2000) An Observational Study of How Objects Support Engineering Design Thinking and Communication: Implications for the Design of Tangible Media. In Proceedings of CHI 2000. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 217–224. Briggs, G. F., Hole, G. J., and Turner, J. A. J. (2018) The Impact of Attentional Set and Situational Awareness on Dual-task Driving Performance. Transportation Research Part F: Traf ic Psychology and Behaviour, 57, 36–47. Brignull, H., and Rogers, Y. (2003) Enticing People to Interact with Large Public Displays in Public Spaces. In Proceedings of INTERACT 2003, Zurich, pp. 17–24. Brkan, M. (2017) AI-Supported Decision-Making Under the General Data Protection Regulation. In Proceedings of the 16th Edition of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL ’17). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 3–8. Brudy, F., Houben, S., Marquardt, N., and Rogers, Y. (2016) CurationSpace: Cross-Device Content Curation Using Instrumental Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Conference on Interactive Surfaces and Spaces (ISS '16). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 159–168. Buchenau, M., and Suri, J. F. (2000) Experience Prototyping. In Proceedings of DIS 2000, Design Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices, Methods, Techniques, pp. 17–19. Budd, A. (2007) Web Heuristics. Available at: www.andybudd.com/archives/2007/01/heuristics\_for\_modern\_web\_application\_de (accessed September 2010). Budiu, R., and Nielsen, J. (2010) Usability of iPad Apps and Websites. First Research Findings. Nielsen Norman Group. Downloaded from www.nngroup.com/reports/mobile/ipad/ (retrieved August 2010). Budiu, R., and Nielsen, J. (2012) Mobile Usability. New Riders Press. Buechley, L., and Qiu, K. (2014) Sew Electric. A Collection of DIY Projects that Combine Fabric, Electronics, and Programming. HLT Press. Buolamwini, J., and Gebru, T. (2018) Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, PMLR, 81, pp.77–91. Burgess, P.W. (2015) Serial Versus Concurrent Multitasking: From Lab to Life. In J. M.Fawcett, E.F.Risko and A.Kingstone (eds.) The Handbook of Attention. 443–462. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Buxton, B. (2007) Sketching User Experiences. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. Caddick, R., and Cable, S. (2011) Communicating the User Experience: A Practical Guide for Creating Useful UX Documentation. Wiley. Caine, K. (2016) Local Standards for Sample Size at CHI. In Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'16). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 981– 992. Caird, J.K., Simmons, S.M., Wiley, K., Johnston, K.A., and Horrey, W.J. (2018) Does Talking on a Cell Phone, With a Passenger, or Dialing Affect Driving Performance? An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Experimental Studies. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 60 (1). Cairns, P. (2019) Doing Better Statistics in Human-Computer Interaction: Short Essays on Some Common Questions. Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK. Campbell, J. L., Brown. J. L., Graving, J. S., Richard, C. M., Lichty, M. G., Sanquist, T., … and Morgan, J. L. (2016, December). Human Factors Design Guidance for Driver-Vehicle Interfaces. Report No. DOT HS 812 360. Washington. Card, S. K., Mackinley, J. D., and Shneiderman, B. (eds) (1999) Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. Card, S. K., Moran, T. P., and Newell, A. (1983) The Psychology of Human–Computer Interaction. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ. Carroll J. M. (2000) Introduction to the Special Issue on Scenario-Based Systems Development, Interacting with Computers, 13(1), 41–42. Carroll, J. M. (2004) Beyond Fun, Interactions, 11(5), 38–40. Carroll, J. M. (ed.) (2003) HCI Models, Theories and Frameworks: Towards a Multidisciplinary Science. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. Carter, S., and Mankoff, J. (2005) When Participants Do the Capturing: The Role of Media in Diary Studies. In Proceedings of CHI 2005. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 899– 908. Chang, C., Hinze, A., Bowen, J., Gilbert, L., and Starkey, N. (2018) Mymemory: A Mobile Memory Assistant for People with Traumatic Brain Injury. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 117, 4–19. Chang, T. (2004) The Results of Student Ratings: Paper vs Online, Journal of Taiwan Normal University: Education, 49(1), 171–186. Charmaz, K. (2014) Constructing Grounded Theory (2nd edn). SAGE Publications. Chen, X., Zou, Q., Fan, B, Zheng, Z., and Luo, X. (2018) Recommending Software Features for Mobile Applications Based on User Interface Comparison, Requirements Engineering (online), 1–15, Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00766- 018-0303-4 Chidziwisano, G., and Wyche, S. (2018) M-Kulinda: Using a Sensor-Based Technology Probe to Explore Domestic Security in Rural Kenya. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems(CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 10, 13 pages. Chuang, L.L., and Pfeil, U. (2018). Transparency and Openness Promotion Guidelines for HCI. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper SIG04, 4 pages. Churchill, E. (2018) Data, Design, and Ethnography, Interactions, 22–23. Churchill, E., Bowser, A., and Preece, J. (2013) Teaching and Learning Human-Computer Interaction. Interactions, 20, 2, 44–53. Clegg, T., Preece, J., Warrick, E., Pauw, D., Boston, C., and Cameron, J. (2019). Community-Driven Informal Adult Environmental Learning: Using Theory as a Lens to Identify Steps Toward Concientización. To appear in Journal of Environmental Education. Clemmensen, T., Hertzum, M., Hornbaek, K., Shi, Q., and Yammiyavar, P. (2008) Cultural Cognition in the Thinking-Aloud Method for Usability Evaluation. In Proceedings of 29th International Conference on Information Systems. Paris, 2008, Paper 189. Cliffe, A. D. (2017) A Review of the Benefits and Drawbacks to Virtual Field Guides in Today's Geoscience Higher Education Environment. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education. 14, 28. Cline, D.H. (2012) Six Degrees of Alexander: Social Network Analysis as a Tool for Ancient History. AHB, 26, 59–70. Cobb, S., Beardon, L., Eastgate, R., Glover, T., Kerr, S., Neale, H., Parsons, S., Benford, S., Hopkins, E., Mitchell, P., Reynard, G., and Wilson, J. (2002) Applied Virtual Environments to Support Learning of Social Interaction Skills in Users with Asperger's Syndrome, Digital Creativity, 13(1), N-22. Cockton, G., and Woolrych, A. (2001) Understanding Inspection Methods: Lessons from an Assessment of Heuristic Evaluation. In A.Blandford and J.Vanderdonckt (eds), People and Computers XV. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 171–191. Cohen, J. (1960) A Coefficient of Agreement for Nominal Scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20(1), 37–46. Cohen, M., Giangola, J. P., and Balogh, J. (2004) Voice User Interface Design. Addison-Wesley, Harlow, Essex. Constantine, L. L., and Lockwood, L. A. D. (1999) Software for Use. Addison-Wesley, Harlow, Essex. Cooper, A. (1999) The Inmates are Running the Asylum. SAMS, Indianapolis. Cooper, A. (2018) When Companies Question the Value of Design. Downloaded from https://medium.com/s/story/whats-the-roi-of-ux-c47defb033d2. Corbin, J. M., and Strauss, A. (2014) Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications. Costa, N.A., Holder, E., and MacKinnon, S.N. (2017) Implementing Human Centred Design in the Context of a Graphical User Interface Redesign for Ship Manoeuvring. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 100, 55–65. Coyle, A. (1995) Discourse Analysis. In G. M.Breakwell, S.Hammond and C.Fife-Schaw (eds) Research Methods in Psychology. SAGE, London. Crabtree, A. (2003) Designing Collaborative Systems: A Practical Guide to Ethnography. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Craik, K. J. W. (1943) The Nature of Explanation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Cramer, H., Evers, V., Ramlal, S., Someren, M., Rutledge, L., Stash, N., Aroyo, L., and Wielinga, B. (2008) The Effects of Transparency on Trust in and Acceptance of a Content-Based Art Recommender. User Model User-Adap Inter, 18, 455. Crampton Smith, G. (1995) The Hand that Rocks the Cradle. ID Magazine May/June, 60–65. Crowcroft, J., Haddadi, H., and Henderson, T. (2018) Responsible Research on Social Networks: Dilemmas and Solutions. In The Oxford Handbook of Networked Communication. Brooke Foucault Welles and Sandra González-Bailón (eds.) Oxford Handbooks online. Crumlish, C., and Malone, E. (2009) Designing Social Interfaces: Principles, Patterns and Practices for Improving the User Experience, O'Reilly. Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996) Go with the flow. Wired Interview. www.wired.com/wired/archive/4.09/czik.html (retrieved May 6, 2005). Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997) Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life. Basic Books, New York. Cutting, J., Gundry, D., and Cairns, P. (2019) Busy Doing Nothing? What Do Players Do in Idle Games? International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 122, 133–144. Cycil, C., Perry, M., Laurier, E., and Taylor, A. (2013) ‘Eyes Free' In-Car Assistance: Parent and Child Passenger Collaboration During Phone Calls. In Proceedings of MobileHCI'13, ACM Press, pp. 332–341. Da Silva, T., Silveira, M. S., Maurer, F., and Silveria, F.F. (2018) The Evolution of Agile UXD. Information and Software Technology, 102, 1–5. Dalton, N.S., Collins, E., and Marshall, P. (2015) Display Blindness?: Looking Again at the Visibility of Situated Displays Using Eye-Tracking. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 3889-3898. Davis, K. (2012) Ethics of Big Data. O'Reilly. de Rada, D., and Dominguez-Alvarez (2014) Response Quality of Self-Administration Questionnaires: A Comparison Between Paper and Web Questionnaires. Social Science Computer Review, 32(2), 256–269. de Souza, C. S. (2005) The Semiotic Engineering of Human-Computer Interaction. Cambridge, MA. The MIT Press. de Souza, C. S., Cerqueira, R., Afonso, L., Brandão, R., Ferreira, J. (2016) Software Developers as Users: Semiotic Investigations in Human-Centered Software Development. Springer. Deng, A., and Shi, X. (2016) Data-Driven Metric Development for Online Controlled Experiments: Seven Lessons Learned. In Proceedings of 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’16), pp. 77–86. Deng, A., Dmitriev, P., Gupta, S., Raff, R. K. P., and Vermeer, L (2017) A/B Testing at Scale: Accelerating Software Innovation. In Proceedings of Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval ’17, pp. 1397–1397. Deng, L., and Huang, X. (2004) Challenges in Adopting Speech Recognition, Communications of the ACM, 47(1), 69–75. Denzin, N. (2006). Sociological Methods: A Sourcebook. Aldine Transaction (5th edn), ISBN 9780-202308401. Denzin, N. K., and Lincoln, Y. S. (2011) The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research. SAGE Publications. Deshpande, A., Sharp, H., Barroca, L., and Gregory, A.J. (2016) Remote Working and Collaboration in Agile Teams. In Proceedings of International Conference on Information Systems, pp. 4543–4559. Dhillon, B., Banach, P., Hocielnik, R., Emparanza, J.P., Politis, I., Paczewska, A., and Markopoulos, P. (2011) Visual Fidelity of Video Prototypes and User Feedback: A Case Study, In Proceedings of BCS-HCI. Diaz de Rada, V., and Dominguez-Alvarez, J. A. (2014) Response Quality of Self-Administered Questions: A Comparison Between Paper and Web. Social Science Computer Review, 32, 2, SAGE Publications. Dietz, P. H., and Leigh, D. L. (2001) DiamondTouch: A Multi-User Touch Technology. In Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 219–226. Diez, T., and Posada, A. (2013) The Fab and the Smart City: The Use of Machines and Technology for the City Production by Its Citizens. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction, ACM Press, pp. 447–454. DiSalvo, C., Sengers, P., and Brynjarsdottir, H. (2010) Mapping the Landscape of Sustainable HCI. In Proceedings of CHI 2010. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1975–1984. Dix, A., Finlay, J., Abowd, G., and Beale, R. (2004) Human–Computer Interaction (3rd edn). Pearson Education, Harlow, Essex. Douglas, H.E., Raban, M. Z., Walter, S. R., and Westbrook. J. I. (2017) Improving Our Understanding of Multi-Tasking in Healthcare: Drawing Together the Cognitive Psychology and Healthcare Literature. Applied Ergonomics, Volume 59, Part A, 45– 55. Dourish, P. (2001) Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Dourish, P., and Bly, S. (1992) Portholes: Supporting Awareness in a Distributed Work Group. In Proceedings of CHI '92. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 541–547. Drascic, D., and Milgram, P. (1996) Perceptual Issues in Augmented Reality. In M. T.Bolas, S. S.Fisher and J. O.Merritt (eds) SPIE Volume 2653: Stereoscopic Displays and Virtual Reality Systems III. SPIE, San Jose, CA, pp. 123–134. Druga, S., Williams, R., Breazeal, C., and Resnick, M. (2017) “Hey Google, is it OK if I eat you?” In Proc. of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (IDC ’17), ACM Press, pp. 595–600. DSDM (2014) The DSDM Agile Project Framework Handbook, DSDM Consortium, Kent, UK, ISBN 978-0-9544832-9-6. Dumas, B., Lalanne, D., and Oviatt, S. (2009) Multimodal Interfaces: A Survey of Principles, Models and Frameworks. Human Machine Interaction Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 5440, 3–26. Dumas, J. S., and Redish, J. C. (1999) A Practical Guide to Usability Testing (rev. edn). Intellect, Exeter. Eason, K. (1987) Information Technology and Organizational Change. Taylor and Francis, London. Eason, K. (2014) Afterword: The Past, Present, and Future of Sociotechnical Systems Theory. Applied Ergonomics, 45, 213–220. Ebert, J.F., Huibers, L., Christensen, B., and Christensen M.B. (2018) Paper- or Web-Based Questionnaire Invitations as a Method for Data Collection: Cross-Sectional Comparative Study of Differences in Response Rate, Completeness of Data, and Financial Cost. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 20(1): e24. Ecker, R. (2016) Automated Detection and Guessing Without Semantics of Sender-Receiver Relations in Computer-Mediated Discourses. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Information Integration and Web-based Applications and Services (iiWAS ’16). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 170–178. Educause (2016) The 2016 Horizon Report. Downloaded from: https://library.educause.edu/topics/teaching-and-learning/learning-analytics. Eggers, D. (2013) The Circle. Knopf. Elgon, M. (2018) The Case Against Teaching Kids to be Polite to Alexa. Mind and Machine. Downloaded from: https://www.fastcompany.com/40588020/the-caseagainst-teaching-kids-to-be-polite-to-alexa. Eliot, C., and Woolf, B. (1994) Reasoning about the User Within a Simulation-Based Real-Time Training System. In Proceedings of 4th International Conference on User Modeling, Mitre Corp., Bedford, MA. Elrod, S., Bruce, R., Gold, R., Goldberg, D., Halasz, F., Janssen, W., Lee, D., McCall, K., Pedersen, E., Pier, K., Tang, J., and Welch, B. (1992) Liveboard: A Large Interactive Display Supporting Group Meetings, Presentations and Remote Collaboration. In Proceedings of CHI '92. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 599–607. Empson, R. (2012) Google Biz Chief: Over 10M Websites Now Using Google Analytics. Retrieved from http://techcrunch.com/2012/04/12/google-analytics-officially-at-10m/. Erickson, T., and Kellogg, W. A. (2000) Social Translucence: An Approach to Designing Systems that Support Social Processes, Transactions of Computer-Human Interaction, 7(1), 59–83. Erickson, T. D. (1990) Working with Interface Metaphors. In B.Laurel (ed.) The Art of Human–Computer Interface Design. Addison-Wesley, Boston. Erickson, T. D., Smith, D. N., Kellogg, W. A., Laff, M., Richards, J. T., and Bradner, E. (1999) Socially Translucent Systems: Social Proxies, Persistent Conversation and the Design of ‘Babble'. In Proceedings of CHI '99, pp. 72–79. Eysenck, M., and Brysbaert, M. (2018) Fundamentals of Cognition. 3rd Edition. Routledge. Fernaeus, Y., and Tholander, J. (2006) Finding Design Qualities in a Tangible Programming Space. In Proceedings of CHI 2006. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 447– 456. Fernández-Luque, F., Zapata, J., Ruiz, R., and Iborra, E. (2009) A Wireless Sensor Network for Assisted Living at Home of Elderly People, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 5602. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 65–74. Ferreira, J., Sharp, H., and Robinson, H. (2012) Agile Development and User Experience Design Integration as an On-going Achievement in Practice. In Proceedings of Agile 2012, Dallas, Texas. Ferreira, J., Sharp, H., and Robinson, H.M. (2011) User Experience Design and Agile Development: Managing Cooperation Through Articulation Work. In: Software Practice and Experience, 41(9), 963–974. Fetterman, D. M. (2010) Ethnography: Step by Step (3rd edn). Applied Social Research Methods Series, Vol. 17. SAGE. Fialho, P., and Coheur, L. (2015) ChatWoz: Chatting through a Wizard of Oz. In Proceedings of the 17th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS ’15). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 423–424. Fishkin, K. P. (2004) A Taxonomy for and Analysis of Tangible Interfaces, Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 8, 347–358. Fiske, J. (1994) Audiencing: Cultural Practice and Cultural Studies. In N. K. Denzin and Y. S. Lincoln (eds) Handbook of Qualitative Research. SAGE, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 189–198. Fitts, P. M. (1954) The Information Capacity of the Human Motor System in Controlling Amplitude of Movement, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47, 381–391. Flanagan, J. C. (1954) The Critical Incident Technique, Psychological Bulletin, 51, 327– 358. Fogg, B.J. (2009) A Behavior Model for Persuasive Design. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology (Persuasive ’09). ACM, New York, NY, Article 40, 7 pages. Folmer, E., Yuan, B., Carr, D., and Sapre, M. (2009) TextSL: A Command-Based Virtual World Interface for the Visually Impaired. In Proceedings 11th international ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility, pp. 59–66. Fontana, A., and Frey, J. H. (2005). The Interview: From Neutral Stance to Political Involvement. In N. K.Denzin and Y. S.Lincoln (eds) The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research (3rd edn), pp. 695–727. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. Foong, E., Gergle, D., and Gerber, E.M. (2017) Novice and Expert Sensemaking of Crowdsourced Feedback. In Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 1, 2, Article 45. Forsell, C., and Johansson, J. (2010) An Heuristic Set for Evaluation in Information Visualization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI ’10), Giuseppe Santucci (ed.). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 199–206. Friedman, N., and Cabral, A. (2018) Using a Telepresence Robot to Improve Self-Efficacy of People with Developmental Disabilities. In Proceedings of the 20th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS ’18). ACM, New York, NY. 489–491. Froehlich, J., Findlater, L., and Landay, J. (2010) The Design of Eco-Feedback Technology. In Proceedings of CHI '10, ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1999–2008. Furniss, D., and Blandford, A. (2006) Understanding Emergency Dispatch in Terms of Distributed Cognition: A Case Study, Ergonomics, 49(12/13), October, pp. 1174– 1203. Gabrielli, S., Rogers, Y., and Scaife, M. (2000) Young Children's Spatial Representations Developed Through Exploration of a Desktop Virtual Reality Scene, Education and Information Technologies, 5(4), 251–262. Galitz, W. O. (1997) The Essential Guide to User Interface Design. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York. Gallo, A. (2017) A Refresher on A/B Testing, Harvard Business Review. Downloaded from https://hbr.org/2017/06/a-refresher-on-ab-testing. Gardner, H., and Davis, K. (2014) The App Generation: How Today's Youth Navigate Identity, intimacy, and Imagination in a Digital World. Yale University Press. Garrett, J. J. (2010) The Elements of User Experience: User-Centered Design for the Web and Beyond (2nd edn). New Riders Press. Gaver, B., Dunne, T., and Pacenti, E. (1999) Cultural Probes, ACM Interactions Magazine January/February, 21–29. Gibson, J. (2014) Introduction to Game Design, Prototyping, and Development. Addison Wesley. Gigante, M. A. (1993) Virtual Reality: Enabling Technologies. In R. A. Earnshaw, M. A. Gigante and H. Jones (eds) Virtual Reality Systems. Academic Press, London, pp. 15–25. Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P., and the ABC Research Group (1999) Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart. Oxford University Press, New York. Glaser, B. G. (1992) Basics of Grounded Theory: Emergence vs Forcing. Sociology Press. Glaser, B. G., and Strauss, A. (1967) Discovery of Grounded Theory. Aldine, London. Golsteijn, C., Gallacher, S., Koeman, L., Wall, L., Andberg, S., Rogers, Y., and Capra, L. (2015) VoxBox: a Tangible Machine That Gathers Opinions from the Public at Events. In Proc. of TEI 2015. ACM. Gooch, D., Barker, M., Hudson, L. Kelly, R., Kortuem, G., van der Linden, J., Petre, M., Brown, R., Klis-Davies, A., Forbes, H., Mackinnon, J., Macpherson, R., and Walton, C. (2018) Amplifying Quiet Voices: Challenges and Opportunities for Participatory Design at an Urban Scale. ACMTransactions on Computer-Human Interaction. 25, 1, 2. Gosper, J., Agathos, J-L., Rutter, R., and Coatta, T. (2011) Case Study: UX Design and Agile: A Natural Fit? Communications of the ACM, 54(1), 54–60. Gothelf, J and Seiden, J. (2016) Lean UX: Designing Great Products with Agile Teams (2nd edition). O'Reilly. Gottesdiener, E., and Gorman, M. (2012) Discover to Deliver: Product Planning and Analysis. EBG Consulting, Inc. Gould, J. D., and Lewis, C. H. (1985) Designing for Usability: Key Principles and What Designers Think, Communications of the ACM, 28(3), 300–311. Granollers, T. (2018) Usability Evaluation with Heuristics, Beyond Nielsen's list. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Advances in Human Computer Interaction. pp. 60–65. Gray, C.M., Kou, Y., Battles, B., Hoggatt, J., and Toombs, A.L. (2018) The Dark (Patterns) Side of UX Design. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 534, 14 pages. Greenberg, S., Carpendale, S., Marquardt, N., and Buxton, B. (2012) Sketching User Experiences. Morgan Kaufmann. Griffiths, A. (2014) How Paro the Robot Seal is Being Used to Help UK Dementia Patients. Downloaded from: http://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/08/paro-robot-seal-dementiapatients-nhs-japan. Grison, E., Gyselinck, V., and Burkhardt, J-M. (2013) Using the Critical Incidents Technique to Explore Variables Related to Users' Experience of Public Transport Modes. In Proceedings of ECCE ’13 Proceedings of the 31st European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics, Article No. 21, ACM. Grosse-Hering, B., Mason, J., Aliakseyeu, D., Bakker, C., and Desmet, P. (2013) Slow Design for Meaningful Interactions. In Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'13). ACM, New York, NY, pp.3431–3440. Grudin, J. (1989) The Case Against User Interface Consistency, Communications of the ACM, 32(10), 1164–1173. Gubbels, M., and Froehlich, J. (2014) Physically Computing Physical Computing: Creative Tools for Building with Physical Materials and Computation. IDC ’14 Extended Abstracts. Guha, M. L., Druin, A., and Fails, J.A. (2013) Cooperative Inquiry Revisited: Reflections of the Past and Guidelines for the Future of Intergenerational Co-Design. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction, 1(1), 14–23. Gui, X., Chen, Y., Caldeira, C., Xiao, D., and Chen, Y. (2017) When Fitness Meets Social Networks: Investigating Fitness Tracking and Social Practices on WeRun. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '17). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1647–1659. Gun, R. J. A., and Billinghurst, L. M. (2016) A Comparative Study of Simulated Augmented Reality Displays for Vehicle Navigation. In Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (OzCHI '16). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 40–48. Gunther, V. A., Burns, D. J., and Payne, D. J. (1986) Text Editing Performance as a Function of Training with Command Terms of Differing Lengths and Frequencies, SIGCHI Bulletin, 18, 57–59. Hampton, K., and Wellman, B. (2003) Neighboring in Netville: How the Internet Supports Community and Social Capital in a Wired Suburb. City and Community, 2, 4, 277–311. Handel, D., Hochman, J., and Santo, D. (2015) Visualizing Teacher Tweets: Finding Professional Learning Networks in Topical Networks. ASIST, 2015, 1–3. Hansen, D., Shneiderman, B., Smith, M. A., and Himelboim, I. (2019) Analyzing Social Media Networks with NodeXL: Insights from a Connected World: (2nd ed.). Elsevier Publishers. Harari, G. M., Gosling, S. D., Wang, R., Chen, F., Chen, Z., Campbell, A. T. (2017) Patterns of Behavior Change in Students Over an Academic Term: A Preliminary Study of Activity and Sociability Behaviors Using Smartphone Sensing Methods, Computers in Human Behavior, 67, 129–138. Harboe, G., and Huang, E.M. (2015) Real-World Affinity Diagramming Practices: Bridging the Paper-Digital Gap. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 95– 104. HarjuniemiE., and Häkkilä, J. (2018) Smart Handbag for Remembering Keys. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Academic Mindtrek Conference (MindTrek 2018). New York, NY: ACM Press, pp. 244–247. Harley, A. (2018a) Visibility of System Status. Downloaded from: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/visibility-system-status/ Harley, A. (2018b) UX Guidelines for Ecommerce Homepages, Category Pages, and Product Listing Pages. Downloaded from: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ecommerce-homepages-listing-pages/. Harley, A. (2018c) UX Expert Reviews: Downloaded from: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ux-expert-reviews/. Harman, M., Jia, Y., and Zhang, Y. (2012) App Store Mining and Analysis: MSR for App Stores. In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR 12),108–111. Harper, R., Rodden, T., Rogers, Y., and Sellen, A. (2008) Being Human: HCI in the Year 2020. Microsoft (free copies from: http://research.microsoft.com/enus/um/cambridge/projects/hci2020/). Harrison, E. (ed.) (2009) Media Space 20 + Years of Mediated Life. Springer. Hartson, H. R., and Hix, D. (1989) Toward Empirically Derived Methodologies and Tools for Human–Computer Interface Development, International Journal of Man– Machine Studies, 31, 477–494. Hassenzahl, M. (2010) Experience Design: Technology for All the Right Reasons. Morgan & Claypool. Hatch, M. (2014) The Maker Movement Manifesto. McGraw Hill. Hayashi, E., Maas, M., and Hong, J.I. (2014) Wave to Me: User Identification Using Body Lengths and Natural Gestures, In Proceedings of CHI 14, pp. 3453–3462. Hayes. G.R. (2011) The Relationship of Action Research to Human-Computer Interaction. ACM Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction, 18, 3, Article 15, 20 pages. Hazas, M., Bernheim Brush, A.J., and Scott, J. (2012) Sustainability Does not Begin with the Individual, Interactions, 19(5), 14–17. Hazlewood, W., Dalton, N. S., Rogers, Y., Marshall, P., and Hertrich, S. (2010) Bricolage and Consultation: A Case Study to Inform the Development of Large-Scale Prototypes for HCI Research. In Proceedings of Designing Interactive Systems, DIS 2010. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 380–388. Heath, C., and Luff, P. (1992) Collaboration and Control: Crisis Management and Multimedia Technology in London Underground Line Control Rooms. In Proceedings of CSCW ’921(1&2), 69–94. Heath, C., Hindmarsh, J., and Luff, P. (2010) Video in Qualitative Research. SAGE. Heer, J., and Bostock, M. (2010) Crowdsourcing Graphical Perception: Using Mechanical Turk to Assess Visualization Design. In Proceedings of CHI 2010. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 203–212. Hektner, J. M., Schmidt, J. A., and Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2006) Experience Sampling Method: Measuring the Quality of Everyday Life. SAGE. Hendriks-Jansen, H. (1996) Catching Ourselves in the Act: Situated Activity, Interactive Emergence, Evolution, and Human Thought. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Henkel, L. A. (2014) Point-and-Shoot Memories The Influence of Taking Photos on Memory for a Museum Tour. Psychological science, 25.2, 396–402. Henschke, M., Gedeon, T., and Jones, R. (2015) Touchless Gestural Interaction with Wizard-of-Oz: Analysing User Behaviour. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human Interaction (OzCHI '15), ACM, New York, NY, pp. 207–211. Hicks, J. (2012) The Icon Handbook. Five Simple Steps Publishing Ltd. Hine, C. (2000) Virtual Ethnography. SAGE. Hodges, S.Hartmann, B., Gellersen, H., and Schmidt, A. (2014) A Revolution in the Making [Guest editors' introduction]. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 13(3): 18–21. Hodges, S., Scott, J., Sentance, S., Miller, C., Villar, N., Schwiderski-Grosche, S., Hammil, K., and Johnston, S. (2013) .NETGadgeteer: A New Platform for K–12 Computer Science Education. In Proceedings of SIGCSE ’13, ACM, 391–396. Hodges, S., Williams, L., Berry, E., Izadi, S., Srinivasan, J., Butler, A., Smyth, G., Kapur, N., and Wood, K. (2006) SenseCam: A Retrospective Memory Aid. In P.Dourish and A.Friday (eds) Ubicomp 2006, LNCS 4206. Springer-Verlag, pp. 177–193. Hofte H. T., Jensen, K. L., Nurmi, P., and Froehlich, J. (2009) Mobile Living Labs 09: Methods and Tools for Evaluation in the Wild. In In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI ’09). ACM, New York, NY, Article 107, 2 pages. Hollingshead, T., and Novick, D. G. (2007) Usability Inspection Methods After 15 Years of Research and Practice. SIGDOC2007, pp. 249–255. Hollis, V., Konrad, A., Springer, A., Antoun, M., Antoun, C., Martin, R., and Whittaker. S (2017) What Does All This Data Mean for My Future Mood? Actionable Analytics and Targeted Reflection for Emotional Well Being. Human–Computer Interaction, 32 (5–6), 208–267. Holloway, C., and Dawes, H. (2016) Disrupting the World of Disability: The Next Generation of Assistive Technologies and Rehabilitation Practices. Healthcare Technology Letters, 3 (4), 254–256. Holtzblatt, K. (2001) Contextual Design: Experience in Real Life. Mensch & Computer. Holtzblatt, K., and Beyer, H. (2017) Contextual Design (2nd ed.) Design for life. Morgan Kaufmann. Holtzblatt, K., and Jones, S. (1993) Contextual Inquiry: A Participatory Technique for Systems Design. In D.Schuler and A.Namioka (eds) Participatory Design: Principles and practice. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 177–210. Höök, K. (2018) Designing with the Body Somaesthetic Interaction Design. MIT Hornbæk, K., and Hertzum, M. (2017) Technology Acceptance and User Experience: A Review of the Experiential Component in HCI. Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction, 24, 5, Article 33, 30 pages. Hornecker, E. (2005) A Design Theme for Tangible Interaction: Embodied Facilitation. In Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, ECSCW ’05, 18–22 September, Paris. Kluwer/Springer, pp. 23– 43. Hornecker, E.Marshall, P., and Jörn Hurtienne, J. (2017) Locating Theories of Embodiment Along Three Axes: 1st–3d Person, Body-Context, Practice-Cognition. Workshop position paper for CHI 2017 workshop on Soma-Based Design Theory. Downloaded from: http://www.ehornecker.de/Papers/SomaestheticWSembodimentshortie.pdf Horton, S. (2005) Access by Design: A Guide to Universal Usability for Web Designers. New Riders Press, Indianapolis, IN. Houben, S., Golsteijn, C., Gallacher, S., Johnson, R., Bakker, S., Marquardt, N., Capra, L., and Rogers, Y. (2016) Physikit: Data Engagement Through Physical Ambient Visualizations in the Home. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '16). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1608–1619. Howells, L. (2011). A Guide to Heuristic Website Reviews http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2011/12/16/a-guide-to-heuristic-websitereviews/ (accessed August, 2014). Hsu, Y., Dille, P., Cross, J., Dias, B., Sargent, R., and Nourbakhsh, I. (2017) Community-Empowered Air Quality Monitoring System. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '17). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1607–1619. Huff, D. (1991) How to Lie with Statistics. Penguin. Hutchings, D. (2012) An Investigation of Fitts' Law in a Multiple-Display Environment. In ACM Proceedings of CHI'12. Hutchings, D., Smith, G., Meyers, B., Czerwinski, M., and Robertson, G. (2004) Display Space Usage and Window Management Operation Comparisons Between Single Monitor and Multiple Monitor Users. In Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, AVI 2004, pp. 32–39. Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the Wild. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Hutchins, E., Holan, J. D., and Norman, D. (1986) Direct manipulation interfaces. In D.Norman and S. W.Draper (eds) User Centered System Design. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 87–124. Hutchinson, H., Mackay, W., Westerlund, B., Bederson, B. B., Druin, A., Plaisant, C., Beaudouin-Lafon, M., Conversy, S., Evans, H., Hansen, H., Roussel, N., and Eiderbäck, B. (2003) Technology Probes: Inspiring Design for and with Families, In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '03). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 17–24. IEEE Ethically Aligned Design (2018), Downloaded from: https://ethicsinaction.ieee.org/. Isaacs, E., Konrad, A., Walendowski, A., Lennig, T., Hollis, V., and Whittaker, S. (2013) Echoes from the Past: How Technology Mediated Reflection Improves Well-Being. In Proceedings of CHI '13, ACM, 1071–1080. Ishii, H., and Ullmer, B. (1997) Tangible Bits: Towards Seamless Interfaces Between People, Bits and Atoms. In Proceedings CHI 1997. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 234–241. Ishii, H., Kobayashi, M., and Grudin, J. (1993) Integration of Interpersonal Space and Shared Work-Space: Clearboard Design and Experiments. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 11(4), 349–375. Jadhav, D., Bhutkar, G., and Mehta, V. (2013) Usability Evaluation of Messenger Applications for Android Phones Using Cognitive Walkthrough. In Proceedings of APCHI'2013, pp. 9–18. Jaidka, S, Reeves, S., and Bowen, J. (2017) Modelling Safety-Critical Devices: Coloured Petri Nets and Z. In Proceedings of ECIS, the ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems, pp. 51–56. Jang, J., Zhao, D., Hong, W., Park, Y., and Yong Yi, M. (2016) Uncovering the Underlying Factors of Smart TV UX over Time: A Multi-study, Mixed-method Approach, In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Interactive Experiences for TV and Online Video (TVX ’16). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 3–12. Jaques, N., Rudovic, O., Taylor, S., Sano, A., and Picard, R. (2017) Predicting Tomorrow's Mood, Health, and Stress Level using Personalized Multitask Learning and Domain Adaptation. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 48, 17–33. Javornik, A., Freeman, R., and Moutinho, A. (2017) Retail Experience With Face Application. Free to download from https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B076C41L31/ref=rdr\_ext\_sb\_ti\_hist\_2. Javornik, A., Rogers, Y., Gander, D., and Moutinho, A. (2017) MagicFace: Stepping into Character through an Augmented Reality Mirror. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'17). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 4838–4849. Johnson, J. (2014) Designing with the Mind in Mind: Simple Guide to Understanding User Interface Design Rules. Morgan Kaufmann. Johnson, J., and Henderson, A. (2002) Conceptual Models: Begin by Designing What to Design, Interactions January/February, 25–32. Johnson, J., and Henderson, A. (2012) Conceptual Models: Core to Good Design. Morgan & Claypool Publishers. Johnson, J., and Finn, K. (2017) Designing User Interfaces for an Aging Population: Towards Universal Design. Morgan Kaufmann. Johnson, R., Van der Linden, J., and Rogers, Y. (2010). To Buzz or Not to Buzz: Improving Awareness of Posture Through Vibrotactile Feedback. In Whole Body Interaction Workshop, CHI 2010. ACM. Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983) Mental Models. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Jokela, T., Ojala, J., and Olsson, T. (2015) A Diary Study on Combining Multiple Information Devices in Everyday Activities and Tasks. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 3–12. Jones, L. A., and Sarter, N. B. (2008) Tactile Displays: Guidance for their Design and Application, Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 50, 90–111. Joonhwan, L., Forlizzi, J., and Hudson, S. E. (2005) Studying the Effectiveness of MOVE: A Contextually Optimized In-Vehicle Navigation System. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '05). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 571–580. Jordan, B., and Henderson, A. (1995) Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practice. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(1), 39–103. Joshi, S., Nistala, P.V., Jani, H., Sakhardande, P., and Dsouza, T. (2017) User-Centered Design Journey for Pattern Development. In Proceedings of the 22nd European Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs (EuroPLoP ’17). ACM, New York, NY, Article 23, 19 pages. Jupp, V. (ed.) (2006) The SAGE Dictionary of Social Research Methods. SAGE. Kahn, R., and Cannell, C. (1957) The Dynamics of Interviewing. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York. Kahneman, D. (2011) Thinking, Fast and Slow. Penguin. Kammer, D., Schmidt, D., Keck, M., and Groh, R. (2013) Developing Mobile Interface Metaphors and Gestures. In Proceedings of MobileHCI, ACM Press, pp. 516–521. Kang, S., Clegg, T., Norooz, L., Froehlich, J., and Byrne V. (2018) Prototyping and Simulating Complex Systems with Paper Craft and Augmented Reality: An Initial Investigation. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 320–328. Kaninsky, M., Gallacher, S., and Rogers. Y. (2018) Confronting People's Fears about Bats: Combining Multi-modal and Environmentally Sensed Data to Promote Curiosity and Discovery. In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’18). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 931–943. Karapanos, E., Martensi, J.-B., and Hassenzahl, M. (2009) Accounting for Diversity in Subjective Judgments. In Proceedings of CHI 2009. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 639– 648. Karat, C.-M. (1994) A Comparison of User Interface Evaluation Methods. In J.Nielsen and R. L.Mack (eds) Usability Inspection Methods. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York. Kari, T., Arjoranta, J., and Salo, M. (2017) Behavior Change Types with Pokémon GO. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games (FDG ’17). ACM, New York, NY, Article 33, 10 pages. Kawa, L. (2018) Two Major Apple Shareholders Push for Study of iPhone Addiction in Children. Available at: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-01- 08/jana-calpers-push-apple-to-study-iphone-addiction-in-children. Kazemitabaar, M., McPeak, J., Jiao, A., He, L., Outing, T., and Froehlich, J.E. (2017) MakerWear: A Tangible Approach to Interactive Wearable Creation for Children. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '17). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 133–145. Keirnan, A., Ahmadpour, N., Pedell, S., and Mayasari, A. (2015) Lights, Camera, Action: Using Animations to Co-Evaluate User Experience Scenarios. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human Interaction (OzCHI '15), ACM, New York, NY, pp. 492–496. Kelley, T. with Littman, J. (2016) The Art of Innovation. Profile Books, Croydon, Surrey. Kempton, W. (1986) Two Theories of Home Heat Control, Cognitive Science 10, 75–90. Kerr, S. J., Tan, O., Chua, J. C. (2014) Cooking Personas: Goal-Directed Design Requirements in the Kitchen, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 72, 255–274. Khalid, H., Shihab, E., Nagappan, M., and Hassan, A.E. (2015) What Do Mobile App Users Complain About? IEEE Software, May/June, 70–77. Kim, H., Coutrix, C., and Roudaut, A. (2018) KnobSlider: Design of a Shape-Changing UI for Parameter Control. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 339, 13 pages. Kim, J., and HastakM. (2018) Social Network Analysis: Characteristics of Online Social Networks after a Disaster. International Journal of Information Management, 38, 86–96. Kim, S. (1990) Interdisciplinary Cooperation. In B.Laurel (ed.) The Art of Human– Computer Interface Design. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. Kim, Y. (2015). Libero: On-the-Go Crowdsourcing for Package Delivery. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’15). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 121–126. Kinshumann, K., Glerum, K., Greenberg, S., Aul, G., Orgovan, V., Nichols, G., Grant, D., Loihle, G., and Hunt, G. (2011) Debugging in the (Very) Large: Ten Years of Implementation and Experience, CACM, 54(7), 111–116. Kirk, D. S., Durrant, A., Wood, G., Leong, T.W., and Wright, P. (2016) Understanding the Sociality of Experience in Mobile Music Listening with Pocketsong. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ’16). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 50–61. Kirkham, R., Mellor, S., Green, D., Lin, J-S., Ladha, K., Ladha, C., Jackson, D., Olivier, P., Wright, P., and Ploetz, T. (2013) The Break-Time Barometer: An Exploratory System for Workplace Break-Time Social Awareness. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’13). ACM, 73–82. Kirsh, D. (2010) Thinking with External Representations, AI & Society. Online version: downloaded from www.springerlink.com/content/5913082573146k68/ (retrieved May 1, 2010). Kirsh, D. (2013) Embodied Cognition and the Magical Future of Interaction Design, ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 20, No. 1, Article 3, 30 pages. Kjeldskov, J., and Skov, M. (2014) Was it Worth the Hassle? Ten Years of Mobile HCI Research Discussions on Lab and Field Evaluations. In ACM Proceedings of MobileHCI. Toronto, Canada, September 23–26. Klein, L. (2014) What Do We Actually Mean by ‘Sociotechnical'? On Values, Boundaries and the Problems of Language. Applied Ergonomics, 45, 137–142. Klemmer, S. R., Hartmann, B., and Takayama, L. (2006) How Bodies Matter: Five Themes for Interaction Design. In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, DIS 2006. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 140–149. Klemmer, S. R., Newman, M. W., Farrell, R., Bilezikjian, M., and Landay, J. A. (2001) The Designer's Outpost: A Tangible Interface for Collaborative Website Design. In Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1–10. Knapp, J. with Zeratsky, J., and Kowitz, B. (2016) Sprint: How to Solve Big Problems and Test New Ideas in Just Five Days. Bantam Press, UK. Knowles, B., and Hanson, V. L. (2018) The Wisdom of Older Technology (Non-Users). In Communications of the ACM, 61, 3, 72–77. Kohavi, R. (2012) Online Controlled Experiments: Introduction, Learnings, and Humbling Statistics. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on Recommender systems (RecSys '12). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1–2. Kohavi, R., and Longbotham, R. (2015) Unexpected Results in Online Controlled Experiments. SIGKDD Explorations, 12, 2, 31–35. Kollman, J., Sharp, H., and Blandford, A. (2009) The Importance of Identify and Vision To User Experience Designers On Agile Projects. In Proceedings of the 2009 Agile Conference, IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC. Komninos, A. (2017) How Emotions Impact Cognition. Downloaded from: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/how-emotions-impactcognition. Kozinets, V. (2010) Netnography. SAGE. Kraut, R., Fish, R., Root, R., and Chalfonte, B. (1990) Informal Communications in Organizations: Form, Function and Technology. In S.Oskamp and S.Krug (eds) Don't Make Me Think. New Riders/Peachpit. Krippendorff, K. (2013) Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology (3rd edn). SAGE Publications. Krug, S. (2014) Don't Make Me Think, Revisited: A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability (3rd edn). Pearson. Kuhn, T. S. (1972/1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (2nd edn). University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Kushniruk A., Monkman H., Borycki E., and Kannry J. (2015) User-Centered Design and Evaluation of Clinical Information Systems: A Usability Engineering Perspective. In: Patel V., Kannampallil T., and Kaufman D. (eds.) Cognitive Informatics for Biomedicine. Health Informatics. Springer. Lakoff, G., and Johnson, M. (1980) Metaphors We Live By. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Lane, N. D., and Georgiev, P. (2015). Can Deep Learning Revolutionize Mobile Sensing? In Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Application. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 117–122. Law, E. L., Roto, V., Hassenzahl, M., Vermeeren, A. P., and Kort, J. (2009) Understanding, Scoping and Defining User Experience: A Survey Approach. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2009. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 719–728. Lazar, J., Feng, H. J., and Hochheiser, H. (2017) Research Methods in Human-Computer Interaction. (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Elsevier/Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. Lazar, J., Goldstein, D., and Taylor, A. (2015). Ensuring Digital Accessibility Through Process and Policy. Waltham, MA: Elsevier/Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. Lazar, J., Jaeger, P., Adams, A., Angelozzi, A., Manohar, J., Marciniak, J., Murphy, J.Norasteh, P., Olsen, C., Poneres, E., Scott, T., Vaidya, N., and Walsh, J. (2010) Up in the Air: Are Airlines Following the New DOT Rules on Equal Pricing for People with Disabilities When Websites are Inaccessible? Government Information Quarterly, 27(4), 329–336. Lechelt, Z., Rogers, Y., Yuill, N., Nagl, L., Ragone, G., and Marquardt, N. (2018) Inclusive Computing in Special Needs Classrooms: Designing for All. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 517, 12 pages. Ledgard, H., Singer, A., and Whiteside, J. (1981) Directions in Human Factors for Interactive Systems. In G. Goos and J. Hartmanis (eds) Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 103. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Ley, B., Ogonowski1, C., Jan Hess, M. M., Race, N., Randall, D., Rouncefield, M., and Wulf, V. (2015) At Home with Users: A Comparative View of Living Labs. Interacting with Computers, Volume 27, Issue 1, pp. 21–35 Li, J., Cho, I., and Wartell I. (2018) Evaluation of Cursor Offset on 3D Selection in VR. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Spatial User Interaction (SUV'18), pp.120–129. Lim, B.Y., Dey, A.K., and Avrahami, D. (2009) Why and Why Not Explanations Improve the Intelligibility of Context-Aware Intelligent Systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '09). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 2119–2128. Lim, S. L., and Finkelstein, A. (2012) StakeRare: Using Social Networks and Collaborative Filtering for Large-Scale Requirements Elicitation, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 38(2), 707–735. Lim, Y.-K., Stolterman, E., and Tenenburg, J. (2008) The Anatomy of Prototypes: Prototypes as Filters, Prototypes as Manifestations of Design Ideas, ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 15(2). Lin, J., Newman, M.W., Hong, J.I., and Landay, J.A. (2000) DENIM: Finding a Tighter Fit Between Tools and Practice for Website Design. In Proceedings of CHI '00, 510– 517. Lingel, J. (2012) Ethics and Dilemmas of Online Ethnography. In CHI '12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’12). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 41–50. Liu, X., Feng, X., Pan, S., Peng, J., and Zhao, X. (2018) Skeleton Tracking Based on Kinect Camera and the Application in Virtual Reality System. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Virtual Reality, pp. 21–25. Liu, Y., and Räihä, K.-J. (2010) Predicting Chinese Text Entry Speeds on Mobile Phones. In Proceedings of CHI 2010: HCI in China, April 10–15, Atlanta, GA, pp. 2183–2192. Loma, N. (2018) WTF is Dark Pattern Design? Downloaded from: https://techcrunch.com/2018/07/01/wtf-is-dark-pattern-design/. Loranger, H., and Laubheimer, P. (2017) The State of UX Agile Development, downloaded from https://www.nngroup.com/articles/state-ux-agile-development/. Lottridge, D.M., Rosakranse, C., Oh, C.S., Westwood, S.J., Baldoni, K.A., Mann, A.S., and Nass, C.I. (2015) The Effects of Chronic Multitasking on Analytical Writing. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 2967–2970. Lotz, N., Sharp, H., Woodroffe, M., Blyth., Rajah, D., and Ranganai, T. (2014) Framing Behaviours in Novice Interaction Designers, In Proceedings of DRS 2014 Design's Big Debates. pp. 1178–1190. Luce, K. H., Winzelberg, A. J., Das, S., Osborn, M. I., Bryson, S. W., and Taylor, C. B. (2003) Reliability of Self-Report: Paper Versus Online Administration, Computers in Human Behavior (accessed online January 20, 2005). Lucero, A. (2015) Using Affinity Diagrams to Evaluate Interactive Prototypes. In Proceedings of INTERACT 2015, Part II, LNCS 9297, pp. 231–248. Ludwig, T., Kotthaus, C., and Pipek, V. (2016) Situated and Ubiquitous Crowdsourcing with Volunteers During Disasters. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct (UbiComp ’16). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1441–1447. Lueg, C., Banks, B., Michalek, J., Dimsey, J., and Oswin, D. (2019) Close Encounters of the 5<sup>th</sup> Kind: Recognizing System-Initiated Engagement as Interaction Type. JASIST. Wiley Online. Lugmayr, A., Grenfeld, A., and Zhang, D.J. (2017) Selected Advanced Data Visualizations: The UX-Machine, Cultural Visualisation, Cognitive Big Data, and Communication of Health and Wellness Data. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion (WWW ’17 Companion), pp. 247–251. Mackay, W., and Fayard, A.-L. (1997) HCI, Natural Science and Design: A Framework for Triangulation Across Disciplines. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices, Methods, and Techniques (DIS'97) pp. 223–234. MacKenzie, I. S. (1992) Fitts' Law as a Research and Design Tool in Human–Computer Interaction, Human–Computer Interaction 7, 91–139. MacKenzie, I. S. (1995). Movement Time Prediction in Human-Computer Interfaces. In R. M.Baecker, W. A. S.Buxton, J.Grudin, and S.Greenberg (eds.), Readings in Human-Computer Interaction (2nd edn) (pp. 483–493). Los Altos, CA: Kaufmann Maglio, P. P., Matlock, T., Raphaely, D., Chernicky, B., and Kirsh, D. (1999) Interactive Skill in Scrabble. In Proceedings of Twenty-first Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ. Maguire, M. (2014) Socio-Technical Systems and Interaction Design—21st Century Relevance. Applied Ergonomics, 45, 162–170. Maher, M. L., Preece, J., Yeh, T., Boston, C., Grace, K., Pasupuleti, A., and Stangl, A. (2014) NatureNet: A Model for Crowdsourcing the Design of Citizen Science Systems. In Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW Companion ’14) pp. 201–204. New York: ACM. Mahyar, N., James, M. R., Ng, M. M., Wu, R. A., and Dow, S. P. (2018) CommunityCrit: Inviting the Public to Improve and Evaluate Urban Design Ideas through Micro-Activities. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 195, 14 pages. Maiden, N. A. M., Ncube, C., and Robertson, S. (2007) Can Requirements Be Creative? Experiences with an Enhanced Air Space Management System. In Proceedings of ICSE ’07. Malamed, C. (2009) Visual Language for Designers: Principles for Creating Graphics that People Understand. Rockport Publishers. Mancini, C., Rogers, Y., Bandara, A.K., Coe, T., Joinson, A.N., Jedrzejczyk, L. Price, B. A. Thomas, K., and Nuseibeh, B. (2010) ContraVision: Exploring Users' Reactions to Futuristic Technology. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '10). ACM, New York, NY, pp.153–162. Mancini, C., Thomas, K., Rogers, Y., Price, B. A., Jedrzejczyk, L., Bandara, A. K., Joinson, A. N., and Nuseibeh, B. (2009) From Spaces to Places: Emerging Contexts in Mobile Privacy, UbiComp 2009, September 30–October 3. Mankoff, J., Fait, H., and Tran, T. (2005) Is Your Web Page Accessible? a Comparative Study of Methods for Assessing Web Page Accessibility for the Blind. In Proceedings of CHI 2003. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 41–50. Mankoff, J., Kravets, R., and Blevis, E. (2008) Some Computer Science Issues in Creating a Sustainable World, Computer, 41(8), 102–105. Mann, S. (1997) An Historical Account of the ‘WearComp' and ‘WearCam' Inventions Developed for Applications in Personal Imaging. In The First International Symposium on Wearable Computers: Digest of Papers. IEEE Computer Society, pp. 66–73. Manuel, D., Moore, D., and Charissis, V. (2012) An Investigation into Immersion in Games Through Motion Control and Stereo Audio Reproduction, September 26–28 AM ’12: In Proceedings of the 7th Audio Mostly Conference: A Conference on Interaction with Sound pp. 124–129. Marquardt, N., Brudy, F., Liu, C., Bengler, B., and Holz. C. (2018) SurfaceConstellations: A Modular Hardware Platform for Ad-Hoc Reconfigurable Cross-Device Workspaces. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 354, 14 pages. Marsden, G., Maunder, A., and Parker, M. (2008) People Are People, but Technology is not Technology, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 366, 3795–3804. Marshall, P., and Hornecker, E. (2013) Theories of Embodiment in HCI. In The SAGE Handbook of Digital Technology Research. 144–158. Marshall, P., Price, S., and Rogers, Y. (2003) Conceptualizing Tangibles to Support Learning. In Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children, IDC 2003. ACM, New York, p. 101–109. Martin, A., Biddle, R., and Noble, J. (2009) XP Customer Practice: A Grounded Theory. In Proceedings of the 2009 Agile Conference, IEEE Computer Society, Washington DC. Mason, B. (2017) Virtual Reality has a Motion Sickness Problem. Downloaded from https://www.sciencenews.org/article/virtual-reality-has-motion-sickness-problem Maurya, A. (2018) IEEE Big Data 2017 Panel Discussion on Bias and Transparency. AI Matters, 4 (2). McCarthy, J., and Wright, P. (2004) Technology as Experience. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. McCullough, M. (2004) Digital Ground: Architecture, Pervasive Computing and Environmental Knowing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. McInerney, P. (2017) UX in Agile projects: Taking Stock After 12 Years, Interactions, March-April, 58–61. Mekler, E.D., Tuch, A.N., Martig, A.L., and Opwis, K. (2014) A Diary Study Exploring Game Completion and Player Experience. In Proceedings of the First ACM SIGGHI Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction In Play (CHI PLAY ’14). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 433–434. Mifsud, J. (2011) 12 Effective Guidelines for Breadcrumb Usability and SEO. Downloaded from https://usabilitygeek.com/12-effective-guidelines-forbreadcrumb-usability-and-seo/. Miller, G. (1956) The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information, Psychological Review 63, 81–97. Miller, L. (2006) Interaction Designers and Agile Development: A Partnership. In Proceedings of UPA 2006. Denver/Broomfield: Usability Professionals' Association. Miller, L. H., and Johnson, J. (1996) The Xerox Star: An Influential User Interface Design. In M.Rudisill, C.Lewis, P. G.Polson and T. D.McKay (eds) Human–Computer Interface Design. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. Mittelstadt, S., Behrisch, M., Weber, S., Schreck, T., Stoffel, A., Pompl, R., Keim, D., Last, H., and Zhang. L. (2012) Visual Analytics for The Big Data Era—A Comparative Review of State-of-The-Art Commercial Systems. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST) (VAST ’12). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, pp. 173–182. Miyake, N. (1986) Constructive Interaction and the Iterative Process of Understanding, Cognitive Science, 10(2) pp. 151–177. Molich, R., Laurel, B., Snyder, C., Quesenbery, W., and Wilson, C.E. (2001) Ethics in HCI, In CHI '01 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 217–218. Morrison, C., Villar, N., Thieme, A., Ashktorab, Z., Taysom, E., Salandin, O., Cletheroe, D., Saul, G., Blackwell, A.F., Edge, D., Grayson, M., and Zhang. H. (2018) Torino: A Tangible Programming Language Inclusive of Children with Visual Disabilities. Human-Computer Interaction, 1–49. Morville, P. (2005) Ambient Findability. O'Reilly Media Inc. Müller, J., Oulasvirta, A., and Murray-Smith, R. (2017) Control Theoretic Models of Pointing. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 24, 4, Article 27, 36 pages. Müller-Tomfelde, C. (ed.) (2010) Tabletops: Horizontal Interactive Displays. Springer. Mullet, K., and Sano, D. (1995) Designing Visual Interfaces. Prentice Hall, Mountain View, CA. Mumford, E. (2006) The Story of Socio-technical Design: Reflections in its Successes, Failures, and Potential, Information Systems Journal, 16, 317–342. Muniz, F. (2016) An Introduction to Heuristic Evaluation. Downloaded from: https://usabilitygeek.com/heuristic-evaluation-introduction/. Nario-Redmond, M. R., Gospodinov, D., and Cobb, A. (2017) Crip for a Day: The Unintended Negative Consequences of Disability Simulations. Rehabilitation Psychology, 62(3), 324–333. Ncube, C., Oberndorf, P., and Kark, A. W. (2008) Opportunistic Software Development: Making Systems from What's Available, IEEE Software, 25(6), 38–41. Neil, T. (2014) Mobile Design Pattern Gallery (2nd edn). O'Reilly. Neustaedter, C., Venolia, G., Procyk, J., and Hawkins, D. (2016) To Beam or Not to Beam: A Study of Remote Telepresence Attendance at an Academic Conference. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW ’16). ACM, New York. pp. 418–431. Nevo, D., and Wade, M. R. (2007) How to avoid Disappointment by Design, Communications of the ACM, 50(4), 43–48. Nielsen (2014) www.useit.com. Nielsen, J. (1993) Usability Engineering. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. Nielsen, J. (1994a) Heuristic Evaluation. In J. Nielsen and R. L. Mack (eds) Usability Inspection Methods. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York. Nielsen, J. (1994b) Enhancing the Explanatory Power of Usability Heuristics. In Proceedings of CHI '94. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 152–158. Nielsen, J. (1999) Designing Web Usability: The Practice of Simplicity. New Riders Publishing Thousand Oaks, CA. Nielsen, J. (2000) Designing Web Usability. New Riders Press, Indianapolis, IN. Nielsen, J., and Li, A. (2017) Mega Menus Work Well for Site Navigation. Downloaded from https://www.nngroup.com/articles/mega-menus-work-well/. Nielsen, J., and Loranger, H. (2006) Prioritizing Web Usability. New Riders Press. Nielsen, J., and Mack, R.L. (eds) (1994) Usability Inspection Methods. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York. Nielsen, J., and Mohlich, R. (1990) Heuristic Evaluation of User Interfaces. In Proceedings of CHI '90. ACM, New York. Nielsen, J., and Norman, D. (2014) The Definition of User Experience, www.nngroup.com/articles/definition-user-experience/ (accessed July 2, 2014). Nielsen, J., and Tahir, M. (2002) Homepage Usability: 50 Websites Deconstructed. New Riders Press. Norman, D. (1983) Some Observations on Mental Models. In D. Gentner and A. L. Stevens (eds) Mental Models. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ. Norman, D. (1986) Cognitive Engineering. In D. Norman and S. W. Draper (eds) User Centered System Design. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 31–62. Norman, D. (1988) The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books, New York. Norman, D. (1993) Things That Make Us Smart. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. Norman, D. (1999) Affordances, Conventions and Design, ACM Interactions Magazine, May/June, 38–42. Norman, D. (2004) Beauty, Goodness, and Usability/Change Blindness. Human– Computer Interaction, 19(4), 311–318. Norman, D. (2005) Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things. Basic Books, New York. Norman, D. (2006) Why Doing User Observations First is Wrong, Interactions, July/Aug, 50. Norman, D. (2010) Natural Interfaces are Not Natural, Interactions, May/June, 6–10. Norman, D. (2013) The Design of Everyday Things. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. North, S, (2017) Hey, Where's My Hay?: Design Fictions in Horse-Computer Interaction. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Animal-Computer Interaction (ACI2017). ACM, New York, NY, Article 17, 5 pages. Nudelman, G. (2013) Android Design Patterns. John Wiley. O'Kaine, A.A., Rogers, Y., and Blandford, A.E. (2015) Concealing or Revealing Mobile Medical Devices? Designing for Onstage and Offstage Presentation. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1689–1698. O'Connaill, B., Whittaker, S., and Wilbur, S. (1993) Conversations Over Video Conferences: An Evaluation of the Spoken Aspects of Video-Mediated Communication, Human–Computer Interaction 8, 389–428. OfcomReport (2018) A Decade of Digital Dependency. Downloaded from https://www.ofcom.org.uk/about-ofcom/latest/features-and-news/decade-ofdigital-dependency. O'Hara, K., Gonzalez, G., Sellen, A., Penney, G., Varnavas, A. Mentis, H., Criminisi, A., Corish, R., Rouncefield, M., Dastur, N., and Carrell, T. (2013) Touchless Interaction in Surgery, Communications of the ACM, 57(1)70–77. Oliveira, N., Jun, E., and Reinecke, K. (2017) Citizen Science Opportunities in Volunteer-Based Online Experiments. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '17). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 6800– 6812. Oliver, J.L., Brereton, M., Watson, D.M., and Roe, P. (2018) Visualisations Elicit Knowledge to Refine Citizen Science Technology Design: Spectrograms Resonate with Birders. In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (OzCHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 133–144. Ophir, E., Nass, C. I., and Wagner, A. D. (2009) Cognitive Control in Media Multitaskers, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 106:15583– 15587. Oppenheim, A.N. (2000) Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and Attitude Measurement. 2<sup>nd</sup> edition. Pinter Publishers. Ortony, A., Norman, D. A., and Revelle, W. (2005) Affect and proto-affect in effective functioning. In J. M. Fellous and M. A. Arbib (eds) Who Needs Emotions? The Brain Meets the Machine. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 173–202. Oviatt, S., Cohen, A., and Weibel, N. (2013) Multimodal Learning Analytics: Description of Math Data Corpus of ICMI Grand Challenge Workshop. ICMI ’13: In Proceedings of the 15th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction. Oviatt, S., Schuller, B., Cohen, P.R., Sonntag, D., Potamianos, G., and Krüger, A. (eds.). (2017) The Handbook of Multimodal-Multisensor Interfaces: Foundations, User Modeling, and Common Modality Combinations—Volume 1. Association for Computing Machinery and Morgan & Claypool, New York, NY. Park, S.Y., and Chen, Y. (2015) Individual and Social Recognition: Challenges and Opportunities in Migraine Management. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW ’15). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1540–1551. Parker, C., Fredericks, J., Tomitsch, M., and Yoo, S. (2017) Towards Adaptive Height-Aware Public Interactive Displays. In Adjunct Publication of the 25th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP ’17), ACM, New York, NY, pp. 257–260. Paterson, B., Winschiers-Theophilus, H., Dunne, T. T., Schinzel, B., and Underhill, L. G. (2011) Interpretation of a Cross-Cultural Usability Evaluation—A Case Study Based on a Hypermedia System for Rare Species Management in Namibia. Interacting with Computers, 23, 3, 239–246. Pearl, C. (2016) Designing Voice User Interfaces. O'Reilly. Peatt, K. (2014) Off the Beaten Canvas: Exploring the Potential of the Off-Canvas Pattern downloaded from http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2014/02/24/off-thebeaten-canvas-exploring-the-potential-of-the-off-canvas-pattern/ Sept 2014. Pêcher, C., Lemercier, C., and Cellier, J.-M. (2009) Emotions Drive Attention: Effects on Driver's Behavior. Safety Science, 47, 1254–1259. Pêcher, C., Lemercier, C., and Cellier, J.-M. (2011) The Influence of Emotions on Driving Behavior. In Traf ic Psychology: An International Perspective. Chapter IX. Publisher: Nova Science Publishers, Editors: Dwight Hennessy. Perterer, N., Sundström, P., Meschtscherjakov, A., Wilfinger, D., and Tscheligi, M. (2013) Come Drive with Me: An Ethnographic Study of Driver-Passenger Pairs to Inform Future In-Car Assistance. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer supported cooperative work (CSCW'13). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1539–1548. Petrie, H., Hamilton, F., King, N., and Pavan, P. (2006) Remote Usability Evaluations with Disabled People. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '06), ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1133–1141. Picard, R. W. (1998) Af ective Computing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Pinelle, D., Wong, N., and Stach, T. (2008) Heuristic Evaluation for Games: Usability Principles for Video Games. In Proceedings of SIGCHI 2008, Florence, Italy, pp. 1453–1462. Pinelle, D., Wong, N., Stach, T., and Gutwin, C. (2009) Usability Heuristics for Networked Multiplayer Games. In ACM Proceedings of GROUP'09. Porcheron, M., Fischer J.E., Reeves, S., and Sharples, S. (2018) Voice Interfaces in Everyday Life. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 640, 12 pages. Porter, C., Letier, E., and Sasse, M.A. (2014) Building a National E-Service Using Sentire: Experience Report on the Use of Sentire: A Volere-Based Requirements Framework Driven by Calibrated Personas and Simulated User Feedback. In Proceedings of RE'2014, 374–383. Poulter, N. (2013) 6 Google Analytics Custom Dashboards to Save You Time NOW! Retrieved from http://www.stateofdigital.com/google-analytics-dashboards/. Preece, J. (2016) Citizen Science: New Research Challenges in HCI. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 32, 8, 585–612. Preece, J. (2017) How Two Billion Smartphone Users Can Save Species, Interactions. Vol. XXIV.2, 27–33. Preece, J., and Shneiderman, B. (2009) The Reader to Leader Framework: Motivating Technology-Mediated Social Participation, AIS Transactions on Human–Computer Interaction, 1(1), 13–32. Preece, J., Pauw, D., and Clegg, T. (2018) Interaction Design of Community-Driven Environmental Projects (CDEPs): A Case Study from the Anacostia Watershed. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA. Pressman, R.S., and Maxim, B.R. (2014) Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach (Int'l Ed). McGraw-Hill Education. Price, B., Kelly, R., Mehta, V., McCormick, C., Ahmed, H., and Pearce, O. (2018) Feel My Pain; Design and Evaluation of Painpad, a Tangible Device for Supporting Inpatient Self-Logging of Pain. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 169, 13 pages. Primak, R. (2014) Walden Warming: Climate Change Comes to Thoreau's Woods. University of Chicago Press. Prohaska, T.R., Anderson, L.A., and Binstock, R.H. (2012) Public Health for an Aging Society. JHU Press.249–252. Purkiss, B., and Khaliq, I. (2015) A Study of Interaction in Idle Games and Perceptions on the Definition of a Game. In Proceedings of IEEE Games Entertainment Media Conference (GEM'2015), 1–6. Putnam, C., Bungum, M., Spinner, D., Parelkar, A.N., Vipparti, S., and Cass, P. (2018) How User Experience Is Practiced: Two Case Studies from the Field. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper LBW092, 6 pages. Putnam, R. D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New York: Simon & Schuster. Rader, E., Cotter, K., and Cho, J. (2018) Explanations as Mechanisms for Supporting Algorithmic Transparency. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 103, 13 pages. Rae, I., Mutlu, B., Olson, G.M., Olson, J.S., Takayama, L., and Venolia, G. (2015) Everyday Telepresence: Emerging Practices and Future Research Directions. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’15). ACM, New York. pp. 2409–2412. Rajanna, V., and Hammond, T. (2018) A Fitts' law evaluation of gaze input on large displays compared to touch and mouse inputs. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Communication by Gaze Interaction (COGAIN ’18). ACM, New York, NY, Article 8, 5 pages. Rajkomar, A., and Blandford, A. (2012) Understanding Infusion Administration in the ICU Through Distributed Cognition. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 45(3), 580– 590. Rajkomar, A., Mayer, A., and Blandford, A. (2015) Understanding Safety-Critical Interactions with A Home Medical Device Through Distributed Cognition. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 56, 179–194. Ramcharitar, A., and Teather, R. J. (2017) A Fitts' Law Evaluation of Video Game Controllers: Thumbstick, Touchpad and Gyrosensor. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 2860–2866. Raptis, D., Jensen, R. H., Kjeldskov, J., and Skov, M.B. (2017) Aesthetic, Functional and Conceptual Provocation in Research Through Design. In Proceedings of DIS'2017, ACM, New York, NY, 29–41. Raskin, J. (2000) The Humane Interface. Addison-Wesley, Harlow, Essex. Ratcliffe, L., and M. McNeill (2012) Agile Experience Design. New Riders. Rau, P.P., Plocher, T., and Choong, Y. (2013) Cross-Cultural Design for IT Products and Services. CRC Press. Read, J., Macfarlane, S., and Casey, C. (2002) Endurability, Engagement and Expectations: Measuring Children's Fun. In Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children 2002, Eindhoven, Amsterdam. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 189–198. Redish, G. (2012) Letting Go of the Words: Writing Web Content That Works (2nd edn). Morgan Kaufmann. Reeves, B., and Nass, C. (1996) The Media Equation: How People Treat Computers, Television, and New Media Like Real People and Places. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Reeves, L., Lai, J. C., Larson, J. A., Oviatt, S. L., Balaji, T. S., Buisine, S., Collings, P., Cohen, P. R., Kraal, B., Martin, J.-C., McTear, M. F., Raman, T. V., Stanney, K. M., Su, H., and Wang, Q. Y. (2004) Guidelines for Multimodal User Interface Design, Communications of the ACM, 47(1), 57–59. Reynaga, G., Chiasson, S., and van Oorschot, P.C. (2015) Heuristics for the Evaluation of Captchas on Smartphones. In Proceedings of the 2015 British HCI Conference (British HCI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, 126–135. Richard, P., Burkhardt, J-M., and Lubart, T. (2014). Users' Participation to Creative Design of New Solutions for Mobility: An Exploratory Study. In Proceedings of the 2014 European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE ’14). ACM, New York, NY, Article 21, 7 pages. Richards, M., and Woodthorpe J. (2009) Introducing TU100 “My Digital Life”: Ubiquitous Computing in a Distance Learning Environment. In Proceedings of UbiComp 2009, Walt Disney Beach Club Resort, Orlando, FL. Rideout, V.J., Foehr, U.G., and Roberts, D.F. (2010) Generation M2: Media in the Lives of 8- to 18-year-Olds. Menlo Park, CA: Henry J Kaiser Family Foundation. Ries, E. (2011) The Lean Startup: How Constant Innovation Creates Radically Successful Businesses. Portfolio Penguin. Righia, V., SayagobS., and Blat, J. (2017) When We Talk about Older People in HCI, Who Are We Talking About? Towards A ‘Turn To Community' In The Design of Technologies For a Growing Aging Population. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 108, Issue C, 15–31. Rizvi, S. A., Tuson, E., Desrochers, B., and Magee, J. (2018) Simulation of Motor Impairment in Head-Controlled Pointer Fitts' Law Task. In Proceedings of the 20th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS ’18). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 376–378. Robertson, S., and Robertson, J. (2013) Mastering the Requirements Process (3rd edn). Pearson Education, New Jersey. Robinson, R., Rubin, Z., Márquez Segura, E., and Isbister, K. (2017) All the Feels: Designing A Tool that Reveals Streamers' Biometrics to Spectators. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games (FDG ’17). ACM, New York, NY, Article 36, 6 pages. Robson, C., and McCartan, K. (2016) Real World Research. John Wiley & Sons. Rodden, K., Hutchinson, H., and Fu, X. (2010) Measuring the User Experience on a Large Scale: User-Centered Metrics for Web Applications, In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '10). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 2395–2398. Rogers, Y. (1989) Icons at The Interface: Their Usefulness, Interacting with Computers, 1(1), 105–117. Rogers, Y. (2006) Moving on from Weiser's Vision of Calm Computing: Engaging UbiComp Experiences. In Proceedings of UbiComp 2006, LNCS 4206, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 404–421. Rogers, Y. (2011) Interaction Design Gone Wild: Striving for Wild Theory, Interactions, 18(4): 58–62. Rogers, Y. (2012) HCI Theory: Classical, Modern and Contemporary. Morgan & Claypool. Rogers, Y., and Aldrich, F. (1996) In Search of Clickable Dons: Learning About HCI Through Interacting with Norman's CD-ROM, SIGCHI Bulletin, 28(3). Rogers, Y., and Lindley, S. (2004) Collaborating Around Vertical and Horizontal Displays: Which Way is Best? Interacting With Computers 16, N33–N52. Rogers, Y., and Marsden, G. (2013) Does He Take Sugar? Moving Beyond the Rhetoric of Compassion, Interactions XX.4 July–August 2013. Rogers, Y., and Marshall, P. (2017) Research in the Wild. Morgan & Claypool. Rogers, Y., Hazlewood, W., Marshall, P., Dalton, N. S., and Hertrich, S. (2010a) Ambient Influence: Can Twinkly Lights Lure and Abstract Representations Trigger Behavioral Change? In Proceedings of Ubicomp 2010, pp. 261–270. Rogers, Y., Lim, Y., and Hazlewood, W. (2006) Extending Tabletops to Support Flexible Collaborative Interactions. In Proceedings of Tabletop 2006, Adelaide, Australia, January 5–7. IEEE, pp. 71–78. Rogers, Y., Lim, Y. Hazlewood, W., and Marshall, P. (2009) Equal Opportunities: Do Shareable Interfaces Promote More Group Participation than Single Users Displays? Human–Computer Interaction, 24(2), 79–116. Rogers, Y., Paay, J., Brereton, M., Vaisutis, K., Marsden, G., and Vetere, F. (2014) Never Too Old: Engaging Retired People Inventing the Future with MaKey MaKey. In Proceedings of CHI 2014, ACM, 2675–2684. Rogers, Y., Payne, S., and Todd, P. (2010b) Projecting Instant Information in Situ: Can it Help us Make More Informed Decisions? In Ubiprojection 2010: Workshop Proceedings, Pervasive 2010. Rogers, Y., Price, S., Randell, C., Fraser, D.S., Weal, M., and Fitzpatrick, G. (2005) Ubi-Learning Integrates Indoor and Outdoor Experiences, Communications of the ACM, 48(1), 55–59. Rogers, Y., Yuill, N., and Marshall, P. (2013) Contrasting Lab-Based and in-the-wild Studies for Evaluating Multi-User Technologies. In Price, S., Jewitt, C., and Brown, B. (eds.) SAGE Handbook of Technology Research. 359–173. Rønby-Pedersen, E., McCall, K., Moran, T. P., and Halasz, F. G. (1993) Tivoli: An Electronic Whiteboard for Informal Workgroup Meetings. In Proceedings of CHI '93. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 391–398. Rooksby, J., Rost, M., Morrison, A., and Chalmers, M. (2014) Personal Tracking as Lived Informatics. In Proceedings of CHI'14, ACM, 1163–1172. Rose, D. (2018) Why Gesture is the Next Big Thing in Design. Downloaded from: https://www.ideo.com/blog/why-gesture-is-the-next-big-thing-in-design. Roth, I. (1986) An Introduction to Object Perception. In I.Roth and J. B.Frisby (eds) Perception and Representation: A Cognitive Approach. The Open University Press, Milton Keynes, UK. Rotman, D., Hammock, J., Preece, J., Boston, C. L., Hansen, D. L., Bowser, A., and He, Y. (2014). Does Motivation in Citizen Science Change with Time and Culture? In Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW Companion ’14). ACM, New York, NY, 229–232. Rotman, D., He, Y., Preece, J., and Druin, A. (2013) Understanding Large Scale Online Environments with Qualitative Methods. iConference, February 2012, Texas. Rotman, D., Preece, J., He, Y., and Druin, A. (2012) Extreme Ethnography: Challenges for Research in Large Scale Online Environments iConference, February 7–10, 2012, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Russell, D. M., and Yarosh, S. (2018). Can We Look to Science Fiction for Innovation in HCI? Interactions 25, 2, 36–40. Ryall, K., Forlines, C., Shen, C., and Ringel-Morris, M. (2004) Exploring the Effects of Group Size and Table Size on Interactions with Tabletop Shared-Display Groupware. In Proceedings of Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). ACM, New York. Sacks, H., Schegloff, E., and Jefferson, G. (1978) A Simplest Systematics for the Organization of Turn-taking for Conversation, Language 50, 696–735. Saffer, D. (2010) Designing for Interaction: Creating Smart Applications and Clever Devices (2nd edn). New Riders Press, Indianapolis, IN. Saffer, D. (2014) Microinteractions: Designing with Details. O'Reilly. Sakr, S., Bajaber, F., Barnawi, A., Altalhi, A., Elshawi, R., and Batarfi, O. (2015) Big Data Processing Systems: State-of-the-Art and Open Challenges. In Proceedings of ICCC 2015. Sambrooks, L., and Wilkinson, B. (2013) Comparison of Gestural, Touch, and Mouse Interaction With Fitts' Law. In Proceedings of the 25th Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference: Augmentation, Application, Innovation, Collaboration (OzCHI '13), ACM, New York, NY, pp. 119–122. Sarikaya, A., Correll, M., Bartram, L., Tory, M., and Fisher, D. (2018) What Do We Talk About When We Talk About Dashboards? IEEE Trans Vis Comput. Graph, 1. Sas, C., and Whittaker, S. (2013) Design for Forgetting: Disposing of Digital Possessions After a Breakup. In Proceedings of CHI '13. ACM, pp.1823–1832. Scaife, M., and Rogers, Y. (1996) External Cognition: How Do Graphical Representations Work? International Journal of Human–Computer Studies 45, 185–213. Scapin, D. L. (1981) Computer Commands in Restricted Natural Language: Some aspects of Memory of Experience, Human Factors 23, 365–375. Schaffer, E. (2009) Beyond Usability: Designing Web Sites for Persuasion, Emotion and Trust. Downloaded from www.uxmatters.com/mt/archives/2009/01/beyondusability-designing-web-sites-for-persuasion-emotion-and-trust.php (retrieved 8 March, 2019). Schank, R. C. (1982) Dynamic Memory: A Theory of Learning in Computers and People. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Schegloff, E. (1981) Discourse as an Interactional Achievement: Some Uses of ‘Uh-Huh' and Other Things that Come Between Sentences. In D. Tannen (ed.) Analyzing Discourse: Text and talk. University Press, Georgetown. Schegloff, E. A., and Sacks, H. (1973) Opening Up Closings, Semiotica 7, 289–327. Schilit, B., Adams, N., Gold, R., Tso, M., and Want, R. (1993) The PARCTAB Mobile Computing System. In Proceedings of Fourth Workshop on Workstation Operating Systems, WWOS-IV. IEEE, pp. 34–39. Schmidt, A. (2017a) Technologies to Amplify the Mind. IEEE Computer, 50(10), 102– 106. Schmidt, A. (2017b) Augmenting Human Intellect and Amplifying Perception and Cognition. IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 6–10, 2017. Schmidt, A., and Herrmann, T. (2017) Intervention User Interfaces: A New Interaction Paradigm for Automated Systems, Interactions, vol 24, no 5, pp. 40–45. Schmitz, K., Mahapatra, R., and Nerur, S. (2018) User Engagement in the Era of Hybrid Agile Methodology. IEEE Software (early access). Schnall, R., Cho, H., and Liu, J. (2018) Health Information Technology Usability Evaluation Scale (Health-ITUES) for Usability Assessment of Mobile Health Technology: Validation Study. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth., 6(1):e4. Schön, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action. Basic Books, New York. Schuler, R. P., Grandhi, S. A., Mayer, J. M., Ricken, S. T., and Jones, Q. (2014) The Doing of Doing Stuff: Understanding the Coordination of Social Group-Activities. In Proceedings of CHI '14, ACM, 119–128. Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N.J., and Griskevicius, V. (2007) The Constructive, Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms, Psychological Science, 18(5), 429–434. Schwaber, K., and Beedle, M. (2002) Agile Software Development with Scrum. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Seffah, A., Gulliksen, J., and Desmarais, M. C. (2005) Human-Centered Software Engineering. Springer. Segura, V.C.B., Barbosa, S.D.J., and Simões, F.P. (2012) UISKEI: A Sketch-Based Prototyping Tool for Defining and Evaluating User Interface Behavior. In Proceedings of the International Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, 18–25. Sentance, S.Waite, J., Hodges, S., MacLeod, E., and Yeomans, L. (2017) Creating Cool Stuff: Pupils' Experience of the BBC micro:bit. In Proceedings of SIGCSE 2017, 531– 536. Sethu-Jones, G.R., Rogers, Y., and Marquardt, N. (2017) Data in the Garden: A Framework for Exploring Provocative Prototypes as Part of Research in the Wild. In Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (OzCHI '17), ACM, New York, NY, pp. 318–327. Shaer, O., and Hornecker, E. (2010) Tangible User Interfaces: Past, Present and Future Directions, Foundations and Trends in HCI (FnT in HCI) 3(1–2), 1–138. Shaer, O., Strait, M., Valdes, C., Wang, H., Feng, T., Lintz, M., Ferreirae, M., Grote, C., Tempel, K., and Liu, S. (2012) The Design, Development, and Deployment of a Tabletop Interface for Collaborative Exploration of Genomic Data, International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 70, 746–764. Sharp, H., Biddle, R., Gray, P. G., Miller, L., and Patton, J. (2006) Agile Development: Opportunity or Fad? Addendum to Proceedings of CHI 2006, Montreal. Sharp, H., Galal, G. H., Finkelstein, A. (1999) Stakeholder Identification in the Requirements Engineering Process. In: Proceedings of the Database and Expert System Applications Workshop (DEXA), pp. 387–391. Sharp, H., Robinson, H.M., and Petre, M. (2009) The Role of Physical Artefacts in Agile Software Development: Two Complementary Perspectives, Interacting with Computers, 21(1-2) 108–116. Shen, C., Everitt, K., and Ryall, K. (2003) UbiTable: Impromptu Face-to-Face Collaboration on Horizontal Interactive Surfaces. In Proceedings of Ubicomp 2003, pp. 281–288. Shen, C., Lesh, N. B., Vernier, F., Forlines, C., and Frost, J. (2002) Building and Sharing Digital Group Histories. In Proceedings CSCW 2002. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 324– 333. Shilton, K. (2018) Values and Ethics in Human-Computer Interaction, Foundations and Trends in Human-Computer Interaction, 12(2), 107–171. Shneiderman, B. (1983) Direct Manipulation: A Step Beyond Programming Languages, IEEE Computer, 16(8), 57–69. Shneiderman, B. (1992) Tree Visualization with Tree-Maps: 2-d Space-Filling Approach. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 11(1), 92–99. Shneiderman, B. (1998) Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Ef ective Human– Computer Interaction (3rd edn). Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. Shneiderman, B., and Plaisant, C. (2006) Strategies for Evaluating Information Visualization Tools: Multi-Dimensional In-Depth Long-Term Case Studies. In Proceedings Beyond Time and Errors: Novel Evaluation Methods for Information Visualization. Workshop of the Advanced Visual Interfaces Conference. Shneiderman, B., Plaisant, C., Cohen, M., Jacobs, S., and Elmqvist, N. (2016) Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Ef ective Human-Computer Interaction (6th ed.).Pearson. Sidner, C., and Lee, C. (2005) Robots as Laboratory Hosts, Interactions 12, 24–26. Siek, K. A., Rogers, Y., and Connelly, K. H. (2005) Fat Finger Worries: How Older and Younger Users Physically Interact with PDAs. In Proceedings of INTERACT ’05, Rome. Silver, J., and Rosenbaum, E. (2012). Makey Makey: Improvising Tangible and Nature-Based User Interfaces. In Adjunct Proceedings of TEI'12. Silverberg, M., MacKenzie, I. S., and Korhonen, P. (2000) Predicting Text Entry Speed on Mobile Phones. In Proceedings of CHI 2000. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 9–16. Silverio-Fernández, M., RenukappaS., and Suresh, S. (2018) What is a Smart Device?—A Conceptualisation within the Paradigm of the Internet of Things. Visualization in Engineering, 6:3. Sim, G., Horton, M., and McKnight, L. (2016) iPad vs Paper Prototypes: Does Form Factor Affect Children's Ratings of a Game Concept. In Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children (IDC '16), pp. 190–195. Simonsen, J., and Robertson, T. (2012) Routledge Handbook of Participatory Design. Routledge, London. Singer, L.M., and Alexander, P.A. (2017). Reading on Paper and Digitally: What the Past Decades of Empirical Research Reveal. Review of Educational Research, 87(6), 315– 343. Singer, P. (2011) The Expanding Circle Ethics, Evolution, and Moral Progress. Princeton University Press. Sitbon, L., and Farhin, S. (2017) Co-Designing Interactive Applications with Adults with Intellectual Disability: A Case Study. In Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (OzCHI '17). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 487–491. Slater, M., and Wilbur, S. (1997) A Framework for Immersive Virtual Environments (FIVE): Speculations on the Role of Presence in Virtual Environments, Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 6, 603–616. Slater, M., Pertaub, D., and Steed, A. (1999) Public Speaking in Virtual Reality: Facing an Audience of Avatars. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 19(2), 6–9. Sleeper, M., Consolvo, S., and Staddon, J. (2014) Exploring the Benefits and Uses of Web Analytics Tools for Non-Transactional Websites. In ACM Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS). Smith, D., Irby, C., Kimball, R., Verplank, B., and Harslem, E. (1982) Designing the Star User Interface, Byte, 7(4), 242–282. Smith, M.E., Ascenzi, L. Qin, Yingsi and Wetsman, R. (2018) Designing a Video Co-Watching Web App to Support Interpersonal Relationship Maintenance. In Proceedings of GROUP '18, 162–165. Smyth, J. D., Dillman, D. A., Christian, L. M., and Stern, M. J. (2005) Comparing Check-All and Forced-Choice Question Formats in Web Surveys: The Role of Satisficing, Depth of Processing, and Acquiescence in Explaining Differences. Technical Report #05-029. Washington State University Social and Economic Sciences Research Center, Pullman, 30 pages. Sohn, T., Li, K. A., Griswold, W. G., and Hollan, J. D. (2008) A Diary Study of Mobile Information Needs. In Proceedings of CHI 2008. ACM, New York. Solovey, E.T., Afergan, D., Peck, E., Hincks, S., and Jacob, R.J.K. (2014) Designing Implicit Interfaces for Physiological Computing: Guidelines and Lessons Learned Using fNIRS1. ACM Transactions on Computer–Human Interaction, 21(6). Sparrow, B., Liu, J., and Wegner, D. M. (2011) Google Effects on Memory: Cognitive Consequences of Having Information at Our Fingertips. Science, 333(6043), 308– 314. Speicher, M., Hell, P., Daiber, F., Simeone, A., and Krüger, A. (2018) A Virtual Reality Shopping Experience Using the Apartment Metaphor. In AVI '18: 2018 International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, 9 pages. Spelmezan, D., Jacobs, M., Hilgers, A., and Borchers, J. (2009) Tactile Motion Instructions for Physical Activities. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2009. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 2243–2252. Spencer, R. (2000) The Streamlined Cognitive Walkthrough Method: Working Around Social Constraints Encountered in a Software Development Company. In Proceedings of CHI 2000. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 253–359. Spool, J. (2018) https://medium.com/@jmspool (accessed December 2018). Starbird, K., Palen, L., Hughes, A. L., and Vieweg, S. (2010) Chatter on the Red: What Hazards Threat Reveals about the Social Life of Microblogged Information. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW 2010. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 241–250. Stavrinos, D., Jones, J.L., Garner, A.A., Griffin, R., Franklin, C.A., Ball, D., Welburn, S.C., Ball. K.K., Sisiopiku, V.P., and Fine, P.R. (2013) Impact of Distracted Driving on Safety and Traffic Flow. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 61, 63–70. Steed, A., Ye, P., Zillah, W., and Slater, M. (2018) “We Wait”—The Impact of Character Responsiveness and Self Embodiment on Presence and Interest in an Immersive News Experience. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 5, 112. Stel, M., and Vonk, R. (2010) Mimicry in Social Interaction: Benefits for Mimickers, Mimickees, and their Interaction. British Journal of Psychology, 101(2), 311–323. Stephens-Davidowitz, S. (2018) Everybody Lies: Big Data, New Data, and What the Internet Can Tell Us about Who We Really Are. Penguin. Stobert, E., and Biddle, R. (2018) The Password Life Cycle. Transactions on Privacy and Security, 21(3), Article 13, 32 pages. Strauss, A., and Corbin, J. (1998) Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory (2nd edn). SAGE, London. Strommen, E. (1998) When the Interface is a Talking Dinosaur: Learning Across Media with ActiMates Barney. In Proceedings of CHI '98. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 288– 295. Subrayaman, R., Weisstein, F. L., and Krishnan, M. S. (2010) User Participation in Software Development Projects, Communications of the ACM, 53(3), 137–141. Suzuki, K., Yokoyama, M., Yoshida, S., Mochizuki, T., Yamada, T., Narumi, T., Tanikawa, T., and Hirose, M. (2017) FaceShare: Mirroring with Pseudo-Smile Enriches Video Chat Communications. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '17). ACM, New York. pp. 5313–5317. Swallow, E. (2013) The U.S. Senate More Divided Than Ever Data Shows, Forbes, Downloaded from: https://www.forbes.com/sites/ericaswallow/2013/11/17/senatevoting-relationships-data/#335036bf4031. Swan, M. (2013) The Quantified Self: Fundamental Disruption in Big Data Science and Biological Discovery. Big Data, 1(2). Sy, D. (2007) Adapting Usability Investigations for Development, Journal of Usability Studies, 2(3), May, 112–130. Szafir, D. (2018) The Good, the Bad and The Biases: Five Ways Visualizations Can Mislead and How to Fix Them, Interactions, Xxv.4. Tallyn, E., Fried, H., Gianni, R., Isard, A., Speed, C. (2018) The Ethnobot: Gathering Ethnographies in the Age of IoT. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). ACM, New York, NY, Paper 604, 13 pages. Tanenbaum, J. (2014) Design Fictional Interactions: Why HCI Should Care About Stories, Interactions, XXI.5, 22–23. Teixeira, C.R.G., Kurtz, G., Leuck, L.P., Tietzmann, R., Souza, D.R., Lerina, J.M.F., Manssour, I.H., and Silveira, M.S. (2018) Humor, Support, and Criticism: A Taxonomy for Discourse Analysis About Political Crisis on Twitter. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research: Governance in the Data Age. ACM, New York, NY, Article 68, 6 pages. Thackara, J. (2001) The Design Challenge of Pervasive Computing. In Interactions May/Jun, 47–52. Thaler, R. H., and Sunstein, C. R. (2008) Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth and Happiness. Penguin. Thimbleby, H. (1990) User Interface Design. Addison-Wesley, Harlow, Essex. Thimbleby, H. (2015) Safer User Interfaces: A Case Study in Improving Number Entry. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 41 (7), 711–729. Tidwell, J. (2006) Designing Interfaces: Patterns for Ef ective Interaction Design. O'Reilly Media Inc. Todd, P.M., Rogers, Y., and Payne, S.J. (2011) Nudging the Trolley in the Supermarket: How to Deliver the Right Information to Shoppers. International Journal of Mobile HCI, 3(2), 20–34. Toepoel, V. (2016) Doing Surveys Online. SAGE Publications Ltd. Toetenel, L., and Rienties, B. (2016) Analyzing 157 Learning Designs Using Learning Analytic Approaches as a Means to Evaluate the Impact of Pedagogical Decision-Making. British Journal of Educational Technology, 4(5), 981–992. Tognazzini, B. (2014) First Principles of HCI Design, Revised and Expanded. Downloaded from: asktog.com/atc/principles-of-interaction-design/ Tomlin, W. C. (2010) Usability, www.usefulusability.com/ (accessed May 1, 2010). Towey, M., Zhang, L., Cottman-Fields, M., Wimmer, J., Zhang, J., and Roe, P. (2014) Visualization of Long Duration Acoustic Recordings of the Environment. Procedia Computer Science, 29, 703–712. Tractinsky, N. (2013) Replicating and Extending Research on Relations between Visual Aesthetics and Usability. In ReplicaCHI 2013. Travis, D. (2016) 247 Web Usability Guidelines. Downloaded from: https://www.userfocus.co.uk/resources/guidelines.html. Trimble, J., Wales, R., and Gossweiler, R. (2002) NASA Position Paper for the CSCW 2002 Workshop on Public, Community and Situated Displays: MERBoard. Trist, E.L., and Bamforth, K.W. (1951) Some Social and Psychological Consequences of the Longwall Method of Coal Getting. Human Relations, 4, 3–38. Tullis, T., and Albert, B. (2013) Measuring the User Experience(2nd ed.).Morgan Kaufmann. Tullis, T. S. (1997) Screen Design. In M.Helander, T. K.Landauer and P.Trabhu (eds) Handbook of Human–Computer Interaction (2nd edn). Elsevier, New York, pp. 377–411. Turkle, S. (2015) Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a Digital Age. Penguin. Ullmar, B., Ishii, H., and Jacob, R. J. K. (2005) Token + Constraint Systems for Tangible Interaction with Digital Information. TOCHI, 12(1), 81–N8. Underkoffler, J., and Ishii, H. (1998) Illuminating Light: An Optical Design Tool with a Luminous–Tangible Interface. In Conference In Proceedings on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley, pp. 542–549. Unger, R., and Chandler, C. (2012) A Project Guide to UX Design. New Riders, Berkeley, CA. Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, K., and Waljas, M. (2009) Development of Evaluation Heurisitcs for Web Service User Experience. CHI 2009 Spotlight on Works in Progress, Session 1, pp. 3679–3684. Vaish, R., Snehalkumar, S., Gaikwad, N., Kovacs, G., Veit, A., Krishna, R., Ibarra, I.A., Simoiu, C., Wilber, M., Belongie, S., Goel, S. Davis, J., and Bernstein, M.S. (2017) Crowd Research: Open and Scalable University Laboratories. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST '17). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 829–843. Valdesolo, P., and DeSteno, D. (2011) Synchrony and The Social Tuning of Compassion. Emotion, 11, 2, 262–266. Valentina, G., and Mohanna, M. (2013) Informal Cognitive Walkthroughs (ICW): Paring Down and Pairing Up for an Agile World. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '13). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 3093– 3096. van Allen, P. (2018) Ways of Prototyping AI, Interactions, 47–51. van Berkel, N., Ferreira, D., and Kostakos, V. (2017) The Experience Sampling Method on Mobile Devices. ACM Computing Surveys, 50, 6, Article 93. van den Broek, E.L. (2013) Ubiquitous Emotion-Aware Computing. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 17, 53–67. van den Hoven, P., Pieter E.Vermaas, P.E., and van de Poel, I. (eds.) (2015) Handbook of Ethics, Values, and Technological Design. Springer. van der Linden, J., Schoonderwaldt, E., Bird, J., and Johnson, R. (2011) MusicJacket– Combining Motion Capture and Vibrotactile Feedback to Teach Violin Bowing. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 60(1), pp. 104–113. van Rens, L. S. (1997) Usability Problem Classifier. Unpublished master's thesis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA. Veen, J. (2001) The Art and Science of Web Design. New Riders Press, Indianapolis, IN. Verma, H., Alavi, H. S., and Lalanne, D. (2017) Studying Space Use: Bringing HCI Tools to Architectural Projects. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2017). ACM, Press, New York, pp. 3856–3866. Veronikha. E. (2016) Sentiment Analysis on Twitter about the Use of City Public Transportation Using Support Vector Machine Method. International Journal on Information and Communication Technology (IJoICT), 2, 57. Vertegaal, R. (2008) A Fitts' Law Comparison of Eye Tracking and Manual Input in the Selection of Visual Targets, ICMI 2008, October 20–22, Chania, Crete, Greece, pp. 241–248. Villar, N., Scott, J., Hodges, S., Hammil, K., and Miller, C. (2012), NET Gadgeteer: A Platform for Custom Devices. Pervasive, 216–233. VisiStat (2010) Case Study: The MountainWinery.com, visistat.com/case-studymountain-winery.php (accessed September 2010). von Neumann, J., and Morgenstern, O. (1944) Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton University Press. Wallace, J., McCarthy, J., Wright, P. C., and Olivier, P. (2013) Making Design Probes Work. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '13). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 3441–3450. Wang, P., Sibi, S., Mok, B., and Ju, W. (2017) Marionette: Enabling On-Road Wizard-of-Oz Autonomous Driving Studies. In Proceedings of Human-Robot Interaction, 234– 243. Wang, Y., Song, G., Qiao, G., Zhang, Y., Zhang, J., and Wang, W. (2013) Wheeled Robot Control Based on Gesture Recognition Using the Kinect Sensor, In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO). Shenzhen, China, December 2013, pp. 378–383. Warrick, E., Preece, J., Kibutu, J., and Sihanya, B. (2016) Social Media as an Indigenized Information World for Environmental Stewardship. In Proceedings of the First African Conference on Human Computer Interaction (AfriCHI), pp. 126–137. Wasserman, S., and Faust, K. (1994) Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. Waterson, P. (2014) Health Information Technology and Sociotechnical Systems: A Report on Recent Developments within the UK National Health Service (NHS), Applied Ergonomics, 45, 150–161. Watson, N., and Naish, H. (2018) Can Computers Understand Human Emotions? A Sentiment Analysis of Economic News. Downloaded from: http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/ippr/can-computers-understand-human-emotions-asentiment-analysis-of-economic-news/. Webster, D., and Celik, O. (2014) Systematic Review of Kinect Applications in Elderly Care and Stroke Rehabilitation, Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, 11:108. Weiser, M. (1991) The Computer for the 21st Century, Scientific American, 94–104. Weller, D. (2004) The Effects of Contrast and Density on Visual Web Search, Usability News, 6(2): http://psychology.wichita.edu/surl/usabilitynews/62/density.htm (retrieved July 11, 2005). Wellman, B., and Berkovitz, S.D., (1988) Social Structures: A Network Approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. Wharton, C., Rieman, J., Lewis, C., and Polson, P. (1994) The Cognitive Walkthrough Method: A Practitioner's Guide. In J. Nielsen and R. L. Mack (eds). Usability Inspection Methods. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York. Whitenton, K. (2018) The Two UX Gulfs: Evaluation and Execution. Downloaded from: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/two-ux-gulfs-evaluation-execution/. Whitenton, K., and Gibbons, S. (2018) Case Study: Iterative Design and Prototype Testing of the NN/g Homepage. Downloaded from: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/case-study-iterative-design-prototyping Whiteside, J., Bennett, J., and Holtzblatt, K. (1988) Usability Engineering: Our Experience and Evolution. In H. Helander (ed.) Handbook of Human–Computer Interaction. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, pp. 791–817. Whitney, H. (2012) Data Insights: New Ways to Visualize and Make Sense of Data. Morgan Kaufmann Publ., San Francisco, CA. Williamson, V. (2016) Can Crowdsourcing Be Ethical? Downloaded from: https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2016/02/03/can-crowdsourcing-beethical-2/ Wilson, C., Hargreaves, T., and Hauxwell-Baldwin, R. (2015) Smart Homes and their Users: A Systematic Analysis and Key Challenges, Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 19, 463–476. Winograd, T. (1997) From Computing Machinery to Interaction Design. In P. Denning and R. Metcalfe (eds). Beyond Calculation: The Next Fifty Years of Computing. Springer-Verlag, Amsterdam, pp. 149–162. Winschiers-Theophilus, H., and Bidwell, N.J. (2013) Toward an Afro-Centric Indigenous HCI Paradigm. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 29: 243–255. Winschiers-Theophilus, H., Bidwell, N. J., and Blake, E. (2012) Community Consensus: Design Beyond Participation, Design Issues, 28(3) Summer 2012, 89–100. Wixon, D., and Wilson, C. (1997) The Usability Engineering Framework for Product Design and Evaluation. In M. G. Helander, T. K. Landauer and P. V. Prabju (eds) Handbook of Human–Computer Interaction. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 653–688. Wong, R.Y., Van Wyk, E., and Pierce, J. (2017) Real-Fictional Entanglements: Using Science Fiction and Design Fiction to Interrogate Sensing Technologies. In Proceedings of DIS 2017. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 567–579. Woolrych, A., and Cockton, G. (2001) Why and When Five Test Users Aren't Enough. In Proceedings of IHM-HCI 2001 Conference, Vol. 2. Cépadèus Éditions, Toulouse, pp. 105–108. Xambó, A., Hornecker, E., Marshall, P., Jordà, S., Dobbyn, C., and Laney, R. (2013) Let's Jam The Reactable: Peer Learning During Musical Improvisation with a Tabletop Tangible Interface. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 20(6), article no. 36. Yeratziotis, A., and Zaphiris, P. (2018) A Heuristic Evaluation for Deaf Web User Experience (HEADWUX). International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 34:3, 195–217. YinR. K. (2013) Case Study Research. SAGE Publications. Yohanan, S., and MacLean, K. E. (2008) The Haptic Creature Project: Social Human-Robot Interaction Through Affective Touch. In Proceedings of the AISB 2008 Symposium on the Reign of Catz and Dogs: The Second AISB Symposium on the Role of Virtual Creatures in a Computerized Society. 1, 7–11. Yu, L., Kittur, A., and Kraut, R. E. (2016) Encouraging “Outside-the-box” Thinking in Crowd Innovation Through Identifying Domains of Expertise. In Proceedings of CSCW '16. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1214–1222. Yuill, N., and Rogers, Y. (2012) Mechanisms for Collaboration: A Design and Evaluation Framework for Multi-User Interfaces. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 19(1), Article 1, 25 pages. Zeiliger, R., Reggers, T., Baldewyns, L., and Jans, V. (1997) Facilitating Web Navigation: Integrated Tools for Active and Cooperative Learners. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Computers in Education, ICCE '97, Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia. Zhai, W., and Thill, J-C. (2017) Social Media Discourse in Disaster Situations: A Study of the Deadly. In Proceedings of EM-GIS' 17 Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGSPATIAL Workshop on Emergency Management. Zhang, T., and Chan, A.H.S. (2011) The Association Between Driving Anger and Driving Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis of Evidence from the Past Twenty Years. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 90, 50–62. Zhao, S., Ramos, J., Tao, J., Jiang, Z., Li, S., Wu, Z., Pan, G., and Dey, A.K. (2016) Discovering Different Kinds of Smartphone Users Through Their Application Usage Behaviors. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp '16). ACM, New York, NY, pp. 498– 509. Zuckerman, O., and Resnick, M. (2005) Extending Tangible Interfaces for Education: Digital Montessori-Inspired Manipulatives. In Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 859–868. Zufferey, G., Jermann, P., Lucchi, A., and Dillenbourg, P. (2009) TinkerSheets: Using Paper Forms to Control and Visualize Tangible Simulations. In Proceedings of TEI09. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 377–384.