<sup>his</sup> <sup>book</sup> <sup>should</sup> <sup>have</sup> <sup>been</sup> <sup>titled</sup> 33 in tribute to the thirty-three companies that agreed to be researched during the 1997 European Design Prize competition. Although all were well known for the excellence of their product design, the research revealed that they were not managing design in the same way. Out of the methods of all these thirty-three companies, a model was devised: the three-level model for design success that constitutes the backbone of this book. The first part of the book describes the field of design: the difference between design as a process and the output of that process; the skills designers possess, and what can be learned from the history of design; and, finally, because “good design is good business,” the importance of design relations, company performance, and design management. The second part of the book explains how design creates value in an organization when the organization follows the model for value creation: design as differentiator; design as coordinator; and design as transformer. Theories, concepts, and studies relevant to this area of design management are developed in detail. Design as differentiator. When design strategy aims to create a better brand, improving product, packaging, or service performance, it increases the financial value by boosting sales, exports, and customer-perceived value. Design as coordinator. When design strategy aims to manage change in the innovation process, it acts as an efficient tool for the management of new product development. Design creates value because it helps coordinate functions and avoid conflicts, encourages cross-disciplinary teams, and improves communications among the designers in a project team. Design is linked to company process management and customer-oriented innovation management. Design as transformer. When design strategy creates value by improving the relationship between the company and its environment, anticipating a clear vision of future markets and competition, creating new markets, and forecasting trends, it generates substantial strategic value, which can have a direct effect on the organization’s positioning. Design contributes to the management of change and to the learning process in organizations Part 3 is practical and professionally oriented. It develops design management tools that marketers, business managers, and design managers can use in their decision-making processes when managing design projects. This section covers how to develop a design project in terms of its operations (operational design management), how to manage a design department (functional design management), and how to develop a design strategy (strategic design management). In sum, this book explains the different ways companies can implement design to be successful. Thanks to the thirty-three! ## PREFACE