# CONCLUSION This book suggests the ways in which a design manager needs to develop value creation through design, by: / Creating value through difference in aesthetics and perception / Creating value through coherence with “gestalt” / Creating value through metamorphosis in systems These ideas of differentiation, coherence, and metamorphosis remind us of management concepts such as difference or heterogeneity in companies, conflict coordination and management, vision and organizational change, and competitive advantage. Design management encourages an inclusive approach: The principal characteristics of design management probably rest in the fact that it tends to involve a large number of people to create the company offer. However, design management is also a tool for change. For certain companies, design contributes to the implementation of a new strategic core in order to reposition the company. In fact, investing in “design management” is also investing in the detection of how the design knowledge of the creative team can inspire the company internally. Every design activity implicitly necessitates the mastery of problem-solving knowhow. In order to envision solutions and options for resolution, it is important to “draw” the context. Therefore, design helps the company structure its environment and make it understandable. It is a way of thinking and a “process” that “imagines” the relationship between the company and its environment. This structuring mechanism develops a worldview among company employees. The employee is no longer only a problem solver; his role is to represent, to “shape,” his own environment. Conception know-how helps management in two principal ways: by contributing to “reality construction” (the way in which the company constructs its relationship to its environment), and by helping strategic management, because the mastery of design skills can contribute to a better understanding of complex situations. A three-part design management model is developed in this book. This model, defined by Patrick Hetzel in the fashion industry in 1993 and validated in our European study of the “33,” can be applied to any type of business. The following is a final table summarizing the key parts of the book, presenting “3” basic design policies at each of the “3” decision-making levels. In his thesis, Patrick Hetzel (1993) concludes that design influences: 1. The offer. It gives a sense to the offer that is, at the same time, an object and a means of discourse. 2. People. It helps mobilize and motivate buyers, facilitates the circulation of information, and unifies employees working in different departments around a common project. <table><tr><td>Design ACTION</td><td>Design FUNCTION</td><td>Design VISION</td></tr><tr><td>The Differentiating Value of Design</td><td>The Coordinating Value of Design</td><td>The Transforming Value of Design</td></tr><tr><td>Design is an economic competency that changes the primary activities in the value chain.</td><td>Design is a management competency that changes in the support activities in the value chain.</td><td>Design is a core competency that changes the value chain of the sector and the vision of the industry.</td></tr><tr><td>“3” &quot;3”</td><td></td><td>“3”</td></tr><tr><td>Brand marketing Production</td><td>Structure</td><td>Strategy</td></tr><tr><td>Communication</td><td>Technology management Innovation management</td><td>Knowledge management Networking management</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Operational Design Management</td><td>Functional Design Management</td><td>Strategic Design Management</td></tr></table> Table 11.5. The Three Levels of Design Management 3. The company. It facilitates the formulation of a mission statement and encourages a strategic intent in the core strategic team. These three levels of design management correspond to the three decisionmaking levels of the design manager: operational, functional, and strategic design management. They also coincide with the three levels of value creation through design: 1. Design action. Design’s impact on the company’s offer, or on the creation of differences valued by the market. 2. Design function. Design’s impact on the company and its coordination methods. 3. Design vision. Design’s impact on the company environment, or the transformative function. Each design management strategy represents a choice in design scope and corporate goals: 1. Design action, or design as economic competence. The goal of design is to create value in the company’s primary functions: production and marketing. 2. Design function, or design as managerial competence. Design will create value in the company’s support departments, and, in particular, in innovation and technology management. 3. Design vision, or design as a core competency. Design improves the understanding of the company environment and changes its scope and the representation of its competition. The organization of design in three strategic choices reinforces the idea of “designence,” developed in this book in the example of total quality. Design and management have points in common, and the design management field, as defined in this book, is not only enriched by management concepts, but also opens a door to management by design. It is the relationship between the concrete situation (perceived reality) and the projected situation (desired reality) that is shaped by design. Therefore, design know-how is used not only to create a product or service, but also to serve a better construction of the perceived reality of the moment and the desired reality. In conclusion, the process of creating, judging, deciding, and choosing is the new intellectual commerce of scientific cultures and disciplines. It encourages the possibility of creating what Nobel prize–winning economist Herbert Simon has termed “a new science of design.”