## BIBLIOGRAPHY Aaker, David, and Joachimstahler, Erich, 2000, Brand Leadership, New York: The Free Press. Ackrich, M., M. Callon, and B. Latour, 1988, A quoi tient le succès des innovations, Gérer et comprendre, nos. 18 & 19. Afuah, Allan, 1998, Innovation Management, Oxford University Press. Alessi, Alberto, 1998, The Dream Factory, Alessi Since 1921, Köneman, Cologne. Alleres, Danielle, 1990, Luxe . . . Stratégies-Marketing, Paris: Economica. Allen, Dave, 2000, “Living the Brand,” The Design Management Journal, Winter, 35. Allouche, José, and Géraldine Schmidt, 1995, Les outils de la décision stratégique, La Découverte. Amit, R., and P. Shoemaker, 1993, “Strategic Assets and Organizational Rent,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 14, no. 1, 33–46. Anders, Robert, 2000, “Defining, Mapping and Designing the Design Process,” Design Management Journal, Summer, 29–37. Arbonies Ortiz, Angel, 1996, “Product Design and the Role of External Design Consultants,” Sixth International Forum on Design Management Research and Education. Argyris, Chris, 1999, On Organizational Learning, Basil Blackwell, Second Edition. Arnheim, Rudolf, 1976, La pensée visuelle, Flammarion. Aubert-Gamet, Véronique, 1996, Le Design d’environnement commercial dans les services, Thèse de Doctorat en Sciences de Gestion, Université d’Aix Marseille III. Austin, Simon, Andrew Baldwin, and Andrew Newton, 1996, “A Data Flow Model to Plan and Manage the Building Design Process,” Journal of Engineering Design, vol. 7, no. 1, 3–26. Ayral, Suzanne, 1994, L’intégration du design dans les stratégies de développement des industries de matériaux polymères, Thèse de Doctorat en Sciences de Gestion, Université de Montpellier 1. Badawy, M.K., 1996, “A New Paradigm for Understanding Management Technology: A Research Agenda for ‘Technologists,’” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 12, nos. 5–6, 717–32. Bailetti, Antonio J., and Paul D. Guild, 1991, “Designers’ Impressions of Direct Contact Between Product Designers and Champions of Innovation,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, 91–103. Bailetti, Antonio J., and Paul F. Litva, 1995, “Integrating Customer Requirements into Product Designs,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 12, 3–15. Baker, J., and Levy M. Grewald, 1992, “An Experimental Approach to Making Retail Store Environmental Decisions,” Journal of Retailing, Winter, vol. 68, no. 4, 445–60. Baker, 1987, The Role of the Environment in Marketing Services: The Consumer Perspective in the Service Challenge: Integrating for Competitive Advantage, Czepiel, J. and Shanahan, J., American Marketing Association. Baldwin, Carliss, and Kim Clark, 1997, “Managing in an Age of Modularity,” Harvard Business Review, September/October, 84–93. Balmer, J.M.T., 2001, “Corporate Identity, Corporate Branding, and Corporate Marketing,” European Journal of Marketing, vol. 35, 248–91. Bamossy, Gary, Debra Scammon, and Marilyn Johnston, 1983, “A Preliminary Investigation of the Reliability and Validity of an Aesthetic Judgment Test,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 10, 685–90. Barkan, Philip, 1991, “Strategic and Tactical Benefits of Simultaneous Engineering,” Design Management Journal, Spring 1991, vol. 2, no. 2, 39–42. Barre, Bertrand, and Francis Le, 2001, Vision Oblique, Les Presses du Management. Barthes, 1970, L’empire des signes, Editions A. Skira. Bassereau, Jean-François, T. Lageat, and R. Duchamp, 1997, “From Semantic Differential to Sensorial Profile,” paper prepared but not presented, Second European Academy of Design Conference, Stockholm, April. Baudrillard, Jean, 1981, For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign, St. Louis Telos, 1972, in French, Gallimard. Bauhain-Roux, Dominique, 1992, Gestion du Design et Management d’Entreprise, Chotard. Bauer, Christine, 2001, Le cas Philippe Starck ou de la construction de la notoriété, L’harmattan, Paris. Beckwith, Deanne, 2000, “Design Leadership at Herman Miller,” Design Management Journal, Winter, vol. 11, no. 1, 54–64. Belk, Russell, and Wendy Bryce, 1993, “Christmas Shopping Scenes: From Modern Miracle to Postmodern Mall,” International Journal of Marketing, vol. 10, 277–96. Belk, R.W., 1975, “Situational Variables and Consumer Research,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 2, 157–64. Belk, R.W., 1974, “An Exploratory Assessment of Situational Effects in Buyer Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 11, 156–63. Bellizi, J. A., A.E. Crowley, and R.W. Hasty, 1983, “The Effects of Color in Store Design,” Journal of Retailing, Spring, vol. 59, no. 1, 21–45. Bergadaa, and Nyeck, 1992, Recherche en marketing: un état de controversies, RAM 7.3, 23–44. Berlyne, D.E., 1971, Aesthetics and Psychobiology, New York: Meredith Corporation. Bernstein, David, 1984, Company Image & Reality, Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Berkowitz, Marvin, 1987, “Product Shape as a Design Innovation Strategy,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 4, 274–83. Bernsen, Jens, 1987, Design Management in Practice, EEC European Design Editions, 12 principles in Design Management, Danish Design Council. Berton, Pierre, James Hulbert, and Leyland Pitt, 1999, “To Serve or to Create? Strategic Orientations Toward Customers and Innovation,” California Management Review, Fall, vol. 42, no. 1, 37–55. Bessant John, Caffyn, 1997, “High Involvement Innovation through Continuous Improvement,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 14, no. 1, 7–27. Birren, F., 1969, Light, Color and Environment, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. Bitner et al., 1987, Consumer Responses to the Physical Environment in Service Settings, from Creativity in Services Marketing, Venkatesan, Schmalensee, Marshall, eds., Chicago, 89–93. Bitner, Mary Jo, 1990, “Evaluating the Service Encounter: The Effects of Physical Surroundings and Employee Responses,” Journal of Marketing, April, no. 54, 69–82. Bitner, Mary Jo, 1992, “Servicescapes: The Impact of Physical Surroundings on Customers and Employees,” Journal of Marketing, April, vol. 56, 57–71. Blaich, Robert, and Janet Blaich, 1993, Product Design and Corporate Strategy: Managing the Connection for Competitive Advantage, New York: McGraw-Hill. Bloch, Peter, 1995, “Seeking the Ideal Form: Product Design and Consumer Response,” Journal of Marketing, July, vol. 59, 16–29. Bloch, Peter, and Marsha Richins, 1983, “A Theoretical Model for the Study of Product Importance Perceptions,” Journal of Marketing, Summer, vol. 47, 69–81. Bohemia, Erik, 2000, “Suitability of Industrial Designers to Manage a Product Development Group: Australian Perspective,” Academic Review Design Management Journal, no. 1, 40–53. Boisot, Max, and Dorothy Griffths, 1999, “Possession is Nine Tenths of the Law: Managing a Firm’s Knowledge in a Regime of Weak Appropriability,” Journal of Technology Management, vol. 17, no. 6, 662–76. Borja de Mozota, Brigitte, 2002, Design and Competitive Edge: A Typology for Design Management Excellence in European SMEs, Academic Review of the Design Management Journal, September, no. 2. Borja de Mozota, Brigitte, 2002, Un modèle de management du design, Revue Française de Gestion, Avril-Juin, vol. 28, numéro 138, 75–95. Borja de Mozota, Brigitte, 2001, Design Management, Editions d’Organisation, Seconde édition corrigée, Paris. Borja de Mozota, Brigitte, 1998, “Structuring Strategic Design Management: Michael Porter’s Value Chain,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 9, no. 2, 26–31. Borja de Mozota, Brigitte, 1998, Challenge of Design Relationships: The Converging Paradigm, Management of Design Alliances, John Wiley and Sons. Borja de Mozota, Brigitte, 1992, “A Theoretical Model for the Future of Design Education and Research,” Design Management Journal, Fall, vol. 3, no. 4. Borja de Mozota, Brigitte, 1990 a, Design & Management, Editions d’Organisation, Paris. Borja de Mozota, Brigitte, 1990 b, Design Management: Handbook of Issues and Methods, editor: Mark Oakley, advisory editors: Brigitte Borja de Mozota and Colin Clipson, chapter 9: Design as a Strategic Management Tool, Basil Blackwell Reference: Oxford. Borja de Mozota, Brigitte, 1985, Essai sur la fonction du Design et son rôle dans la Stratégie marketing de l’Entreprise, Thèse de Doctorat en Sciences de Gestion, Université de Paris I Panthéon Sorbonne, Juin. Bouchard, Carole, 1997, Modélisation du processus de style automobile: méthode de veille stylistique adaptée au Design du composant d’aspect, Thèse Docteur en génie Industriel, ENSAM. Bourdieu, Pierre, 1984, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Briggs, Bonnie, and Jill Dorjath, 2001, “The CAT Rental Store,” Design Management Journal, vol. 12 , no. 4, Fall, 24. Bruce, Margaret, and John Bessant, ed., 2002, Design in Business, Design Council & Pearson Education. Bruce, Margaret, and Richelle Harun, 2001, Exploring Design Capability for Serial Innovation in SMEs, Proceedings 4th European Academy of Design Conference, University of Aveiro, Portugal, April 10–12, 280. Bruce, Margaret, and Birgit Jevnaker, ed., 1998, Management of Design Alliances, Wiley. Bruce, Margaret, and Barny Morris, 1995, Approaches to Design Management in the Product Development Process, John Wiley and Sons. Bruce, Margaret, and Barny Morris, 1994, Managing External Design Professionals in the Product Development Process, Technovation, vol. 14, no. 9, 585–98. Bruce, Margaret, and Barny Morris, 1994, Evaluation of Design Management Practices: A Diagnostic Tool, 6th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, Paris. Brun, Monique, 1998, Design management: les PME aussi, Revue Française de Gestion, Janvier-Février, 31–42. Brun, Monique, and Philippe Rasquinet, 1996, L’identité visuelle de l’entreprise, Les Editions d’organisation. Bucci, Ampelio, 1998, Quand les idées mènent l’entreprise, Dunod. Bucci, Ampelio, 1994, From Design Management to Design Direction, 6th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, Paris. Bukowitz, Wendi, and Gordon Petrash, 1997, “Visualizing, Measuring and Managing Knowledge,” Research Technology Management, 24–30. Butcher, John, 1988, The Macroeconomic Value of Design, 1988, Design talks!, ed. Peter Gorb, The Design Council, London Business School. Caron, Gérard, 1996, L’avenir des marques, Futuribles, Février, 27–43. Cellini, R.J., and F.W. Hull, 1996, “Beyond Work on Hire: Results-based Compensation in the Client Consultant Relationship,” Design Management Journal, Spring, 7, 2, 48–53. Chandler, 1990, Scale or Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Childers, Terry, et al., 1985, “Measurements of Individual Differences in Visual versus Verbal Information Processing,” Journal of Consumer Research, Sept., vol. 12. Clark, Kim, and Takahiro Fujimoto, 1991, Product Development Performance, Harvard Business School Press. Clark, Kim B., and Takahiro Fujimoto, 1990, “The Power of Product Integrity,” Harvard Business Review, November–December, 107–118. Claeys, C., A. Swinnen, and Abeele P.Vanden, 1995, “Consumers’ Means-End Chains for ‘Think’ and ‘Feel’ Products,” International Journal of Research in Marketing. Coates, Del, 1997, “Analyzing and Optimizing Discretionary Information,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 8, no. 2, 58–65. Coates, Joseph F., 1997, “Long-Term Technological Trends and Their Implications for Management,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 14, nos. 6/7/8, 579–95. Cooper, Rachel, and Mike Press, 1997, “Design as a Strategic Resource for Management,” Revue Gestion 2000, Sept.–Oct., 91–108. Cooper, Rachel, and Mike Press, 1995, The Design Agenda, John Wiley & Sons. Cooper, Rachel, Alison Prendiville, and Tim Jones, 1995, “High Technology NPD,” Co-Design, April-May-June, vol. 3, 14–22. Cooper, Rachel Davies, 1995, “Setting a Research Framework,” Co-Design, January-February-March, vol. 2, 14. Cooper, Rachel Davies, and Tim Jones, 1994, Successful Design Interfaces in New Product Development, Sixth International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, Paris. Cooper, Rachel, 1993, Perceptions of Design: A Study of the Attitude and Perceptions among European Buyers of the Design of a Range of Products, 5th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, MIT, July 14–16. Cooper, Robert, 1998, Product Leadership, Perseus Books. Cooper, Robert, Scott Edgett, and Elko Kleinschmidt, 1999, “New Product Portfolio Management: Practices and Performance,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 16, 333–51. Cooper, Robert, and Elko Kleinschmidt, 1996, “Winning Businesses in Product Development: The Critical Success Factors,” Research Technology Management, July–August, vol. 39, no. 4, 18–30. Cooper, Robert, and Elko Kleinschmidt, 1986, “An Investigation into the New Product Process: Steps, Deficiencies and Impact,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 3, 71–85. Cooper, Robin, and Bruce W. Chew, 1996, “Control Tomorrow’s Costs through Today’s Designs,” Harvard Business Review, January–February, 88–97. Corfield, K.G., 1979, Report on Product Design, National Economic Development Office (NEDO), London. Coughlan, Peter, and Nick Backlund, 1996, “Fostering Design Consciousness within a Marketing Research Paradigm: A Case Study in Automotive Design Research,” 8th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Barcelona. Coulter, Robin Higie, and Gerald Zaltman, 1994, “Using the Zaltman Metaphor Elicitation Technique to Understand Brand Images,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 21, 501–7. Cova, Bernard, and Christian Svanfeldt, 1993, “Societal Innovations and the Postmodern Aestheticization of Everyday Life,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, vol. 10, 297–310. Cowell, D., 1983, The Marketing of Services, Institute of Marketing and the CAM Foundation. Cox, Dena, and Locander William, 1987, “Product Novelty: Does It Moderate the Relationship Between Ad Attitudes and Brand Attitudes,” Journal of Advertising, 16, 3, 39–44. Credoc Entreprise, 1992, Design et forme naturelle de l’objet: la mise au point d’un outil de design et d’ingénierie de l’immatériel, Etude financée par Ministère de la recherche et de la Technologie. Creusen, Marielle, and Jan Schoormans, 1998, “The Influence of Observation Time on the Role of the Product Design in Consumer Preference,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 25, 551–56. Crossan, Mary, 1998, “Improvisation in Action,” Organization Science, September–October, vol. 9, no. 5, 593–99. Csikszentmihalyi, M., and R. Robinson, 1990, The Art of Seeing, Malibu, California: Jean Paul Getty Museum. Damak, Leila, 1996, Corps du consommateur et design du produit: recherche d’une similarité ou d’une complémentarité, Thèse de Doctorat Sciences de Gestion Université Paris Dauphine. Dandridge, Thomas, 1983, “Symbols, Function and Use,” in L.R. Pondy, P. Frost, and T.C. Dandridge: Organizational Symbolism, Jay Press, Greenwich, 69–79. Dandridge, Thomas, Ian Mitroff, and Joyce William, 1980, “Organizational Symbolism: A Topic to Expand Organizational Analysis,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 5, no. 1, 77–82. Danger, E.P., 1969, How to Use Colors to Sell, Boston: Cahners. Danzig, Mark, 2002, “By Design: The BlueLight Brand Story,” Design Management Journal, Winter, vol. 13, no. 1, 26. Dano, Florence, 1994, “Contribution de la sémiotique à l’Etude des attentes et représentations des consommateurs à l’égard du Packaging,” Thèse de Doctorat ès Sciences de Gestion, 4 juillet, Université de Paris-Dauphine. Darmon, Françoise, 1992, Le sens dans l’utile: 9 entreprises 9 créateurs, Chêne. Davenport, Thomas, 1993, “Process Innovation: Reengineering Work through Information Technology,” Boston: Harvard Business School Press. Davenport-Firth, David, 2000, “Visual Planning: Design and Clients as Co-conspirators,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 11, no. 2, 57–62. Davis, M., 1987, Visual Design in Dress, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. Davis, Tim, 1984, “The Influence of the Physical Environment in Offices,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 9, no. 2, 271–83. De Bono, Edward, 1970, Lateral Thinking: Creativity Step by Step, New York, Harper and Row. Debord, Guy, 1983, Society of Spectacle, Detroit: Black & Red. Demirbilek, Oya, and Miles Park, 2001, “A Survey of Criteria for the Assessment of ‘Good Product Design,’ Fourth European Academy of Design Conference, University of Aveiro, Portugal, April 10–12, 370. De Noblet, Jocelyn, éditeur, 1993, Design, Miroir du Siècle, Flammarion/APCI. Design de A à Z, Mode d’Emploi, 1998, Ministère de l’Economie, des Finances et de l’Industrie, DPI, rédaction Jean-Charles Gaté. Design Continuum Inc, 2000, “Getting Design: Bringing External Design Resources into an Organization,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 11, no. 2, 53. Design Policy, 1982, “GK Industrial Design Japan. Smallness as an Idea,” Proceedings International Conference, Royal College of Art. Dess Management du Design et le la Qualité, 2000, Enquête professionnelle sur la profession de Design Intégré, Annuaire du Design Intégré, Université de Nancy 2, publié par Design Fax. Djelic, Marie-Laure, and Antti Ainamo, 1999, “The Coevolution of New Organizational Forms in the Fashion Industry: A Historical and Comparative Study of France, Italy, and the United States,” Organization Science, September–October, no. 5, 622–37. Donovan, R.J., and J.R. Rossiter, 1982, “Store Atmosphere: An Environmental Approach,” Journal of Retailing, Spring, vol. 58, no. 1, 34–57. Donovan, R.J., J.R. Rossiter, G. Marcoolyn, and A. Nesdale, 1994, “Store Atmosphere and Purchasing Behavior,” Journal of Retailing, vol. 20, no. 3, 283–94. Dormer, Peter, 1990, The Meanings of Modern Design, Thames and Hudson. Dosi, G., S. Teece, and G. Winter, 1990, Les frontières des enterprises, Revue d’Economie Industrielle, 1<sup>er</sup> trimestre. Droste, Magdalena,1990, Bauhaus, Taschen. Dreyfuss, Henry, 1950, “The Industrial Designer and the Businessman,” Harvard Business Review, November, vol. 28, no. 6. Drucker, Peter, 1998, “The Discipline of Innovation,” Harvard Business Review, November– December, 149–157. Dubois, Bernard, 1987, “Culture et Marketing,” Recherche et Applications en Marketing, vol. II, no. 1/87, 45–63. Dubuisson, Sophie, and Antoine Hennion, 1996, Le Design: l’objet dans l’usage, Presses de l’Ecole des Mines de Paris. Dumas, Angela, and Henry Mintzberg, 1991, “Managing the Form, Function and Fit of Design,” Design Management Journal, Summer, 26–31. Durand, Thomas, Eléonore Mounoud, and Bernard Ramantsoa, 1996, “Uncovering Strategic Assumptions: Understanding Managers Ability to Build Representations,” European Management Journal, August, vol. 14, no. 4, 389. Durgee, Jeffrey, 1996, “Design Research Implications of Adrian Forty’s ‘Objects of Desire’: Merging Consumer Culture with Design Culture,” 8th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Barcelona. Durgee, Jeffrey F., et al., 1995, “Why Some Products ‘Just Feel Right,’ or, The Phenomenology of Product Rightness,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 22, 650–2. Dyson, James, 1997, Against the Odds: An Autobiography, London: Orion Business Books. Eckman, Molly, and Janet Wagner, 1994, “Judging the Attractiveness of Product Design: The Effect of Visual Attributes and Consumer Characteristics,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 21, 560–4. Eckman, Molly, and Janet Wagner, 1995, “Aesthetic Aspects of the Consumption of Fashion Design: The Conceptual and Empirical Challenge,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 22, 646–49. Eco, Umberto, 1992, Les limites de l’Interprétation, Paris: Grasset. Eco, Umberto, 1988, La structure absente, Mercure de France. Ehrnberg, Ellinor, and Staffan Jacobsson, 1996, “Managing Technological Discontinuities—A Tentative Framework,” International Journal Technology Management, vol. 11, nos. 3/4, 452–65. Eisenhard, K. M., 1989, “Building Theories from Case Study Research,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 14, (4), 532–50. Ellis, Willis D., 1950, A Source Book of Gestalt Psychology, London: Routledge. Evans, W., J. Fellows, M. Zorn, and K. Doty, 1980, “Cognitive Mapping and Architecture,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 65, no. 4, 474–78. Everett, Peter B., G.M. Rik Pieters, and Philip A. Titus, 1994, “The Consumer-Environment Interaction: An Introduction to the Special Issue,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, vol. 11, 97–105. Faruque, Omar, 1984, Graphic Communication as a Design Tool, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. Ferry, Luc, 1990, Homo Aestheticus, Paris: Grasset. Feldman, Laurence, 1995, Design Research and the Usability of High Tech Products, 7th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, University of Stanford Fitch, Agence, 2000, “Building and Fostering Long-Term Client Relationships,” Design Management Journal, vol. 11, no. 2, Spring, 41–45. Firat, Fuat, and Alladi Venkatesh, 1995, “Liberatory Postmodernism and the Reenchantment of Consumption,” Journal of Consumer Research, December, vol. 22, no. 3, 239–67. Firat, Fuat, and Alladi Venkatesh, 1993, “Postmodernity: The Age of Marketing,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 227–49. Floch, Jean-Marie, 1989, “La contribution d’une sémiotique structurale à la conception d’un hypermarché,” Recherche et Applications en marketing, vol. IV, no. 2/89, 37–59. Forty, Adrian, 1986, Objects of Desire, London, Pantheon. Franzen, Stefan, et al., 1994, “The Inappreciative Market. Marketing Ergonomic Design,” Sixth International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, Paris. Frery, Frédéric, 2000, Benetton ou l’entreprise virtuelle, Vuibert Collection Management. Freund, Bruno, et al., 1997, “Impact of Information Technologies on Manufacturing,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 13, no. 3, 215–28. Fry, Tony, 1995, “Ecologic Crisis and Design,” in Discovering Design, Buchanan and Margolin, eds. University of Chicago Press. Fujimoto, Takahiro, 1991, “Product Integrity and the Role of ‘Designer as Integrator,’” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 2, no. 2, 29–34. Garber, Lawrence L., 1995, “The Package Appearance in Choice,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 22, 653–60. Gato, J.A., and A. Porter, et al., 1987, Exploring Visual Design, Worchester, Mass.: Davis Publications. Gemser, Gerda, 1997, “Industrial Design and Competitiveness,” 2nd European Academy of Design Conference, Stockholm, April. Gemser, Gerda, and Eric Van Zee, 2002, “Benchmarking Industrial Design Services, Design Journal, United Kingdom. Gemser, Gerda, and Nachoem Wijnberg, 2002, “Industrial Design Awards and Competitive Dynamics,” Academic Review, Design Management Journal, no. 2. Gemser, Gerda, and Nachoem Wijnberg, 2001, “Effects of Reputational Sanctions on the Competitive Imitation of Design Innovations,” Organisation Studies, EGOS 22/4, 563–91. Gemser, Gerda, and Mark Leenders, 2001, “How Integrating Industrial Design in the Product Development Process Impacts on Company Performance,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 18, 28–38. Gobe, Marc, 2001, Emotional Branding, Allworth Press. Goldenberg, Jacob, and David Mazursky, 2002, Creativity in Product Innovation, Cambridge University Press. Gombrich, E.H., 1979, 1984, The Sense of Order, Phaidon Press. Goodrich, Kristina, 1994, “The Designs of the Decade: Quantifying Design Impact over Ten Years,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 5, no. 2, 47. Goodsell, C., 1977, “Bureaucratic Manipulation of Physical Symbols,” American Journal of Political Science, February, XXI, 79–91. Goodwin, C., 1994, “Private Roles in Public Encounters: Communal Relationships in Service Exchanges,” Proceedings 3rd International Research Seminar in Service Management, LaLonde les Maures (cité par Aubert Gamet 1996). Goodwin, C., et al., 1992, “Social Support through the Service Interaction,” Actes du 2ème séminaire International de recherche en management des activités de services, IAE Aix Marseille. Gorb, Peter, 1995, “Managing Design in an Uncertain World,” European Management Journal, March, vol. 13, no. 1, 120–27. Gorb, Peter, 1990, Design-management et gestion des organizations, Revue Française de Gestion, Septembre –Octobre, numéro 80, 66–72. Gorb, Peter, and Raymond Turner, 1992, “A Design Frontier: Corporate Identity and Design Management at Eurotunnel,” Design Management Journal, Winter, 21–32. Gorb, Peter, and Angela Dumas, 1987, “Silent Design,” Design Studies, July, vol. 8, no. 3, 150–56. Goto, Kelly, and Emily Cotler, 2002, Web Redesign: Workflow that Works, NewRiders, traduction française Editions Eyrolles. Grange, Thierry, and Loïck Roche, 1998, Management et technologie: pour un développement de l’imaginaire en entreprise, Collection management technologique ESC Grenoble, Diffusé Maxima. Greimas, A.J., and J. Courtes, 1979, Sémiotique, dictionnaire raisonné de la Théorie du Langage, Paris: Hachette. Grewal, Dhruv, and Julie Baker, 1994, “Do Retail Store Environmental Factors Affect Consumers’ Price Acceptability? An Empirical Examination,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, vol. 11, 107–15. Griffin, Abbie, and John R. Hauser, 1996, “Integrating R&D and Marketing: A Review and Analysis of the Literature,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 13, 191–213. Groppel, A., 1992, “Store Design and Experience-Orientated Consumers in Retailing,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 20. Grossbart, S.L., R.A. Mittelstaedt, W.W. Curtis, and R.D. Rogers, 1975, “Environmental Sensitivity and Shopping Behavior,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 3, no. 4, 281–94. Gulmann, Steffen, 1987, Design Management in Practice: Image Management, EEC Design Publications (SG4). Guimaraes, Luiz, John Penny, and Stanley Moody, 1996, “Product Design and Social Needs: The Case of North East Brazil,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 12, no. 7/8, 849–63. Hamel, Gary, and C.K. Pralahad, 1994, Competing for the Future, Boston: Harvard Business School Press. Hamel, Gary, and C.K. Pralahad, 1993, “Strategy as Stretch and Leverage,” Harvard Business Review, March–April. Hansen, R.A., and T. Deutscher, 1978, “An Empirical Investigation of Attribute Importance in Retail Store Selection,” Journal of Retailing, Winter, vol. 53, no. 4, 59–72. Hargadon, Andrew, 1998, “Firms as Knowledge Brokers: Lessons in Pursuing Continuous Innovation,” California Management Review, vol. 40, no. 1, 209–27. Hargadon, Andrew, and Y. Douglas, 2001, “When Innovations Meet Institutions: Edison and the Design of the Electrical Light,” Administrative Science Quarterly, September, vol. 46. Hargadon, Andrew, and Robert Sutton, 2000, “Building Innovation Factory,” Harvard Business Review, May–June, 157. Hargadon, Andrew, and Robert Sutton, 1997, “Technology Brokering and Innovation in a Product Development Firm,” Administrative Science Quarterly, vol. 42, 716–49. Harris, K., S. Baron, and J. Ratcliffe, 1994, “Oral Participation of Customers in a Retail Setting: An Empirical Study,” Actes du 3<sup>ème</sup> séminaire international de recherche en management des activités de services, IAE Aix Marseille III, 347. Hart, Susan, and Linda Service, 1988, “The Effects of Managerial Attitudes to Design on Company Performance,” Journal of Marketing Management, vol. 4, no. 2, Hivers, 230. Hart, Susan J., Linda M. Service, and Michael J. Baker, 1989, “Design Orientation and Market Success,” Design Studies, April, vol. 10, no. 2, 103–8. Hatchuel, Armand, and Benoit Weil, 1999, Design Oriented Organizations: Towards a Unified Theory of Design Activities, Ecole des Mines de Paris, 6th International Product Development Management Conference, Cambridge, July. Hayes, Robert, Steven Wheelwright, and Kim Clark, 1988, Dynamic Manufacturing, New York: The Free Press. Hayes, Robert, 1990, Design: Putting Class into ‘World Class,’” Design Management Journal, Summer 1990, vol. 1, no. 2, 8–14. Henderson, Pamela, and Joseph Cote, 1998, “Guidelines for Selecting or Modifying Logos,” Journal of Marketing, April, vol. 62, 14–30. Henry, Jane, ed., 1991, Creative Management, Sage Publications, 319. Herbruck, Diane, and Steven Umbach, 1997, “Design Management and New Product Development: Linking People and Process,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 8, no. 2, 44–50. Hertenstein, Julie, Marjorie Platt, and David Brown, 2001, “Valuing Design: Enhancing Corporate Performance through Design Effectiveness,” Design Management Journal, Summer, vol. 12, no. 3, 10–19. Hertenstein, Julie H., and Marjorie B. Platt, 1997, “Developing a Strategic Design Culture,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 8, no. 2, 10–19. Hetzel, Patrick, and Gilles Marion, 1995, “Contributions of French Semiotics to Marketing Research Knowledge,” Revue Marketing and Research Today, February–May, vol. 23, nos. 1 and 2. Hetzel, Patrick, 1995, Le rôle de la mode et du design dans la société postmoderne, Revue Française du Marketing, Numéro 151, vol. 1, 19–35. Hetzel, Patrick, 1995, Pour renouveler les processus d’innovation en entreprise, Revue Française de Gestion, Mars-Avril-Mai, Numéro 103, 87–97. Hetzel, Patrick, 1994, Design Management, constitution de l’offre et “néo-marketing”: les contributions du design au renouvellement de la “construction” des processus d’innovation en entreprise, Sixth International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, Paris. Hetzel, Patrick, 1993, Design Management et Constitution de l’Offre, Thèse de Doctorat Sciences de Gestion, Université Jean Moulin Lyon 3. Hirschmann, Elisabeth, and Morris Holbrook, 1992, Postmodern Consumer Research, Newbury: Park Sage Publications. Hise, Richard T., Larry O’Neal, James McNeal, and A. Prasuraman, 1989, “The Effect of Product Design Activities on Commercial Success Levels of New Industrial Products,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 6, 43–50. Holbrook, Morris, 1986, “Aims, Concepts, and Methods for Representation of Individual Differences in Esthetic Responses to Design Features,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 13, 337–47. Holbrook, Morris, and Elisabeth Hirschmann, 1993, The Semiotics of Consumption, New York: Mouton de Gruyter. Holbrook, Morris, and Elisabeth Hirschmann, 1982, “The Experimental Aspects of Consumption: Consumer Fantasies, Feelings and Fun,” Journal of Consumer Research, September, vol. 9, 132– 40. Holland, Ray, 1995, “Integrated ‘R’ Us: Multidisciplinary Team Design of Education Toys,” 7th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Stanford University. Hollins, Bill, 1995, “Managing Concurrent Engineering,” Co-Design, April-May-June, vol. 3, 22–30. Hollins, Bill, and Stuart Pugh, 1990, Successful Product Design, London: Butterwoths. Hollins, Gillian, and Bill Hollins, 1991, Total Design: Managing the Design Process in the Service Sector, London: Pitman. Holt, Knut, 1991, “The Impact of Technology Strategy on the Engineering Design Process,” Design Studies, April, vol. 12, no. 2, 90–5. Holt, Knut, 1990, The Nature of the Design Process, in Handbook of Design Management, edited by Mark Oakley, Basil Blackwell, 195–98. Hubel Vello, Diedra, and B. Lussow, 1984, Focus on Designing, McGraw-Hill, Ryerson Limited. Hughes, David G., and Don C. Chafin, 1996, “Turning New Product Development into a Continuous Learning Process,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 13, 89–104. Ingram, Jack, and Richard Heppenstall, 1996, “Design Management Strategy and Concurrent Engineering,” 8th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Barcelona. Itten, Johannes, 1970, The Elements of Color, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. Jenkins, S., et al., 1997, “Managing the Product Development Process (Part 1 & 2),” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 13, no. 4, 359–77, 379–93. Jensen, M., and W. Meckling, 1976, “The Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Cost and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 4, no. 3, 305–60. Jevnaker, Birgit, 2000, “Championing Design: Perspectives on Design Capabilities,” Academic Review, Design Management Journal, no. 1, 25–39. Jevnaker, Birgit, 1996, “Fostering Strategic Design Directions in Business Firms: The Hidden Assets,” 8th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Barcelona. Jevnaker, Birgit, 2000, “How Design Becomes Strategic,” Design Management Journal, Winter, vol. 11, 41–7. Johne, Axel F., and Patricia A. Snelson, 1988, “Success Factors in Product Innovation: A Selective Review of the Literature,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 5, 114–28. Jonas, Wolfgang, 1997, “Viable Structures and Generative Tools,” Second European Academy of Design, Stockholm, 23–25, April. Jones, Christopher, 1992, Design Methods, Wiley & Sons, (first edition, 1970). Jones, P., 1991, Taste Today, New York: Pergamon Press. Kaminagai, Yo, 2002, la stratégie de design d’une marque de transport urbain, Eurosyn, lettre trimestrielle, juillet. Kapferer, Jean-Noël, and Jean-Claude Thoenig, 1989, La Marque, Ouvrage Collectif, McGraw-Hill. Katz, D., 1950, Gestalt Psychology, New York: Ronald Press. Keeley, Larry, 1991, “Taking the D-team Out of the Minor Leagues,” Design Management Journal, Spring 1991, vol. 2, no. 2, 35–8. Keller, Kevin Lane, 1993, “Conceptualizing, Measuring, and Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 57, 1–32. Keller, Kevin Lane, 1999, “Brand Reinforcement and Revitalization Strategies,” California Management Review, Spring, vol. 41, no. 3, 102–23. Kelley, Tom, 2001, Prototyping is the shorthand of innovation, Design Management Journal, vol. 12, Summer, 35–42. Kelley, Tom, 2001, The Art of Innovation, New York: Doubleday. Kelley, Tom, 1999, “Designing for Business, Consulting for Innovation,” Design Management Journal, Summer, vol. 10, no. 3. Keen, P.G.W., 1997, The Process Edge, Harvard Business School Press, 11. Kogut, Bruce, and Udo Zander, 1996, “Why Firms Do? Coordination, Identity, and Learning,” Organization Science, September-October, vol. 7, no. 5, 502–17. Kotler, Philip, and Alexander Rath, 1984, “Design, A Powerful but Neglected Strategic Tool,” Journal of Business Strategy, Fall 1984, vol. 5, no. 2, 16. Kotler, Phillip, 1973, “Atmospherics as a Marketing Tool,” Journal of Retailing, Winter, vol. 49, no. 4. Kristensen, Tore, 1995, “The Contribution of Design to Business: A Competence-Based Perspective, Process of Change Laboratory, Stanford University /Copenhagen Business School; 22 February. Landry, Roch, 1987, Contributions du design industriel au processus d’innovation et de communication dans l’entreprise, Thèse pour le Doctorat ès Sciences de gestion,Université d’Aix–Marseille, 3 mai. Langrish, John, and Chiwu Huang, 1996, “Product Semantics and Ease of Use,” 8th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Barcelona. Lawson, B., 1983, How Designers Think, Westfield, NJ: Eastview Editions. Lazarus, R.S., 1991, Emotion and Adaptation, NYK, Oxford University Press. Lebahar, Jean-Charles, 1994, Le Design Industriel, Editions Parenthèses. Leifer, Richard, C. McDermott, G. O’Connor, L. Peters, M. Rice, and R. Veryzer, 2000, Radical Innovation, Harvard Business School Press. Leonard, Dorothy, and Sylvia Sensiper, 1998, “The Role of Tacit Knowledge in Group Innovation,” California Management Review, Spring, vol. 40, no. 3, 113–31. Leonard-Barton, Dorothy, 1991, “Inanimate Integrators: A Block of Wood Speaks,” The Design Management Journal, Summer, vol. 2, no. 3, 61–7. Le Quement, Patrick, 1994, “The Case of the Twingo,” 4th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, Paris, 1–3 June. Lewasky, Z., 1988, Product Esthetics: An Interpretation for Designers, Carson City, NV: Design and Development Engineering Press. Lester, Richard, Michael Piore, and Kamal Malek, 1998, “Interpretive Management: What General Managers Can Learn from Design,” Harvard Business Review, March–April, 86–96. Levin, Morten, 1997, “Technology Transfer is Organizational Development: An Investigation into the Relationship between Technology Transfer and Organizational Change,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 14, nos. 2/3/4, 297–308. Liedtka, Jeanne, 2000, “In Defense of Strategy as Design,” California Management Review, Spring, vol. 42, no. 3, 8–30. Linquist, J.D., 1974, “Meaning of Image,” Journal of Retailing, Winter, vol. 50, 29–38. Loken, Barbara, and James Ward, 1990, “Alternative Approaches to Understanding the Determinants of Typicality,” September, Journal of Consumer Research, 111–26. Loewy, Raymond, 1963, La laideur se vend mal, Gallimard. Looschilder, Gérard et al., 1995, “A Means-End Chain Approach to Concept Testing, in Product Development,” edited by Bruce and Biemans, Wiley & Sons, 117. Lorenz, Christopher, 1986, The Design Dimension, Blackwell (édition française Editions d’Organisation 1990). Lovering, Tim, 1995, “Corporate Design Management as an Aid to Regional Development,” 7th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, University of Stanford. Lutz R., and P. Kakkar, 1975, “The Psychological Situation as a Determinant of Consumer Behavior,” Advances in Consumer Research, 439–53. McCracken, Grant, 1986, “Culture and Consumption,” Journal of Consumer Research, June, vol. 13. Macelroy, J.C., P.C. Morrow, and S. Eroglu, 1990, “The Atmosphere of Personal Selling,” Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management, Fall, 31–41. Macneal, J.U., 1973, “An Introduction to Consumer Behavior,” John Wiley & Sons, New York. Madahvan, Ravindranath, and Rajiv Grover, 1998, “From Embedded Knowledge to Embodied Knowledge: New Product Development as Knowledge Management,” Journal of Marketing, October, 1–12. Maeda, John, 2002, “Design Education in the Post-Digital Age,” Design Management Journal, Summer, vol. 13, no. 3, 39–45. Maffessolli, Michel, 1990, Au creux des apparences, Paris Plon. Magne, Stéphane, 1999, Essai de mesure de l’attitude esthétique du consommateur envers la forme—design du packaging et d’une variable explicative, la sensibilité esthétique personnelle: une application au Design de couvertures de livres, Université de Toulouse I, Thèse de Doctorat en Sciences de Gestion, 22 janvier, ESUG. Maisseu, André, 1995, “Managing Technological Flows into Corporate Strategy,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 10, no. 1, 3–20. Manzini, Ezio, 1995, Ecology of the Artificial, in Discovering Design, Buchanan & Margolin, eds., University of Chicago Press. Margulies, W.P., 1970, Packaging Power, World Publishing, New York. Marinissen, A.H., 1990, Effectivity of Ergonomics in the Design Process, Delft University of Technology, Colloque recherches sur le Design, Compiègne, octobre. Marion, Gilles, 1999, La nouvelle crise des modèles rationalisateurs du marketing, Revue Française de Gestion, Septembre-Octobre, 81. Marchandet, Eric, 1994, Les formes de la relation à l’objet: contribution à une sociologie de l’objet, Thèse de Doctorat de Sociologie, Université Paris 5. Markin, R.J., C.M. Lillis, and C.L. Narayana, 1976, “Social Psychological Significance of Store Space,” Journal of Retailing, vol. 52, 43–54. Marquardt, R.A., J.C. Makens, and R.G. Roe, 1979, Retail Management, The Dryden Press, Hinsdale. Mehrabian, A., and J.A. Russell, 1974, An Approach to Environmental Psychology, MIT Press. Meyers, Herbert M., 1994, “The Role of Packaging in Brand Line Extensions,” The Journal of Brand Management, June, vol. 1, no. 6. Meyers, Levy Joan, and Alice Tybout, 1987, “Schema Incongruity as a Basis for Product Evaluation,” Journal of Consumer Research, 16, June, 39–54. Mick, David Glen, and Fournier, Susan, 1998, “Paradoxes of Technology: Consumer Cognisance, Emotions and Coping Strategies,” Journal of Consumer Research, September, vol. 25, 123–43. Mick, David Glen, 1986, “Consumer Research and Semiotics: Exploring the Morphology of Signs, Symbols and Significance,” Journal of Consumer Research, September, vol. 13, 196–213. Midler, Christophe, 1993, L’auto qui n’existait pas, Intereditions. Mintzberg, Henry, 1994, Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning, Prentice Hall. Mintzberg, Henry, 1990, “The Design School: Reconsidering the Basic Premises of Strategic Management,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 11, no. 3, 171–95. Mitchell, Thomas, 1996, New Thinking in Design: Conversations on Theory and Practice, Van Nostrand Reinhold. Mitchell, Thomas, 1993, Redefining Designing: From Form to Experience, Van Nostrand Reinhold. Mok, Clement, 1996, Designing Business, Adobe Press. Moles, Abraham, 1992, Qualité de vie et constance de l’environnement, Design Recherche, Numéro 2, Septembre. Moody, Stanley, 1982, “Role of ID in Development of New Science-Based Products Innovation,” Design Policy, Proceedings International Conference, Royal College of Art, Design and Industry. Morello, Augusto, 1995, Marketing Design, in Buchanan et al., ed., Discovering Design, University of Chicago Press. Morin, Edgar, 1991, La Méthode: 4 Les idées, Seuil. Morris, Charles, 1964, Signification and Significance: A Study of the Relations of Signs and Values, Cambridge: MIT Press. Morrow, P.C., and J.C. Elroy, 1981, “Interior Office Design and Visitor Response,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 66 (5), 646–50. Mueller, James, 1995, “Designing for Real People,” 7th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, University of Stanford. Nadler, Gerald, 1991, “Design Teams: Breakthroughs for Effectiveness,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 2, no. 2, 5–9. Nonaka, I., and N. Konno, “The Concept of Ba: Building for Knowledge Creation,” California Management Review, Spring 1998, vol. 40, no. 3. Nonaka, Ikujiro, and Hirotaka Takeuchi, 1995, The Knowledge-Creating Company, Oxford University Press. Nussbaum, Bruce, 1993, “Hot Products,” Business Week. Oakley, Mark, editor, Clipson and Borja de Mozota, coeditors, 1990, Design Management: A Handbook of Issues and Methods, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. O’Connor, William J., 1990, “The Package Design Imperative: Think Globally—Act Locally,”Design Management Journal, Summer, vol. 1, no. 2, 54–61. Olins, Wolf, 1989, Corporate Identity, Thames & Hudson. Olins, Wolf, 1974, The Wolf Olins Guide to Design Management. Olson, Eric, Orville Walker Jr., and Robert Ruekert, 1995, “Organizing for Effective New Product Development: The Moderating Role of Product Innovativeness,” Journal of Marketing, January, vol. 59, 48–62. Olson, J., 1988, Theoretical Foundations of Means-End Chains, working paper at Penn State University. Ornstein, Suzyn, 1986, “Organizational Symbols: A Study of Their Meanings and Influences on Perceived Psychological Climate,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, no. 38, 207– 29. Osborne, Harold, 1986, What Makes An Experience Aesthetics in Possibility of the Aesthetics Experience, Boston: Kluwes Academic Publishing. Owens, David, 2000, “Structure and Status in Design Teams: Implications for Design Management,” academic review of The Design Management Journal, no. 1, 55–63. Oxman, Riuka, 1990, “Prior Knowledge in Design: A Dynamic Knowledge-Based Model of Design and Creativity,” Design Studies, vol. 11, no.1, January, 17–28. Pahl, G, and W. Beitz, 1988, Engineering Design, Design Council. Papanek, Victor, 1991, Design for the Real World, Thames and Hudson. Parasuman, A., V. Zeithaml, and L. Berry, 1985, “A Conceptual Model of Service Quality and Its Implications for Future Research,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 49, 41–50. Parasuman, A., V. Zeithaml, and L. Berry, 1988, “A Multiple Item Scale for Measuring Consumer Perceptions of Service Quality,” Journal of Retailing, vol. 64, no. 1, Spring, 12–37. Paul, Joseph, 2000, “Performance Metrics to Measure the Value of Design,” Design Management Journal, vol. 11, no. 4, Fall, 71–5. Paul, Joseph, and Patrick Fricke, 1999, The Pursuit of Performance Metrics: Measuring the Value of Design at Eastmann Kodak, 3rd European International Design Management Conference, March 14–16, Amsterdam. Pavesi, Giovanni, and Michael Carlo Sommer, 1996, Washing Machines: Users’ Perceptions and Expectations as Input into the Professional Design Process, 8th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Barcelona. Peirce, Charles, 1931–58, Collected Papers, edited by Hartshorne, Weiss, and Burks, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Peter, P., and J. Olson, 1987, Consumer Behaviour: Marketing Strategy Perspectives, Richard Erwin Inc. Peters, Tom, 2000, “Design as Advantage No. 1: The Design + Identity 50,” Design Management Journal, Winter, 11–17. Peters, Tom, 1989, “The Design Challenge,” Design Management Journal, Fall, vol. 1, no. 1, 8–13. Pettigrew, Andrew, Richard Woodman, and Kim Cameron, 2001, “Studying Organizational Change and Development: Challenges for Future Research,” Academy of Management Journal, vol. 44, no. 4, 697–713. Phillips, Peter, 2002, “Lessons from the Trenches: Insights from Design Management Seminars,” Design Management Journal, Summer, vol. 13, 53–7. Pinson, Christian, N.K. Malhotra, and A.K. Jain, 1988, Les styles cognitifs des consommateurs, Recherche et Applications en Marketing, vol. III, no. 1/88. Piore, Michael, and Richard Lester, 2001, Language, Interpretation, and the Understanding of Economic Processes, in Management de l’Innovation, Management de la connaissance, ouvrage collectif séminaire Condor, Lharmattan. Pirkl, James, 1994, Transgenerational Design, Van Nostrand Reinhold. Porter, Michael, 1998, “What is Strategy?” in The Strategy Reader, edited by Susan Segal-Horn, Basic Blackwell. Porter, Michael E., 1990, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, New York: The Free Press. Porter, Michael E., 1980, Competitive Strategy, New York: The Free Press. Potter, Norman, 1980, What is a Designer? (revised edition), Hyphen Press. Potter, Stephen, and Roy Robin, et al., 1991, The Benefits and Costs of Investment in Design, The Open University UMIST report DIGG-03, Design Innovation Group, September. Pralahad, C.K., and Venkatram Ramaswamy, 2000, “Co-opting Customer Competence,” Harvard Business Review, January–February, 79–87. Press, Mike, 1995, From Mean Design to Lean Design and a Smarter Future: Design Management in the British Ceramic Tableware Industry, 7th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, University of Stanford. Price, Alun, 1995, Design Users’ View of Their Design Experiences: Some Western Australian Evidence, 7th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, University of Stanford. Quarante, Danielle, 1994, Eléments de Design Industriel, Seconde edition, Polytechnica. Quinton, Philippe, 1997, Design graphique et changement, L’harmattan, Paris. Ram, S., 1989, “Successful Innovation Using Strategies to Reduce Consumer Resistance: An Empirical Test,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 6, 20–34. RATP (entreprise), 1995, La Métamorphose, InterEditions et Vous avez dit design? Yo Kaminagai, RATP revue interne. Reinhardt, Forest L., 1998, “Environmental Product Differentiation: Implications for Corporate Strategy,” California Management Review, vol. 40, no. 4, Summer. Rhodes, Ed, and Ruth Carter, 1995, “Emerging Corporate Strategies,” Co-Design, April-May-June, vol. 3, 9. Riedel, Johann, Robin Roy, and Stephen Potter, 1996, Market Demands that Reward Investment in Design, 8th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Barcelona. Ring, Peter, 1999, Using Trust to Promote Economic Growth, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship, 2<sup>ème</sup> Colloque La Métamorphose des Organisations, Octobre, Université de Nancy 2, Grefige. Rioche, Laurence, 2002, On the Agenda: Design Management to Increase Cross-functional Integration in High-tech Companies, 11th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Northeastern University, Boston. Rogers, Everett, 1995, Diffusion of Innovations, 4th edition, New York: Free Press. Rook, D.W., 1987, “The Buying Impulse,” Journal of Consumer Research, no. 14, 189–99. Rose, David, 2001, “Experience Architecture: A Framework for Designing Personalized Customer Interactions,” Design Management Journal, Spring, 68. Rothwell, Roy, et al., 1983, Design and the Economy, The Design Council. Rothwell, Roy, and Paul Gardiner, 1983, “The Role of Design in Product and Process Change,” Design Studies, vol. 4, no. 3, July, 161–69. Rothwell, Roy, and Paul Gardiner, 1984, The Role of Design in Competitiveness, Design Policy, The Design Council. Roy, Robin, and Stephen Potter, 1996, “Managing Engineering Design in Complex Supply Chains,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 12, no. 4, 403. Roy, Robin, 1990, Product Design and Company Performance, Design and the Economy, Design Council, London. Roy, Robin, et al., 1990, Design and the Economy, The Design Council (récriture du rapport de 1983). Roux, Dominique, 1995, Design et Management: une revue critique de la literature, Institut de recherche en Gestion Université Paris Val de Marne, Cahier de Recherche, numéro 95–09. Roy, Robin, G. Salaman, and Vivien Walsh, 1986, Research Grant Final Report, Design-based Innovation in Manufacturing Industry. Principles and Practices for Successful Design and Production, Report DIG-02, Milton Keynes: Design Innovation Group, Open University. Rufaidah, Popy, 2002, Corporate Identity Management: The Comparison Between Verbal and Visual Models, 11th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Boston, June 12–13. Russel, J.A., and G. Pratt, 1980, “A Description of the Affective Quality Attributed to Environments,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 38, no. 2, 311–22. Rutter, Bryce G., Anne Marie Becka, and David Jenkins, 1997, “A User Centered Approach to Ergonomic Seating,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol. 8, no. 2. Ryan, Laura, 2002, The Transformational Leadership of Creative Work Teams: A Large Scale Survey of Design Managers, Proceedings 11th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Boston, June 10–11. Sanchez, Ron, 2000, “Modular Architectures, Knowledge Assets and Organisational Learning: New Management Processes for Product Creation,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 19, no. 6, 610–29. Sanchez, Ron, 1999, “Modular Architectures in the Marketing Process,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 63, 92–111. Schenk, Pamela, 1991, “The Role of Drawing in the Graphic Design Process,” Design Studies, vol. 12 , no. 3, July 1991, 168–81. Schewe, C.D., 1988, “Marketing to Our Aging Population: Responding to Physiological Changes,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 5, 61–73. Schmitt, Bernd, and Alex Simonson, 1997, Marketing Aesthetics: The Strategic Management of Brands, Identity and Image, New York: The Free Press. Schmitt, Bernd, 2000, “Creating and Managing Brand Experiences on the Internet,” Design Management Journal, Fall, 53. Schmitt, Bernd, 1999, “Experiential Marketing: A Framework for Design and Communications,” Design Management Journal, vol. 10, no. 2, Spring, 10–177. Schön, Donald A., and Glen Wiggins, 1992, “Kinds of Seeing and Their Functions in Designing,” Design Studies, vol. 13, no. 2, 135–56. Schwach, Victor, 1994, Micropsychologie du mode d’emploi, Design Recherche, no 5, janvier, 63. Seidel, Victor, 2000, “Moving from Design to Strategy: The 4 roles of Design-Led strategy consulting,” Design Management Journal, vol. 11, no. 2, Spring. Senge, Peter, 1999, In the Dance of Change, Interview with Fast Company, USA, May. Sewall, Murphy, 1978, “Market Segmentation Based on Consumer Ratings of Proposed Product Designs,” Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 16, November, 557–64. Siehl, C., D.E. Bowen, and C.M. Pearson, 1990, The Role of Rites of Integration in Service Delivery, Actes du 1er séminaire international en management des activités de service, IAE, Université Aixmarseille III, 617 (cité par Aubert-Gamet, 1996). Simmel, Georg, 1986, La tragédie de la culture, Paris petite bibliothèque Ravage. Simon, Herbert A., 1982, The Sciences of the Artificial, The MIT Press (first edition, 1969). Simonson, Alex, 1997, “Affecting Consumers through Identity and Design,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 24, 64–6. Smith, Preston, 1996, “Your Product Development Process Demands Ongoing Improvement,” Research Technology Management, vol. 39, no. 2, March–April, 37–44. Solomon, Michael, 1983, “The Role of Products as Social Stimuli: A Symbolic Interactionism Perspective,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 10, December, 319–29. Solomon, O., 1988, “Semiotics and Marketing: New Directions in Industrial Design Applications,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 4, 3, 201–16. Speak, Karl, 2000, “Beyond Stewardship to Brand Infusion,” Design Management Journal, Winter, vol. 11, 45. Speak, Karl, 1998, “Brand Stewardship,” Design Management Journal, vol. 9, no. 1, Winter, 32. Spies, Kordelia, Friedrich Hesse, and Kerstin Loesch, 1997, “Store Atmosphere, Mood, and Purchasing Behaviour,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, vol. 14, 1–17. Steiner, Carol J., 1995, “A Philosophy for Innovation: The Role of Unconventional Individuals in Innovation Success,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 12, 431–40. Story, Molly Follette, 1995, Universal Product Design through Consumer Product Evaluations, 7th International Forum on Design Management Research & Education, University of Stanford. Sujan, Mito, and Christine Dekleva, 1987, “Product Categorization Inference Making,” Journal of Consumer Research, 14, December, 378–92. Svengren, Lisbeth, 1995, Industrial Design as a Strategic Resource, Proceedings, The European Academy of Design: vol. 4, April 11–13, University of Salford. Svengren, Lisbeth, and Ulla Johansson, 2002, One Swallow Doesn’t Make a Summer, 11th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Boston, June. Sweeney, Gerry, 1996, “Learning Efficiency, Technological Change and Economic Progress,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 11, nos. 1/2, 5–27. Swift, Philip W., 1997, “Science Drives Creativity: A Methodology for Quantifying Perceptions,” Design Management Journal, vol. 8, no. 2, Spring, 51–7. Tabachneck, Hermina, and Simon Herbert, 1997, Effect of Mode of Data Presentation on Reasoning about Economic Markets (432–43), in Simon Herbert, 1997, Models of Bounded Rationality, MIT Press, vol. 3, Empirically Grounded Economic Reason. Takeuchi, Hirotaka and Ikujiro Nonaka, 1986, “The New Product Development Game,” Harvard Business Review, January–February, 137–46. Tarondeau, Jean Claude, 1998, Le management des saviors, PUF Que sais-je, numéro 3407. Teece, David, 1998, “Research Directions for Knowledge Management,” California Management Review, vol. 40, no. 3, Spring, 289–92. Temple, Sue, 1994, “The Value of Sketching,” Co-Design, Oct.-Nov.-Dec., vol. 1, 16. Thackara, John, ed. 1997, Winners !, BIS. Thomke, Stefan, 2001, “Managing Digital Design at BMW,” Design Management Journal, Spring, vol.12, no. 2, 20. Thomke, Stefan, and Takahiro Fujimoto, 2000, “The Effect of ‘Front-Loading’ Problem Solving on Product Development Performance,” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 17, 128–42. Topalian, Alan, 1986, “The Documentation of Corporate Approaches to Design Management to Share Experience and Improve Performance,” Engineering Management International, no. 4, 54. Tufte, Edward, 1983, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, Connecticut: Graphics Press. Ulrich, Karl, and Steven Eppinger, 2000, Product Design and Development, second edition, McGraw-Hill Higher Education. Unghanwa, Davidson, and Michael Baker, 1989, The Role of Design in International Competitiveness, London: Routledge Ed. Urban, G.L., and J.R. Hauser, 1980, Design and Marketing of New Products, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall. Valkenburg, Rianne, and Kees Dorst, 1998, “The Reflective Practice of Design Teams,” Design Studies, July, vol. 19, no. 3, 249. Van De Kraats, Anthony H., and Lambert Thurlings, 1997, “A New Approach Towards Strategic Decision-taking in a Multi-product Innovative Organization,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 13, no. 2, 93–109. Van De Ven, A., and M.S. Poole, 1995, “Explaining Development and Change in Organizations,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 20, 510–40. Vervaeke, Monique, and Bénédicte Lefevre, 2002, “Design Trades and Inter-firm Relationships in the Nord-Pas de calais Textile Industry,” Regional Studies, vol. 36, no. 6, 661–73. Veryzer, Robert, 2000 a, Design and Development of Innovative High-Tech Products, 10th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Frankfurt, November. Veryzer, Robert, 2000 b, “Design and Consumer Research,” Design Management Journal, no. 1, 64. Veryzer, Robert, 1998, “Discontinuous Innovation and the New Product Development Process,” Journal of Product Innovation, vol. 15, 304–21. Veryzer, Robert W., 1993, “Aesthetic Response and the Influence of Design Principles on Product Preferences,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 20, 224–28. Veryzer, Robert W., 1995, “The Place of Product Design and Aesthetics,” Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 22, 641–45. Veryzer, Robert, and Wesley Hutchinson, 1998, “The Influence of Unity and Prototypicality on Aesthetic Responses To New Product Designs,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 24, March, 374–94. Vitrac, Jean-Pierre, 1984, Comment gagner de nouveaux marchés par le design industriel, Editions de l’Usine Nouvelle. Von Bertalanffy, L., 1973, Théorie générale des Systèmes, Dunod, Paris. Von Krogh, Georg, 1998, “Care in Knowledge Creation,” California Management Review, vol. 40, no. 3, Spring, 133–49. Von Stamm, Bettina, 1993, “Whose Design Is It: The Use of External Designers?” Design Journal, vol. 1, issue 1, 41–52. Walker, David, 1990, Managing Design, ESCP, Paris, June. Wallart, Isabelle, 1996, Structuration du flux de nouveaux produits, trajectoires et performance de PME de haute technologie, Recherche et Applications en Marketing, vol. 11, numéro 3, 23–37. Wallendorf, Melanie, and Eric Arnould, 1998, “My Favorite Things: Across Cultural Inquiry into Object Attachment, Possessiveness, and Social Linkage,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 14, 531–47. Walsh, Vivien, 1996, “Design, Innovation and the Boundaries of the Firm,” Research Policy, vol. 25, 509–29, (reprint Academic Review, no. 1, Design Management Journal, 2000). Walsh, Vivien, 1995, “The Evaluation of Design,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 10, nos. 4/5/6, 489–509. Walsh, Vivien, Carole Cohen, and Albert Richards, 1996, Design for the User: A Case Study of Learning by Doing in the Telecom Industry, 8th International Forum on Design Management Research and Education, Barcelona. Walsh, Vivien, 1995, “The Evaluation of Design,” International Journal of Technology Management, vol. 10, nos. 4/5/6, 489–509. Walsh, Vivien, Robin Roy, Margaret Bruce, and Stephen Potter, 1992, Winning by Design, Basil Blackwell. Walsh, Vivien, Robin Roy, and Margaret Bruce, 1988, “Competitive by Design,” Journal of Marketing Management, vol. 4. Walsh, Vivien, and Robin Roy, 1983, Plastics Products: Good Design, Innovation and Business Success, The Open University, Design Innovation Group, report DIG O1, Milton Keynes. Weick, K.E., 1995, Sensemaking in Organizations, Sage Publications. Wener, R.E., 1985, The Environmental Psychology of Service Encounter, in The Service Encounter de Czepiel, Solomon, Surprenant. Wernerfeft, B., 1984, “A Resource Based View of the Firm,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 5, N1, 171–80. Wheelwright, Clark, 1992, Revolutionizing Product Development, New York: The Free Press. Whitney, Daniel E., 1988, “Manufacturing by Design,” Harvard Business Review, July–August, 83–91. Williamson, O., 1991, “Strategizing, Economizing and Economic Organization,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 12, 75–94. Williamson, Oliver, 1999, “Strategy Research: Governance and Competence Perspective,” Strategic Management Journal, 20(12), 1087–1108. Woudhuysen, James, 1990, Product design management in the European market, Design Management Journal, Summer, vol. 1, no. 2, 32–5. Xerox (company), 2000, “Industrial Design: Crossing the Client/Consultant Divide,” Design Management Journal, vol. 11, no. 2, Spring, 28–34. Yamamoto, Mel, and David R. Lambert, 1994, The Impact of Product Aesthetics on the Evaluation of Industrial Products, vol. 11, 309–24. Zack, Michael, 1999, “Developing a Knowledge Strategy,” California Management Review, vol. 41, no. 3, Spring, 125–43. Zimmer, M.R., and L.L. Golden, 1988, “Impressions of Retail Stores: A Content Analysis of Consumer Images,” Journal of Retailing, vol. 64, Fall, 265–93. Zweigenhalt, R.L., 1976, “Personal Space in the Faculty Office,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 61, no. 4, 529–32.