# INTRODUCTION

# Rebecca Houze

The first part of the Reader takes as its point of departure John Walker's understanding of the history of design' as the material from which design history is written - that is, the fabricated, constructed, produced, planned and envisioned objects and images of the past and che institutions, communities, and frameworks from which they emerged. In its broadest definition 'history of design' constitutes a vast realm of human activity. It is the discipline of'design history' that seeks to organize and understand this rich material.

We have organized Part I chronologically beginning with the long eighteenth century as a point at which design and manufacture separated. The subject of our first selection, an Algonquin basket from 1676, will certainly appear to some as an odd example of 'design'. It was not produced by industrial means and we do not know whether its construction was planned in any way. It was described by its collectors as a spontaneous production, and has been valued over the centuries for its evocation of a special relationship between white settlers and indigenous peoples in seventeenth-century North America, as much as for the materials and techniques of ics woven fabrication. This little basket, as we see in Ulrich's analysis, is rich material indeed, laden with unexpected meaning.

Three of the authors in Section 1, Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, Darron Dean, and Mary Guyatt, begin by examining a single object. What does it look like? What is the shape, texture, colour? How was it made? What was it used for? And by whom? Who decided to preserve it? Why? What does this tell us about the social, political and cultural contexts from which the object emerged? The objects therselves, and our curiosity about them, mobilize broader and more complex issues such as the mechanism of production and consumption, discussed in that same section by Adam Smich and John Styles. Mary Guyatt's reading of the Wedgwood Slave Medallion points ahead to post-colonial discourse. Ideas flow between Part I and Part II of the Reader. Whereas 'Consumption' is given a section of its own in Part II, issues of identity, race, and colonialism are treated in various ways throughout the Reader, for example, by Bibi Bakare-Yusuf, in her examination of Jamaican dancehall culture in Section 5, and by Jeanne van Eeden, in her critique of racist modes of advertising by Land Rover in South Africa in Section 12.

The uneasy relationship between 'craft' and 'design', between ethnographic object and accoutrement of culture, revealed throughout Section 1, foreshadows the problems that ernerge in Section 2, Design Reform 1820–1910, when critiques of industry by Gottfried Semper, John Ruskin and William Morris lay the groundwork for the innovative and experimental turn of the twentieth century that would come to be known as 'Molernism' but which we have presented as modernisms in order to draw attention to the plurality of movements, productions and ideologies of that period, which cannot be uniformly categorized. The juxtaposition of design historian John Heskett's reading of American responses to industrialization with the poetic exuberance of architect Frank Lloyd Wright demonstrates that modernist responses to industry were ambivalent and often contradictory.

Debora Silverman, Nancy Troy and Christopher Breward, although represented in different sections of the Reader, each demonstrate how ambivalences towards commerce and industry compelled designers, such as Eugène Gaillard, Henry van de Velde and Charles Edouard Jeanneret, as well as consumers in the vein of Óscar Wilde, to engage with complex styles of interior furnishings and dress at the turn of the rwentieth century. The embrace of decoration and pleasure by those designers and consumers offers a sharp contrast to Nikolaus Pevsner's picture of modernism, which was inspired by the ascetic functionalism of Adolf Loos, Hermann Muthesius, and the teachers and students of the Bauhaus. The championing of the International Style by Pevsner and others in the first half of the twentieth century has made it difficult to reconcile the various strains and tendencies of the period – a problem that Paul Greenhalgh addresses in his essay for that section. More experimental and decorative modes of modernism that sought to merge art and industry are noted in the selections by Gillian Naylor, who traces the work of Laszlo Moholy-Nagy at the Bauhaus, and Nicolas Maffei, who offers a new reading of American 'streamlined' design of the 1930s.

Section 4, which examines design in the period surrounding the Second World War, offers provocative connections to other areas of the Reader as well. The Utility furniture investigated by Matthew Denney might be seen as a precursor to ecologically and environmentally responsible purchasing practices, such as those advocated in The Green Consumer Supermarket Guide. Becky Conekin's study of the futuristic models displayed at the Festival of Britain invites us to think critically about the processes of mediation that are explored in greater detail in Section 11.

The section on postmodernisms - also plural – deals primarily with tendencies and movements of the 1980s and 1990s, with its roots in 1970s literary theory, but its celebration of popular culture reaches further back in time to converse with the work of Reyner Banham in the 1960s and the midcentury love of consumption identified by Thomas Hine as Populuxe'. Many of the issues raised in this section are relevant to the readings in Part II of the Reader. Gert Selle's theory of German popular design in the 1980s, for example could be compared to the many analyses of national identity in Section 4, to Pierre Bourdieu's erhnographic study of the French middle-class consumer in the 1960s and 1970s in Section 10, and to David Crowley's case study of early twentieth-century Polish design in Section 12. Postmodernism has been a much-debated concept in critiques of design over the years and its complexity can be seen in the different attitudes expressed, for example, by Robert Venturi, Denise Scott-Brown, and Steven Izenour, and Jean Baudrillard, reproduced in Section 5. But postmodernism has been an especially useful tool for pointing out the ruptures within 'modernism'. The period dealt with in section 6, Sustainable Futures, one might argue, preceded postmodernism, with its concern for environmental and consumer responsibility that emerged in writings of Buckminster Fuller, Vance Packard, and Victor Papanek in the 1960s and 1970s. We have positioned it at the end of Part I, however, because its project is ongoing, and all the more relevant today.

## SECTION 1

New Designers,1676-1820