# INTRODUCTION

# Grace Lees-Maffei

This opening section of The Design History Reader invites reflection on definitions of design and the role of the designer, within the context of industrialization. Much consideration has been given by design historians, art historians, economic historians and others, to identifying a point in history at which design and manufacture separated. Arguably the search for such a moment is fruitless when chere have always been instances in which design and manufacture have existed separately: the age-old practice of copying. for example, involves little design and much manufacture, and the sketching of plans never realized involves design to the exclusion of manufacture. Nevertheless, design historians have tended to regard processes of industrialization as significant for providing the conditions necessary for the emergence of a distinct practice of design. The shift from a sociery in which goods were made by the people who devised their form and function to a sociery in which design was a discrete practice performed by a specialist prior to manufacture, has preoccupied design historians. The design of proto-industrial, industrial and post-industrial society has formed the primary object of study within design history, including not only machine-made goods, but also the hand-crafted, the small scale, the pre-industrial methods of production. These have persisted throughout industrialization to form highly significant objects of study in the post-industrial age.

The first extract is from a richly detailed analysis by American historian Laurel Thatcher Ulrich of 'An Indian Basket, Providence, Rhode Island, 1676'. Ulrich demonstrates how much archival research can tell us about an individual, but representative, object, as she uses the basket to explore relations between Native Amnericans and English settlers in seventeenth-century New England. As she explains:

Baskers are hard to find in early records because they resisted commodification. As manufactured products they were less valuable to the English than furs and skins, nor were the materials of which they were made of particular interest to colonists. Where Indian women found abundant fibres for weaving, the English saw only dark forests, waste fields, and dismal swamps. But baskets were there, and they, like blankets, were essential props in the unfolding events that led to misunderstanding and war.

While each basket refers to others of its type, the pattern was devised by the person who made ic, and therefore the object under scrutiny here represents pre-industrial production within a particularly contested context.

Next, British design historian Darron Dean uses a slipware dish by Samuel Malkin to broaden definitions of 'vernacular' design to encompass a range of production, marketing and consumption practices beyond purely local materials and methods. Section 1 therefore begins with two extracts that explore examples of localized design and production as a negotiated and complex phenomenon, feeling the effects of modernity spearheaded in Britain and the US. Indeed, the UK was the first country to industrialize with rapid movement among the expanding population from the rural areas of agricultural production to industrial manufacture in the cities.

The methods of manufacture employed by Malkin vary quite considerably from those examined in 1776 by contemporary thinker, Adam Smith. The juxtaposition of extracts 2 and 3 dramatizes something of the effects of industrialization. Smith's importance as a commentator on his period is exemplified by the fact that his name recurs in the other texts in this section: Ulrich refers to his distinction between civilized and uncivilized economies and British curator Mary Guyatt discusses Smith's anti slavery sentiments as representative of an important strain of discourse for understanding Wedgwood's slave medallion. Smith's account of the ramifications of the division of labour, extracted here, helps us to understand the context in which design, too, was detached from other aspects of production.

Section 1 goes on to examine the mutually dependent phenomena of the industrial revolution' – although such a term is hardly appropriate any longer as a description of a process which historians have shown to have been attenuated over a long period of time – and the development of consumer society. Guyatt continues the interest in consumption demonstrated by Dean's text in this section, and explores issues of gender raised by Ulrich. Wedgwood has received a great deal of attention from design historians and economic historians for the way in which he harnessed the larger scale of production enabled by industrialization, to develop a name for his work. The carefuly recorded technical experiments through which Wedgwood developed new ceramic techniques and finishes such as Jasperware are as significant, design historically, as his use of marketing methods to promote what would now be called a designer brand. Guyatt shows how the ceramicist exploited his name, his technical skill, his market and his influence, to create an object through which political ideas could be communicated in a fashionable way. As an exemplar of what Guyatt terms the now much-debated "conflict" berween philanthropy and commerce', Wedgwood's medallion can be seen as a forerunner of che slogan t-shirt, which can be harnessed to political ends.

In the closing text, British historian John Styles questions the application of terms such as 'mass production', 'standardization' and 'consumer revolution' to the development of design in che eighteenth century. Styles's account helps us to understand what was signifcant and distinctive about eighteenth century design and it forms a precursor to the examination of nineteenth-century debates about design, culture and technological developments in section two, when design was regarded by some as the saviour of a society split apart by industrialization. Like Dean, Styles shows that design during this period was not always localized; and a web of communication channels and travel circulated ideas across the UK.

The blend of texts presented here has been chosen to represent debates of the period and more recent ones. Three of the five texts are object analyses; they focus on one object in order to explore wider themes. With the exception of the primary text from Smith, the ocher texts have a revisionist emphasis and seek to change the record in relation to the various issues they engage.

The 250-year period from the production of an Indian basket in Rhode Island to the end of what historians term 'the long eighteenth century' (1680 to 1820) was one of unprecedented social change. During that time, the motives, methods and meanings of design were continually developing in ways that remind us how ambiguous is the term 'progress', as subsequent generations of design reformers made clear.