# MANUFACTURING, CONSUMPTION AND DESIGN IN EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY ENGLAND

# John Styles (1993)

(...]

## THE DICTATES OF THE MARKET AND THE IMPLEMENTATION OF DESIGN

Eighteenth-century manufacturers of batchproduced consumer goods faced markets that were often keenly attuned to rhe visual appearance of their products. Novelty and fashion could be important, although not necessarily dominant, at every level in the market. [...]

The manufacturers of products such as these were often geographically distant from the final consumer. Moreover, they were, more often than not, distant from the metropolitan high society which was so influential on eighteenth-century fashionable taste. Two questions arise regarding the design of their products. First, how did such manufacturers determine the way their products should look in order to enjoy success in a variety of markets? Second, how did they ensure that their workers, often using hand techniques in their own homes, produced goods that accorded with the desired and often very precise visual specifications?

Most existing work on these subjects has focused either on the activities of those producing high design goods for the elite market, or on the distinctive ways design was exploited by Josiah Wedgwood and Matthew Boulton. Particular emphasis has been placed on the latter's initiation of new designs (both in the sense of new products and new forms of decoration) in accordance with or in advance of changes in fashionable taste, in order to secure a privileged place in the market. By making products to original designs, Boulton and Wedgwood were simply doing what had long been established practice in the London luxury trades. Not all metropolitan producers of luxury goods developed new designs, but it could be an important element in che success of such a business. In his discussion of cabinetmaking in The London Tradesman of 1747, Campbell emphasized that

A youth who designs to make a Figure in this Branch must learn to Draw; for upon this depends the Invention of new Fashions, and on that the Success of his Business: He who first hits upon any new Whim is sure to make by the Invention before it becomes common in the Trade; but he that must always wait for a new Fashion till it comes from Paris, or is hit upon by his Neighbour, is never likely to grow rich or eminent in his Way.'

The fruits of innovation were similar in many of the other luxury trades. The Spitalfields silkmakers, for example, systematically commissioned novel designs in order to pre-empt changes in fashion.2

Producers of more modest consumer goods did not generally exercise the same degree of initiative in staying ahead of fashion. They simply adapted the broad trend of prevailing London high fashion to the prejudices and pockets of their intended customers. As in many aspects of eighteenth-century industrial innovarion, a process of copying combined with small incremental adjustments was the norm. Stanley Chapman has pointed out the importance of systematic piracy of expensive London designs by Lancashire cotton printers producing for the lower end of the market in the 1780s. During the same decade, the Leeds merchant house of Horner and Turner often arranged for their manufacturing suppliers to imitate woollen and worsted cloths sold by their competitors in continental Europe.' Manufacturers were often secretive, but successful copying and adaptation required information about what other producers, and particularly fashion leaders, were doing, as well as information about what different markets were anxious or prepared to accept.' Hence the constant monitoring by manufacturers of what producers of similar goods were up to, hence the desperate efforts to secure information on changes in London taste, hence the voluminous advice from agents and wholesale customers on market trends.

If design depended for most producers on copying and adaptation, precisely how was visual information on what was to be copied communicated? One way was simply to acquire an example of the product to be pirated. This was common. In textiles, for example, it was fairly easy to secure a small piece of a competitor's fabric. A 1787 parliamentary committee was informed that a print of a new design from a Surrey printworks had been sent by a London warehouseman to the Peel printworks in Lancashire to be copied. Within a fortnight it was on sale in London at two-thirds of the price of the original.

Another means of communicating visual information was to use two-dimensional depictions of an object or its ornament. One of the most striking new features of late seventeenth-and eighteenthcentury manufacturing in England was a dramatic increase in the use of two-dimensional paper plans for subsequent chrce-dimensional execution. Designs on paper had been employed long before the mid-seventeenth century, by architects and goldsmniths for example, but over the next century and a half there was a massive expansion, at first concentrated in London, but later more extensive, of activities reliant on sophisticated design and ornament, such as cabinetmaking, coachmaking. cotton printing, silkweaving and the manufacture of decorative metalware. At the same time, there were important technical innovations in wodimensional and low relief ornament: for example, copper plate printing on fabrics, stamping on the softer metals, che use of transfers on ceramics. The consequence was a vastly increased use of both printed and hand-drawn two-dimensional designs in the manufacturing of consumer goods, for a variety of purposes. They were used as sources of visual ideas, as instructions for the execution of the work, for recording information about products and as a means of visualizing products for customers.

As two-dimensional design became more important, designer and pattern drawer emerged as distinct occupational designations. The term designer was first used early in the eighteenth century to describe those who performed the highly specialized task of providing new designs for fine patterned textiles, often on a freelance basis, but by mid-century it was being used more extensively.? The demand for drawing and associated skills like engraving grew apace. By the middle years of the cighteenth century there was much complaint about skill shortages in this area. Some of the deficiency had to be made up from overseas and considerable efforts were mounted to provide training. In 1759 it was claimed that there are two or chree drawing schools established at Birmingham, for the instruction of youth in the arts of designing and drawing, and 30 or 40 Frenchmen and Germans are constancly employed in drawing and designing'.\*

From the later seventeenth century, the London book and print trade catered to the expanding industrial market for two-dimensional designs with prints and subsequently illustrated source books. As early as the 1660s, the London bookseller and print dealer Robert Walton stocked prints which he advertised as extraordinarily useful for goldsmiths, jewellers, chafers, gravers, painters, carvers, drawers, needlewomen and all handicrafts'." In the eighteenth century. design source books were often targeted at particular trades, like Smith and Linnell's A New Book of Ornaments Useful for Silver-Smith's Etc. of 1755 or Chippendale's The Gentleman and Cabinet Maker's Director of 1754, although designs for one material could be transferred to another, given the ubiquity of certain types of classical and rococo ornament within elite material culture."º From mid-century, if nor before, printed designs also circulated in the illustrated trade catalogues issued by some manufacturers of ceramics, light consumer metalwares and even tools." These were unabashed marketing devices, for use in showrooms, by travelling salesmen and by wholesale customers, similar in purpose to the pattern cards and books which were widely employed by textile manufacturers and merchants to circulate samples of fabric.

Clearly the increasing availability of drawing and design skills and the growing circulation in various guises of design illustrations facilitated the acquisition of design information by manufacturers and its adaptation for use in their products (legitimately or otherwise)." It is therefore surprising to realize the extent to which manufacturers in many eighteenth-century industries producing batches of relatively modest products on a large scale secured design information by means of the written or spoken word. This was partly because in these industries the crucial design changes were often quite simple – a new range of colours here, a different width of stripe there. In textiles, for example, weaving simple patterned cloths did not necessarily require the painstakingly prepared patterns on point paper used in weaving elaborate designs on unwieldy draw looms in the Spitalfields silk industry. One should not, however, underestimate the richness of the information that could be communicated by means of the written word. The degree of complexity is indicated in a letter that Matthew Boulton wrote to his London buckle agent in 1793 on the need to settle on a terminology for describing changes in fashion: 'As you and I shall ofen have occasion to speak of forms and proportions of buckles, it is necessary we should settle a distinct language that our definitions may be precise.'In most trades, however, an appropriate language of visual description already existed. Indeed, it was a fundamental aspect of that elusive but much prized knowledge of the trade which was essential to participation in it.' But it was also possible for non-specialists to use a verbal language of visual description in the same way. For example, information about new fashions in clothes sufficiently precise to instruct a local mantua maker was sent to a Lancashire gentlewoman from a London relative mainly through the medium of words, not drawings or illustrations.'

The importance of a verbal language of visual description was not confined to the process whereby manufacturers secured informarion about design innovation. It was also central to their ability to adapt that information to their own advantage: to get their workers successfully to produce goods which incorporated those innovations. ln other words, it was crucial to communication within the firm. For example, the late eighteenth-century London hat-maker Thomas Davies was accustomed to communicate the design of new hats to the manager of his manufacturing operation in Stockport, Cheshire by letter along the following lines: a short napp, almost like a French hat but not so bare, pleasant stiffen'd, rather smart, by no means raggy and not a heavy hat; they are to be from 71/4 to 71/2, 31/4 to 33/4 high, not quite upright, a little taper.' Here we observe the use of a specialist vocabulary in comnbination with a system of standard sizes to communicate precise specifications for a batch of goods.

Even when two-dimensional information was transmitted, words were often an essential accompaniment, because manufacturers did not simply want their workers to copy, but to adapt, adjust and elaborate in ways appropriate to their markets, their materials and their skills. The partners in one Lancashire cotton printing firm at the beginning of the nineteenth century sent samples of other firms' prints to their pattern drawer with accompanying verbal instructions, usually to vary the ground or the motifs, or to change the direction, the emphasis or the size of the pattern. For example, 'Enclosed you have a pattern of one of the Bury House's plate furnitures. Joseph Peel desires you will draw up and engrave two or three patterns similar, they must be showey and full of work.""

Success in the consumer industries depended not only on the products being of a marketable and therefore often a fashionable design, but also on each individual item conforming strictly to a precise visual specification embodying that markerability. Distant wholesale customers who bought on the basis of samples and illustrated trade catalogues expected the goods delivered to them to conform to the look of the sample or the illustration. Uniformity was crucial, but was often extremely difficult to achieve, especially when making adaptations of more expensive products in large batches using inferior materials and cheaper, less skilled and more pressured labour." Consequently manufacturers, agents, wholesalers and retailers were constantly monitoring the appearance of batch-produced goods and chiding their workers and suppliers about visual deficiencies. This kind of visual policing was conducted mainly in words.

## [...]

Implementing design in large-batch manufacturing of consumer goods in the eighteenth century depended on the dexterity and adaptability of che individual worker, and on the employer's capacity to direct and instruct a workforce. The initiative in specifying design flowed predominantly from master manufacturer to worker, but the abilitry of workers autonomously to interpret and adapt the manufacturer's instructions was also essential. Much turned on the capacity of employees, frequently working in their own homes within an intense division of labour, to use what were often general purpose tools to produce the required specification uniformly across hundreds or thousands of objects. Much also turned on the ability of the employer to communicate his requirements to such employees with sufficient precision. All sorts of devices for specifying, transmitting and reproducing visual information could play a part here, including moulds, models, dies, transfers, scale patterns and paper designs. In the course of the eighteenth century the use of two-dimensional designs probably increased, but their importance should not be overestimated. In many of these industries a specialized and sophisticated verbal language of visual description remnained crucial.'

## CONCLUSION: DESIGN PRACTICE AND DESIGN TRAINING

Eighteenth-century England witnessed considerable efforts to improve the quality of design in manufacturing. As Charles Saumarez Smith has demonstrated, the central thrust of these efforts was to teach drawing and other artistic skills to workpeople.2° If, as has been argued in this chapter, two-dimensional designs were of restricted importance in many of the industries producing humble consumer goods, why was there such concern to promote drawing?

Part of the answer lies in the rapid expansion during the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries of those forms of production which relied on the most sophisticated ornament and design, especially for the luxury market. The consequence of this expansion and the rechnical innovations of the same period in two-dimensional and low relief ornament was a real increase in the need for drawing and engraving skills, a need that sometimes had to be supplied by foreign immigrants. The design debate was conducted principally in London. The metropolitan area was by far the largest manufacturing centre in the country, and it was distinguished by a disproportionately large luxury sector, which made heavy use of both printed and hand-drawn two-dimensional designs.

Another important consideration behind the promotion of drawing skills was the persistent eighteenth-century English obsession with French competition. This was made clear in 1756 by one of the protagonists of design training, William Shipley, the founder of the Sociery of Arts and owner of a drawing school.

The money given for the encouragement of boys and girls to apply themselves to drawing has not, 'tis hoped, been misemployed, since drawing is necessary in so many trades, that the general knowledge of it must conduce greatly to the improvement of our manufactures, and give them an elegance of air and figure, which a rival nation (where drawing is much encouraged) has found, to its great advantage, capable of setting off even indifferent workmanship and mean materials.2

The English worried throughout the eighteenth century about French superiority in the manufacture of luxury goods. Efforts to improve design reached their height in the middle decades of the century, when such anxieties were at their most intense. In the second quarter of the century, before the rapid pre-revolutionary expansion of the North American colonial market, foreign markets for the humble products in which the English excelled (especially woollen textiles) appeared to stagnate.2 Worries about England being priced out of these markets by its high wage costs prompted the belief that it was necessary for English manufacturing to compete more effectively at the top of the market, a belief reinforced by the perceived buoyancy of luxury imports from France, despite heavy duties and prohibitions. French success in the manufacture of luxury goods seemed to owe everything to the quality of French design.

Such fears receded later in the eighteenth century, as doubts about the success of English products in the middle and lower levels of the markets for consumer goods waned. In the aftermath of the commercial treaty of 1786, which reduced trade restrictions between Britain and France, it was the British who appeared to benefit and the French who complained.2 What happened to the promotion of drawing skills for manufacturing is less clear. There is no doubt that at the middle and lower levels of the market drawing skills could be very important. The Birmingham toy makers and the Lancashire cotton printers, for example, depended on specialist engravers and draughtsmen. As we have seen, however, such expertise was mainly required for copying and adapting designs to be implemented in large volume by other workers wichin an intense division of labour, rather than for initiating original designs to be produced in very small numbers. Copying and adaptation did not necessarily entail a high degree of proficiency in drawing and, on che evidence of the early years of Sir Robert Peel's Bury printworks, it required only very small numbers of workers with the appropriate skills. There was no drawing shop at Bury and only one draughtsman employed there.2 It is therefore questionable how relevant schemes for the encouragement of formal drawing skills, like those promoted in mid-century London, were to manufacturing of this sort, compared with on-the-job training involving some sort of apprenticeship.2

In so far as the process of design in the eighteenth century has been explored in detail by historians, the focus has usually been on the part played by the compilers of pattern books in the making of extremely expensive and often bespoke products. The precise role of visual design in the making of many humble consumer goods remains obscure. Understanding it will demand a great deal more attention to the mundane drawing skills required for successful industrial piracy, but a narrow focus on drawing will not suffice if what is to be explained is the changes in appearance of the consumer products discussed in this chapter. Thar will also require study of the specialized languages of visual description used in the various manufacturing trades; indeed it will require investigation of all aspects of what might loosely be termed their and their customers' visual culture. The history of cighteenth-century design in this wider sense has yer to be written.

## NOTES

Extracted from Styles, J., 'Manufacturing, Consumption and Design in Eighteenth-century England,' in John Brewer and Roy Porter (eds), Consumption and the World of Goods, London: Routledge, 1993, 1994, pp. 527–54. Copyrighe © 1993, Routledge. Reproduced by permission of Taylor & Francis Books, UK.

1. R. Carnpbell, The London Tradesman (London, 1747), p. 171.

2. N. K. A. Rothstein, 'The silk industry in London, 1702–1766' (University of London, M.A, chesis, 1961), passim.

3. S. D. Chapman and S. Chassagne, European Textile Printers of the Eighteenth Century (London, 1981), pp. 78–81.

4. For example, Public Record Office, C108/101: letter books of Horner and Turner, merchants, of Leeds; letter to Mr George Darby, merchant in Naples, 30 December 1789.

5. For secrecy see M. Berg, The Age ofManufactures, 1700–1820 (London, 1985), p. 296. For similar practices in the nineteenth century see Toshio Kusamitsu, "Novelty, give us novelry", London agents and norchern manufacturers', in M. Berg (ed.), Markets and Manufacture in Early Industrial Europe (London, 1991).

6. Referred to in Chapman and Chassagne, European Textile Printers, 81, from Journal of the House of Commons, xlii (1787), pp. 584–5; see Public Record Office, C108/101: letter books of Horner and Turner, merchants, of Leeds for similar activities.

7. Information from Charles Saumarez Smith. See his 'Design and economy in mideighteenth century England', paper presented at Oxford University, 1987, and Eighteenthcentury man', Designer (March 1987), pp. 19-21. For designers in the Spitalfields silk industry, see Rothstein, 'The silk industry in London', passim.

8. Journal of the House of Commons, xviii (1757–61), pp. 496–7. For a discussion of the whole issue of skill shortages and training, see Saumarez Smith, 'Eighteenth-century man'.

9. Quoted in Leona Rostenberg, English Publishers in the Graphic Arts (New York, 1963), p. 45.

10. S. Lambert (ed.), Pattern and Design: Designs for the Decorative Arts, 1480–1980 (London, 1983), sect. 2.

11. See D. Towner, Creamware (London, 1978), Appendix 2; M. B. Rowlands, Masters and Men (Manchester, 1975), pp. 152–3; N. Goodison, The Victoria and Albert Museum's collection of metal-work pattern books', Furniture History, xi (1975), pp. 1–30; S. Ashton, An Eighteenth-Century Industrialist: Peter Stubbs of Warrington, 1756–1806 (Manchester, 1939), p. 60.

12. The law on design copyright was extremely weak at this period.

13. Quoted in E. Robinson, 'Eighteenth-century commerce and fashion: Matthew Boulton's marketing techniques', Economic History Review, xvi (1963–4), p. 49.

14. See D. Defoe, The Complete English Tradesman, vol. 1 (London, 1745), pp. 19–23.

15. Elizabeth Shackleton of Alkincoats, Colne, who is discussed at length in 'Women and the world of goods: a Lancashire consumer and her possessions, 1751–81', in Brewer, John, and Roy Porter, eds., Consumption and the World of Goods, (1993) London, New York: Routledge, 1994, pp. 274–201. I would like to chank Amanda Vickery for chis information.

16. Public Record Office, C107/104: Davies letter book, letter dated 3 February 1785.

17. Letter of 1807, quoted in Chapman and Chassagne, European Textile Printers, p. 84.

Also see H. Clark, 'The anonymous designer',. in Design and Industry: the Effects of Industrialisation and Technical Change on Design, ed. Nicola Hamilton (London, 1980), pp. 33–8 and idem, 'The design and designing of Lancashire printed calicoes during the first half of the 19th century', Textile History, xv (1984), PP. 109–10.

18. A witness before a 1787 parliamentary committee claimed that the Lancashire cotton printers who copied southern firms' design executed 'them in a much inferior style, and consequently are not at the same expense in cutting their blocks', as well as using cheap colours that ran; Journal of the House of Commons, xlii (1787), 584.

19. This calls into question the extent of the contrast identified by Craig Clunas between the 'visual' design practice of Europe and the 'verbal' design practice of China during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries; C. Clunas, 'Design and cultural frontiers: English shapes and Chinese furniture workshops, 1700-90', Apollo, cxxvi (October 1987), p. 259.

20. Saumarez Smith, 'Design and economy in mid-eighceenth-century England' and 'Eighteench-century man'.

21. Gentleman's Magazine (February 1756), quoted in Saumarez Smith, 'Design and economy'. For the Society of Arts, see D. G. C. Allen, William Shipley: Founder of the Royal Society of Arts (London, 1979), chs. 3, 4.

22. M. Jupp, 'Economic policy and economic development', in J. Black (ed.), Britain in the Age of Walpole (London, 1984), pp. 124–5.

23. J. Black, Natural and Necessary Enemies: Anglo-French Relations in the Eighteenth Century (London, 1986), p. 152.

24. Chapman and Chassagne, European Textile Printers, p. 79. Also see Clark, The anonymous designer' and ‘Design and designing of Lancashire printed calicoes'.

25. We have here, in an incipient form, the disjuncture that dogged design education in nineteenth-century Britain berween fine art sensibilities and the limited skill requirements of manufacturers producing for the middle and lower sections of the market.