# INTRODUCTION

# Rebecca Houze

Debates between designers, manufacturers and commentators on design, industry and economics continued and intensified into the nineteenth century as industrialization and its surrounding discourses grew. Of design historical relevance are the ideas of Andrew Ure (1778–1857), Karl Marx (1818–83) and A. W. N. Pugin (1812–52), the latter being notable among designers and writers to argue for a new understanding of quality and purpose of design. Public debates surrounding industrialization were stimulared by the many international exhibitions staged in the second half of the nineteenth century. London's Great Exhibition of 1851 was the first of these spectacular events held on a massive scale. lt took place in architect Joseph Paxton's Crystal Palace', an enormous structure developed from his designs for glass houses. The public was invited to examine objects from around the globe. Facrory-made furnishings were displayed alongside hand-made items from Britain's many colonies abroad, vividly marking the difference berween a primitive past and technological future. Of the 100,000 exhibits, vast quantities of manufactured fabrics, glass, silver and other decorative objects seemed to reveal that the machine had not only conquered craft traditions but had even introduced new uses for media, such as industrial cast iron, papier-måché, gutta-percha and celluloid, which could mimic traditional materials and forms in an endless variety of ways, fuelling the consumer's passion for novelty.

German architect and art historian Gottfried Semnper was living in London as an exiled revolutionary when he was invited to design several installations at the Great Exhibition. Afterwards, Semper reflected on the aesthetic consequences of the promiscuous industrial manufacture that he had seen at the fair in his influential essay, Science, Industry and Art'. Now we could cut the hardest stone like cheese and bread', he observed, but what had we lost as a result? The wondrous vision of new technology was unsettling for Semper. In the many traditional crafts on display, such as hand-woven shawls from India, he discerned an intrinsically logical relationship between material, technique and aesthetic form that he believed was absent from industry all too ready to supply cheap, imitative goods to a hungry public.

The loss of meaningful aesthetic form was especially criticized by proponents of England's Gothic Revival, following A. W. N. Pugin. Prominent among them was John Ruskin, who found a deep spiritualiry in the architecture of late medieval churches. For Ruskin, the 'savage' decoration of these buildings signified 'truth' and mirrored the noble imperfection of nature and of the human soul. His meditative 1853 essay, 'The Nature of Gothic' was a source of inspiration for members of England's Arts and Crafts Movement, including William Morris, who advocated a rerurn to pre-industrial craft traditions, in which both worker and consumer would be elevated spiritually by virtue of their close relationship to beautiful and lovingly made objects. In the passage reproduced here, Ruskin describes 'Savageness', one of the six key characteristics of the Gothic (the others being 'Changefulness', 'Naturalism', 'Grotesqueness', 'Rigidity' and 'Redundance'). Both Ruskin and Morris believed in design as a moral force for good, which could liberate humanity from cheir drudgery and enslavement to the capitalistic factory system of production.

Morris reprinted Ruskin's essay at his Kelmscott press in 1893 according to the design criteria ourlined in his own article 'The Ideal Book', a manifesto for the organic relationship berween typeface, illustration, ornament, and structure of a book. His theories, which countered the Victorian eclecticism and superficial historicism of objects on display at the Great Exhibition, led many of his followers and later design historians such as Nikolaus Pevsner to uphold Morris as a pioneer' of modern design.

Design historian John Heskett suggests that architects and designers in the USA may have been less critical of industrialism than their European counterparts. In his chapter 'The "American system" and Mass-Production', Heskett traces the emergence of new inventions, such as the mechanical McCormick reaper, the Singer sewing machine and the Remington typewriter, whose origins lay in the successful mechanization of firearms. These objects not only reflected the strength of industry to produce standardized, interchangeable, mechanical parts cheaply and efficiently; chey also revolutionized processes of agriculture, clothes-making, and even writing. Advances made in the production of mechanical watches and revolvers led to the experiments in assembly-line production promoted by Frederick Taylor's theory of 'Scientific Management', which found its greatest expression in the automobile industry, with the exemplary success of Henry Ford's Model T.

Heskett also attributes the innovations of American architects Louis Sullivan and Frank Lloyd Wright to their enthusiasm for the machine. Sullivan's notion that 'form follows function', which he expressed in his analysis of contemporary skyscraper design, quickly became one of the central tenets of the modern movement. Indeed, both men grappled with industrialism in their invention of an entirely new form of architecture. But Heskett's assessment of American design as something that emerged from the purely utilitarian and commercial motivations of a young. audacious, and militaristic republic may obscure the complexity behind the work of Sulivan and Wright, whose ideas were rooted in a spiritualized organicism as well as in the American spirit of invention. Wright's utopian, visionary essay 'The Art and Craft of the Machine' demonstrates the architect's efforts to reform design by marrying William Morris's moral and aesthetic sensibility to the reality of modern mechanical production.

Theories of design at the turn-of-the-twentieth-century were rich, complex, idiosyncratic, and often contradictory. Historian Debora Silverman, in the concluding chapter to her book Art Nouveau in Fin-de-siècle France: Politics, Psychology and Style, describes the organic 'feminine' interiors designed by Georges de Feure and Eugène Gaillard for art dealer Siegfried Bing's installation of decorative arts at the 1900 Paris Exposition Universelle as a turning inward, having less to do with an outward enthusiasm for, or rejection of, the machine than with a nuanced effort to create a modern national and personal identity that looked both forward and back. De Feure's sinuous gilded settee with its tapestry of pale pink rosettes simultaneously recalled the long French aristocratic tradition of fine furniture craftsmanship, while also proclaiming its distinctly modern nature. Art Nouveau, or /ugendstil, as it was called in Germany, drew inspiration from the arts and crafts, studies of evolution, the symbolist movement in literature and the visual arts, with its love of the macabre and the femme-fatale. In a way similar to Ruskin's valorization of the 'savage' gothic, art nouveau designers found pleasure in the seemingly irrational forms of a fervent nature. Unlike those affiliated with the Arts and Crafts Movement, however, art nouveau designers did nor reject industry or commerce. Racher they combined new attitudes towards fashion, shopping, luxury, and femininity, as well as erotic female sexuality, with a fine craft tradition, in which, nature, commerce and the 'new woman' were often conflated.