# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING

For more on Pugin and Ruskin's influence on modernists see Clive Wainwright, "The Legacy of the Nineteenth Century' (1900). Henry Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson's 1932 New York Museum of Modern Art exhibition and catalogue The International Style, like Pevsner's Pioneers, celebrated modern architecture that exalted the machine and repudiated ornament. Loos had argued strongly for this ascetic modernism, as had Le Corbusier in The Decorative Art of Today (1925) and Towards a New Archirecture (1927). Walter Gropius expressed his evolving theories of design in his 'Programme of the Staatliches Bauhaus in Wiemar' (1919) and 'Principles of Bauhaus Production' (1926).

The narrow focus by Pevsner and others on innovations in concrete and steel, advanced by science and technology for a clean, orderly, and efficient world exaggerates the role of the Bauhaus, however, and overlooks the dynamic experimentation of the Futurists, Dadaists and Constructivists. Johanna Drucker corrects this bias in her book The Visible Word: Experimental Typography and Modern Art, 1909–1923 (1994), as does Victor Margolin in The Struggle for Utopia: Rodchenko, Lissitzky, Moholy-Nagy 1917–1946 (1997). Terry Smnith, Making the Modern: Industry, Art and Design in America (1993) and Jeffrey L Meikle, Design in the USA (2005), offer engaging readings of the theories and questions first proposed by industrial designers in the first half of the twentieth cenrury, such as Norman Bel Geddes, Horizons (1932), Harold van Doren, 'Streamlining: Fad or Function?' (1949), and Raymond Loewy, Never Leave Well Enough Alone (1951).

As applied arts institutions began to admit more women to their programmes, new issues surrounding women's professionalization arose. Christine Frederick's scientific analysis of modern kitchen designs, in The New Housekeeping: Efficiency Studies in Home Management (1913), applied scientifc theory to common-sense principles that would help women save time and labour in more sanitary and efficient work spaces. Like Margarete Schutte-Lihorzky, who introduced the 'Frankfurt kitchen' in Germany, Frederick articulated practical ways to adapt industrial methods and technology to the home. The masculinized concept of industry upheld in some of the most influential histories of design, including Siegfried Giedion's Mechanization Takes Command (1948) and Reyner Banhar's Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (1960), has obscured che complex gender dynamics of the modern movement. Sigrid Wortman Weltge explores the marginalization of female students at the Bauhaus in her book Bauhaus Textiles: Women Artists and the Weaving Workshops (1993). See also Nicholas Bullock, 'First the Kitchen, then the Façade', (1988), and Rebecca Houze, 'From “Wiener Kunst im Hause" to the Wiener Werkstätte: Marketing Domesticity with Fashionable Interior Design' (2002). Frederic J. Schwartz, in his book The Werkbund: Design Theory and Mass Culture before the First World War (1996), considers the emergence of standardized type-forms as well as corporate trademarks from within a cultural discourse of 'fashion' and 'style', revealing that masculine philosophies of commerce and design were intimately tied to ideas surrounding dress.

The emphasis on industrial manufacture in much of the earlier design history makes it difficult to reconcile varying aesthetic strains and modes within the modern movement, such as the organic shapes of Scandinavian designs by Alvar Aalto and Eliel Saarinen, the eclectic and surrealist interiors of the 1920s and 1930s, or the futuristic shapes of Art Deco in America. More recent studies that draw attention to chese alternate and competing modernisms include Christopher Reed, Bloomsbury Rooms: Modernism, Subculture, and Domesticity (2004), and Penny Sparke, Elsie de Wolfe: The Birth of Modern Interior Decoration (2005). None of these modernisms of the first half of the twentieth century, however, can be understood without also looking closely issues of national identity and design – see Wendy Kaplan, ed., Designing Modernity: the Arts of Reform and Persuasion, 1885–1945 (1995) and the political, economic and psychological repercussions of two continents twice traumatized by violent nationalism and world war.

## SECTION 4

War/Post-War/Cold War, 1943-70