# INTRODUCTION

# Grace Lees-Maffei

This section continues from the previous section in tracing various modernisms. The extracts here show how versions of modernism were promoted and modified in response to specific political and economic contexts, specifically Second World War Utility furniture (Denney), the post-war 'Populuxe' consumer society (Hine) and Festival of Britain (Conekin), the Soviet kitchen (Reid) and che ways in which, for Banham, speaking in 1966, materials embodied design ethics. During the period examined in this section, attempts were made to promote competing ideologies through claims to improved standards of life epitomized by new developments in the domestic interior and its contents. During the mid-rwentieth century, the domestic interior became explicitly politicized through government and state intervention.

As the preceding secrion suggests, there is scope for more comparative work exploring the relationships between the 'International Sryle' as it emerged in Germany, che Netherlands and elsewhere, and was promoted in the US by retailers and organizations such as MoMA, and modernism as it appeared in the UK. It has been argued that, prior to 1940, British approaches to modernism represented a compromise. State-sponsored design, made compulsory through special measures such as materials rationing and the Utility scheme, and the concerted government-led campaign of design promorion following the war, had the effect of promulgating modernism more widely within the UK, but the extent to which it was genuinely popular with consumers has yer to be fully examined.

Design historians have recognized the fact that products originally developed for military applications have found success in the mass market. Examples include the Jeep (see Porter, W., 'Toledo Wheels: The Design Story of Willys-Overland, the Jeep, and the Rise of the SUV', in The Alliance of Art and Industry: Toledo Designs for a Modern America, Toledo, Ohio: The Toledo Museurn of Art, 2002, pp. 109–28) and Rayban Aviator sunglasses (Sudjic, D., Cult Objects, London: Paladin, 1985). However, British Utility design of the Second World War involved a different situation: designing for the wartime mass market within the constraints of manufacturing and materials shortages. Purchased with rationing coupons, also issued for food, Utility design encompassed not only garments, which wear out relatively quickly or are grown out of, but also the ostensibly more permanent category of furniture, which was destroyed as people's homes were routinely bombed. While Norman Hartnell's Utility clothing enabled the whole country to be dressed in patriotic quasi-militaristic styles by the Queen's dressmaker, Utility furniture has been seen as a route through which a British public notoriously resistant to continental modernism was persuaded to accept a pared-down practical aesthetic. Utility design was informed by the more extreme manifestations of modernist design and, indirectly, by the design reformers of the nineteenth century and was offered to consumers who had little alternative. Matthew Denney challenges several misconceptions about Utility design, in the extract presented here, from a book edited by the late Judy Attfeld, who saw Utility as a precursor to today's concerns for etlical design in terms of ecological sustainability.

To say that the post-war period, beginning with the end of the Second World War in 1945, was one of optimism is both a cliché and a truism. In the UK, national pride was harnessed and engendered through social programmes such as the introduction of free universal healthcare through the National Health Service in 1948, just as it was through a government programme of countrywide celebrations including the Festival of Britain of 1951 and its precursor, the Britain Can Make It exhibition of 1946. Conceived in part as a reprise of the Great Exhibition of 1851, the organizers of the Festival of Britain were interested in promoting ideas about the future as much as the past, as Becky Conekin shows in her analysis, extracted here. However, the extent to which post-war prosperity was actually enjoyed by consumers outside the US needs qualification. Rationing continued until 1954 and while young people had the opportunity to earn more than their parents for the first time, the post-war period was not one of unalloyed prosperity; rather, the end of the war left the UK both culturally energized and materially impoverished.

Post-war culture across the 'Western' world has typically been characterized as having undergone a process of Americanization, in which the international influence of the US increased both politically and culturally. Hine's writing on what he has termed 'Populuxe' shows how consumerist practices and values were supported by a sense of material abundance communicated in rapidly developing popular culture media channels, such as television and advertising, which seemed an appropriate response to increased prosperity. Consumerism permeated post-war daily life, from the development of convenience food, which relied on new technologies in food distribution and storage enabled by applications of freezer technology, to the introduction of mass air travel, expanding the horizons of middle-class holidaymakers as well as the jet set. Commentators have tried variously to articulate this broad cultural process with phrases such as J. B. Priestley's 'Admnass society', Bevis Hillier's austerity/binge', Thomas Hine's 'Populuxe' - extracted here - and Reyner Banham's 'throwaway aesthetic'. Within the context of the other texts extracted here, Hine's Populuxe is shown to be as ideologically laden as the other examples examined in this section. Populuxe was not mandated by government decree, as was Utility and the Khrushchev kitchen, but the market-led design by which it is characterized was the result of a political decision to allow a free-market economy to spread relatively unchecked in a capitalist, consumerist society

The 'Cold War', from 1945, was one in which newly developed nuclear weapons were largely kept on standby rather than being detonated – their symbolic force being so great as to constitute a war of threats and menace distinct from the carnage of trench warfare and air raids in the First and Second World Wars. It was a war of competing ideologies in which socialism and capitalism, as represented by their respective leaders, the USSR and the US, sought to assert primacy over one anocher and thereby gain global dominance. Within the Cold War context, the quality of life enjoyed by ordinary people became highly politicized, with each superpower seeking to show that it offered superior living standards. As Susan Reid shows here, in her analysis of the Khrushchev kirchen, the Cold War was fought as much through public debate about the domestic interior as it was through the space race: 'Scientific communism', she writes, was embedded in 'household advice, domestic science education, rational planning of the kitchen or "scientific management" and the domestication of the scientifictechnological revolution through the mechanization of housework'. Design was a crucial tool in the armoury of ideology and iconography, whether directly – for exarnple in che flexible and space-saving furnishings developed to meet the needs of citizens of the new apartment blocks showcased by Soviet city planners – or indirectly – from the space-inspired fashion of Frenchman Pierre Cardin to the application of new materials to furniture and interior design, exemplifed by the fibre-glass chairs of Charles and Ray Eames and the anonymous pattern designers at Formica.

Both within and outside the US, many people's lives remained unrelieved by an Americanization that was, in practice, largely confined to the cultural realm of aspiration, in movies, magazines and television programmes. It was the America of dreams and cultural artefacts that the Independent Group. Banham prominent among them, invoked in its debates about high culture and mass culture. The talk by Banhar presented here explains something of the moral weight attached by designers and design commentators to materials and their use. Banham presents a war of design philosophies attendant upon the use of materials, which engaged modernist notions of honesty and dishonesty. His analysis of the opposition of materials is set, in this section, between the larger opposition of Utility, the Festival of Britain, the Khrushchev kitchen and Populuxe. In retrospect, Banham's talk can be seen as a watershed berween modernist and postmodernist sensibilities.