# INTRODUCTION

# Rebecca Houze

Roughly a century after Arts and Crafts theorists had criticized the dehumnanizing and wasteful excesses of industrialization, twentieth-century critics, designers, historians, manufacturers and concerned citizens again began to raise awareness of the environmental crisis that now holds our planet in peril. American biologist and writer Rachel Carson drew attention to the dangerous results of chemical pesticides in her 1962 book Silent Spring, which provoked public outcry and inspired a grassroots environmental movement in the United States that led to a nationwide ban on the use of DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane), and the establishment of the Clean Air Act of 1963 and Environmental Protection Agency in 1970. That same year the first Earth Day was celebrated. More than twenty years later, the first United Nations Earth Summit was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992. The rapid depletion of natural resources, mass extinction of plant and animal life and global warming that threatens to change earth's climate and destroy ecosystems around the world have been understood by many to be a direct result of the industrialism that gave birth to modern design. Numerous organizations have since been established around the world specifically to rethink design in light of new ecological awareness and reshape it for a sustainable future.

This section begins with an extract from Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth, written in 1969 by the visionary American architect and designer R. Buckminster Fuller, who first developed his theories of sustainability with models for ‘Dymaxion' houses and cars in the 1920s and geodesic domes in the 1940s. In 'Spaceship Earth', Fuller conceives of the planet as both organic sustainer of life and technological wonder that we must care for and maintain in order for humanity continue to exist.

American social critic and journalist Vance Packard caused a sensation with his 1957 book The Hidden Persuaders, which claimed that the advertising industry used psychoanalytic methods to play upon our fears and desires, terpting us to buy. Packard's ideas, which implicated the designer in the corrosive and deleterious mechanisrn of manipulative advertising, were indicative of a growing discomfort within the design community itself. 'First Things First: A Manifesto' (1964), signed by twenty-rwo prominent graphic designers, including Ken Garland and Anthony Froshaug, asserted, 'we have reached a saturation point at which the high-pitched scream of consumer selling is no more than sheer noise ... We think that there are other things more worth using our skill and experience on.' In 2000, 'First Things First', was revised and reissued, adding, 'Unprecedented environmental, social and cultural crises demand our attention ... We propose a reversal of priorities in favour of more useful, lasting and democratic forms of communication – a mindshift away from product marketing and toward the exploration and production of a new kind of meaning.

Packard's The Waste Makers (1960) was a scathing critique of America's gluttonous throwaway culture, unethical manufacturing practices, and depletion of natural resources. In the selection reproduced here, 'How to Outmode a \$4,000 Vehicle in Two Years', Packard criticizes the automobile industry's manipulation of the consumption cycle through 'dynamic obsolescence'. In the 1950s, car manufacturers, he argues, finding little need for further mechanical innovation in their products, put their energies into making stylistic changes to each new model by adding different colours, squashing the body into Alatter shapes, adding decorative headlights, voluptuous chrorne detailing and sharper tailfins. Packard echoed Adolf Loos in his criticism of such changes, akin o the stylistic changes in women's fashions. which contributed to a more rapid devaluing of vehicles that were otherwise in good working order. Aside from the questionable ethical strategy of increasing sales through needless production, stylistic obsolescence sometimes led to manufacturing changes that were dangerous in other ways. In order to accommodate an increasingly Aattened silhouette, for example, General Motors produced the Corvair with a rear-end motor. The Corvair, which became notorious for its deadly tendency to flip, was the impetus for consumer advocate Ralph Nader's influential book Unsafe at Any Speed: The Designed-In Dangers of the American Automobile (1965).

Austrian-American industrial designer Victor Papanek criticized the design profession for ignoring human need as well as that of the natural environment of planet earth in his collection of essays Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change (1971). In 'Do-it-Yourself Murder: The Social and Moral Responsibilities of the Designer', Papanek picks up on Packard's criticism of stylistic obsolescence, and argues that the responsible designer, rather than stimulating the whims of the wealthiest fraction with streamlined toasters, should find solutions to living improvements in the developing world, and among the overlooked 'minority', who actually constitute the majority of the human population. Simple irrigation pumps made of old tires, ergonomic chairs for restless schoolchildren, contraceptive packaging for the illiterate and low-cost educational television sets were among the creative design projects he supported.

Whereas Fuller, Packard and Papanek each approached design as designers or critics, Jeffrey Meikle looks at the plastics industry from the point of view of a historian. His account, based on trade and popular literature, as well as archival documents, traces the development of imitative synthetic materials, from celluloid in the nineteenth century to Bakelite in the 1930s to the explosion of industrial chemical products in the 1960s. The section extracted here, 'Material Doubts and Plastic Fallout', deals with the backlash against the plastics industry as a result of new ecological awareness. Critics of plastics warned against the expensive wastefulness of petroleum fuel, unsightly overflowing landfills, children smothered by clinging plastic laundry bags, and fatal destruction of land, air, water, plant, animal and human life as a result of coxic pollution.

By the 1980s and 1990s, our impact on the environment began to be seen as the responsibility not only of the designer or government regulation but of the consumer as well. Joel Makower's The Green Consumer Supermarket Guide, teminiscent of the Whole Earth Catalogue project, with contributions from John Elkington and Julie Hailes (1991), offered simple ways for consumers to make more educated choices about the products they purchased, from dishwashing detergents to juice boxes to batteries. By selecting items produced by companies with echical manufacturing records, made with non-toxic ingredients and packaged in recyclable containers, consumers could exert pressure on industry to design in a more sustainable manner. In the past century we have stuffed landfills with garbage. In 'Redefning Rubbish: Commodity Disposal and Sourcing', in Second Hand Culrures (2003), Nicky Gregson and Louise Crewe explore what happens to the discarded trash of our throwaway culture when it becomes reabsorbed as a new type of desirable object

As both the cause and effect of industrialization, what role will design play in the future? Today, 'green' design has become more than a fashionable trend. In the wake of human-caused environmental catastrophe, and of natural disaster insufficiently planned for, ecologically sensitive design is now the only option. Architect William McDonough sees the natural world, like R. Buckminster Fuller before him, as the model for design and as the supplier of a perpetually renewable energy source – the sun. In The Hannover Principles written for the 1992 Earth Summit, William McDonough summarizes the view that we are one among many species who must coexist, and chat we must design 'for all children, of all species, for all tire'.