# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING

For a thorough overview of early literature on design and sustainability, see Pauline Madge, 'Design, Ecology, Technology: A Historiographical Review' (1993). Notable among books to champion environmental responsibility in the later twentieth century was Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People Mattered (1973) by British economist Ernst Friedrich Schumacher, followed by Timothy O'Riordan's Environmentalism (1976).

Victor Papanek continued to influence designers and public with his books How Things Don't Work, co-authored with Jim Hennessy (1977), Design for Human Scale (1983) and The Green Imperative: Natural Design for the Real World (1995). Architect Christopher Alexander also contributed to ideas on the relationship of people and their built structures to the natural world, most notably in A Partern Language. Towns, Buildings, Construction, co-authored with Sara Ishikawa and Murray Silverstein (1977), The Timeless Way of Building (1979) and The Nature of Order, Books 1–4 (2003–2004). Many of these ideas, however, had already been addressed in the 1860s and 1870s, for example, by Frederick Law Olmstead, whose essays are collected in Civilizing American Cities: Writings on City Landscapes (1971), and Ebenezer Howard, To-morrow: A Peaceful Path to Real Reform (1898), reissued in 1902 as Garden Cities of To-Morrow. The theme of the 2009 annual conference of the Nineteenth Century Srudies Association in the United States, 'The Green Nineteenth Century', reflected the current interest in recovering theories of sustainability in those first efforts to rethink industry and che urban fabric. Lewis Mumford's 'Toward an Organic Ideology' in Technics and Civilization (1934), Frank Lloyd Wright's 'Prairie Architecture' (1931) and The Natural House (1954) show the persistence of reform ideals even as industry flourished in the first half of the twentieth century.

The particular mobilization of these issues in the 1960s and 1970s, such as in Charles Reich's The Greening of America (1970), was related in part to a growing awareness of the complex ecology of planet Earth, newly imagined as a fragile and beautiful entity seen in photographs taken from space. The NASA image of the earth as a swirling blue-green globe was depicted on the cover of the Whole Earth Catalogue, a collaborative compilation of information, published by Stewart Brand between 1968 and 1972. The goal of the project was to provide useful information and tools for individuals to help build sustainable communities. Similarly infuential was British scientist James Lovelock's Gaia Hypothesis', named after the ancient Greek goddess of Earth, which asserted that the biosphere and physical components of our planet form a complex, interrelated, self-sustaining system. See Norman Myers, The Gaia Atlas of Planet Management: For Today's Caretakers of Tomorrow's World (1984). The notion of Earth as life-giving and nurturing mother found parallels as well in the burgeoning women's movement of the 1960s and 1970s.

Other prominent theorists of sustainable design in the second half of the twentieth century include Otl Aicher and Gui Bonsiepe, both of whom were affiliated with the Hochschule für Gestaltung (College of Design) in Ulm, Germany. See, for example, Otl Aicher, Die Welt als Entwurf( The World as

Design) (1991) and Gui Bonsiepe, 'Design and Democracy' (2006). The strategy of planned obsolescence' was first introduced by the American advertising pioneer Earnest Elmo Calkins in 'Advertising Art in the United Scates' (1936). Karrie Jacobs admonishes the graphic designer for contributing to an unsustainable industry in 'Disposability, Graphic Design, Seyle and Waste' (1990), while Naomi Klein resists the forces of globalized and multinational commerce in No Logo (2000). It is not possible to do justice to the extensive literature on or organizations devoted to sustainable design in the past two decades. A few notable English language examples include Our Common Future, published by the World Commission on Environment and Development (1989), More From Less (exhibition catalogue. London, Design Centre, 1990–1), Dorothy Mackenzie, Green Design, Design for the Environment (1991), and Green Desires: Ecology Design, Products (exhibition catalogue, EcoDesign Foundation, University of Sydney, 1992).

Today, architects and designers such as William McDonough and Bruce Mau continue to further the cause for sustainability. See William McDonough, 'Design, Ecology, Ethics, and the Making of Things' (1993), William McDonough and Michael Braungart, Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make Things (2002), as well as the catalogue for the exhibition 'Massive Change', by Bruce Mau and the Institute Without Boundaries (2004).

## PART II METHODS AND THEMES