# THE STATE OF DESIGN HISTORY, PART I: MAPPING THE FIELD Clive Dilnot (1984)

## THE EMERGENCE OF DESIGN HISTORY

Before 1939, there were two or three areas of design historical activity, with the exception of architecture.' One area was the history of the decorative arts. Largely constituted as a branch of che history of monumental architecture, especially of great houses, it included the histories of interior or garden design and the contents and furnishings of rooms. It also included the provenance-creating histories of all those objects, that is, furniture, glassware, ceramics, silver, and so forth, collected in museums, preserved in the country houses, and, above all, sold through the antiques trade and the sales room. The histories of che decorative arts are intimately related to the history of art in this area.² Because the histories of the decorative arts are oriented to the needs of the sales rooms as the most vital and vigorous consumers of their work, they have accomplished important achievements in detailed research. But they lacked a concept and a comprehension of design.3 [...}

By contrast, the second embryonic form of design history, building on art and architectural history, clevated design to the highest principle. If design history has an academic antecedent, it is surely Nikolaus Pevsner's Pioneers of Modern Design, despite all later criticisms. First published in 1936, it is animated by two powerfully linked ideas. First, design is of great importance and significance in the modern world. Second, precisely because of this, the form that designing takes in this emerging world is of social and ontological importance; so, too, is its history. [...] Scarcely formulated in his writings to any explicit theoretical extent, the conviction of the import and subtlety of this relationship animates almost every sentence Pevsner wrote.“

History as polemic in the service of a design principle, or even history for use as functional to collecting, has lost much of its respectability or has taken on the new form of history as celebration. But the quasi-scientific detachment to which historians now sometimes pretend, was, before 1939, ruled out of court, at least for 'design history' (for what possible market could there have been for it?). [...] Design history arises, in the service of design, as a response to particular practical problems. It does not arise artificially, simply for the sake of itself. Once the problem is solved, through the assistance of history, interest in the subject tends to die down again. This tendency prompts the question, what is implied by the current simultaneous rise of a need for history on all design fronts? And, will the answer explain the otherwise puzzling absence of desigr history berween 1936 and the late 1960s?

The reasons for chis absence are many. Modernism's rampant success in colonizing both the British and American architectural establishments after 1945, undoubredly helped by Pevsner and Siegfried Giedion,' was not perfectly repeated in design. When product design, in particular, took on the Modernist ethic, it did not need the historical and intellectual weight that was a necessary pre-condition for adaptation by architecture. The crirical arguments such as those developed in Herbert Read's Art and Industry wete of more impact. The same remained generally true in graphic design. Except for specialist areas, notably typography8 and illustration, history seemed to be irrelevant for a discipline in the process of forming itself and attempting to escape the historic limitarions of arts-and-crafts attitudes and its commercial art background.

Conditions were not propitious for the emergence of design history. A rampant anti-intelleccualism, combined with a hierarchical dominance of the fine arts, the history of art, and the idea of 'culture' in the art and design schools, served to make discussions of design in any historical sense more or less impossible. But [...] in the 1950s and 1960s [...] design came of age; [...] The consumer revolutions of the post-war period, the institutionalization of design, the expansion of art and design education, and the explosion of youth and pop cultures, all served in different ways to highlight design and styling skills and to emphasize the new significance of the look or style of things. [...]

This cultural identification with things also marked an acceptance of industrial culture. Beginning in 1952 with the exhibition of Victorian and Edwardian decorative arts at the Victoria and Albert Museum, a gradual revival of interest occurred in the objects and history of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The Victorian Society was founded in England in 1957, the Society for the History of Technology in America in 1958. The decade also brought the beginnings of industrial archeology and a general popular obsession with the previously despised Victorian Age.

Pevsner's Pioneers of Modern Design was revised and re-issued in 1960, and in the same year, Reyner Banham's Theory and Design in the First Machine Age was published. Banham's book marked the beginning of a period of intensive study of

Modernism and its origins, which [...] departed somewhat from the Pevsnerian model. However, [...] the emerging design history still fit easily into the traditional forms of art and architectural history writing. Pevsner's book treats painting seriously, and is written in terms of 'great men' (and) it is on individuals that the early design history was based.

This approach was not necessarily counter to the interest of the emerging design professions. The codifcation of professional design education in Britain in the early 1960s was accompanied by the enhanced status of designers and design. In that context, design histories that further developed the role of professional designers and design institutions were welcomed initially. However, [...] it was clear by the early 1970s that good design' was not a magic talisman. Modernism began to lose its appeal, and problems of design organization, technology, and the relation of design to society and to the economy came to the fore. Also, the question of design's relationship to commerce, markets, and popular taste provoked both practitioners and embryonic historians to re-examine the tenets and assumptions of a Modernist design practice and a history of design that simply reproduced the modernist story or somewhat naively documented the emergence of good design and its institutions. This rethinking of approaches ser the stage for the emergence of a new design history.

## THE FORMS AND VARIETIES OF DESIGN HISTORY

[...] The coherence of a design historical attitude was both slow in forming and not bound by any rigid framework or set of texts. (In that respect, even Pioneers has not dominantly imposed its values on present design history.) On the contrary. with the laudable aim of keeping the discipline open and relativistic, there was a notable reluctance to specify objects and subjects of study or to consider what the role of this history might be.

The major consequence of this almost accidental emergence of a history of design is that design history, in the sense of a single, organized discipline with defined aims and objects, does not exist.

It is thus bafflingly difficult to survey or define design history in its present state. At best, one can say that, without explicit definition or statement, the new design history is formed around four linked principles and four related absences. The principles are as follows:

• Design history is the study of the history of professional design activity.

• It is not the activity itself that forms the first layer of attention of historians, but the results of that activity: designed objects and images. (This emphasis is justified on a number of aesthetic and archeological grounds, as well as on the premise that design is a practical activity that results in a new thing or image.)

• An equally natural orientation was added to design in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

• Design history emphasizes individual designers. Explicitly or implicitly, they are the focus of the majority of design history written and taught today.

The absences, by contrast, are less specific, but equally present in the way the discipline operates:

• There is little explicit consideration of aims, methods, or roles of design history in relation to its actual or potential audiences.

• There is little consideration of design history's origins, except in an educational and institutional sense.

• There is a general lack of hisrorical, methodological, or critical self-reflection. Whereas self-reflection might at the very least engender clear statements of position or clarification of aims, the ad hoc nature of most design history means that it is very difficult to define social, theoretical, or methodological presuppositions. This not to say they do not exist.

Differences of emphasis and orientation in design historical work certainly exist. These can be classified as four general traditions or approaches; however, it is important to note that these are only general attitudes or tendencies, not schools to which historians ally themselves, nor are they necessarily exclusive categories. Many historians of design cross some or all of these boundaries in the course of their work. In addition, there are four areas of work in design history that can be set out as follows:

1. A CONTINUATION OF THE TRADITIONAL HISTORIES OF THE DECORATIVE AND MINOR ARTS AS APPLIED TO THE SUBJECT MATTER OF DESIGN, DECORATION, AND EPHEMERA OF THE NINETEENTH AND TWENTIETH CENTURIES

As the recent past has become of more concern to design historians, museum directors, collectors and designers, there has also been a narural tendency to extend to the decorative arts of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the kind of scholastic attention that, prior to 1945, was confined almost exclusively to works of the eighteenth century and earlier. This has taken a number of forms. The most dominant at present is the encounter with the world of mass culture (the break is approximately 1925). There, the orientation of the studies has shifted to a whimsical conception of popular taste and to a concern with what might be called junk antiques. Typical products of the recent histories of this genre are the enthusiastic studies of early Art Deco products, histories of fashion, and popular books on ephemera, such as Bevis Hillier's Austerity Binge.

What links all of chese works is the patent problem of atternpting to discuss issues of twentiethcentury decoration within the traditional terms of the 'high' decorative arts. [...] The central issues in terms of the decorative (and one must ask whether that term can even apply to twentieth century phenomena) now are issues of style, taste, and fashion. Indeed, it is precisely works that deal centrally with these concepts that best support the attempt to write a serious history of the meaning of decorative style in the twentieth century. [...]

Yet the tradition of writing decorative history survives. lts ability to elucidate the precise provenance of an object is in considerable demand by the sales rooms, the antiques trade, and the new museums that emphasize nineteenth- and twentieth-century collections. What this tradition can give in terms of developing an understanding of design and decoration in the twentieth century remains to be seen.

[...] There is a need to construct histories of design crafts that either avoid the excesses of recent decorative histories or assimilate them into an overall model of the development of industrial design. [...] Recent work undertaken on William Morris, the Arts and Crafts Movement, and Art Nouveau [...] augments the lineage of Modernism that was first set out in Pevsner's Pioneers. [... These] can be considered as celebrations of a slightly different set of values, even if they are read as proto-Modernist [... and] their general development is toward an increasing examination of the social conditions in which this work was produced and its connection to theories of life and human relations." [...]

## 2. A FOCUS ON MODERNISM

The fascination with William Morris and Arts and Crafts values is almost a Pevsnerian trademark. Later studies of Modernism, beginning with Banham's 1960 revisions on architectural history in Theory and Design in the First Machine Age, have'stressed the period after 1900, the less immediately central aspects of the European avant-garde (Italy, Expressionism, De Stijl), and technology (electricity and building services). [... As] the Open University's third-level course on the history of modern architecture and design from 1890 to 1939 [...] concentrat[es] on the development of the work of individual designers across their careers and across a range of conditions, it follows and also modifies the Pevsnerian tradition. Pevsnerian also is the emphasis on stylistic analysis. However, the course departs from the straightjackets of Modernist histories. The introduction contains a design case study on Norman Bel Geddes, and the course includes units on British design and the electric home, the garden cities movement, and mechanical services.

Organizing the course made evident at least two of the problems of doing design history: The abundance of potential [archival] material disclosed the lack of a conceptual framework within which to make sense of it all. [... And] the history of Modernism, which had been primarily an architectural history, cannot remain unaltered by the incorporation of the history of design. [...] A broader history of social and industrial developments [...] shifts from Modernism per se to the unraveling of its meaning and function in che present phase of capitalist development [... including] the more anonymous developments in technique, industrial production, and consumerism.

[...] As a counterpoint to Pevsner's history and European work in general, Penny Sparke in Britain and Jeffrey Meikle and Arthur Pulos in the United States are asserting the validity of American design contributions, particularly the American system of manufactures and the development of professional design consultants in the 1930s.'° These histories [...] challenge the notion of what it is to be modern. For Pevsner this meant to have a self-conscious awareness of design's social role and its progression toward a rational universalism. Indeed, one was modern to the extent that one was aware of the significance of design as an ideal. For Americans, to be modern in the esthetic or design theoretical sense is acceptable, but of more import is to be modern in the economic and technological sense, to be in tune with the most progressive developments of American capitalism

[...]

## 3. A FOCUS ON ISSUES OF DESIGN ORGANIZATION

If there is a clear thread at all discernible in the history of design in industrial societies, it is that design in the process of production has become separated from the act of making and, therefore, has increasingly become a process of conceiving rather than realizing form [...] having to do not only with design questions, but also increasingly with those of company corporate policy and political or legal matters.

[...] In practice, design organization is the core concern of works as chronologically and methodologically diverse as John Heskett's Industrial Design, Jonathan Woodham's The Industrial Designer and the Public, and Penny Sparke's Consultant Design. [...] Natural extensions of this relation lead either to technological and industrial histories, to institutional studies, or to studies of the consumer or the design purchasing and design-affected public. In specific cases, design organization is also a subject that social and economic historians have become interested in.

## 4. A FOCUS ON THE SOCIAL RELATIONS OF VARIOUS KINDS OF DESIGN

Design historical and analytical developments in Europe have directly confronted this issue. For example, Wolfgang Fritz Haug has developed a theory of commodity esthetics (Warenasthetik) from a Marxist perspective [... and] Gert Selle has formulated a theory of design as an expression of social relations from a comparable perspective." Both Haug's and Selle's work relate to the more general social and political aspects of art, architecture and design as manifested through the collective work of the Ulmer Verein für Kunstwissenschaft, the left-wing West German association of art and architectural historians that has been stimulating and focusing work on the sociopolitical aspects of architecture and design. This group sees the forms of art, architecture, and design as being produced within capitalism, bur conversely playing a significant ideological role in capitalist culture. This group's work is directly comparable to work being produced in East Germany. [...] British and American scholars are used to attacks on the left-wing or totalirarian aspects of functionalism but Hüter and Lothar Kühne reject this view, contending that the Bauhaus and 1920s Modernism are products of a phase of the capitalist economy. [...]

Italian design history perhaps is even more cultural than social. Related to the dominance of high-level quasi-Marxist architectural history and criticism, design history and criticism in Italy attempt to grasp the difficult connection of designed material to sociocultural forms and relations. This approach is the thrust of the highly developed, theoretical essays in two exhibition catalogs: Italy: The New Domestic Landscape' and Italian Re-evolution: Design in Italian Society in the Eighties."

[...] [This] emphasis on cultural aspects of design meaning [...] rather than design production or reception, connects Italian work to some of the new English design history, which falls on the axis between the Birmingham Center for Contemporary Cultural Studies and a group at Middlesex Polytechnic that produces the journal Block and runs one of the two main British Master of Arts courses in design history. The primary emphasis of this work is the srudy of representations, which owes its origins to the semiotic cultural criticism pioneered by Roland Barthes. [...] Dick Hebdige's work, particularly Subculture: The Meaning of Style, deals marginally with conventional design history, but is at the center of the relation of material culture, images, and forms of representation to social relations and processes. So, too, is the emerging feminist analysis of design. [...] Feminist design history possesses the supreme virtue of refusing the distinction between design and social life that characterizes so much design thinking, practice, and historical work.

## NOTES

Extracted from Dilnot, C., 'The State of Design History, Part I: Mapping the Field', Design Issues 1(1) (Spring, 1984), pp. 4–23. Reprinted by permission of che author.

1. What is the different significance of history and study between architecture and design? A study that focused on this issue could provide a whole range of insights into what differentiates the practices of architecture and design in a conceptual sense.

2. In retrospect, it seems that design history's problem with art history was less the way the latter imposed its methodology on design history and more the fact that design history kept art history's methods but renounced its intellectual core, thus depriving itself of the means to give significance to the form of the things it dealt with. The histories of the decorative arts, with some exceptions, have already anticipated design history in this.

3. When historically does society begin to recognize consciously that things are designed rather than that chey simply are? This seems to be a fundamental problem. It is the difference between design as a necessary but barely acknowledged moment of human praxis and 'design' as the conscious apperception and acceptance of this fact. But when and why does the latter occur?

4. Nikolaus Pevsner, Pioneers of Modern Design (London: Faber and Faber, 1936).

5. This is in sharp contrast to the poor caricature of Pevsner's work recently drawn in David Watkin, Morality in Architecture (London: Oxford University Press, 1978).

6. It certainly fires Pioneers and guides the series of bipgraphic and critical articles Pevsner wrote in the late 1930s and 1940s. Many of these articles are usefully collected in Nikolaus Pevsner, Studies in Art, Architecture, and Design, vols. 1 and 2 (London: Thames and Hudson, 1976).

7. Giedion's influence on Modernism has been frequently commented on. Less discussed, because more problematic, is the influence of Giedion's Mechanisation Takes Command (London: Oxford University Press, 1948). In some ways, it would seem that chis curious work has never been fully assimilated into design history.

8. The exceptions as it were prove the rule. The 1950s saw the Swiss school of typographer attempt to establish their scheme of rationa design in part by reclaiming the functional heritage of the 1920s. See, for example Karl Gerstner and Markus Kutter, Die Neu Graphik (The New Graphic Art) (Teufen: Arthur Niggli, 1959). But history was her wholly functional to the design enterprise.

9. See, for example, the shifts of focus fron. Gillian Naylor, Arts and Crafts Movemen: (London: Studio Vista, 1971), to Lionel Lambourne, Utopian Crafismen: The Arts and Crafts Movement from Cotswolds to Chicage (London: Astragal Books, 1980).

10. Arthut Pulos, American Design Ethic: A History of Industrial Design, Cambridge: MIT, 1983: Penny Sparke, Consultant Design: the Histon and Practice of the Designer in Industry London: Pembridge Press, 1983. Meikle's wor is Twentieth Century Limited: Industrial Desig in America, 1925–1939 (Philadelphia: Tempk University Press, 1979). The subject is now highly fashionable one for design historians. However, concentration on che most overt designers (Loewy and so forth) is likely α distort considerably the wider understanding of the commercial role of design in the United States in the 1930s and its relation to the U.S. economy and society.

11. Gert Selle, Ideologie und Utopie des Designs (Köln: DuMont, 1968), and Die Geschich des Designs in Deutschland von 1870 bis heust (Köln: Du Mont, 1978).

12. Emilio Ambasz, ed., Italy: The New Domestic Landscape (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1972).

13. Piero Sartogo, ed., Italian Re-Evolution: Design in Italian Sociery in the Eighries (La Jolla, CA: La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art, 1982).