# RESISTING COLONIZATION: DESIGN HISTORY HAS ITS OWN IDENTITY Jonathan M. Woodham (1995)

## DESIGN HISTORY AND DESIGN STUDIES

Since its emergence as a distinct feld of acadernic study in the 1970s, design history has been subject to considerable criticism from many quarters; whether at the hands of scholars working within the general framework of the discipline but seeking to redefine radically its goals and broaden its ambit or academics concerned with different academic fields, such as anthropology, who criticized trenchantly the limitations of the design historical work which they had encountered; as well as others who should have been wellplaced to review the position of design history as a legitimate area of pedagogy, research and publication.3 Victor Margolin\* falls into this latter category, particularly with regard to his 1992 article 'Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter and Methods." The reason why I wish to draw particular attention to this text is that it misrepresents the academic health and identity of design history (at least in Britain), understates the increasing opportunities for specialist design historical study at undergraduate and postgraduate levels and largely overlooks the growing body of valuable research, exhibition and publication work in the field. Secondly, since it seeks to colonize design history under the imperial umbrella of design studies (the territorial boundaries of which are seemingly endless), I would resist this on the grounds that design historians, particularly of the modern period, are already highly conversant with the inter-disciplinary possibilities described and have litdle need of an aspirant parent discipline' to help them enter into meaningful and productive academic debate, research, or pedagogy.

At the outset of his piece, Margolin drew attention to the fact there had been a range of publications, exhibitions and conferences devoted to the design of the past; the establishment of design history societies in Britain, che United States, and Scandinavia, the launch of the Design History Society's fournal of Design History in Britain; as well as curriculum development on both sides of the Arlantic. However, he concluded thus:

And yet, despite these activities, there is little to show thar could gain recognition for design history as a solid field of acadernic study. [ do not wish to take away from the benefit it has had on thousands of design students on several continents who have come to understand the wider cultural context in which designers work. But I do want to address the issue of what has or has not been accomplished to establish design history as a productive scholarly enterprise.

Such a viewpoint, alongside others articulated elsewhere in the article, caused ripples of disquiet among a number of those in Britain involved with design historical research, publication, specialist teaching, and curriculum development at the undergraduate and postgraduate levels.8 This sense of disquiet was engendered not as a result of the validity of the criticisms put forward as much as from the inaccuracy of many of the premises upon which they were based. It was, perhaps, more than coincidental that his 1992 article was placed within a journal of desigo studies since it followed a line of approach taken up in Margolin's introduction to an earlier publication, Design Discourse: History, Theory, Criticism, in which he wrote of 'Design Studies as a New Discipline." [...] It would be interesting to speculate about the extent to which this envisaged shift away from the positioning of design history as a legitimate area of academic inquiry in its own right (towards the broader umbrella of design srudies) has been conditioned by its relative status and context in academic curricula in the United States. After all, in the fall of 1991, a reviewer in the North American Design Book Review, while acknowledging that design history was a relatively new discipline,' also expressed the view that it 'was well-established in Britain, but still forming in this country' and that, not surprisingly, 'the discipline has been dominated by British design historians.'º

## THE STATE OF DESIGN HISTORY: A PARTLAL REMAPPING OF THE FIELD"

[...] While it is true that in Britain the genesis of design history as an academic discipline developed initially as part of a wider response to the British Ministry of Education's Coldstream and Summerson Reports of the 1960s and 1970, respectively,'² it also is the case that such a context was perceiyed to be problematic in several of the earlier articles reflecting on the shortcomings of design historical practice." [...]

It also is clear that design history in Britain had received a considerable shot in the arm from the growing number of courses with ‘a distinct identity within academia that [were] independent of [their] relations to practice.'' An important spearhead, its modernist inclinations notwithstanding, was the Open University's third-level course on the history of modern architecture and design in 1972, which was based on the research of Charlorte and Tim Benton, Adrian Forty, Reyner Banham, and others." From the mid-1970s onward, a flurry of institutional activity in the higher education sector saw, over a five-year period, the establishment in Britain of a number of freestanding courses which offered honors degrees with either a distinct design historical focus; as at the Polytechnics of Manchester and Brighton;" or in combination with art history, film studies and architectural history; as at the Polytechnics of North Staffordshire, Newcastle upon Tyne, Leicester, Sheffield, and Middlesex.'"

Whatever the difficulties involved in the ideology, methodological underpinning and academic direction of the new degree courses in design history established in Britain from che mid-1970s onward, Her Majesty's Inspectorate (HMI), part of the State's Department of Education and Science,'8 was strongly supportive. The conclusions were drawn on the basis of first-hand observation and consultation with the staff and students in 1986 and 1987. It was stated on the opening page that:

Although each of the [seven] courses has a distinct identity, they all share at least two common concerns. One is a desire to extend the range of artifacts, objects and images properly regarded as legitimate material for historical study. The other is a desire to develop new theoretical frameworks of analysis and criticism which are appropriate to this extended range. One consequence has been their appeal to a wider cross-section of students than established conventional history of art students.'9

In Britain today, the number of freestanding. distinct design history degrees has expanded considerably, including courses at the Universities of Teesside, Lancashire and Derby, the London Institute (Camberwell), and the West Surrey College of Art and Design, Many others include design historical studies within a wider modular framework. For many years also in Britain there have been a small number of Masters programs in the field, the most noteworthy being those run at Middlesex University and at the Victoria and Albert Museum in conjunction with the Royal College of Art; both have very distinct identities within the spectrum of design historical studies in Britain.2º While Margolin may be right in staring chat 'there are no formal doctoral programs in design history anywhere in the world, although there are a number of individuals who have received doctorates in Britain and the United States,"' he fails to acknowledge the general pattern of doctoral research in che arts and humanities in Britain. There are, in fact, established links berween M.A. courses taught in design history and Ph.D. output, a trend which is likely to gather speed over the next few years. There also are other ways in which design historical research work may be consolidated within institutional frameworks, although these have not reached the levels of maturity or funding that may be found in other longstanding fields of historical research. For example, a Research Assistantship program 'with a distinct identity within academia' resulting in a number of doctoral awards² has been in place since the early 1970s at che University of Brighton. A number of other British universities and institutions of higher education have also been active in chis field. Whether che relative design historical research throughput at the doctoral level in Britain is as significant as might be desired in an academic discipline still in the process of consolidation at the highest academic levels is another matter. It should be noted that, historically, this has been due as much to the relative differentials of British government funding for research at the 'old' and 'new' universities (where design historical work almost exclusively resides); a very real problem which only has been addressed since the centralization of funding for the expanded university sector in Britain in the early 1990s.24

## DESIGN HISTORY: A DISCOURSE

It is difficult to see why Margolin still continues to attach such importance to the methodological limitations of Pevsner's Pioneers of the Modern Movement of 1936 (later revised as Pioneers of Modern Design) at a time when the methodological possibilities of design history have moved on considerably.2 [...] [1]t is not as though his thesis has not been addressed elsewhere, perhaps most obviously by Herwin Schaefer in his 1970 text, The Roots of Modern Design: the Functional Tradition in the 19th Century.26 Schaefer, who was acknowledged by Pevsner to have been of great assistance in the preparation of the 1949 Museum of Modern Art edition of Pioneers, was critical of Pevsner's undue emphasis on 'the artistic creativity of individuals,' and dwelt instead on the history of functionalism in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, concentrating on those strands of machine and anonymous design which he felt were lacking in Pevsner's work. [...]

Another well-known alternative to the Pevsnerian perspective is to be found in Siegfried Giedion's Mechanization Takes Command, published in 1948 with the subcitle a contribution to anonymous history.'7 [...] Much more recently, Matthew Turner, in an attack on what he characterized as the narrow geopolitical and aesthetic base on which design history was established, proposed the exploration of registered designs as another possible means of escaping from the tyranny of 'an extremely limited range of Western cult objects.'2\* [...] Philip Pacey proposed another mode of action, contending that design history [... should examine ...} 'the prior and current activities of non-professional designers [... to avoid ...] seeming exclusively concerned with an activity associated with the industrialized, affluent West.2”

Historiography notwithstanding it is interesting to note that Margolin appears to have overlooked the significance of Adrian Forty's book, Objects of Desire: Design and Society."º Ic should be remembered that the manuscript was completed in 1980 and, although not opening up a number of the key concerns articulated later by Buckley, Attfield, Kirkham and other feminist writers of design history admired by Margolin, the text is still an important marker in the demotion of the centrality of the designer in design historical accounts. Its reception in the design press was understandably cool as its readers, buoyed up by the 'Designer hype' of the 1980s, saw the notion of the 'individual creative genius' seriously undermined.3 [...]

Daniel Miller, an anthropologist from University College, London [...] is now well known to many design historians, particularly as studies in material culture increasingly are being explored. British design historians also have contributed to Winterthur conferences in the United States which deal with many aspects of material culture, as indeed does the Winterthur Portfolio,"which contains much material of value. (...] Many people involved in design history have taken such critical perspectives on board, utilizing fresh methods and approaches, harnessing the findings of research in other fields, and revising their perspectives as appropriate. [...]

## DESIGN HISTORY: A POSITIVE VIEW

Given his views about the lack of achievement of design history as a field of academic study, it is perhaps somewhat ironic that, in his efforts to validate the position of 'Design Studies as an Academic Discipline,'" Margolin has unwittingly made a good case for the wider recognition of the achievements of design history since it already embraces much of what is discussed. Contrary to his suggestions, design historians have taken on many of the challenges posed by other disciplines such as anthropology, cultural studies, or feminist theory, and there is a growing body of evidence to support this.

Contrary to Margolin's suggestion, most design historians have absolutely no desire 'to produce a single history of modern design,' since interdisciplinary thinking has long been the province of historians, albeit conditioned by a strong sense of intellectual rigor. The Journal of Design History has sought to promote such interdisciplinary interchange as part of its endeavor to consolidate the discipline. Its Editorial Policy states that the Journal:

aims to help consolidate design history as a distinct discipline but it will not be narrowly specialist in content or sectarian in tone. The widespread recognition of the cultural significance and economic importance of design will provide a broad base on which to build and the Journal seeks to build links with other disciplines exploring material culture, such as anthropology, architectural history, business history, cultural studies, design management studies, economic and social history, and the history of science and technology.

The core of the discipline of design history is, of course, design and it is that focus which distinguishes it from other fields of historical inquiry. As with any other academic discipline. its methods and approaches are continually appraised, boundaries change and are occasionally crossed with positive results. To attempt to draw up a definitive map of design history with fixed perimeters would be to deny the distinct, positive and differing character of design historical practice of many of the cenrers where design history is taught and researched in Britain. To place design history under the yoke of the aspirant new discipline of design studies - however thar may be defined - seems to be imposing a somewhat unnecessary burden.

## NOTES

Extracted from Woodham, J. M. 'Resisting Colonization: Design History Has Its Own Identity Design Issues 11(1) (1995), pp. 22–37, © 1995 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

1. See, for example J. Attfield and P. Kirkham, eds., A View From the Interior (London: Women's Press. 1989); and J. Attfield, 'FORM/female FOLLOWS FUNCTION/male: Feminist Critiques of Design,' John A Walker, Design History and the History ofDesign (London: Pluto Press, 1989); A. Forty, Objects of Desire: Design and Society 1750–1850 (London: Thames & Hudson. 1986).

2. See D. Miller, Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Oxford: Blackwell, 1987).

3. See, for example Denis Kelly's idiosyncratic, dispiriting, and rather unrepresentative piece entitled 'Design History: Doing It Yourself from the Picture on the Package,' Issues 1:2 (Winter 1990/1991), Pp. 102–111. There are still others who have written from a position of relative unawareness of recent methods, content of, and research in che history of graphic design, such as T. Kalman, J. Abbot Miller, and K. Jacobs in 'Good History, Bad History' Print (NewYork, March/April 1991): 114–123.

4. A member, since its launching of the Advisory Board for the Journal of Design History published by Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK 1988-, he also is a co-founder and editor of Design Issues.

5. Victor Margolin, 'Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter and Methods,' Design Studies, vol. 13, no. 2 (April 1992), p. 132. Robin Kinross, a few years earlier, also broached some of the potential difficulties inherent in the formation of design historical curricula for the practical designer in his brief polemic 'Design History's Search for Identity,' Designer (November 1985, London: SIAD): 12–13. Some of the problems raised in relation to the broad issue of arriving at a definition of design history stem from Kinross's and, as will be argued below, Margolin's concern to locate the subject under the umbrella of design practice. It is worth noting. however, that Kinross concluded that there is something to fear in a monolichic system whereby critic-historians are trained on specially-devised courses in design studies.'

6. Its value has been recognized in the national funding of research in Britain, and it would be unfortunate if Margolin's criticisms were taken at face value by any of those involved in the next evaluation in 1996.

7. Margolin, 'Design History,' 105. Immediately preceding this, he evidenced an increasing recognition of design history by design professionals through che fact that sessions were conducted by historians at national and international conferences mounted by such bodies as the Industrial Designers Society of America and ICOGRADA (the International Council of Graphic Design Historians). The fact that a Design History Working Group set up by the latter 'made litcle impact on the organization' may say more about it and its parent group than the signifcance of design historical study per se. Conversely, Reed Benhamou, in Technology  Culture 32:1 (January 1991): 135, wrote of the Design History Sociery based in Britain as having proved its worth by organizing a number of groundbreaking conferences and colloquia in this developing field' and that the fournal of Design History's 'concept of design as a socioeconomic activity promises to unify potentially sectarian disciplines within design and to provide scholars working in the fields with a new forum for research'.

8. A forthright response was articulated by Adrian Forty in 'DEBATE: A Reply to Victor Margolin,' Journal of Design History 6:2 (1993): 131–132.

9. Victor Margolin (ed.), Design Discourse: History Theors Criticism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), 4–10.

10. Bruno Gilberti, 'Design History and the History of Design, John A. Walket, The Meaning of Design, Peter Dormer,' Design Book Review (Fa11 1991): 53–56.

11. More than a decade on from Clive Dilnot's 1983 article on ‘The State of Design History I: Mapping the Field,' this is not so much an attempt to redraw a comprehensive map of design historical studies as it is to suggest that the evidence adduced by Margolin is partiat and nor necessarily reflective of the general methods of design history, its health and practice in Britain. A useful bibliography of some of the early debates in Britain is contained in John A. Walker, Design Hisrory and the History of Design (London: Pluto Press, 1989).

12. The first report of Sir Willlam Coldstream's National Advisory Council on Art Education was published by the Ministry of Education in 1960; the joint Coldstream/Summerson Report on The Structure of Art and Design Education in the Further Education Sector in 1970 sought to introduce academic studies to practical courses in art and design as a means of upgrading them to university equivalent status.

13. F. Hannah and T. Putnam. 'Taking Stock in Design History,' BLOCK 3 (Middlesex Polytechnic. 1980): 26. The intellectual distance traveled between these early useful and thoughtful speculations and present practice in design history itself bears testimony to the development of design historical study and research in Britain. It is interesting to note, in the light of subsequent critiques of design history, that, among the authors Hannah and Putnam cited as potentially useful, were Berg, Bird, Bourdieu, Foucault, Douglas and Isherwood, and McKendrick and Tickner.

14. Margolin, 'Design History and Design Studies Subject Matter and Methods,' 112.

15. Discussed by Clive Dilnot, 'The State of Design History, Part I: Mapping the Field', Design Issues, vol. 1, no. 1 (Spring, 1984), pp. 4-23.

16. Now the Manchester Metropolitan University and the University of Brighton, respectively.

17. Now Staffordshire University, the University of Northumbria, De Montfort University, Sheffield Hallam University, and the University of Middlesex. The content of all of these first generation courses was described in J. Griffiths, Where the Courses Are,' Designer (London: SIAD. November 1985): 14–15. Given the genesis in an ethos where such courses evolved in higher education institutions containing faculties with strong practical courses in art and design practice, one or two of them devoted a small proportion of their curriculum hours to practical work, normally of a non-assessable, diagnostic nature. This is not to say, as did Margolin, that such course do not have 'a distinct entity within academia.' Incidentally, such practical elements as originally existed have generally been downsized or abandoned altogether.

18. Responsible for the monitoring of standards in the public sector of higher education.

19. HMI, Survey of Public Sector Degree Courses in the History of Art & Design (London: Department of Éducation and Science, 1988), 2.

20. A wide range of opportunities for specialist study at the Masters level also exist at the Courtauld Institute of Art, Winchester School of Art, the University of Central England, and at other centers. A number of other courses are in the process of formulation, as at the University of Brighton.

21. Margolin. 'Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter and Methods,' 112.

22. I understand thar the M.A. Course Team ar the Victoria &Albert Museum/Royal College of Art currently is considering the possibilities of instituting a formal doctoral program.

23. These have included Penny Sparke on Theory and Design in the Age of Pop, 1975: Suzette Worden on Furniture for the Living-Room: An Investigation of the Interaction Between Sociery and Design in Britain from 1919 to 1939, 1980; Hazel Clark on The Designer in Early Mass Production: An Examinarion of the Factors influencing His Role with Special Reference to Calico Printing 1800–1850, 1983; Lesley

Miller on Designers in the Silk Industry in Lyons 1712–1787, 1989; Helen Long on The British Domestic Interior 1870–1910, 1992; and Judy Attheld on The Role of Design Within the Relationship Between Furniture Manufacture and its Retailing (1935–65) with Initial Reference to the Firm of J. Clarke, 1992.

24. When the former polytechnics were given university status alongside the already existing. thus 'old universities. Formerly, particularly in the area of research, the polytechnics were illserved by central funding: they are now being evaluated alongside the old' universities, and thus are able to compete for an appropriate share of resources. As stated [...] above, it would be unfortunate if Margolin's assessment of the achievements of design history was in any way instrumental in undermining the relative success enjoyed in the area in the first national research funding exercise, from which a small number of the new universities benefited.

25. It is somewhat ironic that Margolin draws his conclusions from the 1960 Pelican edition of the text which, although the central argument remained intact, incorporated a new title and a large number of changes made in the light of considerable developments in research and publication in the feld since its original publication by Faber in 1936. Furthermore, its whole appearance changed following the production of the second edition in 1949 in conjunction with the Museum of Modern Art in New York, itself an ardent propagandist for architecture and design which followed the aesthetic canons of the Modern Movement. Perhaps the most striking change was in the number of illustrations which increased from 84 to 134.

26. H. Schaefer, The Roots of Modern Design: the Functional Tradition in the 19th Century (London: Studio Vista, 1970).

27. S. Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1948).

28. M. Turner, 'Registered Design as a History of Design,' Art Libraries Journal, 16.3 (London 1991): 33.

29. P. Pacey, "“Anyone Designing Anything?" Nonprofessional Designers and the History of Design,' Journal of Design History, 5.3 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992): 21.

30. A. Forty, Objects of Desire: Design and Society 1750–1980 (London, Thames & Hudson, 1986).

31. A. Forty. 'Lucky Strikes and Other Myths,' Designer (London SIAD, November 1985): 16.

32. It is perhaps surprising, in this context, that more reference to North American work in this field is not made in Margolin's appraisal of design history in 'Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter and Methods.' This is particularly so given the fact that, when he was charting the achievements of 'A Decade of Design History in the United States 1977–87 for the fournal of Design History 1:1 (Oxford University Press): 51-71, considerable acknowledgement was made to material culture studies at the University of Delaware and the Winterchur Museum.

33. Margolin, Design Discourse: History, Theory Criticism, Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1989, esp. pp. 3–10 and pp. 285–287.

34. Margolin, 'Design History or Design Studies," 110. A singular definition also appeared to be what several of the American participants were seeking from their British counterparts at the closed seminar on Design History at the Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts at the National Gallery of Art, Washingron D. C. in May, 1993.

35. Published by Oxford University Press since 1988, it is che journal of the Design History Sociery. The author has served on its Editorial Board since its founding.