# HOW THE REFRIGERATOR GOT ITS HUM Ruth Schwartz Cowan (1989)

## THE REFRIGERATOR: GAS VERSUS ELECTRIC

All mechanical refrigerators create low temperatures by controlling the vaporization and the condensation of a liquid, called a refrigerant'; when liquids vaporize they absorb heat and when they condense they release it, so that a liquid can remove heat from one place (the 'box' in a refrigerator) and transport it to another (in this instance, your kitchen). Virtually every refrigerator on the market in the United States today controls the condensation and the vaporization of its refrigerant by a special electric pump known as a compressor.' Compression is not, however, the only technique by which these two processes can be controlled. The simplest of the other techniques is 'absorption.' The gas refrigerator is an absorption refrigerator. lnside its walls, a refrigerant (ammonia, usually) is heated by a gas fame so as to vaporize; the ammonia gas then dissolves (or is absorbed into) a liquid (water, usually), and as it dissolves it simultaneously cools and condenses. The absorption of ammonia in water automatically alters the pressure in the closed system and thus keeps the refrigerant flowing, hence making it possible for heat to be absorbed in one place and released in another, just as it would be if the flow of the refrigerant were regulatcd by a compressor. The absorption refrigerator, consequently, does not require a motor – the crucial difference between the gas refrigerator and its electric cousin. Indeed, with the exception of either a timing device or a chermal switch (which turns the gas flame on and off so as to regulate the cycles of refrigeration), the gas refrigerator need have no moving parts at all, hence no parts thar are likely to break or to make noise. [...]

Between 1830 and 1880, dozens upon dozens of mechanical refrigerating machines were patented – machines that would make ice as well as machines that would cool large compartments without making ice. [...] By 1890, nearly every brewery in the United States had purchased a refrigerating machine to remove the heat generated during the fermentation of beer and to cool the finished product while it aged and awaited transportation. Before the nineteenth century had turned into the twentieth, meat packers were using mechanical refrigerarion in the handling and processing of meat, cold-storage warehouses had begun to appear in cities, icemen were carrying manufactured ice through the streets, and refrigerated transport (which utilized manufactured ice in railroad cars and refrigerating machines on ocean-going vessels) was becoming increasingly common and less expensive. [...]

The technical obstacles to developing a domestic mechanical refrigerator were substantial: such a refrigerator would have to be small and light enough to fit somewhere in a household, automatic enough not to require constant supervision, reliable enough not to require constant servicing; and it would have to have a power source that could be operated by a totally unskilled worker. Ultimately, it would also have to be designed so thar it could be massproduced, and it would have to be safe: many of the refrigerants then in common use were either toxic or flammable, and 'ice-house' accidents were regularly highlighted in the newspapers. That a potential market existed was clear, for the use of ice and iceboxes in American households expanded drastically after 1880. In Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Chicago, over five times as much ice was consumed in 1914 as in 1880; and in New Orleans, the increase was thirteenfold; the dollar value of iceboxes manufactured in the United States more than doubled berween 1909 and 1919.' In the early years (1910–20), neophyte manufacturers of domestic refrigerators had no difficulty finding investors willing to lend them money and large corporations willing to buy them out. Just before and after the First World War, the problems involved in initiating domnestic refrigeration were technical, not financial or social, and appear to have been about as great for the absorption machine as for the compression one. Indeed, since, until about 1925, gas service was more widespread than electric service, one might guess that the absorprion machine would have had the competitive edge.

## THE ELECTRIC COMPRESSION MACHINE

The first domestic refrigerator acrually to go into large-scale production, however, was a compression machine. The honor of being first seems to belong to A. H. Goss, then an executive of the General Motors Company; to E. J. Copeland, a purchasing agent for General Motors; and to Nathaniel B. Wales, a Harvard graduate who was an independent inventor.² [...] In 1917, Copeland ,developed a satisfactory automatic control device and a solution to the problem of gas leakage (sulfur dioxide is toxic); and in February 1918, the frst Kelvinator refrigerators were sold.

{...] By 1923, fifty-six companies were already involved in the business. Some of these, such as Kelvinator and its rival, Frigidaire (which had been founded in 1916 and purchased by General Motors in 1919), were heavily capitalized and had already produced several chousand refrigerators. Other companies had just entered the field and had only test models and/or faltering finances. In chose early years, compression refrigerators dominated che field; and out of the fifty-six companies, only eight were yet either well financed or well on their way to large-scale production.

Yet, in 1923, even the compression domestic machine was still in its developmental stage: the machines on the market did not inspire every middling householder to reach immediately for a checkbook. They were, to start with, expensive: the price had fallen from its original peak; but in 1923, the cheapest still ran to \$450 - not an inconsiderable sum at a time when most people earned less than \$2,000 a year. Furthermore, refrigerators were difficult to run. Electric utilities estimated that, once every three months, they serviced the machines that they had sold: the tubes leaked; the compressors malfunctioned; the thermostats broke; and so did the motors. All these early machines were, in addition, 'separated' machines - and water-cooled ones at that. The refrigerating machinery was sold separately from the refrigerating compartment, which might well have been simply the icebox that a famnily had previously used; the machinery could be set up in the basement, say, and the icebox put in the kitchen. The compressor had additional work to do, since the refrigerant had to be moved a considerable distance, but it must have been a relief to houscholders to have the noise, the oil, and the serviceman in some remote part of the house. Water cooling (the standard technique in large commercial installations) was not convenient in the home. The water pipes froze in some locales in che winter time (turning a refrigerator back into an icebox); or the water frequently leaked into parts of the machinery where excess humidity created excess problems. [...]

In the decade between 1923 and 1933, inventions that would profoundly alter the design of domestic refrigerators did, in fact, materialize. [...) In Sweden, for example, two young engineering students, Carl G. Munters and Baltzar von Platen, figured out how to design an absorption refrigerator that would run continuously and thus would not require expensive automatic controls; this machine (the Electrolux Servel) went on the market in 1926. Engineers at Kelvinator and, later, at General Electric discovered techniques for dispensing with water as a cooling agent. In 1927, General Electric became the first manufacturer to make a hermetically sealed motor and to sell the box as an integral part of its refrigerating machinery. Within a year, other manufacturers followed suit and also began mass production of refrigerator boxes made from steel rather than from wood. In 1930, chemists at General Motors (which still owned Frigidaire) developed a series of artificial refrigerants (che Freons) that were neither toxic nor flammable; and in 1932, engineers at Servel designed an air-cooled absorption machine. By the middle years of the Depression, most of the fundamental innovations in domestic refrigeration design (with the exception of automatic defrosting, which came later) had been made.'

[...} The potential market for domestic refrigeration was enormous: by 1923, it was clear that every household in the United States was going to be equipped with either gas or electric service (and probably both in many places); and, thus, that if the price could be brought low enough, every household would become a potential customer for a refrigerator." The potential revenues for the gas and electric utility companies would be even more enormous, since, unlike other household appliances, the refrigerator operates twenty-four hours a day. [...]

One of the manufacturers that succeeded, and whose success helped carry the compression refrigerator to dominance, was General Electric. By the 1920s, General Electric was an enormous corporation with vast resources and had its finger in almost every aspect of the electrical industry in the United States, from che design of large generating plants to the manufacture of light bulbs.7 [...] Immediately after the First World War, G.E. found itself in poor financial condition; in 1922, the company was reorganized, and Gerard Swope was brought in as president. Swope believed that General Electric was going to have to enter the consumer electric market and, to this end, instructed A. R. Stevenson, who was then head of the engineering laboratories in the company's main headquarters in Schenectady, to review the current state of the refrigerator business.8 [...]

Stevenson understood that General Electric would be assuming a considerable risk if it entered the refrigerator business; but he believed the risk to be worth caking for a number of reasons: he believed that there was a good chance that G.E. would be first, that the company had the resources to sustain the initial losses, that after this initial period the profits would be great, and finally that widespread adoprion [would] increase the revenue of the central stations, [... "the utility company that is generating electricity" ...] thus indirectly benefiting the General Electric Company." G.E. stood to gain, both coming and going, from developing a successful refrigerator.

[...] During 1926, construction of an assembly line began (at a total cost of eighteen miliion dollars), and the design was modifed again to allow for mass production. In 1927, a new department of the company was created to promote and market the machine; and within months of its establishmnent, the first mass-produced Monitor Tops had found their way into kitchens across the land. By 1929, fifty thousand Monitor Tops had been sold – a figure that may have been as surprising to the top management of General Electric (the company had anticipated sales of seven thousand to ten thousand per year) as it was to everyone else."º

General Eiecrric stimulated sales ofits refrigerators by means of ourlandish advertising and public relations techniques. Franchised distributors were appointed in the major cities across the country and given exclusive rights to sell and service their territories. Rex Cole, in New York, was famous for constructing a neon sign that could be read three miles away, and for staging promotional parades. Judson Burns of Philadelphia had his new store designed in the shape of a Monitor Top. [...]

General Electric was not alone, either in these outlandish promotional schemes or in its effort to develop a successful compression refrigerator; the ocher major refrigerator manufacturers, just as anxious to attract consumer attention (especially during the straitened Depression years), were just as willing to spend money on advertising and promotion. The electric utility companies, which were then in a most expansive and profitable phase of their history, cooperated in selling both refrigerators and the idea of mechanical refrigeration to their customers. By 1940 the market for household refrigeracors was dominated by the four manufacturers of compression machines which had at their disposal the financial resources of enormous corporations: General Electric; Westinghouse, which began to manufacture refrigerators in 1930; Kelvinator, which was then owned by American Motors; and Frigidaire, which still belonged to General Motors." Cross-licensing and mass-production techniques had made it possible for the manufacturers to lower their prices; installment plans and occasional price wars had made it possible for ever larger numbers of people to purchase refrigerators. Despite the Depression, and despite the still relatively high cost of refrigerators (when compared with other household appliances), roughly 45 percent of American homes were taking advantage of mechanical refrigeration by the time we entered the Second World War."

## THE GAS ABSORPTION MACHINE

The manufacturers of gas absorption refrigerators were not idle during these years, but they lacked the large sums of money, the armies of skilled personnel, the competitive pressure, and the aggressive assistance of utility companies that the compression manufacturers had been able to command [...] the Common Sense Company, for example, was working with thirty thousand dollars in the same year in which Kelvinator had one million dollars." [...]

By 1926, when the American Gas Association met in Atlantic City for its annual convention, only three manufacturers of gas refrigerators remained in the feld; and of these three, only one - Servel – would succeed in reaching the stage of mass production." [...] Thus, Servel was essentially alone: from 1927 until 1956, (when it ceased production of refrigerators), it was the only major manufacturer of gas-absorption refrigerators in the United States. Never as highly capitalized as its competitors in the field of compression machinery (G.E., after all, had invested eighteen million dollars just in its production facilities in 1927, when Servel's entire assets amounted to not more than twelve million dollars), Servel had entered the market somewhat later than the other manufacturers and was never able to compete effectively. The gas utilities, notoriously conservative companies, were defending themselves against the encroachments of electricity and were not helpful; [...] For all its virtues as a machine, the Servel, even in its peak years, never commanded more than 8 percent to 10 percent of the total market for mechanical refrigerators."

The demise of the gas refrigerator was not the result of inherent deficiencies in the machine itself. [...] [T]he compression machine [...} succeeded for reasons that were as much social and economic as technical; its development was encouraged by a few companies that could draw upon vast technical and financial resources. With the exception of Servel, none of the absorption manufacturers was ever able to finance the same level of development or promotion; and Servel never approached the capabilities of General Motors, General Electric, or Westinghouse. The compression refrigerator manufacturers came on the market earlier and innovated earlier, making it doubly difficult for competing devices to succeed. The fact that the electric utilities were in a period of growth and great profitability between 1920 and 1950, while the gas manufacturers and utility companies were defensive, conservative, and financially weak, cannot have helped matters either. [...]

## THE PROFIT MOTIVE AND THE ALTERNATIVE MACHINE

The case of the gas refrigerator appears, in many particulars, to be structurally similar to the cases of many other aborted or abandoned devices intended for the household. There were, at one time, dozens of different kinds of washing machine: [...] All these washing machines yielded, during the 1920s and 1930s, to the agitator within the vertically rotated drum, because of the aggressive business practices of the Maytag Company which owned the rights to that design.'6 The central vacuum cleaner, which technical experts preferred, quickly lost ground to its noisier and more cumbersome portable competitor, in part because of the marketing techniques pioneered by door-to-door and store-demonstration salesmen employed by such firms as Hoover and Apex.7 [...]

We have compression, rather than absorption, refrigerators in the United States today not because one was technically better than the other, and not even because consumers preferred one machine (in the abstract) over the other, but because General Electric, General Motors, Kelvinator, and Westinghouse were very large, very powerful, very aggressive, and very resourceful companies, while Servel and SORCO were not. Consumer preference' can only be expressed for whatever is, in fact, available for purchase, and is always tempered by the price and convenience of the goods that are so available. At no time, in chese terms, were refrigerators that ran on gas really competitive with those that ran on electric current.

## NOTES

Extracted from Cowan, R. S., 'How the Refrigerator Got Its Hum', in D. MacKenzie and J. Wajcman (eds), The Social Shaping of Technology: How the Refrigerator Got Its Hum, Milton Keynes: Open University Press, Pp. 202–18. © 1985. Reproduced with the kind permission of Open University Press. All rights reserved.

1. These figures come from U.S. Census Bureau data as quoted in Oscar Edward Anderson, Jr., Refrigeration in America: A History of a New Technology and its Impact (Princeton, N.J. 1953), pp. 114–115.

2. See 'Arnold H. Goss Ends His Life,' Elecrric Refrigeration News 25 (26 October 1938): 1, 2, 11; Anderson, Refrigeration, p. 195; obituary of Nathaniel B. Wales, New York Times (18 November 1974); J. W. Beckman, 'Copeland Tells Story of Household Refrigeration Development' Air Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration News 6 (6 July 1932): 9–11; and Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command (New York, 1948), p. 602.

3. A. R. Stevenson's report, 'Domestic Refrigerating Machines,' can be found, in its original typewritten form, in the Technical Data Library. General Electric Company, Schenectady, N.Y., Data File 1120. The original report was dated 17 August 1923, but many appendices were added in the ensuing five years, making a document chat runs to several hundred pages. I was given access to it originally and will quote from it (citing it as (DRM - GE) through the kindness of Dr. George Wise, Corporate Research and Development, General Electric Company, Schenectady. The pagination in various sections of the report is not sequential. The complete list of companies and the report on their products is DRM – GE, vol. III.

4. Electric Domestic Refrigeration, 1924, a report of the Electric Domestic Refrigeration Committee National Electric Light Association (New York, 1924), p. 2, table 1.

5. Anderson, Refrigeration, chap. 11; 'Electrolux Inventors Receive Franklin Award,' Gas Age 70

(2 July 1932); 'Industry Pioneer Number,' Air Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration News 19 (7 October 1936), passim.

6. See Electric Domestic Refrigeration, 1924, p. 2; and The Facts About Gas Refrigeration Today, American Gas Association (New York, 1933).

7. There is no scholarly history of General Electric; the best of the popular accounts is John Winthrop Hammond, Men and Volts, The Story of General Electric (Philadelphia, 1941), the copyright on which was held by G.E. See also David G. Loth, Swope of G.E. (New York, 1958). On the history of G.E.'s refrigerator, see DRM – GE, Report 2, General Survey, Historical Introduction, pp. 1–2; and Report 1, Summary and Conclusions, Audiffren, PP. 16–19, and appendices 21 and 22.

8. See Loth, Swope , pp. 116–18; and letter from Pratt to Swope, 17 August 1923, DRM-GE.

9. DRM – GE, Report 1, Summary and Conclusions, Reasons for Exploitation, p. 17.

10. 'Outline History of the General Electric Household Refrigerator' (typescript, Public Relations Dept. G.E., Schenectady, N.Y., 1970); 'G.E. Announces New Refrigerator, G.E. Monogram (October 1925): 22; Ralph Roeder, 'General Electric Refrigerators' (typescript, Public Relations Dept., G.E., Schenectady N.Y., n.d.); and T. K. Quinn, Giant Business, Threat to Democracy, The Autobiography of an Insider (New York, 1956), chap. 8. Quinn was in charge of the refrigerator division of G.E. during the late 1920s and early 1930s.

11. For a summary of the refrigerators that were available in the late 1930s and their relative advantages and disadvantages, see John F. Wostrel and John G. Praetz, Household Electric Refrigeration, Including Gas Absorption Systems New York, 1938). For the relative market share of each manufacturer, see Frank Joseph Kottke,

Electrical Technology and the Public Interest (Washington, D.C., 1944), pp. 168–70.

12. Sixteenth Census of the United States, Housing, 1940, vol II, General Characteristics, part I, United States Summary (Washington, D.C., 1943), p. 2.

13. DRM – GE [5], vol. III, appendices, especially appendices on 'Common Sense' and 'Kelvinator.'

14. 'Survey of Gas Refrigerators.' American Gas Journal (2 April 1927), pp. 329–34.

15. On estimates of the sales of Servel, see H. B. Hull, Household Refrigeration, 4th ed. (Chicago, 1933); and Don Wright, 'Gray Sees Bright Future for Gas Refrigerator', Gas Age 34 (March 1958): 84; and 'When Everybody Loves a Competitor,' Business Week (25 November 1950), p. 72.

16. On some of the different forms of washing machine, see Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command, pp. 562–70; as well as Edna B. Snyder, A Study of Washing Machines, University ofNebraska, Agricultural Experiment Station Research Bulletin 56 (Lincoln, 1931). On the tactics of the Maytag Corporation, see U.S. Federal Trade Commission, 'Kitchen Furnishings and Domestic Appliances,' vol. IlI of the Report on the House Furnishings Industry (Washington, 1925); and 'U.S. Supreme Court Hears Patent Suit Argumnents, New York Times, 20 April 1939 (25:3).

17. On che advantages of the central vacuum cleaner over the portable forms, see M. S. Cooley, Vacuum Cleaning Systems (New York, 1913), chap. 1. On the sales techniques of the portable vacuum cleaner manufacturers, see Frank G. Hoover, Fabulous Dustpan: The Story of the Hoover Company (New York, 1955); and Earl Lifshey, The Housewares Story: A History of the American Housewares Industry (Chicago 1973), chap. 8.