# THE ARCHITECT'S WIFE, INTRODUCTION TOAS LONG AS IT'S PINK:THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF TASTE

# Penny Sparke (1995)

It is evident that women's "character" – her convictions, her values, her wisdom, her tastes, her behavior – are to be explained by her situation.

Simone de Beauvoir'

Sometimes what seem like the most trivial of tragedies are the most poignant. In Nicholas Barker's television series Signs of the Times (1992). television cameras entered 'ordinary' people's living spaces and asked chem to talk about their lives. One woman, married to an architect for whom white walls, minimal décor and Venetian blinds were de rigueur, explained how she sometimes went into the children's bedroom – the only room in which curtains were 'permitted' – and softly wept. A middle-class woman shedding tears for curtains in her domestic space may seem absurd in today's society in which tragedies of enormous global and personal significance are beamed into our living-rooms. And yet it was a televisual moment which moved a considerable number of people, especially women. It hit a nerve.

[...]

Very little scholarly writing on consumption has addressed the question of feminine taste, or seen it as part of the broader discussion about sexual politics. Until recently cultural theorists have tended to view consumption as a form of manipulation, the commodity out to trap the unsuspecting consumer.² The only alternative to this essentially negative account of consumption has been that of anthropologists who have studied it as a form of social ritual, a means of achieving social cohesion.3 However, their accounts, like those of their fellow social scientists, have underplayed the role of gender.\* A number of social, economic and cultural historians have addressed feminine consumption as it emerged in the late-nineteenth century with the growth of department stores and mass retailing. While some have perpetuated che idea that women's role in this was entirely passive, others have offered a more positive view of feminine taste, seeing it as operating outside the value judgments imposed on it by masculine culture. The evocation in these writings of the sensations of pleasure and aesthetic delight go some way towards an understanding of consumption in specifically feminine terms. While these accounts have emphasized the physical and aesthetic sites of consumption and their role in stimulating a response from consumers – a response rooted in the values of the domestic sphere – they have stopped short of a descripcion of goods themselves as objects of feminine taste. This book takes those objects as its starting point. It bases its argument on che assumption that chey alone – the curtains and che glass ornaments – have represented and embodied masculine and feminine values in action - that is, the dynamic tension berween gendered values as they have moved through the cycle of production, consumption and use. Only objects experience that cycle in its entirety and only they cross the bridge between the separate spheres.

Like people, objects have lives and their meanings change in response to the different contexts within which they are found. At the same time, they carry their accrued meaning to each new context, transforming and enriching it in the process. While many scholars have tried to break the codes of objects, few have grasped the importance of the object's life span. Only the British cultural theorist, Dick Hebdige, in his analysis of the Italian Vespa motor-scooter,' which moved from being a mainstream mass cultural object in one country to a subcultural icon in another, has made fully explicit the importance of recontextualzation in decoding objects.8 In focusing on an object which was consumed by a predominately male subculture, Hebdige side-stepped the vital question of gender raised by the vast number of goods within mainstream mass culture which are designed and made by men in a masculine cultural setting and consumed and used by women in a feminine context. The gender relationships within mass-produced goods are complex. Within sexual politics objects have a clear role to play: like barometers, they measure the extent to which masculine values dominate culture at any one time, and feminine culture's resistance. They also reflect the way in which masculine and feminine values meet at the intersection between production and consumption, negotiating the power relationships between them.

Interestingly, the moments of feminine 'resistance,' as represented by the objects of mass production and mass consumption, have not kept in step with radical feminist action in this century. At moments of feminist achievement - the 1920s, for example - objects were ofen at their most masculine while at moments of feminist inactivity – the 1950s come to mind - many objects were extremely feminine. This can be explained by the fact that mass-produced objects, which represent and embody stereotypical notions of femininity, have tended to be seen by radical feminists as oppressive constructions of patriarchal culture from which, they believe, women should free chemselves if they want to achieve equality with men. The evidence from objects suggests, however, that the relationship berween women and gendered goods is more complex and ambiguous than this, and that it can be seen to have liberated women as much as it has oppressed them. Any account of the relationship between gender and taste has to take place on the level of the stereotypical, rather than the actual, attributes of the two sexes. Within the epochs of modernity and postmodernity gender identity has been established to a significant extent through negotiations with the stereotypes that have been presented chrough che mass media. They play, therefore, a key role in the construction of gender. Wichin che context of feminine domesticity, stereotypical images of women and of the home were conflated and turned into a single ideal. In response to chat ideal women have formed their own individual and collective identities. By incorporating, in material form, the stereotypical attributes of femininity and domesticity, objects of consumption have also played an important part in the cultural construction of gender. Through the exercise of their tastes women have selected and arranged objects in their domestic settings and in doing so have both formed and reinforced their own gender identities.

The question of how mass-produced objects are imbued with stereotypically gendered attributes is, of course, central to this discussion. Once industrialisation had removed much 'making' from the home, and standardised factory production had come to dominate the manufacture of individual iterns for specific customers, large numbers of goods had co be 'designed' for customers whose individual characteristics were unknown to their makers. The nineteenthcentury designers and manufacturers of goods destined for che domestic sphere worked wich an

image of the customer, usually female, frmly in their minds, catering, as closely as possible, for her psychological, symbolic and aesthetic needs. Conscious that fashion, novelty and comfort were general requirements, they translated those concepts as faithfully as they could into goods. In doing so, they aligned the concept of design, as it functioned within production, directly with that of taste, as it operated in the arena of consumption. While the spheres of production and consumption were clearly gendered, the aesthetic values of goods on the marketplace reflected the primacy of the latter. The shift from a world in which the female consumer played a central role to one in which rationally conceived, standardised mass production began to dictate a new aesthetic and role for the domestic object came with the marriage of technological and economic modernity to cultural modernism. Motivated and justified by a commitment to democratic ideals, architectural and design modernism imposed on goods and their design a stereotypically masculine aesthetic, not only because it was undertaken by men but because it was now embedded within masculine culture. Thus taste was superseded by design which, in turn, set out to remove all aesthetic autonomy and authority from the hands of women.

The terms of the struggle, which still goes on today, as the architect's wife knows to her cost, were not simply those of the aesthetic characteristics of objects - their shape, colour and decoration - but the ways in which the two sexes used and related to objects in their everyday lives. With the separation of the spheres came a split between the realms of aesthetics and utility: within the feminine sphere objects became, first and foremost, symbols, sacrificing their utilitarian features to their symbolic functions. Thus, while a chair remained an object for sitting in, its primary function within the domestic context was not only to represent, but also to embody in a material manner, the idea of comfort.° In sharp contrast, within the masculine sphere, objects were defined increasingly as tools. In its attempt to assert the pre-eminence of masculine culture, and the role of objects as its representatives, architectural and design modernism set out to rid chem of their feminine content. It achieved this by removing them from the contexts for which they were intended, and by defining them instead in terms of their internal properties. Thus a modernist chair became an exercise in an examination of chairness' which did not take into account, and indeed forcibly set out to deny, the role of that object within che feminine, domestic context of comfort and display. Such was the power of feminine culture, however, allied to that of the marketplace within which it found a home, thar the aestheric role of the object survived and the modernist 'style' became, by the middle of this century, a familiar characteristic of the everyday environment. In curn, masculine culture embarked on a campaign intent upon devaluing and crivialising what it saw as an unacceptable feminisation' of modernist ideals.

While on one level the links between women, commerce and the marketplace succeeded in pulling mass-produced objects away from the exclusive control of masculine culture, on the other; they reinforced the marginalisation of feminine taste. Defined as part of mass culture, it suffered the fate of other cultural manifestations of the mass media, such as romantic novels and TV soaps; generally perceived as trivial and potentially damaging because of their sentimentality and lack of sophistication. Like them, the objects of feminine taste have, in this century, frequently been deemed inferior to those of high culture. The material culture of feminine domesticity - expressed by such reputedly 'vulgar' items as coaleffect fires, chintzy fabrics and potted plants – has frequently been singled out for condemnation or, at best, sarcasm, termed as 'bad taste' or 'kitsch'. The aesthetic and ideological opposition to modernism demonstrated by these objects served to divorce them from the world of 'legitimate' culture and its 'good taste'.

By the early years of this century, che concept of caste, once whole and feminine, was no longer a unified one. The split into 'good taste' and 'bad taste' was the result of a male-directed moral crusade which began with the mid-nineteenth century design reform movement and which moved into modernist architectural and design theory as well as modern cultural criticism. It was, in reality, little more than a thinly-disguised attempt by masculine culture to set the cultural terms of reference for modernity such that women, with their new-found power as consumers, would not rake over the reins. Surprised and threatened by women's suddenly increased authority in the marketplace, masculine culture attempted to redress the balance of gender power by condemning and devaluing the alliance between aesthetic, commercial and feminine culture. In its place they posited a high cultural model which aligned itself with universal values and the pure logic of function. In his insistence on Venetian blinds rather than curtains, the architect in Signs of the Times was perpetuating a tradition of male domination, the puritanical control of the material environment begun over a century and half earlier. His wife did have something to cry about after all.

## NOTES

Extracted from Sparke, P., 'Introduction: The Architect's Wife', in Sparke, P., As Long As It's Pink: The Sexual Politics of Taste, London: Pandora Press, 1995, pp. 1–12. Reprinted by permission of Rivers Oram Press.

1. Simone de Beauvoir. The Second Sex, (London: Penguin Books, 1972), p. 635.

2. Judith Williamson adopted this neo-Marxist position in her book Consuming Passions: The Dynamics of Popular Culrure, (London: Marion' Boyars, 1986). The writers Rosalind Williams, Dream Worlds: Mass Consumption in late 19 Century France, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1982, and Rachel Bowlby, /ust Looking: Consumer Culture in Dreiser, Gissing and Zola, New York, Methuen, 1985, in their

accounts of nineteenth-century department stores, also saw women playing a passive, 'enslaved' role in this context.

3. The anthropologists, Mary Douglas (in her book written with Baron Isherwood, The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption, Harmondsworth, Penguin Books, 1978) and Daniel Miller (in his book Material Consumption and Mass Consumption, Oxford, Basil Blackwell 1987) have both described consumption in this positive way.

4. Many social psychologists writing about consumption, among them Peter Lunt and Sonia Livingstone in cheir book, Mass Consumption and Personal Identity: Everyday Economic Experience, Buckingham, Open University Press, 1992, have tended to underplay the role played by gender. Their book, for example, devotes only one section in one chapter (chere are seven in all) to the subject of 'Shopping as a gendered activity.'

5. The most enlightening texts in this context are Rachel Bowlby's Just Looking, Rosalind Williams' Dream Worlds, and W.R. Leach's 'Transformations in a Culture ofConsumption': Women and Department Stores 1980-1912. published in Journal of American History, 71, Sept. 1984, pp. 319–342.

6. The discipline of semiotics, and more recendy, that of product semantics, have as their goal to read objects as if they constituted a language Their usefulness to this project is limited by their lack ofinvolvement in the historical, socioeconomic and cultural contexts of objects.

7. Dick Hebdige. 'Object as Image: the ltalian Scooter Cycle In Dick Hebdige, Hiding in the Light, London and New York, Comedia, Routledge, 1988.

8. This theme is also dealt with by George Basalla in his article 'Transformed Utilitarian Objects. published in Wintherthur Porsfolio, 1982, PP 184-201.

9. The idea that objects can be read' in a gendered way parallels similar ideas in other cultural arenas, among them literature (Elaine Showalter, A Literature of Their Own, London,

Virago, 1982); film (Laura Muivey, 'Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema,' Screen, vol. 16, no. 3, Autumn 1975, Pp. 6–18); and advertising (Diane Barthel, Putting on Appearances: Gender and Advertising, Philadelphia, Temple University Press, 1988).