# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING

Following A View From the Interior: Feminism, Women and Design (1989), attention to constructions of gender in design grew considerably. This current was reflected in a series of exhibitions on women designers held in the early 1990s: Goddess in the Details: Product Design by Women (Pratt Institute, 1994) examined works by Florence Knoll and Eva Zeisel; International Women in Design (Supon Design Group, 1993) looked at women graphic designers, such as April Greiman, Sheila Levrant de Bretteville and Rosemarie Tissi; Women Designing: Redefining Design in Britain Berween the Wars (University of Brighton, 1994) included contributions by Hazel Clark, Cheryl Buckley and Jonathan Woodham. Women Designing, in particular, offered a more nuanced approach than that of Isabelle Anscombe's A Woman's Touch: Women in Design from 1860 to the Present Day (1984), which has been criticized, despite its important preliminary research in bringing to light the work of women who have historically been overshadowed by their male counterparts. Indeed the women designers' approach has also led to insightful examinations of the institutional structures that shape design, as in Martha Scotford, Cipe Pineles: A Life of Design (1999), and in excavations of the gender imbalance in design partnerships by Pat Kirkham, Charles and Ray Eames: Designers of the Twentieth Century (1998), and Rebecca Houze, 'From Wiener Kunst im Hause to the Wiener Werkstätte' (2002).

While many design historians interested in gender have focused on the producers of things, some have tried to understand the things themselves. In addition to the articles in The Gendered Object, edited by Pat Kirkham (1996), on topics ranging from Barbie dolls to bicycles and neck ties, examples of object-based approaches include, Rozsika Parker, The Subversive Stitch: Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine (1984), and Sigrid Wortmann Weltge, Bauhaus Textiles: Women Artists and the Weaving Workshop (1993). Research into spaces and objects that have been traditionally associated with women in recent history, such as cosmetics and the fashion show, has led frequently to particularly creative scholarship. See, for example, Melissa Hyde, 'The "Make-Up" of the Marquise: Boucher's Portrait of Pompadour at Her Toilette', (2000), and Nancy Troy, Couture Culture: A Study in Modern Art and Fashion (2002).

Phillipa Goodall's essay 'Design and Gender' (1983), first published in BLOCK, calls into question the politics of the 'home' in which women's traditionally unpaid domestic labour was gradually appropriated by the masculine world of manufacture and commerce as a result of industrialization in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Drawing upon sources such as Caroline Davidson's A Woman's Work is Never Done: A History of Housework in the British Isles 1650–1950 (1982), Goodall demonstrates that designed obiects in the home, especially those associated with the kitchen and laundry, or with the eroticized space of the bathroom, as well as publications like the 1947–8 Daily Mail Ideal Homes Book, encoded the institutional practices of production and consumption. The subject of housework, first addressed by Christine Frederick and Margarete Schütte-Lihotzky in the early twentieth century (see section 3 of the Reader) was later taken up by Dolores Hayden, The Grand Domestic Revolution:

A History of Feminist Designs for American Homes, Neighborhoods, and Cities (1981). Ella Howard provides a useful overview of chis literature in Feminist Writings on Twentieth-Century Design History, 1970–1995: Furniture, Interiors, Fashion' (2000–1), published in a special issue of Srudies in the Decorative Arts on Women in Design, edited by Pat Kirkham, which coincided with the exhibition 'Women Designers in the USA 1900–2000: Diversity and Difference' (2000–1).

Sheila Levrant de Bretteville published one of the earliest feminist readings of graphic design, entitled 'Some Aspects of Design From the Perspective of a Woman Designer' (1973). See also her contribution Feminist Design: At the Intersection of the Private and Public Spheres', in Richard Langdon and Nigel Cross (eds) Design and Society (1984). Feminist readings of interior spaces and dress have also opened the door to more complex examinations of gender. Shaun Cole elaborates on Breward's investigation of masculinity, by looking more closely at homosexuality, class and dress in his book 'Don We Now Our Gay Apparel': Gay Men's Dress in the Twentieth Century (2000). Bill Osgerby examines the masculine space of‘The "Bachelor Pad" as Cultural Icon' (2005), while Christopher Reed locates signs of subversive political resistance in che rooms decorated by Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant in Bloomsbury Rooms: Modernism, Subculture, and Domesticity (2004), describing an alternative, eclectic modernism later suppressed by homophobic attitudes towards the decorative arts. For further examinations of the gendered interior, see INTIMUS: Interior Design Theory Reader, edited by Mark Taylor and Julieanna Preston (2006).

## SECTION 10

## Consumption