# INTRODUCTION

# Grace Lees-Maffei

During its development, design history has examined the object, as focal concern, through the contexts in which objects are produced, mediated, used and understood. The dominance of issues of consumption in the 1990s (explored in the previous section) has been accompanied by a concern for those processes that might conveniently be gathered under the banner 'mediation'. A concern for mediation in the late 1990s and early twenty-first century is not unique to design history and is shared, for example, with cultural studies, literary studies and area studies. To study mediation is to study the phenomena which exist between production and consumption, as being fundamentally important in inscribing meanings for objects, as Dick Hebdige notes in section 8 of this book and as Jeffrey L. Meikle has noted in his article Material Virrues: On the Ideal and the Real in Design History' (1998).

Awareness of the role of mediating discourses in generating meanings for designed goods and processes has prompted studies that seek to find out about design through analysis of discourse (as distinct from the analysis of design as discourse, a discrete and very rich area of enquiry). This section explores the significance of mediation as a focus by presenting a variety of texts, each focussed upon a different type of source material: photography and film, advertising, advice literature, oral history and magazines, respectively. It begins with Walter Benjamin's The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction'. Dating from 1936, this essay has exerted a tremendous influence on cultural analysis in the twentieth century. Although as a commentary on photography and film, it falls into the group of secondary sources, its landmark status and its date mean that it has developed its own history and can now be treated as a primary source. The remaining texts in this section are presented to exemplify the mediation tendency within design history, from the late 1990s onwards. Steven Heller's essay 'Advertising, the Mother of Graphic Design' was first published in Eye, the graphic design magazine: consistent with its status as design journalism, it is concise, opinionated and practice-oriented. Different again are the scholarly articles by Emma Ferry and Liz Linthicum, both from The fournal of Design History. These texts analyse mediating sources, while also reflecting on their use. Similarly reflective is Jeremy Aynsley and Kate Forde's introduction to their anthology Design and the Modern Magazine, which comprises historiographic contextual survey and methodological pointers to the contribution that design history can make to the understanding of the significance of magazines, a theme being pursued across several disciplines. Rather than simply presenting exemplary studies of mediation, this section offers texts in which the emphasis is on methodological reflexivity.

Walter Benjamin's 'The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction' is framed by a discussion of the politics of its time, beginning with Marx and ending with fascism. The preface considers the significance of 'theses about the developmental tendencies of art under present conditions of production' for brushing aside 'ourmoded concepts such as creativity and genius, eternal value and mystery' and 'for the formulation of revolutionary demands in the politics of art'. The epilogue notes that the logical result of Fascism is the introduction of aesthetics into political life' and its culmination in war, to which communism responds by politicizing art'. The main body of the essay discusses how technologies of mass production have changed the nature of art, and altered the meaning and significance of its ‘aura' (this is the section reproduced here) before examining photography and film as two examples. For design historians, it offers a consideration of che value of the mass produced cultural artefacts which may be applied to the designed object. Benjamin's discussion of'aura' forms an example of how the conditions of production determine the reception of cultural artefacts. The work of art, or. more broadly, the cultural artefact of which design is part, is, in the age of mechanical reproduction, mediated by a mass media as well as itself forming part of that media.

Heller's essay concerns two kinds of mediating discourse – advertising and graphic design – through che medium of a third, design journalism. Heller identifies reluctance among graphic designers to identify their output as associated with advertising. He responds by tracing a history of graphic design which shows the central place of advertising in its development. Not only are graphic design and adverrising indivisible, they are mutually constitutive, Heller suggests. Although more recent than Benjamin's work, Heller's essay can be placed into historical context with reference to his own introduction to Looking Closer 2, the book within which it has been anthologised. Heller asserts thar design criticism written by designers has blossorned to the extent that it can be identifed as a trend. Within this context, Heller positions his essay as a corrective to partial versions of the past and an intervention which intends to improve contemporary discourse.

Emma Ferry's meticulous article "Decorators May be Compared to Doctors" An Analysis of Rhoda and Agnes Gartett's Suggestions for House Decoration in Painting, Woodwork and Furniture (1876)' offers an empirical case srudy of a mediating discourse – the advice book and, particularly, the Garretts' Høuse Decoration – set within sensitive and useful methodological reflection. Ferry tells us not only about a most interesting and significant advice book, but also about how it should be used by design historians. Through close reading, Ferry produces observations and conclusions that could not have been achieved with reference to any other material.

In 'Integrative Practice: Oral History, Dress and Disability Studies', Liz Linthicum proposes an affinity between design history and dress history, disability studies and oral history: 'first-hand accounts provide a rich source of primary material which is open to interprecation on many levels but is especially significant in recording the experiential, emotional, affective engagement with clothing as identity'. Her article fills important gaps: it places the experiential within dress history and puts dress into the foreground of disability studies. This article therefore makes a multiple contribution and demonstrates for design historians how oral history is an invaluable discourse for illuminating the practices which exist between production and consumption.

Finally, in their introduction to the anthology Design and the Modern Magazine, Jeremy Aynsley and Kate Forde consider not only che utility of magazines as a resource for design historical understanding, but also thespecific strengths of a design historical analysis of magazines. 'Unlike design history', they note, 'cultural studies rarely engages with the circurnstances of production, the design process or the material qualities of the magazines'. The essays in their book provide excellent examples.