# INTRODUCTION

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

## INTRODUCTION

The emergence and development of the Zakopane Style in Polish culture in the 1890s is a familiar story.' The same plot is found in different settings across Europe in the late nineteenth century. In essence, the tale hangs on the 'discovery' of vernacular culture by urban, often academically trained artists, composers and writers. Aspects of peasant life such as homes, dress and styles of ornament came to be regarded as free from the straitjacket of academicism and historicism. In the hands of its proponents, peasant culture was refined for middle-class, artistically minded consumption.² This pattern occurs in the history of many, if not most, Northern and Central European peoples at around the same time, though often for different reasons. It has been connected to international currents such as the fascination with what later came to be called 'Primitivism', which rippled across the continent from the 1890s, and with the rise of the discipline of anthropology. But, as I will argue, consideration also needs to be made of 'local' political circumstances and, in particular, the rise of forms of'echnic nationalism' in the period. Anthony Smith, in his interpretation of the phenomenon, has stressed that ethnic nationalism took as its aim the formation of an ethnically defined nation capable of secession from a larger political unit such as empire. [...]

As most writers reflecting on nationalism in Europe in the late ninetcenth century have observed, peoples pressing for independence from imperial rule usually based their claims to a particular 'homeland' by arguing chat ancient ancestors, from whom they claimed lineage, had once inhabited this territory. As Smith has observed in his discussion of 'ethno-history' special poetic spaces' were often positioned at the heart of such national claims." [...] The isolation of such regions, it was claimed, had preserved ancient cultural forms and ways ofliving from the threat of change.

It is perhaps not surprising that similar distinctions in the characterization of place have been internalized in the intellectual tradicions of anthropology, a discipline that developed in Europe under the influence of nationalist thinking." As Arjun Appadurai has stressed, by holding on to an internalized notion of territory, anchropology has tended to fix its subjects – typically isolated and settled native peoples - outside urban centres. Anthropology has sought out places where culture appeared to be closely adapted to a particular environment.? However, migration and the movement of people between ciry and country as well as the sometimes arbitrary narure of political boundaries complicare the neat localization of cultures. Appadurai's writings have been part of an important critique within anthropology over the last two decades that has challenged the discipline's historic blindness to the interrelations and exchanges within and between cultures." New thinking has come to understand 'the field not primarily in terms of place or territory but in terms of human relations. Thus, in the early 1990s Appadurai made the case for considering the world as 'deterritorialized ethnoscapes' whose culturally constructed places of identification do not often coincide with their actual physical locations'. Taking this critique as a cue, in this article I will explore the relations and processes that led to the discovery of Zakopane and the invention and dissemination of the Zakopane Style beyond the narrow limits of the Tatra region where it originated in the 1870s and 1880s. My aim is to explore the close relations and interactions berween intellectual circles in Warsaw, a major metropolis in the Russian Empire, and Zakopane, a small and distant town in Austria-Hungary.

