# Joel Makower, John Elkington and Julia Hailes (1991) / SHOPPING 'TIL WE DROP / THE THREE RS / 1. REFUSE / 2. REUSE / 3. RECYCLE / NOTE / REDEFINING RUBBISH: COMMODITY DISPOSAL AND SOURCING Nicky Gregson and Louise Crewe (2003) / ENTERING THE SECOND-HAND WORLD / DISPOSAL DISPOSITIONS / PHILANTHROPY / POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CRITIQUE / MONEY-MAKING

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# Joel Makower, John Elkington and Julia Hailes (1991)

Let's start with the basics: Every time you open your wallet, you cast a vote 'for' or 'against' the environment.

This is more powerful than you might imagine. First and foremost, the marketplace - whether the supermarket, hardware store, or appliance showroom - is not a democracy. It doesn't take 51 percent of people 'voting' in any one direction to affect environmental change. Far from it. In fact, a relative handful of shoppers can send shock waves through an industry simply by making good, 'green' choices.

Here's an example. In April 1990, three major tuna canning companies announced that they had made a revolutionary decision: They would stop buying tuna caught in a way that harmed dolphins. In the past, millions of dolphins a year were being needlessly killed simply because they became caught in the tuna fishermen's nets. When these three tuna companies made their announcement, they said nothing about 'protecting dolphins,' or even about 'saving the earth.' They spoke instead of 'consumer pressure.'

What's amazing about all this is that it was a relatively small number of consumers who were 'pressuring' the tuna companies – probably less than a million active individuals, according to some reports. That's less than 1 percent of the American marketplace. In fact, during the twelve months preceding the tuna companies' announcement, tuna sales had barely changed. And so the 'votes' of a very small number of individuals revolutionized an entire industry

Another revolution took place a few months later. In October 1990, McDonald's Corporation announced that it was abandoning its polystyrene foam 'clamshell' hamburger boxes in favor of paper products. In making their announcement, McDonald's officials didn't claim that there was anything wrong with its plastic packages. But our customers just don't feel good about it,' said the company's president. 'So we're changing.' And again, while McDonald's had been the subject of consumer protests over che amount of unrecyclable trash it created, its sales had increased during the preceding year.

There are other, less dramatic revolutions happening nearly every day. Since Earth Day 1990, practically every consumer products company seems to have examined its products and policies through a 'green' lens, taking a hard look at how sales might be affected by American's growing concern about the impact of their purchases on the environment. Across America, companies are listening to consumers' concerns for a cleaner environment, and watching carefully the way we 'vote' with our dollars.

This book will show you how to cast votes for' Planet Earth whenever you shop for food and groceries. It is intended to help you sort through the often confusing world of Green Consumerisrn to choose products that are environmentally sound.

Why should you do this? For starters, as you'll see, some of the products we buy contribute to environmental problems. You may be surprised at the ways this can happen. For example, the manufacture of a paper towel or napkin can contribute dangerous pollutants downstream from a paper mill. The use of some aerosol products contributes to urban smog. Many products are packaged excessively in materials that are neither recycled nor recyclable. Some products are made by companies that have poor environmental records. Buying products from companies that pollute supports their lack of concern for the environment.

Make no mistake: We're not suggesting we can simply shop our way to environmental health. Part of being a Green Consumer is learning when not to buy - when more is not necessarily better ... By making the right choices, you can help to minimize the pollution and waste created by many 'un-green' products and companies.

[...]

## SHOPPING 'TIL WE DROP

[...] [W]e've become rampant consumers. Nearly uninterrupted economic growth has helped to create a glut of goods in the marketplace. More than 20,000 new products land on supermarket shelves every year, a rate that does not appear to be slowing down. Those products arrive in stores in an astonishing assortment of materials, sizes, and formats. It's no longer simply 'regular size' and 'family size.' From aerosols to zip tops, the possibilities have been limited only by financial and technological constraints. Plastic has helped create thepackaging boom, but equally disturbing is packaging made of several materials – combinations of plastics, for example, or laminates consisting of paper, plastic, and foil. All of these present new problems and challenges when it comes time to recycle, reuse, or otherwise dispose of such trash. Ironically, some of these packaging options - aerosols and aseptic ‘juice boxes,' for example - are being presented by their creators as environmentally superior.

It's been a colorful carnival of choices. But now we're finding that along with this apparent prosperity comes some tough problems, not the least of which is how to reconcile che resources being used and the trash created by it all. We've come to expect to pay extra for convenience, but we're just beginning to fully understand how high the price tag for convenience may really be.

[...]

## THE THREE RS

To help us remember what to do when shopping, the Green Consurmner movement has its own ser of ‘Three R's': refuse, reuse, and recycle. Each of them plays a key role in our attempts to minimize the environmental problems caused by our purchases and lifestyles. Keep in mind that this is a hierarchy: they are listed in descending order of preference.

## 1. REFUSE

This is where the power of green is at its strongest. By refusing to buy wasteful and polluting products, you can make a powerful statement. As we have learned in other cases – most notably in the tuna industry's decision to go 'dolphin-safe', and in McDonald's decision to switch from polystyrene to paper – a few Green Consumers can send shock waves through an industry.

What should you refuse to buy? Several things:

• products packaged in many layers of packaging • products packaged in unrecycled or unrecyclable materials

• single-use and other products thar have a short life before they must be thrown away

• products that are not energy efficient • products made by companies with poor environmental records

• products purchased from retailers that have poor environmental records

• products that make false or misleading claims about their greenness

As we said before, few products are perfect. Your level of refusal to purchase some of these products will likely be influenced by the available alternatives. If a product you feel you need is available only in one form, and it is an environmentally undesirable one, you may choose to buy it anyway. But you don't have to accepc this as the best you can get.' Consider writing the manufacturer and ask them to consider changing the product's packaging or contents to make ic more environmentally responsible. Your letter will have more impact, however, if you have chosen not to purchase che product, and tell the manufacturer that.

[...]

## 2. REUSE

Things that may only be used once before being thrown away are an inefficient use of our precious resources. It would be ideal if the products you do buy had the longest life possible. So, it is important to buy products that can be reused over and over. Consider batteries that must be chrown away – filling landfils with a mélange of hazardous chemicals - when you can buy ones that are rechargeable hundreds of times? Why buy something that will have a short life when you can buy something that will last and last?

Some reusable things may cost a bit more to buy – rechargeable batteries, for example, are considerably more expensive than disposable ones – but over time, most of these products can more than pay for themselves. For example, a battery charger and four AA' batteries sell for about \$15, compared to four disposable 'AA' batteries, which retail for around \$3. But if you recharge the batteries only five times, you'll save enough money to recover the cost of the equipment, plus the electricity used for recharging. After that, you're ahead of the game!

Another aspect of'reuse' is to look for products made from or packaged in recycled material. By doing this you are supporting the reuse of resources. The greater the content of recycled material, the better. Some products or packages state specifically: 'Made of 100% recycled content.' Lacking such statements, it's difficult to tell the exact amount of recycled content.

## 3. RECYCLE

If you have refused and reused as much as possible, a high percentage of your leftover trash should be recyclable. And it is extremely important that you make sure to recycle what's left.

Recycling is not a new idea. During World War II, it was a way of life for Americans. Everything from tin cans to scrap iron, rubber to cooking grease, was recycled to help the war effort. Everyone did his or her part to preserve the country's scarce or strategic resources. But when the war ended and the economy boomed, there was a backlash: Americans were taught by advertisers that true prosperity meant having the luxury to use things once and throw them away. Unfortunately, thar notion became a way of life for many people.

Now, recycling has come full cycle. Our scarce and strategic resources are once again being associated with some of our everyday purchases – the petroleum contained in the plastic packaging we buy, for example, the bauxite and energy used to produce aluminum, the drinkable water spoiled by the effluents of paper mills, and on and on. And so, recycling has once again taken on a new importance.

Consider just a few of the benefits recycling can bring:

• Recycling a single aluminum can saves enough energy to produce 20 more cans.

• Recycling a glass bottle or jar saves 25 percent of the energy it took to produce it and cuts up to half of the pollution created manufacturing a new one.

• Using recycled paper instead of virgin paper for one print run of the Sunday edition of the New York Times would save the equivalent of 75,000 trees and reduce landfill waste.

• Each year, the amount of steel recycled in chis country saves enough energy to meet the equivalent of the electrical power needs of the city of Los Angeles for more than eight years.

Despite these impressive statistics, Americans recycle only about a tenth of our household trash; another 10 percent or so is incinerated. The rest of the trash is tossed into landfills. In discarding our trash, we are also discarding vast amounts of raw materials - and the energy it takes to convert these materials into finished goods.

[...]

## NOTE

Extracted from Makower, J., Elkington, J. and Hailes, J., 'Introduction' in The Green Consumer Supermarket Guide, New York: Penguin, 1991, Pp. 7–58. Copyright © by John Elkington, Julia Hailes, and Viking Penguin. Used by permission of Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc., and by Victor Gollancz, an imprint of the Orion Publishing Group.

# REDEFINING RUBBISH: COMMODITY DISPOSAL AND SOURCING Nicky Gregson and Louise Crewe (2003)

[...]

## ENTERING THE SECOND-HAND WORLD

There are, we argue, a range of practices that determine which commodities come to enter the second-hand arena, when, and at which sites and spaces. Such strategies range from the more organized retro and car-boot trader sourcing strategies and charity sorting warehouses to the more personalized, fortuitous discarding strategies of individuals clearing out commodities to either donate to charity or retro shops or to sell on at a car-boot sale. It is important to think too, here, about temporalities of possession and disposal and the differences which exist in relation to this across different commodity groups. Some commodities are treasured, loved, never to be discarded. Others, mistakes for example, or unwanted gifts, have a very short temporality and are quickly put back into circulation. For analytical ease we will distinguish in what follows between traders' sourcing strategies which typically comprise detailed and ongoing searches for commodities to sell (i.e. akin to an occupation), and the more personalized, ad hoc casting-off and disposal strategies which individuals undertake in their homes and gardens as part of broader consurr.ption practices.' Taken together, sourcing and disposal strategies determine when and how commodities enter and leave the second-hand world. In practice of course such analyrical separation rarely holds up; the boundaries between sourcing and disposal are fuzzy, unclear and ruptured; many traders work in unplanned, unorganized ways, ways which are worlds apart from conventional buying and sourcing work undertaken in formal retail spaces; many good housekeeping' sorting and discarding strategies are themselves highly regulated, ordered and organized in ways which approximate hard work. Sourcing, sorting and disposal strategies vary, then, not only across and berween the three case-study sites, but also in terms of the levels of investment which individuals make in such practices. The spatialities of supply are complex, circular and dynamic and reveal both the connections berween our study sites and the variability across them. In the following two sections we try to capture the range and complexity of ways in which things come to be in second-hand worlds, focusing first on the disposal of commodities and their deposition by individuals in second-hand spaces, and secondly on the ways in which commodities are sourced for sale in the second-hand world. We identify three key disposal dispositions and two main sourcing models, although again, as we have been at pains to emphasize, these strategies are not mutually exclusive in either time or space, but rather may occur concurrently.

## DISPOSAL DISPOSITIONS

Throughout the course of our work we encountered a range of different investments in different kinds of disposal practices. These practices are in turn linked to the spatialities of disposal, as individuals make often quite complex judgments about not just how, but where, to dispose of their 'rubbish'. The spaces of disposal thermselves map onto and parallel individual constructions of commodity value and judgments about appropriate disposal behaviours – that which is defined as rubbish or garbage at a particular moment in time is likely to be discarded to the bin, the skip, the tip or the landfill site. Junk, in contrast, is more likely to be hoarded, collected and, much later, either rediscovered and revalorized (by self or other), or given away, cleared out or sold, ending up in the recycling bin, the jumble sale, the car-boot sale or at the charity or retro shop. But again such valorization judgments are neither linear nor objective, but vary in time and space and are subjectively determined. There are, too, a number of evaluative layers at work here which makes it often difficult in practice to determine with any certainty the precise motivations underpinning disposal strategies. For example, while the dumping of a washing machine onto a skip might be read as the straightforward disposal of a non-functional (and therefore valueless) commodity, there is rarely, we would argue, a straightforward association between functionality and value. In the case of consumer durables, it may appear on first reading that functionality is the key determinant of value, but in fact, and as we go on to demonstrate below, such connections are far more complex and relate to a matrix of variables which include functionality but critically also involve design and aesthetic issues, so that apparently 'functional' commodities may be cast our not simply because they don't work, but because an owner's aesthetic principles have shifted – the casting out of formica units and Bakelite telephones are illustrative examples here of commodities which have been cast out (and devalorized) and subsequently refound and revalorized not simply by repair but by design shifts too. Again, this example illustrates the complex interplay berween structural and market shifts on the one hand, and design history, aesthetic taste and subjective style judgments on the other in determining the practices and spaces chrough which disposal occurs

Below we argue that disposal – as a means of making space – is the primary strategy through which individuals cast out' and the main way in which commodities enter the second-hand world. Quite which spaces commodities are cast out to, however, depends on boch the nature of the commnodity and, critically, on the disposal disposition of the subject, as we go on to discuss below. For conceptual ease we identify three main disposal dispositions as a way in to tracking where commodities are cast out to.' These dispositions in turn have particular potency for particular commodities and particular gendered subject positions, and we thus use particular commodity groupings as lenses through which to uncover the range and variability in disposal motivations. These three dispositions we call philanthropy economic/political critique and money-making. The three dispositions serve as an analytical framework to shape our discussion below but, again, such distinctions do not always hold up in practice: some consumers, as we go on to illustrate below, may display several disposal dispositions at different times for different commodities in different contexts. Consequently, the importance of subject position and the subject: object relation infuses the specificities of disposal strategies through time and space.

[...]

## PHILANTHROPY

The first rationale we explore is based around notions of philanthropy, of casting out in order to help others deemed or imagined to be less fortunate. For certain people, participation in second-hand consumption is not something that they would ever consider – to buy cast-offs is simply not for them – but they are happy to donate their discarded goods to 'deserving' others - often via charity shops. This disposition in part is described as about doing good through disposal. Sam provides one example of this practice: a 20-something secretary, she recounts how part of her good housekeeping space-making strategy is about selecting clothing for people 'less fortunate' than herself. Moreover, she is careful to ensure that this clothing is deposited at what for her are appropriate charity shops - in her case 'the Cancer shop'. This disposition, however, is not confined to those who just donate. Val both donates and purchases, and she provides one of the few instances among our respondent group for whom fund-raising imperatives over-ride pragmatism in shaping disposal practices. Indeed Val drives from one area of Sheffield to the other side of the city to deposit her goods at a shop dedicated to fundraising for a local animal charity.

For others, casting out as philanthropy is triggered by key world events such as recent world crises in Rwanda, Kosovo and latterly, Afghanistan. Often linked to media reports and charitable appeals for donations to, for example, Romanian orphanages, this is about helping out others in distant places. Anna, for example, discusses how she prefers to give to a known cause when having a clear-out, telling how she has just given a whole bagful to Romania, to the orphans,' while Nicky recently donated a bag destined initially for either the nearest charity shop or the next plastic-bag drop to a door-to-door collection for Kosovo. And closer to home still are the successful 'toys for Christmas' campaigns in the UK that again depend on the philanthropic conscience of potential donors.

What we see here is the moral imperative of disposal: not only is disposal constituted as an appropriate good housekeeping practice, but part of this good housekeeping is overlain with notions of casting out appropriately, in ways that depend clearly on the identification of the deserving other. Desperate, poor and needy, the other is here constituted unproblematically, as the assumed-to-be-grateful recipient - in short as che charitable case, defined by those who are in the position to act charitably.

## POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CRITIQUE

This second disposition connects with the moral economy and political critique ... For some this political critique is a fairly straightforward rejection of the rampant commercialism and aggressive consumerism they see as typifying first cycle consumption. We have already seen how, prompted in part by desires toward recycling and sustainability, at least some of our interviewees mobilize narratives around global equity in order to explain their desire to dispose of commodities into the second-hand arena. Margi and Trish are clear examples of this emergent sense of a critique of first-cycle consumption:

Yes, we need to be clothed and we need to feel good abour how we look, but that doesn't mean we need to impose all of this bollocks onto the world – so in away it's almost a protest against that in a way - you know, recycle to survive I think is a really good philosophy. (Margi, Derbyshire)

If you're a charity shopper, you know, everybody's junk is somebody else's treasure – you know, if I have a clear out, chere might be some little nick nack, but I make the effort to go and get that bag just because I know that somewhere somebody is not going to be making money out of it ... it's also about the world and recycling. (Trish, London)

More specifically, we would argue that disposal for reasons to do with political critique is particularly marked in the case of certain commodity groups. The case of children's clothing ilustrates this disposal disposition particularly keenly, and it is here that we find the most developed sense of a critique of first-cycle exchange and consumption as well as the tentative stirrings of ethical consumption. Given the speed with which young children in particular outgrow clothing, individual items have a very limited temporality of individual use. And they are thus frequently disposed of to second-hand sites such as charity shops and carboot sales in order that others might benefit (note the connections here to philanthropic dispositions). One of our interviewees, Daphne, [...] is particularly instructive in articulating this version of ethical consumption. She expressed considerable disquiet at what she sees as the extortionate cost of children's clothes in the shops and argues that it is 'not right' to charge £40 for shoes that will last children six weeks or to charge £60 for a jumper for a five-year old. Her disposal and sourcing strategies in respect of children's clothes are thus best interpreted as resistant strategies in a broader moral economy of household provisioning. And Anna too discusses the ways in which second hand clothes for babies and children circulate around friendship and kin groups 'Caroline brings her stuff from her daughters for Caroline E to check through, and Caroline E checks through it and then it's handed on to me and I check through it for my friend in York, and 1 parcel it all up ... it's like this big thing going on, there's no money involved but there's all this exchange'. And so while the disposal (and indeed purchase) of second-hand clothing for children serves to reproduce gendered discourses about Woman as (style-conscious) mother, nurturer and carer, it also offers scope at least for a partial reworking of these discourses. In coming to recognize that the characteristics of newness and difference need not mean the same thing as never worn and currently in the shops, women put both a subtle twist on the style conscious mother construction and provide themselves with the basis for a moral critique of the intensifying commodification of children on the high street and through the media. In short they are constituting second-hand arenas as a way of offering nearly new, often fashionable and very cheap clothing for children, and in so doing are invoking a prototypical version of ethical consumption, for and of mothers.

Although most clearly developed in relation to children's clothing, such strategies are also apparent around a few other commodities, specifically books and toys, which also have a residual life that transcends their use by their initial owner. Passing such goods on to others through the medium of second-hand sites such as charity shops and car-boot sales seems to us to approximate a consumer: object relation that is best viewed in terms of temporary possession rather than ownership. Charity shops, then, operate as a form of alternative library facility, from which books can be bought for a nominal sum and to which they can then be returned. Similarly with toys - Val for example, recounted how she put her initials on jigsaws that she had already bought/returned. Reducing the need for costly first-cycle purchase of such commodities, we argue more broadly that this form of political critique is often less about the recycling of matter and its associated environmental benefts, and rather more grounded in a narrative thar desires to extend the useful life (i.e use value) of commodities.

## MONEY-MAKING

Our third disposal disposition we call moneymaking. This disposition is distinctly abour exchange values. For some this is about making money from used commodicies; for others it is about supplementing low incomes. Again, chis strategy varies both across and berween destinations and is acutely differentiated in terms of product category. And again, like our other strategies it is variegated by gender, so that while borh women and men dispose of goods in order to make money (often to buy more) this strategy is on the whole, we would argue, apparently far more masculine than our other two strategies, and is bound up more with functionalist discourses rather than questions of embodiment, respectability or political critique." First, then, at one level there is evidence of a fairly straightforward selling-to-make-money approach demonstrated by both men and women. Sophie, for example, told us

Sophie: I needed a bit of money (when I was at UCL). I was very skint so I came here (Portobello Market) and sold a few of my clothes.

Louise: A few of the vintage things you'd bought for yourself?

Sophie: Yeah, the things I felt I could just about let go. And it worked really well. I enjoyed it. 1 loved it. It's an addictive thing to do ... (Notting Hill).

For others, as the following vendor intimates, selling at a boot sale is frequently a follow-on from participation as a buyer. Indeed, for some the motivation for buying at boot sales is primarily to stock up to sell later: 'You never know what you'll come back with, golf clubs, aromatherapy oils, ballet shoes. We've got a house stuffed full of junk. When there's enough, we'll go out and sell all over again' (Mrs Coates).

And yet for others – and primarily here we are referring to men – there is a particular logic to disposal-for-sale strategies which has its roots, we would argue, in discourses of masculinity and which, particularly in the case of car-boot-saledisposal, serve to reproduce conventional gendered consumption practices. Involving an array of commodities encompassing primarily electrical goods, DIY tools and materials, gardening equipment, car sundries and audio goods, the critical feature of men's disposal strategies at car-boot sales is that they are governed seemingly primarily by utilitarian and instrumentalist considerations and by technical discourses. Many of these acts of disposal as moneymaking are riven through with constructions of Man as builder/repairer of the domestic form – here money-making often comes from the left overs and cast-offs of DIY projects [...] Others, though, are about attempting to sell on items/goods that have been 'upgraded': redundant and/or obsolete PCs and printers, personal stereos, audio systems, vinyl that has been replaced by CDs and so on.

This form of disposal continues to incrigue us. Rather than turning to philanthropic motivations, then – and give away – there is a desire to sell, to elevate exchange over use values, even when things are faulty and admitted to be. [...] Why this is we can only speculate about, but we would note that rarely - if ever - did women talk about selling such faulty iters, tending instead to dispose of them at 'rubbish' venues: in skips, at landfll sites and in household dustbins.

[...]

