# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING

Paul Greenhalgh, in his book Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions. and World's Fairs, 1851–1939 (1988), discusses the World's Fair of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as a visual medium that not only introduced new technologies and promoted the economic strength of the host country, but which also initiated new modes of display and advertising that asserted commercial and national identity, See also Sabine Clemm, ""Amidst the Heterogeneous Masses": Charles Dicken's Household Words and the Great Exhibition of 1851' (2005).

Whereas Ruskin and Morris espoused a moral reform of design through their return to the spiritualized aesthetic of the Gothic period, outlined in Pugin's True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture (1841), others, including Owen Jones and Christopher Dresser, sought to understand better the capability of the machine and to improve the artistic possibilities of industrial manufacture through careful education, rather than do away with it altogether. Jones's reference book The Grammar of Ornament (1856) provided hundreds of examples of decorative patterns to be applied by designers to all different media. See Elizabeth Kramer, 'Master or Market? The Anglo-Japanese Textile Designs of Christopher Dresser' (2006). Tracey Avery explores the Victorian design debate from the perspective of Australia in her article 'Furniture Design and Colonialism (2007), which is reproduced in Section 12 of the Reader.

Semper's theories influenced design education throughout Europe, including at London's South Kensington Museum, established by Henry Cole following the 1851 exhibition. See Louise Purbrick, 'South Kensington Museum: The Building of the House of Henry Cole' (1994). The arguably more enthusiastic industrialization of manufacture in the US during this period is further examined by David A. Hounshell in his book From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States (1984), which elaborates on Heskett's discussion. Journals devoted to the decorative arts, such as The Studio, L'Art Décoratif, Deutsche Kunst und Dekoration and The Crafisman, disseminated reform ideas, largely rooted in the theories of William Morris, to a wide audience. Two insightful studies of Morris are Fiona MacCarthy, William Morris: A Life for Our Time (1994) and Charles Harvey and Jon Press, William Morris: Design and Enterprise in Victorian Britain (1991). The exhibition 'The Arts and Crafts in Europe and Amnerica: Design for the Modern World' (Los Angeles, Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 2004), with catalogue edited by Wendy Kaplan, examines the overlapping philosophies among designers on both sides of the Atlantic.

The area of most fraught design reform debate in the late nineteenth century was women's clothing. The 'reform dress', with its loose and comfortable cut, resisted the confining wasp-waisted shapes of contemporary ladies' fashions. See Patricia A. Cunningham, Reforming Women's Fashion, 1850–1920: Politics, Health, and Art (2003). The struggle to reform design, and to come to terms with the relationship between industry and craft at the end of the nineteenth-century was also poignantly expressed in art nouveau meditations such as Siegfried Bing's essay 'Where Are we Going?' (1897), as well as in

Louis Sullivan's canonical essay 'The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered' (1896), in which the architect unites the technological progress of the steel-framed building with the organic model of a vibrant nature, in his assertion that 'form follows function'. Paul Greenhalgh, in his article The Sryle and the Age' (2000), demonstrates that the reform efforts of Semper, Ruskin and Morris ushered in a complex and contradictory design sensibility, which was at once urban and rustic, national and international, and which saw the exciting potential of the machine expressed in the vital forms of nature, as well as the integrity of materials, as its innovators forged a new path into the twentieth century.

