# Grace Lees-Maffei / THE WORK OF ART IN THE AGE OF MECHANICAL REPRODUCTION Walter Benjamin (1936) / II / III / IV / VII / x / XII / XIII / NOTE / ADVERTISING, MOTHER OF GRAPHIC DESIGN Steven Heller (1995) / ICONS OF PROGRESS / THE FORMALIST LENS / NOTE / 'DECORATORS MAY BE COMPARED TO DOCTORS', AN ANALYSIS OF RHODA AND AGNES GARRETT'S SUGGESTIONS FOR HOUSE DECORATION IN PAINTING, WOODWORK AND FURNITURE (1876)

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# Grace Lees-Maffei

During its development, design history has examined the object, as focal concern, through the contexts in which objects are produced, mediated, used and understood. The dominance of issues of consumption in the 1990s (explored in the previous section) has been accompanied by a concern for those processes that might conveniently be gathered under the banner 'mediation'. A concern for mediation in the late 1990s and early twenty-first century is not unique to design history and is shared, for example, with cultural studies, literary studies and area studies. To study mediation is to study the phenomena which exist between production and consumption, as being fundamentally important in inscribing meanings for objects, as Dick Hebdige notes in section 8 of this book and as Jeffrey L. Meikle has noted in his article Material Virtues: On the Ideal and the Real in Design History' (1998).

Awareness of the role of mediating discourses in generating meanings for designed goods and processes has prompted studies that seek to find out about design through analysis of discourse (as distinct from the analysis of design as discourse, a discrete and very rich area of enquiry). This section explores the significance of mediation as a focus by presenting a variety of texts, each focussed upon a different type of source material: photography and film, advertising, advice literature, oral history and magazines, respectively. It begins with Walter Benjamin's The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction'. Dating from 1936, this essay has exerted a tremendous influence on cultural analysis in the twentieth century. Although as a commentary on photography and film, it falls into the group of secondary sources, its landmark status and its date mean that it has developed its own history and can now be treated as a primary source. The remaining texts in this section are presented to exemplify the mediation tendency within design history, from the late 1990s onwards. Steven Heller's essay 'Advertising, the Mother of Graphic Design' was first published in Eye, the graphic design magazine: consistent with its status as design journalism, it is concise, opinionated and practice-oriented. Different again are the scholarly articles by Emma Ferry and Liz Linthicum, both from The fournal of Design History. These texts analyse mediating sources, while also reflecting on their use. Similarly reflective is Jeremy Aynsley and Kate Forde's introduction to their anthology Design and the Modern Magazine, which comnprises historiographic contextual survey and methodological pointers to the contribution that design history can make to the understanding of the significance of magazines, a theme being pursued across several disciplines. Rather than simply presenting exemplary studies of mediation, this section offers texts in which the emphasis is on methodological reflexivity.

Walter Benjamin's 'The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction' is framed by a discussion of the politics of its time, beginning with Marx and ending with fascism. The preface considers the significance of 'theses about the developmental tendencies of art under present conditions of production' for brushing aside 'ourmoded concepts such as creativity and genius, eternal value and mystery' and 'for the formulation of revolutionary demands in the politics of art'. The epilogue notes that the logical result of Fascism is the introduction of aesthetics into political life' and its culmination in war, to which communism responds by politicizing art'. The main body of the essay discusses how technologies of mass production have changed the nature of art, and altered the meaning and significance of its ‘aura' (this is the section reproduced here) before examining photography and film as two examples. For design historians, it offers a consideration of che value of the mass produced cultural artefacts which may be applied to the designed object. Benjamin's discussion of'aura' forms an example of how the conditions of production determine the reception of cultural artefacts. The work of art, or. more broadly, the cultural artefact of which design is part, is, in the age of mechanical reproduction mediated by a mass media as well as itself forming part of that media.

Heller's essay concerns two kinds of mediating discourse – advertising and graphic design – through che medium of a third, design journalism. Heller identifies reluctance among graphic designers to identify their output as associated with advertising. He responds by tracing a history of graphic design which shows the central place of advertising in its development. Not only are graphic design and adverrising indivisible, they are mutually constitutive, Heller suggests. Although more recent than Benjamin's work, Heller's essay can be placed into historical context with reference to his own introduction to Looking Closer 2, the book within which it has been anthologised. Heller asserts thar design criticism written by designers has blossorned to the extent that it can be identifed as a trend. Within this context, Heller positions his essay as a corrective to partial versions of the past and an intervention which intends to improve contemporary discourse.

Emma Ferry's meticulous article ""Decorators May be Compared to Doctors" An Analysis of Rhoda and Agnes Gartett's Suggestions for House Decoration in Painting, Woodwork and Furniture (1876)' offers an empirical case srudy of a mediating discourse – the advice book and, particularly, the Garretts' Høuse Decoration – set within sensitive and useful methodological reflection. Ferry tells us not only about a most interesting and significant advice book, but also about how it should be used by design historians. Through close reading, Ferry produces observations and conclusions that could not have been achieved with reference to any other material.

In 'Integrative Practice: Oral History, Dress and Disability Studies', Liz Linthicum proposes an affinity between design history and dress history, disability studies and oral history: 'first-hand accounts provide a rich source of primary material which is open to interprecation on many levels but is especially significant in recording the experiential, emotional, affective engagement with clothing as identity'. Her article fills important gaps: it places the experiential within dress history and puts dress into the foreground of disability studies. This article therefore makes a multiple contribution and demonstrates for design historians how oral history is an invaluable discourse for illuminating the practices which exist between production and consumption.

Finally, in their introduction to the anthology Design and the Modern Magazine, Jeremy Aynsley and Kate Forde consider not only che utility of magazines as a resource for design historical understanding, but also thespecific strengths of a design historical analysis of magazines. 'Unlike design history', they note, 'cultural studies rarely engages with the circurnstances of production, the design process or the material qualities of the magazines'. The essays in their book provide excellent examples.

# THE WORK OF ART IN THE AGE OF MECHANICAL REPRODUCTION Walter Benjamin (1936)

In principle a work of art has always been reproducible. Man-made artifacts could always be imitated by men. Replicas were made by pupils in practice of their craft, by masters for diffusing their works, and, finally, by third parties in the pursuit of gain. Mechanical reproduction of a work of art, however, represents something new. Historically, it advanced intermittently and in leaps at long intervals, but with accelerated intensity. The Greeks knew only two procedures of technically reproducing works of art: founding and stamping. Bronzes, terra cottas, and coins were the only art works which they could produce in quantity. All others were unique and could not be mechanically reproduced. With the woodcur graphic art became mechanically reproducible for the first time, long before script became reproducible by print. The enormous changes which printing, the mechanical reproduction of writing. has brought about in literature are a familiar story. However, within the phenomenon which we are here examining from the perspective of world history, print is merely a special, though particularly important, case. During the Middle Ages engraving and etching were added to the woodcut; at the beginning of the nineteenth century lithography made its appearance. With lithography the technique of reproduction reached an essentially new stage. This much more direct process was distinguished by the tracing of the design on a stone rather chan its incision on a block of wood or its etching on a copperplate and permitted graphic art for the first time to put its products on the market, not only in large numbers as hitherto, but also in daily changing forms. Lithography enabled graphic art to illustrate everyday life, and it began to keep pace with printing. But only a few decades after its invention, lithography was surpassed by photography. For the first time in the process of pictorial reproduction, photography freed the hand of the most important artistic functions which henceforth devolved only upon the eye looking into a lens. Since the eye perceives more swiftly than the hand can draw, the process of pictorial reproduction was accelerated so enormously that it could keep pace with speech. A film operator shooting a scene in the studio captures the images at the speed of an actor's speech. Just as lithography virtually implied the illustrated newspaper, so did photography foreshadow the sound film. The technical reproduction of sound was tackled at the end of the last century. These convergent endeavors made predictable a situation which Paul Valery pointed up in this sentence:

Just as water, gas, and electricity are brougho into our houses from far off to satisfy our needs in response to a minimal effort, so we shall be supplied with visual or auditory images, which will appear and disappear at a simple movement of che hand, hardly more than a sign.

Around 1900 technical reproduction had reached a standard that not only permitted it to reproduce all transmitted works of art and thus to cause the most profound change in their impact upon the public; it also had captured a place of its own among the artistic processes. For the study of this standard nothing is more revealing than the nature of the repercussions that these two different manifestations – the reproduction of works of art and the art of the film – have had on art in its traditional form.

## II

Even the most perfect reproduction of a work of art is lacking in one element: its presence in time and space, its unique existence at the place where it happens to be. This unique existence of the work of art determined the history to which it was subject throughout the time of its existence. This includes the changes which it may have suffered in physical condition over the years as well as the various changes in its ownership. The traces of the first can be revealed only by chemical or physical analyses which it is impossible to perform on a reproduction; changes of ownership are subject to a tradition which must be traced from the situation of the original.

The presence of the original is the prerequisite to the concept of authenticity. Chemical analyses of the patina of a bronze can help to establish this, as does the proof that a given manuscript of the Middle Ages stems from an archive of the fifteenth century. The whole sphere of authenticity is outside technical – and, of course, not only technical - reproducibility. Confronted with its manual reproduction, which was usually branded as a forgery,-the original preserved all its authority; not so vis-à-vis technical reproduction. The reason is twofold. First, process reproduction is more independent of the original than manual reproduction. For example, in photography, process reproduction can bring out those aspects of the original that are unattainable to the naked eye yet accessible to the lens, which is adjustable and chooses its angle at will. And photographic reproduction, with the aid of certain processes, such as enlargement or slow motion, can capture images which escape natural vision. Secondly, technical reproduction can put the copy of the original into situations which would be out of reach for the original itself. Above all, it enables the original to meet the beholder halfway, be it in the form of a photograph or a phonograph record. The cathedral leaves its locale to be received in the studio of a lover of art; the choral production, performed in an auditorium or in the open air, resounds in the drawing room.

The situations into which the product of mechanical reproduction can be brought may not touch the actual work of art, yet the quality of its presence is always depreciated. This holds not only for the art work but also, for instance, for a landscape which passes in review before the spectator in a movie. In the case of the art object, a most sensitive nucleus - namely, its authenticity – is interfered with whereas no natural object is vulnerable on that score. The authenticity of a ching is the essence of all thac is transmissible from its beginning, ranging frorn its substantive duracion to its testimony to the history which it has experienced. Since the historical testimony rests on the authenticity, the former, too, is jeopardized by reproduction when substantive duration ceases to matter. And what is really jeopardized when the historical testimony is affected is the authority of the object.

One might subsume the eliminated element in the term aura' and go on to say: that which withers in the age of mechanical reproduction is the aura of the work of art. This is a symptomatic process whose significance points beyond the realm of art. One might generalize by saying: the technique of reproduction detaches the reproduced object from the domain of tradition. By making many reproductions it substitutes a plurality of copies for a unique existence. And in permitting the reproduction to meet the beholder or listener in his own particular situation, it reactivates the object reproduced. These two processes lead to a tremendous shattering of tradition which is the obverse of the contemporary crisis and renewal of mankind. Both processes are intimately connected with the contemporary mass movements. Their most powerful agent is the flm. Its social significance, particularly in its most positive form, is inconceivable without its destructive, cathartic aspect, that is, the liquidation of the traditional value of the cultural heritage. This phenomenon is most palpable in the great historical films. It extends to ever new positions. In 1927 Abel Gance exclaimed enthusiastically:

Shakespeare, Rembrandt, Beethoven will make films .., all legends, all mythologies and all myths, all founders of religion, and the very religions ... await their exposed resurrection, and the heroes crowd each other at the gate

Presumably without intending it, he issued an invitation to a far-reaching liquidation.

## III

During long periods of history, the mode of human sense perceprion changes with humanity's entire mode of existence. The manner in which human sense perception is organized, the mediurn in which it is accomplished, is determined not only by nature but by historical circumstances as well. The fifth century, with its grear shifts of population, saw the birth of the late Roman art industry and the Vienna Genesis, and there developed not only an art different from that of antiquity but also a new kind of perception. The scholars of the Viennese school, Riegl and Wickhoff, who resisted the weight of classical tradition under which these later art forms had been buried, were the first to draw conclusions from them concerning the organization of perception at the time. However far-reaching their insight, these scholars limited themselves to showing the significant, formal hallmark which characterized perception in late Roman times. They did not attempt - and, perhaps, saw no way – to show the social transformations expressed by these changes of perception. The conditions for an analogous insight are more favorable in the present. And if changes in the medium of contemporary perception can be comprehended as decay of the aura, it is possible to show its social causes.

The concept of aura which was proposed above with reference to historical objects may usefully be illustrated with reference to the aura of natural ones. We define the aura of the latter as the unique phenomenon of a distance, however close it may be. If, while resting on a summer afternoon, you follow with your eyes a mountain range on the horizon or a branch which casts its shadow over you, you experience the aura of those mountains, of that branch. This image makes it easy to comprehend the social bases of the contemporary decay of the aura. It rests on two circumstances, both of which are related to the increasing significance of the masses in contemporary life. Namely, the desire of contemporary masses to bring things 'closer' spatially and humanly, which is just as ardent as their bent toward overcoming the uniqueness of every reality by accepting its reproduction. Every day the urge grows stronger to get hold of an object at very close range by way of its likeness, its reproduction. Unmistakably, reproduction as offered by picture magazines and newsreels differs from the image seen by the unarmed eye. Uniqueness and permanence are as closely linked in the latter as are transitoriness and reproducibility in the former. To pry an object from its shell, to destroy its aura, is the mark of a perception whose 'sense of the universal equality of things' has increased to such a degree that it extracts it even from a unique object by means of reproduction. Thus is manifested in the feld of perception what in the theoretical sphere is noticeable in the increasing importance of statistics. The adjustment of reality to the masses and of the masses to reality is a process of unlimited scope, as much for thinking as for perception.

## IV

The uniqueness of a work of art is inseparable from its being imbedded in the fabric of tradition. This tradition itself is thoroughly alive and extremely changeable. An ancient statue ofVenus, for example, stood in a different traditional context with the Greeks, who made it an object of veneration, than with the clerics of the Middle Ages, who viewed it as an ominous idol. Both of them, however, were equally confronted with its uniqueness, that is, its aura. Originally the contextual integration of art in tradition found its expression in the cult. We know that the earliest art works originated in the service of a ritual – first the magical, then the religious kind. It is significant that the existence of the work of art with reference to its aura is never entirely separated from its ritual function. In other words, the unique value of the authentic' work of art has its basis in ritual, the location of its original use value. This ritualistic basis, however remote, is still recognizable as secularized ritual even in the most profane forms of the cult of beauty. The secular cult of beauty, developed during the Renaissance and prevailing for three centuries, clearly showed that ritualistic basis in its decline and the first deep crisis which befell it. With the advent of the first truly revolutionary means of reproduction, photography, simultaneously with the rise of socialism, art sensed the approaching crisis which has become evident a century later. At the time, art reacted with the doctrine of l'art pour l'art, that is, with a theology of art. This gave rise to what might be called a negative theology in the form of the idea of pure' art, which not only denied any social function of art but also any categorizing by subject matter. (In poetry, Mallarmé was the first to take this position.)

An analysis of art in the age of mechanical reproduction must do justice to these relationships, for they lead us to an all-important insight: for the first time in world history, mechanical reproduction emancipates the work of art from its parasitical dependence on ritual. To an ever greater degree the work of art reproduced becomes the work of art designed for reproducibility. From a photographic negative, for example, one can make any number of prints; to ask for the 'authentic print makes no sense. But the instant the criterion of authenticity ceases to be applicable to artistic production, the total function of art is reversed. Instead of being based on ritual, it begins to be based on another practice – politics.

[...]

## VII

The nineteenth-century dispute as to the artistic value of painting versus photography today seems devious and confused. This does not diminish its importance, however; if anything, it underlines it. The dispute was in fact the symptom of a historical transformation the universal impact of which was not realized by either of the rivals. When the age of mechanical reproduction separated art from its basis in cult, the semblance of its autonomy disappeared forever. The resulting change in the function of art transcended the perspective of the century; for a long cime it even escaped that of the twentieth century, which experienced the development of che film. Earlier much futile thought had been devoted to che question of whether photography is an art. The primary question - whether the very invention of photography had not transformed the entire nature of art – was not raised. Soon the film theoreticians asked the same ill-considered question with regard to the film.

[...}]

## x

[...] The film responds to the shriveling of the aura with an artificial build-up of the personality outside the studio. The cult of the movie star, fostered by the money of the film industry, preserves not the unique aura of the person but the 'spell of the personality,' the phony spell of a commodity. So long as the movie-makers' capital sets the fashion, as a rule no other revolutionary merit can be accredited to today's film than the promotion of a revolutionary criticism of traditional concepts of art. We do not deny that in some cases today's films can also promote revolutionary criticism of social conditions, even of the distribution of property. However, our present study is no more specifically concerned with this than is the film production of Western Europe. [...]

For centuries a small number of writers were confronted by many thousands of readers. This changed toward the end of the last century. With the increasing extension of the press, which kept placing new political, religious, scientific, professional, and local organs before the readers, an increasing number of readers became writers – at first, occasional ones. It began with the daily press opening to its readers space for 'letters to the editor.' And today there is hardly a gainfully employed European who could not, in principle, find an opportunity to publish somewhere or other comments on his work, grievances, documentary reports, or that sort of thing. Thus, the distinction between author and public is about to lose its basic character. The difference becomes merely functional; it may vary from case to case. At any moment the reader is ready to curn into a writer. As expert, which he had to become willynilly in an extremely specialized work process, even if only in some minor respect, the reader gains access to authorship. In the Soviet Union work itself is given a voice. To present it verbally is part of a man's ability to perform the work. Literary license is now founded on polytechnic rather than specialized training and thus becomes common property.

## XII

Mechanical reproduction of art changes the reaction of the masses toward art. The reactionary attitude toward a Picasso painting changes into the progressive reaction toward a Chaplin movie. The progressive reaction is characterized by the direct, intimate fusion of visual and emotional enjoyment with che orientation of the expert. Such fusion is of great social significance. The greater the decrease in the social significance of an art form, the sharper the distinction between criticism and enjoyment by the public. The conventional is uncritically enjoyed, and the truly new is criticized with aversion. With regard to the screen, the critical and the receptive attitudes of the public coincide. The decisive reason for this is that individual reactions are predetermined by the mass audience response they are about to produce, and this is nowhere more pronounced than in the film.

[...]

## XIII

The characteristics of the film lie not only in the manner in which man presents himself to mechanical equipment but also in the manner in which, by means of this apparatus, man can represent his environment. [...] By close-ups of the things around us, by focusing on hidden details of familiar objects, by exploring common place milieus under the ingenious guidance of the camera, the film, on the one hand, extends our comprehension of the necessities which rule our lives; on the other hand, it manages to assure us of an immense and unexpected field of action. Our taverns and our metropolitan streets, our offices and furnished rooms, our railroad stations and our factories appeared to have us locked up hopelessly. Then came the film and burst this prison-world asunder by che dynamite of the tenth of a second, so that now, in the midst of its far-flung ruins and debris, we calmly and adventurously go traveling. With the close-up, space expands; with slow motion, movement is extended. The enlargement of a snapshot does not simply render more precise what in any case was visible, though unclear: it reveals entirely new structural formations of the subject. So, too, slow motion not only presents familiar qualities of movement but reveals in them entirely unknown ones 'which, far from looking like retarded rapid movements, give the effect of singularly gliding, floating, supernatural motions.' Evidently a different nature opens itself to the camera than opens to the naked eye - if only because an unconsciously penetrated space is substituted for a space consciously explored by man. Even if one has a general knowledge of the way people walk, one knows nothing of a person's posture during the fractional second of a stride. The act of reaching for a lighter or a spoon is familiar routine, yet we hardly know what really goes on between hand and metal, not to mention how this fluctuates with our moods. Here the camera intervenes with the resources of its lowerings and liftings, its interruptions and isolations, it extensions and accelerations, its enlargements and reductions. The camera introduces us to unconscious optics as does psychoanalysis to unconscious impulses.

[...]

## NOTE

Excerpts from Benjamin, W., Illuminations: Essays and Reflections, ed. Hannah Arendt, New York: Schocken Books. Copyright © 1955 by Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt a.M., English translation by Harry Zohn copyright © 1968 and renewed 1996 by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Comnpany, reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company.

# ADVERTISING, MOTHER OF GRAPHIC DESIGN Steven Heller (1995)

[...] Although graphic design as we know it originated in the late nineteenth century as a tool of advertising, any association today with marketing, advertising, or capitalism deeply undermines the graphic designer's self-image. Graphic design history is an integral part of advertising history, yet in most accounts of graphic design's origins advertising is virtually denied, or hidden behind more benign words such as 'publicity' and promotion.' This omission not only limits the discourse, but also misrepresents the facts. It is time for graphic design historians, and designers generally, to remove the elitist prejudices that have perpetuated a biased history

In Layout in Advertising (Harper Brothers 1928), William Addison Dwiggins, who coined the term graphic designer' in 1922 to defne his own diverse practices of book, type, lettering and advertising design, wrote that, 'for purposes of argument, “advertising" means every conceivable printed means for selling anything.' This suggests that advertising is the mother of almost all graphic design endeavor, except for books and certain journals. In fact, the majority of commercial artists from che turn of the century until fairly recently – from anonymous 'sho card' renderers to celebrated affichistes – were engaged in the service of advertising of one kind or another. Despite the common assertion rhat graphic design began with seventeenth-century Italian printing, modern graphic design is the result of the transition in the late nineteenth century from a product to a consumer culture. The move from producing (or bartering for) goods to buying mass-produced consumables created a need for printed advertising that quickly developed into a huge, dedicated industry.

Dwiggins' manual is not the only one to assert that graphic design was invented to put ‘an advertising project into graphic form.' Jan Tschichold's Die Neue Typographie, also published in 1928, was a seminal handbook for the practitioners of Gebrauchsgraphik, or advertising art. This book and Tschichold's subsequent Typographische Gestaltung (1935), which became the basis of the modern canon, were focused not on some idealistic notion of visual communications in an aesthetic vacuum, but on dynamic new possibilities for advertising composition in an archaic and cluttered print environment. In The Art Director at Work (Hastings House, 1960), Arthur Hawkins, Jr., describes how such ideas influenced American advertising design: 'As competitive pressure squeezed the innocence out of advertising, [art directors] became rougher and tougher. They were usually paste-up boys ... who had picked up a certain facility with a 6B pencil. Somehow, they discovered Gebrauchsgraphik magazine and the Bauhaus School. Their future was paved with Futura.

By the 1920s, graphic design was synonymous with advertising design. In Germany, France, and [taly, agencies and consortia extolled the virtues of the well-designed advertising image. Lucian Bernhard and others associated with the Berliner Plakat group, under the management of printing salesman and advertising agent Ernst Growald, invented artful ways to identify and announce new products. Even the cultural avant-gardes – Futurism, Dada, Surrealism – created design forms for advertising that expressed their particular visions and ideologies. Russian constructivism's most notable graphic achievements were advertisements for films and products. The 'Productivists' Alexander Rodchenko and Lasar El Lissitzky developed ways of composing typecase design elements on an advertising page that eventually influenced layout trends in capitalist nations. In Germany the Ring, a closeknit association of radically modern designers including Kurt Schwitters, Willi Baumeister, and Piet Zwart, attempted to sell to an expanding industrial clientele a 'new advertising' based on the New Typography.

For the avant-garde, producing advertising for technologically progressive corporations, which incidentally often sponsored artistic innovation, was such a modern idea that they proudly referred to themselves as 'artists for industry' or ‘advertising engineers.' Since advertising was at once the medium of progressive graphic expression and a growing industry, many of the most influential graphic design trade journals of the late 1920s and 1930s had names with advertising in their titles: De Reclame (the Netherlands and Germany), Reklama (Russia), Gebrauchsgraphik (Germany), Werbung (Germany), Publicité (France), Pubblicità d' Italia (ltaly), and Advertising Arts (United States). Even those trade magazines that focused on printing and other aspects of commercial art featured many articles on advertising.

## ICONS OF PROGRESS

"Today it is difficult to recapcure the intoxicating feeling of aesthetic possibility that once surrounded national advertising,' writes Jackson Lears about the American experience of the 1920s (Fables of Abundance, Basic Books, 1995). 'But for a while, especially during the early years of the courtship, it seemed to many artists as if advertising embodied exhilarating energy, rather than merely impoverishment of spirit.' As the modern movements sought to redefine the place of art and the role of the artist in society, advertising was seen not only as a medium ripe for reform, but also as a platform on which the graphic symbols of reform could be paraded along with the product being sold. Within this scenario, layout (or craft) was replaced by graphic design as an artistic endeavour, the engine of style. Lears points out that during this period, advertising art 'became detached from the product to which it referred. "Advertising design" became a value in and of itself, without reference to the sales that design was intended to generate.' Design still served, but was no longer a slave to copy-driven campaigns.

American advertising agencies gradually shifted their preference from capitalist realism,' or unambiguous if mythic representation, to surrealistic imagery that imbued the commodity with a fantastic aura. Refrigerators floating in space signified the abstract notion of progress as well as the fantasy of an ethereal, modern hotne. Industry became the totem of the American Century and advertising extolled its monumentality through modern and moderne graphic forms. As in the Soviet idealization of the industrial state, factories, smokestacks, and gigantic bearings and gears were heroicized as icons of progress. Advertising not only sold, but it also told a tale about America's aspirations.

American advertising had traditionally been dominated by hard-sell copy, and the shift in emphasis from words to art and design did not occur overnight. But it did change precipitously thanks to Earnest Elmo Calkins, founder of the Calkins & Holden advertising agency in New York. Calkins became interested in design reform in about 1908 and instituted his new ideas by engaging somne of the most widely admired magazine illustrators, including James Montgomery Flagg and J. C. Lyendecker, to render ads for common products. Later he led the field in the introduction of modern art (cubism and futurism) into advertising. He wrote profusely in trade journals and design and poster annuals and was a frequent contributor to London's Commercial Art annual.

In articles in general magazines, such as one titled 'Beauty the New Business Tool' (Atlantic Monthly, August 1927), Calkins expounded on the need for dynamic new design to help communicate the marketing innovation that became known as programmed or forced obsolescence.

Calkins, whom Jackson Lears calls the apostle of taste' and 'corporate connoisseur of artifice, introduced the consumerist idea that all products – from coffee tins to automobiles – should regularly shed their surface styles as an inducement to consumers to toss out the old and purchase the new. This pseudoscience of style engineering - a kind of design-based behavior modification - forced American industrial design to shift from its quaint Victorian ornamentalism to machineage modernism, and so encouraged the retooling of American industry. As Terry Smith states in Making the Modern: Industry, Art, and Design in America (University of Chicago Press, 1994), 'Advertising's parentage of U.S. type industrial design is traceable not only to their common economic purposes, but to the histories of the individuals who shaped the design profession. Most ... spent the 1920s as advertising artist-illustrators. Joseph Sinel, John Vassos, Raymond Loewy, and Walter Dorwin Teague are the outstanding examples.'

These pioneering practitioners are rarely cited in graphic design histories. Likewise Calkins, who is arguably the single most important figure in early twentieth-century American graphic design, makes no more than a few cameo appearances in such significant accounts as Philip B. Meggs's A History of Graphic Design, Richard Hollis's Graphic Design: A Concise History, and R. Roger Remington and Barbara J. Hodik's Nine Pioneers in American Graphic Design. Yet thanks to Calkins's promotion of European modern and modernistic design, along with his invention of the creative team of copywriter and designer, graphic design grew by leaps and bounds as a service to advertising in the late 1920s, prior to the Great Depression. During the 1930s it developed into a feld with its own integrity, canon, and luminaries. Although Calkins did not invent contemporary design standards, he codified them and urged their adoption. Advertising design infuenced modes of editorial and institutional design until World War II; afterwards editorial design surpassed advertising in originality.

The 1950s saw the beginnings of a schism between graphic and advertising design. Modern graphic design veered from mass advertising towards corporate and institutional communications and evolved into a rarefied practice decidedly more sophisticated than advertising design of the same period. Some advertising artist/designers were celebrated for individual achievement, but as Terry Smith writes, 'advertising designed primarily by an individual artist was becoming rare enough in the United States to be remarkable, exceptional, and expensive.' Over time such advertising luminaries as did exist – E. McKnight Kauffer and A. M. Cassandre being the prime examples - were detached from the history of advertising and made into heroes of graphic design.

A kind of sociocultural strarification began to distinguish the advertising designer from che graphic designer. Today, a common view among advertising people is that graphic designers simply 'do letterheads,' while graphic designers scorn their advertising counterparts for being ignorant about type. Job or class distinctions have driven a wedge between graphic designers and advertising designers and graphic design history has perpetuated the schism. While cultural scholars, consumer theorists, and media critics have done considerable work on the social, political, and psychological role of advertising in American culture, their writings are rarely cited in graphic design literature, as if issues of consumerism and marketing have no bearing on the 'art' of graphic design. This omission can be traced back to formal prejudices.

## THE FORMALIST LENS

If advertising is the function, then graphic design is the form. As Dwiggins pointed out in Layour in Advertising, "The advertising piece is not an end-product; it is an intermediate step in a process. The end product of advertising is not [design] - it is sales.' Yet selling is an ignored aspect of the story contemporary graphic design historians choose to tell – afer all, graphic designers are not salespeople but form-givers, which is perceived as a more culturally significant activity than being a mere advertising huckster. The problem is that an advertisement must be analyzed as a collaborative endeavor involving considerably more than just its graphics. So to avoid having to admit that graphic design has a subordinate role, the historical discourse has built up around graphic design as a formal endeavor. [...] The audience, which is rarely considered in formalist critiques of fine art, is likewise ignored in favor of aesthetic and sometimes philosophical or ideological considerations. This not only denies the public's role, but the client's as well.

In the first important historical text published in America, A History of Graphic Design (Van Nostrand Reinhold, second ed. 1992), Philip Meggs skirts the role of advertising. [...] In Meggs's otherwise painstaking historical account, advertising is portrayed not as the mother of graphic design, but as a midwife. While scant attention is given to the economic forces that forged the practice, certain key individuals who were nurtured by advertising are highlighted. Thus discussion of advertising is used merely to push the great master narrative along until the individual emerges from the birth canal as a graphic designer.

The problem is not that advertising cannot be read from a formalist viewpoint, but that history demands that its function and outcome be equally scrutinized. This turns the focus away from graphit design, and in order to refocus attention on their discipline, graphic design historians tend to treat advertising simply as a matter of surface. For instance, when one of Alexey Brodovitch's advertisements for the New York department store Saks Fifth Avenue is put under the historical/critical microscope, we learn about the typeface, lettering, and illustration, but not about how it functioned as a piece of advertising in a newspaper. Does consideration of its function diminish its artistic – or graphic design – value? By referring to it as 'advertising.' does the work shrink in stature from a paradigmatic piece of graphics to kitsch?

In Nine Pioneers in American Graphic Design (MIT Press, 1989), R. Roger Remington and Barbara J. Hodik marginalize Brodovitch's early advertising design when they write that. {...} 'He learned how to simplify the subject through analysis of the Purist painters. His posters for Martini, now in the Museum of Modern Art in New York, are among the major products of this fruitful period.' Nowhere do the authors acknowledge this work as advertising, even when they report that Brodovitch was invited to create a program in advertising design at the Philadelphia Schooł of Industrial Design. Wich rare exceptions, when advertising is included in graphic design history, it is as an incidental part of the consideration of individuals and artifacts. In my own Graphic Sryle: from Victorian to Postmodern (Harry N. Abrams 1988), che advertising artifact is treated merely as a vessel for style, not as a model from which to examine functional attributes.

Rernington and Hodik do, however, take a step towards integrating advertising and graphic design in cheir selection of Charles Coiner, art director of the Philadelphia-based ad agency N. W. Ayer, as one of their pioneers. Coiner brought modernity to America's oldest advertising agency, introducing fine art to the repertoire and hiring some of America's leading graphic designers, such as Leo Lionni and Alexey Brodovitch, to conceive and style print ads. The authors give him full credit for his contribution to his firm's success: 'Ayer clients received forty-one awards during the first nineteen years of exhibitions by art directors ... Ayer pioneered the production of "beautiful” ads through campaigns for Cannon Mills, Caterpillar Tractor, Climax Molybdenum, French Line, Marcus lewelers, DeBeers Diamonds, and Capehart.' Yet their text - the only contemporary study of this significant advertising pioneer (a profile appeared in Portfolio in 1950) - reads more as a list of achievements than an analysis of advertising's, and by extension Coiner's, role in the larger culrure. Advertising is used as a backdrop to his endeavor rather chan a lens through which consumer culture can be explored. Despite Coiner's inclusion, advertising remains marginalized.

Yet Nine Pioneers provides a key insight inco how graphic design began to break from advertising during che war and how advertising designers emerged as creative forces afterwards. 'During the war, very few goods were available for consumer purchase. Advertising had nothing to sell. When the war ended, the scene changed dramatically to a buyer's market. Designers finally had the opportunity to express their ideas in the spheres of advertising and communications.' That wartime austerity offered other creative challenges to the advertising industry that were consequential to graphic design is conveniently overlooked.

Of the histories discussed here, only Richard Hollis's Graphic Design: A Concise History (Thames and Hudson, 1994) openly addresses the role of advertising. 'In the 1930s, it had been art directors who had established graphic design, mainly in advertising and magazine layouts.' Hollis concisely argues the importance of the 'New Advertising' – the integrated design – and concept-driven carnpaigns of the late 1950s and 1960s. He focuses on the key art directors – Paul Rand and Gene Federico -- and campaigns such as Doyle Dane Bernbach's for Volkswagen, explaining this work as important because it made the spectator active, not passive. But Hollis's brief discussion avoids the broader implications of advertising, focusing instead on iconoclasts who are soon positioned in his narrative as graphic design exemplars.

This is the inevitable paradox of graphic design history. Since advertising is marginalized, the few acknowledged advertising design leaders must somehow be presented as graphic design leaders.

For instance, the majority of work by Lou Dorfsman, the former art director of CBS

Radio and Television, is institutional and trade advertising, through which he not only set new typographic standards, but also increased business. Although the success of his ads is sometimes cited anecdotally in references to his career, Dorfsman is usually presented as either a typographer or an art director, rarely as an advertising man. Likewise Herb Lubalin, the art director of Suddler & Hennesy before branching out into edicorial and type design, is routinely discussed as a typographic pioneer who, incidentally, broke new ground in pharmaceutical advertising. Analyzing such figures' design as a milestone in the marriage of type and image avoids the stigma of it being advertising. Gene Federico and George Lois, both of whom owned ad agencies, are presented as creative forces who transcended the advertising feld. Federico was a great typographer, Lois a brilliant art director, and, for the purposes of design history, they achieved cheir status in spite of their profession.

Graphic designers have distanced themselves from advertising in the same way that children put as much space as possible berween themselves and their parents. And indeed, graphic design did develop its own characteristics. American advertising was originally copy-based and unresponsive to design, and though reformers like Calkins (and later Bill Bernbach) encouraged the seamless integration of words, pictures, and design, the copy, slogan, and jingle have been the driving forces. From the turn of the century, would-be journalists and novelists were recruited as copywriters, giving the field a certain faux-literary cast. Eventually, advertising developed its own stereotypical professionals, who even today are distinct from graphic design professionals.

The tilting of the scales towards the copydriven 'big idea' is one reason why advertising histories veer away from extensive analysis of graphic design. Another issue is quality as defined by the two felds - a great advertising campaign may noc be exceptional graphic design, while a superb piece of graphic design may mask a poor advertising campaign. [...]

Although the Lucky Strike package designed by Raymond Loewy and the Eve Cigarette package designed by Herb Lubalin and Ernie Smith are featured as design artifacts, the advertising campaigns that sold the designs have been ignored. Graphic design historians are prudishly selective in what they discuss. They base decisions on ideal formal attributes - what is inherently interesting from a design perspective. They write as though consumerism is wicked – us (the canon) versus them (the mass) underscores graphic design history. Yet by eliminating advertising, design history loses rich insights into visual culture.

One of the touchstones of inclusion in graphic design histories is whether or not a work broke the stranglehold of commercial convention. Paul Rand's advertisements for Orbachs, for instance, have become part of the canon not because they were effective advertising, but because they assaulted antiquity. But this criterion is not the only way to read advertising design. Like some of the European modernists before him, Rand introduced principles of modern art into advertising. bringing the rarefied avant-garde to ordinary citizens. In Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920–1940 (University of California, 1985), Roland Marchand describes the mainstreaming of the avant-garde as a significant marketing ploy that both introduced and made it frivolous. This important aspect of graphic design history can only be told if certain unheroic artifacts are included in the narrative. To refer to or reproduce only billboards, posters, and other aesthetically acceptable tokens of advertising is not enough.

In the 1930s, the distinction berween advertising art and graphic design was virtually nonexistent. While typography was often written about as a separaté aesthetic field, it was also addressed in terms of its function in advertising. Moreover, whether discussing a book jacker, record sleeve, poster, brochure, magazine, or any other form of graphic endeavor, the word ‘advertising' was not regarded as derisive.

Today, advertising is not totally ignored – many trade magazines cover it – but it is rarely integrated into the broader analysis of graphic design. While certain aspects of advertising – marketing. demographics, and other pseudosciences – are less important to graphic design history, considerably more consumerist theory, media criticism, and even perceptual psychology would be useful in understanding the form and function of graphic design through the advertising lens. Likewise aeschetic theories can be applied through che lens of design to put a visually bereft advertising history into clearer focus.

During the past decade there have been calls to develop new narratives and to readdress graphic design history through feminist, ethnic, racial, postcolonialist, post-structuralist, and numerous other politically correct perspectives. There are many ways to slice a pie, but before unveiling too many subtexts, it is perhaps first useful to reconcile a mother and her child.

Advertising and graphic design have more in common than even the postmodern trend for vernacularism (or the aestheticization of timeworn artifacts) reveals. Advertising and graphic design are equally concerned with selling, communicating, and entertaining. To appreciate one, the other is imperative. But more important, if graphic design history does not expand to include advertising and other related studies, it will ultimately succumb to the dead-end thinking that will be che inevitable consequence of being arrested in a state of continual adolescence.

## NOTE

Extracted from Heller, S., 'Advertising, Mother of Graphic Design', Eye 17(5) (1995). Reprinted courtesy of Eye magazine Ltd., eyemagazine.com/

# 'DECORATORS MAY BE COMPARED TO DOCTORS', AN ANALYSIS OF RHODA AND AGNES GARRETT'S SUGGESTIONS FOR HOUSE DECORATION IN PAINTING, WOODWORK AND FURNITURE (1876)

Emma Ferry (2003)

