# Rebecca Houze / OPERATING MANUAL FOR SPACESHIP EARTH / NOTE / HOW TO OUTMODE A \$4,000 VEHICLE IN TWO YEARS, FROM THE WASTE MAKERS / Vance Packard (1960) / [...]

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# Rebecca Houze

Roughly a century after Arts and Crafts theorists had criticized the dehumnanizing and wasteful excesses of industrialization, twentieth-century critics, designers, historians, manufacturers and concerned citizens again began to raise awareness of the environmental crisis that now holds our planet in peril. American biologist and writer Rachel Carson drew attention to the dangerous results of chemical pesticides in her 1962 book Silent Spring, which provoked public outcry and inspired a grassroots environmental movement in the United States that led to a nationwide ban on the use of DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane), and the establishment of the Clean Air Act of 1963 and Environmental Protection Agency in 1970. That same year the first Earth Day was celebrated. More than twenty years later, the first United Nations Earth Summit was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992. The rapid depletion of natural resources, mass extinction of plant and animal life and global warming that threatens to change earth's climate and destroy ecosystems around the world have been understood by many to be a direct result of the industrialism that gave birth to modern design. Numerous organizations have since been established around the world specifically to rethink design in light of new ecological awareness and reshape it for a sustainable future.

This section begins with an extract from Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth, written in 1969 by the visionary American archirect and designer R. Buckminster Fuller, who first developed his theories of sustainability with models for 'Dymaxion' houses and cars in the 1920s and geodesic domes in the 1940s. In 'Spaceship Earth', Fuller conceives of the planet as both organic sustainer of life and technological wonder that we must care for and maintain in order for humanity continue to exist.

American social critic and journalist Vance Packard caused a sensation with his 1957 book The Hidden Persuaders, which claimed that the advertising industry used psychoanalytic methods to play upon our fears and desires, terpting us to buy. Packard's ideas, which implicated the designer in the corrosive and deleterious mechanisrn of manipulative advertising, were indicative of a growing discomfort within the design community itself. 'First Things First: A Manifesto' (1964), signed by twenty-rwo prominent graphic designers, including Ken Garland and Anthony Froshaug, asserted, 'we have reached a saturation point at which the high-pitched scream of consumer selling is no more than sheer noise ... We think that there are other things more worth using our skill and experience on.' In 2000, 'First Things First', was revised and reissued, adding, 'Unprecedented environmental, social and cultural crises demand our attention ... We propose a reversal of priorities in favour of more useful, lasting and democratic forms of communication – a mindshift away from product marketing and toward the exploration and production of a new kind of meaning.

Packard's The Waste Makers (1960) was a scathing critique of America's gluttonous throwaway culture, unethical manufacturing practices, and depletion of natural resources. In the selection reproduced here, 'How to Outmode a \$4,000 Vehicle in Two Years', Packard criticizes the automobile industry's manipulation of the consumption cycle through 'dynamic obsolescence'. In the 1950s, car manufacturers, he argues, finding little need for further mechanical innovation in their products, put their energies into making stylistic changes to each new model by adding different colours, squashing the body into Alatter shapes, adding decorative headlights, voluptuous chrorne detailing and sharper tailfins. Packard echoed Adolf Loos in his criticism of such changes, akin to che stylistic changes in women's fashions which contributed to a more rapid devaluing of vehicles that were otherwise in good working order Aside from the questionable ethical strategy of increasing sales through needless production, stylistic obsolescence sometimes led to manufacturing changes that were dangerous in other ways. In order to accommodate an increasingly Aattened silhouette, for example, General Motors produced the Corvair with a rear-end motor. The Corvair, which became notorious for its deadly tendency to flip, was the impetus for consumer advocate Ralph Nader's influential book Unsafe at Any Speed: The Designed-In Dangers of the American Automobile (1965).

Austrian-American industrial designer Victor Papanek criticized the design profession for ignoring human need as well as that of the natural environment of planet earth in his collection of essays Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change (1971). In 'Do-it-Yourself Murder: The Social and Moral Responsibilities of the Designer', Papanek picks up on Packard's criticism of stylistic obsolescence, and argues that the responsible designer, rather than stimulating the whims of the wealthiest fraction with streamlined toasters, should find solutions to living improvements in the developing world, and among the overlooked 'minority', who actually constitute the majority of the human population. Simple irrigation pumps made of old tires, ergonomic chairs for restless schoolchildren, contraceptive packaging for the illiterate and low-cost educational television sets were among the creative design projects he supported.

Whereas Fuller, Packard and Papanek each approached design as designers or critics, Jeffrey Meikle looks at the plastics industry from the point of view of a historian. His account, based on trade and popular literature, as well as archival documents, traces the development of imitative synthetic materials, from celluloid in the nineteenth century to Bakelite in the 1930s to the explosion of industrial chemical products in the 1960s. The section extracted here, 'Material Doubts and Plastic Fallout', deals with the backlash against the plastics industry as a result of new ecological awareness. Critics of plastics warned against the expensive wastefulness of petroleum fuel, unsightly overflowing landfills, children smothered by clinging plastic laundry bags, and fatal destruction of land, air, water, plant, animal and human life as a result of toxic pollution.

By the 1980s and 1990s, our impact on the environment began to be seen as the responsibility not only of the designer or government regulation but of the consumer as well. Joel Makower's The Green Consumer Supermarket Guide, teminiscent of the Whole Earth Catalogue project, with contributions from John Elkington and Julie Hailes (1991), offered simple ways for consumers to make more educated choices about the products they purchased, from dishwashing detergents to juice boxes to batteries. By selecting items produced by companies with echical manufacturing records, made with non-toxic ingredients and packaged in recyclable containers, consumers could exert pressure on industry to design in a more sustainable manner. In the past century we have stuffed landfills with garbage In 'Redefning Rubbish: Commodity Disposal and Sourcing', in Second Hand Culrures (2003), Nicky Gregson and Louise Crewe explore what happens to the discarded trash of our throwaway culture when it becomes reabsorbed as a new type of desirable object

As both the cause and effect of industrialization, what role will design play in the future? Today, 'green' design has become more than a fashionable trend. In the wake of human-caused environmental catastrophe, and of natural disaster insufficiently planned for, ecologically sensitive design is now the only option. Architect William McDonough sees the natural world, like R. Buckminster Fuller before him, as the model for design and as the supplier of a perpetually renewable energy source – the sun. In The Hannover Principles written for the 1992 Earth Summit, William McDonough summarizes the view that we are one among many species who must coexist, and chat we must design 'for all children, of all species, for all tire'.

# OPERATING MANUAL FOR SPACESHIP EARTH

R. Buckminster Fuller (1969)

Our little Spaceship Earth is only eight thousand miles in diameter, which is almost a negligible dimension in the great vastness of space. Our nearest star – our energy-supplying mother-ship, the Sun - is ninety-two million miles away, and the nearest star is one hundred thousand times further away. It takes approximately four and one third years for light to get to us from the next nearest energy supply ship star. That is the kind of space-distanced pattern we are Aying. Our little Spaceship Earth is right now traveling at sixty thousand miles an hour around the sun and is also spinning axially, which, at the latitude of Washington, D.C., adds approximately one thousand miles per hour to our motion. Each minute we both spin at one hundred miles and zip in orbit at one thousand miles. That is a whole lot of spin and zip. When we launch our rocketed space capsules at fifteen thousand miles an hour, that additional acceleration speed we give the rocket to attain its own orbit around our speeding Spaceship Earth is only one-fourth greater than the speed of our big planetary spaceship. Spaceship Earth was so extraordinarily well invented and designed that to our knowledge humans have been on board it for two million years not even knowing that they were on board a ship. And our spaceship is so superbly designed as to be able to keep life regenerating on board despite the phenomenon, entropy, by which all local physical systers lose energy. So we have to obtain our biological life-regenerating energy from another spaceship: the sun.

Our sun is Alying in company with us, within the vast reaches of the Galactic system, at just the right distance to give us enough radiation to keep us alive, yet not close enough to burn us up. And the whole scheme of Spaceship Earth and its live passengers is so superbly designed that the Van Allen belts, which we didn't even know we had until yesterday, filter the sun and other star radiation which as it impinges upon our spherical ramparts is so concentrated that if we went nakedly outside the Van Allen belts it would kill us. Our Spaceship Earth's designed infusion of that radiant energy of the stars is processed in such a way that you and I can carry on safely. You and I can go out and take a sunbath, bur are unable to take in enough energy through our skins to keep alive. So part of che invention of the Spaceship Earth and its biological life-sustaining is that the vegerarion on the land and the algae in the sea, employing photosynthesis, are designed to impound the life-regenerating energy for us to adequate amount.

But we can't eat all the vegetation. As a matter of fact, we can eat very little of it. We can't eat the bark nor wood of the trees nor the grasses. But insects can eat these, and there are many other animals and creatures that can. We get the energy relayed to us by taking the milk and meat from the animals. The animals can eat the vegetation, and there are a few of the fruits and tender vegetation petals and seeds that we can eat. We have learned to cultivate more of those botanical edibles by genetical inbreeding.

That we are endowed with such intuitive and intellectual capabilities as that of discovering the genes and che R.N.A. and D.N.A. and other fundamental principles governing the fundamental design controls of life systems as well as of nuclear energy and chemical strucruring is part of the extraordinary design of the Spaceship Earth, its equipment, passengers, and internal support systems. It is therefore paradoxical but strategically explicable, as we shall see, that up to now we have been mis-using, abusing, and polluting this extraordinary chemical energy-interchanging system for successfully regenerating all life aboard our planetary spaceship.

One of the interesting things to me about our spaceship is that it is a mechanical vehicle, just as is an automobile. If you own an automobile, you realize that you must put oil and gas into it, and you must put water in the radiaror and take care of the car as a whole. You begin to develop quite a little thermodynamic sense. You know that you're either going to have to keep the machine in good order or it's going to be in trouble and fail to function. We have not been seeing our Spaceship Earth as an integrally-designed machine which to be persistently successful must be comprehended and serviced in total.

Now there is one outstandingly important fact regarding Spaceship Earth, and that is that no instruction book came with it. I think it's very significant that there is no instruction book for successfully operating our ship. In view of the infinite attention to all other details displayed by our ship, it must be taken as deliberate and purposeful that an instruction book was omitted. Lack of instruction has forced us to find that there are two kinds of berries – red berries that will kill us and red berries that will nourish us. And we had to find out ways of telling which-was-which red berry before we ate it or otherwise we would die. So we were forced, because of a lack of an instruction book, to use our intellect, which is our supreme faculty, to devise scientific experimental procedures and to interpret effectively the significance of the experimental findings. Thus, because the instruction manual was missing we are learning how we safely can anticipate the consequences of an increasing number of alternative ways of extending our satisfactory survival and growth-both physical and metaphysical.

Quite clearly, all of life as designed and born is utterly helpless at the moment of birth. The humnan child stays helpless longer than does the young of any other species. Apparently it is part of the invention "man" that he is meant to be utterly helpless through cerrain anthropological phases and that, when he begins to be able to get on a little better, he is meant to discover some of the physical leverage-multiplying principles inherent in [thel universe as well as the many nonobvious resources around him which will further compoundingly multiply his knowledge-regenerating and life-fostering advantages.

1 would say that designed into this Spaceship Earth's total wealth was a big safety factor which allowed man to be very ignorant for a long time until he had amassed enough experiences from which to extract progressively the system of generalized principles governing the increases of energy(-]managing advantages over environment. The designed omission of the instruction book on how to operate and maintain Spaceship Earth and its complex life-supporting and regenerating systems has forced man to discover retrospectively just what his most important forward capabilities are. His intellect had to discover itself. Intellect in turn had to compound the facts of his experience. Comprehensive reviews of the compounded facts of experiences by intellect brought forth awareness of the generalized principles underlying all special and only superficially-sensed experiences. Objective employment of those generalized principles in rearranging the physical resources of environment seems to be leading to humanity's eventually toral success and readiness to cope with far vaster problems of universe.

To comprehend this total scheme we note that long ago a man went through the woods, as you may have done, and I certainly have, trying to find the shortest way through the woods in a given direction. He found trees fallen across his path. He climbed over those crisscrossed trees and suddenly found himself poised on a tree that was slowly teetering. It happened to be lying across another great tree, and the other end of the tree on which he found himself teetering lay under a third great fallen tree. As he teetered he saw the third big tree lifting. It seemed impossible to him. He went over and tried using his own muscles to lift that great tree. He couldn't budge it. Then he climbed back atop the first smaller tree, purposefully teetering it, and surely enough it again elevated the larger tree. I'm certain that the first man who found such a tree thought that it was a magic tree, and may have dragged it home and erected it as man's first totem. It was probably a long time before he learned that any stout tree would do, and thus extracted the concept of the generalized principle of leverage out of all his earlier successive special-case experiences with such accidental discoveries. Only as he learned to generalize fundamental principles of physical universe did man learn to use his intellect effectively

Once man comprehended that any tree would serve as a lever his intellectual advantages accelerated. Man freed of special-case superstition by intellect has had his survival potentials multiplied millions fold. By virtue of the leverage principles in gears, pulleys, transistors, and so forth, it is literally possible to do more with less in a multitude of physio-chemical ways. Possibly it was this intellectual augmentation of humanity's survival and success through the metaphysical perception of generalized principles which may be objectively employed that Christ was trying to teach in the obscurely told story of the loaves and the fishes.

## NOTE

Reproduced from Buckminster Fuller, R., Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth, Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 1969, pp. 49–56. Reprinted by permission of the Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller.

# HOW TO OUTMODE A \$4,000 VEHICLE IN TWO YEARS, FROM THE WASTE MAKERS

# Vance Packard (1960)

One of the strangest, yet best recognized, secrets of Detroit is 'planned obsolescence' - a new model every year. - BUSINESS WEEK

An auto-parts dealer in Springfield, Illinois, offered me the opinion that as far as he could figure the United States motorcar had become "a women's fashion item." And an advertising executive working on a motorcar account confessed: "You want to know what sells cars today? It's style, period!" The advertisements certainly seemed to spell out his conviction. Some samples

Ford: "Nothing Newer in The World of Style" - or later, “Vogue magazine says Ford is a Fashion Success."

Chevrolet: "Styling That Sets a New Style"

De Soto: "Best dressed Car of the year"

Oldsmobile: "Start of a New Styling Cycle."

When the new 1960 Pontiac was unveiled, The New York Times described its sculptured lines – "a horizontal V front" – and added this observation: "Emphasis is almost entirely on styling, for there are no major mechanical changes."

The aupomobile industry was the first major group to become fascinated with the increased sales that might be achieved by imitating the women'sfashion stylists. Decades ago, General Motors took the automotive leadership from Henry Ford I by successfully insisting that competition be on the basis of styling rather than pricing. Mr. Ford in fifteen years had brought the price of his Model T motorcar down from \$780 to \$290, by sticking to a basic design except for minor changes. Such fantastical dedication to the ideal of an ever-lower price tag made competition on the basis of price most unattractive. Competitors such as General Motors did not relish trying to match Old Henry in either production know-how or pricing, so they emphasized a yearly change and a variety to choose from.

In the twenties and chirties, significant technological innovations such as balloon tires, shock absorbers, and four-wheel brakes were available almost every year to captivate the public. By the early fifties, however, the automnobile industry was finding itself with fewer and fewer significant technological improvements that it felt were feasible to offer the public. Consequently, at all the major automotive headquarters - Ford now included - more and more dependence was placed on styling. One aim was to create through styling "dynamic obsolescence," to use the phrase of the chief of General Motors styling, Harley Earl. The motorcar makers began "running up and down stairs," as fashion merchandiser Alfred Daniels put it.

"New" became the key word as the manufacturers sought to make car owners feel like old fuds in any vehicle more than two years old. When the 1957 motorcars were launched, Chrysler revealed that it had "The Newest New Cars in 20 Years." Nash had "The World's Newest ... Car." And

Pontiac was “Complerely New From Power to Personality." A columnist for Advertising Age noted that Buick - which he called the least changed of the new models – had used the word “new" twenty times in an advertisement. He added: "We find it difficult to assume that such complete and utter nonsense is justified by the need to sell 7,000,000 cars in 1957, If our national prosperity is to be founded on such fanciful, fairyland stuff as this, how real and tangible can our prosperity be?"

That, indeed, seemed a fair question. And glory be to an advertising-industry man for raising it!

The intensified preoccupation with obsolescence-through-style brought new power to the automobile stylists and more than a litrle grumbling from engineers, who felt they were receiving less and less attention when it came to fixing the format of automobiles. General Motors' Mr. Earl defined the stylist, incidentally, as “a man who is dissatisfied with everything." At Ford, styling was taken away from engineering and made a separate department. The \$200,000-a-year head of this styling department, George W. Walker - "the Cellini of Chrome" – was at one time a stylist for women's clothing. When the 1958 models were launched, he frankly conceded that he designed his cars primarily for women. "They are naturally style conscious," he said, and even though they may not drive the car in many cases they seern to have a major say in the choice of a new car

When the president of General Motors found himself testifying before a Senate subcommittee in the late fifties, he alluded to the “application of fancification to our automobiles." At another sitting he said, "Styling has become increasingly important in determining the share of the market."

Let us pause and examine in some detail just how "fancification" and other styling devices were systematized to produce obsolescence of desirability in the traveling machines made in the United States.

To comprehend the strategic mapping going on behind all the commotion about styling, we need first of alt to understand the shell game

Detroit plays with the public. The body shell is crucial to obsolescence planning.

If motorcar salesmen had their way, automobile makers would issue a vehicle that at least looks brand new each year or half year. Unfortunately for them, it costs many, many millions of dollars for retooling to overhaul a motorcar's physical form in any fundamental way. Consequently, even in seeking the superficial outer appearances of change, the motorcar makers have depended to a large extent upon illusion created by changes of decoration rather chan of the body shell.

As recently as 1956, the Detroit motorcar makers customarily made a major overhaul in their shel only every third year. During the two intervening annual models they simply rejiggered grilles, lights, fenders, and so on. By 1957, the industry was heading toward an overhaul of the shell every second year. One year was becoming known as the year for "basic" change and the other the year for the "trim" change.

And by 1958, insiders were whispering the news - stunning to competitors – that General Motors was going to overhaul the shells of its fve motorcars every single year. Each car was to be a new car each year. General Motors was able to achieve this break-through by an interesting expedient made possible by its gargantuan size. It chose to create a new look for its five cars each year by sacrificing some of the distinctiveness in the appearance of each of the five, Chevrolec, Pontiac, Oldsmobile, Buick, Cadillac. (This was before the compacts.) In short, all General Motors cars would bear more than a little family resemblance. The bold decision was made to bring out a brand new shell each year and to use it for all five cars. Almost all models of all five cars each year would have substantially the same body. The basic body shell was to be stretched amidship about three inches for some of the big Cadillacs and Buicks. Later, there were reports that the three "luxury" compacts, which General Morors began unveiling in late 1960, would also have their own common body shell.

When General Motors' five standard-size cars for 1959 were unveiled, Joseph Callahan, the engineering editor of Automotive News, reported that "at least 12 important stampings are identified on all 5 cars."1 Among the twelve he mentioned were a number of door panels, the upper back panel, three cowl panels.

"The big advantage of the common body," he explained, "is that the manufacturer of a multiple line of cars can save some of the millions it annually spends to create style obsolescence."

Obviously the major hazard in such an approach was the possible appearance of sameness in all General Motors motorcars. Action was taken to reduce this hazard by attaching different trimmings to the basic shell. Strips of painted metal were attached to the doors to produce distinctive sculptured looks. And Callahan added "Differences also were produced by using a variety of chrome trim, rear deck lids, quarter panels, bumper and bumper guards. Of course, many interchangeable parts are reworked for different cars and models. Reworking is achieved by chang ing the location of holes, making minor changes of shape, attaching extra pieces, etc.

Automotive insiders began speculating – and still are - whether the less gigantic Ford and Chrysler companies would be able to follow General Motors' all-new-shell-every-year program. A Senate subcommittee report on "Administered Prices" in the automobile field expressed concern abour General Motors' move. It stated: "General Morors ... alone has the financial resources to play this form of nonprice competition to the full: all other companies have good cause to be deeply alarmed over the future."

Meanwhile, advertising journals surmised that eventually the automobile industry might be able to reach a new-car-every-six-months cycle of innovation.

How could the stylists know what shell to use when they had to design at least three years ahead of che car's unveiling? The styling experts at General Motors held an advantage in trying to anticipate - without exercising more than moderate clairvoyance – what shell or silhouette was likely to be considered smart looking by the public three years hence. General Motors bought about half of all automobile advertising. Since the silhouette had to be frozen so far in advance of unveiling, General Motors was aided in securing a favorable response from the public three years later by its superior image-building power. As the Senate report pointed out: "Because of its great sales volume it [General Motors] has an immense impact in framing consumer attitudes toward style changes." During Senate hearings George Romney, president of the then-small American Motors, which pioneered the American-built compacts, testified to General Motors' power to mold public taste when he talked about the wraparound windshield – and the "millinery" aspect of car making. He said that if a small company had introduced the wrap-around, it probably would have been a lop. It took a big company to swing it. Familiarity, he said, begins acceptance. Mr. Romney then made chis remarkable comment:

"Now, Senator, in chis millinery aspect, in the fashion aspect, a company doing 45 to 50 per cent of the business can make an aspect of car appearance a necessary earmark of product acceptance by the public just as a hat manufacturer – a woman's hat manufacturer - who sold 50 per cent of the hats would have a much easier time of making all other hat manufacturers put cherries on their hats if the cherries were decided by it to be the fashion note for the year." (Mr. Romney spent several heartbreaking years trying to interest the American public in the rationality of compacts and probably succeeded only because of the dazzling logic of his case – and the fact that many American sophisticates had turned to small foreign cars for relief from Detroit's gaudy giantism. This made it psychologically safe for Americans to be seen in small cars.)

During most of the fifties, the General Motors stylists decided that the trend in silhouettes should be toward cars that were ever longer, ever lower. and ever wilder at the extremities. By 1959, one automobile executive was confessing: "In length we have hit the end of the runway." A Chicago official estimated that just getcing cars back to the postwar length would release eight hundred miles of street space for parking. There was no question, however, that millions of Americans still wanted the biggest-looking car they could get, particularly if they lived in wide-open areas where parking was not a serious and chronic problem.

Detroit producers who tried to bring out cars that defied the direction in styling general Motors had set – such as Chrysler in the early fifties – were badly mauled.

By the late fifties, Poiret's law that all fashion ends in excess was indubitably being demonstrated in the automotive field. The Big Three stylists were speculating how many more inches they could lower the silhouette before snapping the human endurance and overstraining cheir own ingenuity. A four-wheeled vehicle can be squashed only so far. They used smaller wheels. They sacrificed rigidity. Some of ther spread the wheels still further apart as the only way left to get the engine lower. Meanwhile, the hump down the middle grew. The joke spread that the front sear of che new wide, wide cars could hold rwo grownups and a midget. One reason General Motors accepted the revolutionary idea of putting a rear-end motor in its Corvair was that this helped solve the hump problem.

As early as 1957, Automotive Industries reported that the low silhouette had become so low that "many people feel we have reached bottom." It added, however, "There is a feeling that stylists are aiming ever lower." The sight line of drivers had dropped nine inches below the sight line of prewar autos. The following year, The Harvard Business Review carried an illuminating paper on product styling by Dwight E. Robinson, professor of business administration at the University of Washington. His investigations had taken him, among other places, to Detroit's secretive studios for styling. He reported: "Stylists recognize that the extreme limits on lowness imposed by the human physique are only a few inches away and [will] come close to realization in the 1960 models."

By 1959, Pontiac's Bonneville hardtop stood just four and a half feet high, a full foot lower than the Pontiac of a decade earlier. Some drivers of late-model makes of cars – where seats were nearly a half foot closer to the floor than they had been a decade earlier – reported they were wearing bicycle clips to keep their pant cuffs from dragging on the floor. People also began discovering that sitting in a low-seated car throws more of the weight onto the end of the spine, a more tiring position for long trips.

In July, 1959, The Wall Street Journal reported an astonishing incident that indicated the style swing must certainly finally be approaching its nadir. At General Motors' own annual meeting, shareholders stood up and lamented their personal difficulties in trying to work their bodies into late-model General Motors cars. One man from New Jersey exclaimed, "I bumped my knee and my head getting into" a 1959 Oldsmobile. He was received by a burst of applause. An averagesized man from Massachusetts exclaimed that he found he couldn't sit in a 1959 Buick with his hat on. And he added: "It's a disgrace for a woman to have to get in and out of such low cars."

The report commented that General Motors Chairman Frederic G. Donner "listened impassively and without comment" to these laments.

Six months earlier, the same Mr. Douner was quoted in Sales Management as supporting what it referred to as “artificial obsolescence." Mr. Donner was reported stating, “if it had not been for the annual model change, the automobile as we know it today would not be produced in volume and would be priced so that relatively few could afford to own one. Our customers would have no incentive or reason to buy a new car until their old one wore out." He clearly was concerned about giving car owners "an incentive or reason" to turn in their old cars before they wore out physically.

Meanwhile, stylists were striving to justify the new low, low cars on high philosophic or sound functional grounds. A Chrysler stylist told a Detroit gathering of the Society of Automobile Engineers thar the low silhouette was all a part of a broad trend to the "low look" in contemporary design. He cited everything from ranch houses to sofas. Others cited the low center of gravity in the new cars as a great aid in cornering. Actually, the banked curves of most of the recently built highways made this a puny plus factor.

As for the trend to wildness at the extremities, this was evidently related stylistically to squashing down the midsection. If you believed the motorcar advertisements, you assumed there was sound functional reason for the fantastic outcropping of tail fins on motorcars in the late fifties. The fins were said to stabilize a moving car in a crosswind. Professor Robinson commented: "I found few designers in Detroit willing to say there is much scientific support for these claims."

Instead, Professor Robinson concluded that the fins began jutting up on the drawing boards as the stylists sought to push the midsection lower and lower. He asserted: "The analogy between this squashing effect and tight lacing at the waist and expansion of the skirt in the crinoline era is almost irresistible." He went on to say, "The tail fin - supposedly derived from the airplane tail – may be interpreted as the last resort of over-extension, an outcropping that quite seriously serves much the same purpose as the bustle or the train."

## [...]

The Big Three of Detroit were spending more than a billion dollars a year to put a new dress on their cars each year. To put it another way, since the consumer of course pays in the end, the average new-car buyer was paying more than two hundred dollars extra to cover the annual cost of restyling the cars. And this did not include the actual cost of the non-functional "brightwork" or "goop" placed on the cars. That added at least another hundred dollars.

A further cost of the annual styling was the loss in quality. Laurence Crooks of Consumers Union put it this way: "The annual model change has a great deal to do with lack of quality in cars, and any speeding up of this changing... always redounds to the discredit of the cars. It takes a long time to perfect a car and get the bugs out of it."

Because of all these factors related to style change, American cars were declining in value ar a precipitous rate. The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia made a study of this aging problem of "second-hand sirens" and concluded that motorcars were depreciating twice as fast as they reasonably should. It explained:3 "Because yearly model changes make a car look older than it actually is, mechanically speaking, the price drops faster than the remaining mileage potential ... A car four years old with roughly two-thirds of its active life left usually sells for about one-third of its original price. Variety and change accelerate obsolescence."

