# INTRODUCTION

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

## INTRODUCTION

An assessment of recent work on Jamaican dancehall culture reveals the absence of any systematic analysis of the role that fashion and adornment play in the culture. This is surprising given that fashion is a prominent and constitutive part of the culture and the site for vigorous debate about lower-class women's morality and sexuality in Jamaica. This failure can only be attributed to the fact that analyses of dancehall culture have generally focused on lyrical content, the sound system and the economic production of music.' I suggest that underlying this focus is the implicit assumption that music equates with interiority, language and "deep" meaning. In contrast, adornment and fashion are considered to elude or even destroy meaning. Therefore, to invest energy on adornment conjures up images of superficial, transient and frivolous activities undertaken only by women,² in contrast to the serious male world of ideas connoted by music production. While undeniably significant for a critical analysis of dancehall culture, a continued over-emphasis on music and lyrical content, to the neglect of other aspects of the culture, unwittingly privileges the activities of men and their interpretation of the culture to the exclusion of women.3

In this article, I want to shift attention away from lyrical content and to examine the embodied practices that emerged in the late 1980s to the end of the 1990s in Jamaica. I argue that working-class Black women in Jamaica use fashion to fabricate a space for the presentation of self-identity and assertion of agency. Through adornment, dancehall women have been able to address creatively the anxiety, violence and joy of daily life. At the same time, they have been able to register historical, cultural, economic and cechnological changes through their bodies. Prior to speech or any written manifesto, different modes of adornment are employed to contest society's representation of and expectation about lower-class leisure activity, morality and sexual expression. Fashion allows dancehall women to challenge the patriarchal, class-based and (Christian and Rastafarian) puritanical logic operating in Jamaica. Of course, the wider context in which this articulation of social relations has taken place is that of socio-political and economic realities which includes continued anti-black racism, black nationalism and global cultural and economic restructuring. In this sense, far from fashion being meaningless, superficial and unworthy of cultural analysis, it allows working-class black women to invest their everyday lived realities with multiple meanings and processes which links them to both the speccacular ferishism of global consumerism and mass media semiosis as well as the African love of ceremonial pomp and pageantry.

The fact that dancehall women most often do not consciously adhere to this critical position in their speech, nor readily perceive their action as jamming the hegemonic syntax, is quite beside the point." Phenomenology teaches us that there is ofen a gap between intentional action and explicit, self-aware interpretation.' Far from imputing a kind of rational, contestive voluntarism to dancehall women, I suggest that the significance and meaning of their action as a form of contestation is not always available for self-articulation. As such, my account and interpretation of the meaning of fashion and adornment in the culture is not wholly circumscribed by empirical enquiry into conscious explanation, speech acts, or verbalized discourse. Rather, my analysis is based on both empirical engagement and my own analysis of the expressive body in the culture. This body, its desires and perceptions are seldom fully disclosed within speech; rather, they are made manifest in a variety of bodily practices.

