# Grace Lees-Maffei / TAKING STOCK IN DESIGN HISTORY Fran Hannah and Tim Putnam (1980) / THE FORMATION OF DESIGN HISTORY ECLECTICISM / AESTHETIC EVALUATION / INNOVATION AND INFLUENCE / THE NATURE OF 'DESIGN / CONCLUSIÓN

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# Grace Lees-Maffei

Design history has its foundations in texts unknowingly conceived as contributions to a nascent discipline. As European functionalist design gained currency between the wars, so writers produced commentaries that promoted modernist design practice. Pre-eminent among these is Nikolaus Pevsner's 1936 book Pioneers of the Modern Movement from William Morris to Walter Gropius (revised and republished in 1949 as Pioneers of Modern Design). But, while his work was influential as a catalyst for debate and research into modern design, Pevsner's position as a starting point for design history needs to be interrogated. His focus on key figures and a limited definition of design as a professional activity proved a rich spur to critical opposition. For example, although it retained aspects of Pevsner's modernist techniques, in its use of an overarching metanarrative to mount a linear, progressive history of furniture, Siegfried Giedion's anonymous history' Mechanization Takes Command (1948) moved away from Pevsner's canonical approach to an understanding of design as being embedded in everyday things.

Mistakenly characterized by those outside che feld as being hidebound by Pevsnerian modernist values, design history in Britain instead coalesced around the Design History Society in 1977, at least partly as a way of moving the critique beyond a celebration of modern movement designers towards a more inclusive understanding of design. As would-be design historians negotiated design history's genesis and future formation, a trail of self-consciously critical and reflective writings formed, mostly in the journal literature. A selection of this material, dating from 1980 to 1995, is presented in this section, and aspects of debates about the nature of design history are represented throughout the Reader. Questions such as 'how do we define design?' and its correlarive 'what should we be writing design history about?', 'what is the wider relevance of design history beyond its own disciplinary borders?' and, particularly, 'what is the relationship between design history and design practice?' became important for understanding current and future practice in the discipline.

Informed by the British cultural studies movement centred around the University of Birmingham, Fran Hannah and Tim Putnam characterize early design history as displaying twin tendencies; neither the history of styles, nor eclecticism – the aspiration to social and historical context, assembled through dabbling in other disciplines such as business history and the history of technology – has produced satisfactory work. They advocate a design history that acknowledges the historically-specific nature of aesthetic evaluation, which replaces notions of a designer's 'innovation and influence' with deeper understanding of a designer's culture and which understands design not as a noun but rather as a series of changing processes of use.

Hannah and Putnam's account, which specifies a very British story of design history responding to the needs of UK art college education, can be compared with Clive Dilnot's transatlantic perspective to reflect upon the differences berween design history as it developed in the UK and the US respectively, as can the texts by Victor Margolin and Jonathan Woodham, which also appear in this section. Dilnot's schematic 'Mapping the Field' considers the purpose, emergence and varieties of design history, with the latter placed into four spheres of interest: decorative arts, modernisms, design organisation and social relations. Dilnot extended his ideas into a second, looser and more discursive article, considering, in turn, 'Problems' and ‘Possibilities', informed by contemporary art historical practice. There, Dilnot's conclusion echoes Hannah and Putnam's: he calls for debate, which relates the design profession to the society in which it operates'.

A readiness to harness che work of other disciplines has been a characteristic strength of design history. It is not in spite of but because design history emerged in opposition to an art historical umbrella chat no longer fit its needs that it has enjoyed its interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary freedom. A significant number of the texts included in The Design History Reader were not conceived specifically as design historical contributions. Design history has benefitted from sharing its concerns with neighbouring disciplines including business history, the history of technology, social history, anthropology and material culture studies as well as art history and the more recent visual culture studies. This very freedom to roam means that asking questions about the disciplinary boundaries of design history is an important and rewarding exercise. Published in 1989, John A. Walker's landmark textbook Design History and the History of Design still remains useful. Extracted here are Walker's ideas about the scope of design history, the meaning of design, the significance of a design canon', the outline of a more inclusive production-consumption model' and the varieties of design history.

A notable contribution by Victor Margolin to these disciplinary debates argued that design history's shortcomings meant it would be better off incorporated into what he has termed 'design studies'. Adrian Forty published a reply in which he stated: 'I do not feel the need, as Margolin does, to discover a boundary for design history [...] surely the discipline of history as it has developed over the last century or so already provides a perfectly satisfactory definition of the "field".' British design historian Jonathan Woodham, too, responded that design history was thriving, at least in Britain, and needed no parent discipline. As the extracts in this section make clear, the UK has developed a greater profile for design history institutionally, so that design history has been represented departmentally, with degree provision at BA, MA and PhD levels. Conversely, design history has retnained marginal to art history and American studies within the US acaderny, although this trend is slowly changing, as Margolin discusses in his revised article, which appeared in the 2002 volume of his essays The Politics of the Artificial.

Scholarship proceeds collectively through questioning, disagreement and revision as well as collaboration and consensus. It is a sign of the discipline's vigour that debates about its nature and practice have continued. Design history has benefited from these foundational debates and moved on, so that the majority of design historians working today embrace a broad conception of the discipline's scope. Indeed, the transarlantic debate shown in che extracts here has been eclipsed by a global imperative for design history (discussed in section 12 of this Reader). And an early concern for good design has become less compelling during a period in which design history seeks to challenge ideas about discrimination and pursue an inclusive definition of design within social context.

Because they have been useful, the writings extracted can be regarded as having achieved canonical status. Retrospectively, debates about what design is and what design history should be can be viewed as so much male jockeying indicative of a desire to draw boundaries, to prescribe the discipline and thereby gain mastery of it. Walker's book includes an important chapter by Judy Attfield on gender and design. The fact that Attfield's contribution is reproduced in Section 9 of this Reader with other gender analyses is not intended to diminish the significance of gender as a foundational issue for design history. On the contrary, it is because the editors of this volume believe that gender is absolutely fundamental as a first principle of design historical analysis that the subject has been accorded its own section for more detailed treatment than could be afforded by its appearance in chis section. The remaining sections in Part II examine some of the core questions facing contemporary design history, which have emerged as a consequence of the debates represented here.

# TAKING STOCK IN DESIGN HISTORY Fran Hannah and Tim Putnam (1980)

What is 'design'? How, and for whom, has it existed? What is a history of design a history of? What are its distinctive problems and methods? To whom is this knowledge of any use or interest?

In the mid-1970s, when design history was emerging as a distinct area of study in Britain, these questions were much discussed. Lecturers in polytechnics and colleges of art, who had experimented for a number of years in adapting the history of art to the needs of design students and had come to think of themselves as 'design historians', felt a need to define the area of their study. To a large extent this was a definition against ruling conventions of art history; the designer was not to be considered an artist-hero; design was not to be treated as an art object. [...]

Today, half a decade later, design history seems on the surface to have achieved the status of a distinct subject specialism: it has its own degrees, conferences and publications.' Yet neither of these critical routes has been followed very far by very many. The empirical consolidation' of the subject has largely taken place around the formula of the history of design in social-economic context. All too often this means that art-conventional notions of design still pass as the substance of the subject while context amounts to an eclectic dipping into new fields. Bits of business history, history of technology or social history find their way into an account wichout consideration of the problems proper to those histories or even the processes by which they have become established as knowledge. 'Context' is not really established because we are still in chrall to certain categories which present themselves as the self-evident substance of any history of design. Such notions as 'designer', 'school', 'artefact', 'medium', 'style', continue to be taken as starting points even when they have been the subject of critical discourse in art history. Far from being a greener pasture free from the contradictions of art history, design history is in fair danger of becoming an academic backwater.

This would be a great shame, as the subject has many pretensions and not a small list of responsibilities. Its development in Britain, due to the nature and scope of art and design education in this country, is unique and is attracting an increasing interest overseas. [...] We want to open up the way to thinking historically about design as a complex social relation interconnected with other relations. This knowledge should involve and relate to people, and it should relate to the practical knowledge involved in making and using design. A first stage in developing this knowledge is distinguishing the different histories of design' extant in design history, or which need to be developed in order to meet the demands placed upon it. A critical comparison of these histories may then lead to the establishment of the History of Design which would be the appropriate object of study for design historians

## THE FORMATION OF DESIGN HISTORY ECLECTICISM

When the new Dip A.D. courses began in 1963 they contained a compulsory art historical element. This was intended as a background to the fine art' element of visual analysis which was considered the appropriate general theoretical study for 'designing'. The students were to study 'the major Arts in several significant periods'.2 From the beginning the actual place of art historical work in design courses was problematical. While visual research might pretend to a general theoretical position in relation to design, art history could only escape from the deep background by becoming involved with the history of aspects of design studied on diploma courses. These are the forces which induced the development of design history, apart from those areas, chiefly related to the history of architecture, which formed part of the art history survey courses.

This increasing integration with design education was reflected in the substitution of an extended essay project or thesis for the final examination in art history. The drawing up of the guidelines for these pieces of research, the definition of their subject matter, and the criteria used to assess them embodied the embryo of a new theoretical and empirical study more directly related to the main study areas. The subjects undertaken in the theses, chosen by the students, came to include a progressively wider range of cultural artefacts, including works of popular culture hitherto disregarded by art history.

In practice the closer involvement with design students meant accommodating the media-based grouping of the design courses themselves. This pattern is quite historically specific. It derives in part from'the nature of subject differentiation in British academic tradition, in part from a regard for the structure of British industry. The desire to produce designers suitable for industry has been a major factor in post-war design education and prompted numerous debates which affected course structure. Certain of these concerned the relative merits of British models of designing (which are generally organised around in-house designers) as opposed to the American system of freelance induscrial design. The 'generalists' argued for inter-media courses based on study of design methods and problem analysis, while the 'specialists' claimed that a knowledge of processes for specific media was necessary until the pattern of employment itself changed.3 [...]

In situations where design students from several areas came together, a more comprehensive coverage of design types could be undertaken. The courses depended fairly heavily on the avail able literature concerning architecture with a strong emphasis on the 'Modern Movement' and che Bauhaus. Pressure to include material outside that of che dominant avant-garde (partly a result of the nostalgia boom of the early 1970s) led to the inclusion of stylistic categories such as Art Deco and 1930s streamlining. [...]

Where, as was often the case, design history teaching followed the media basis of a design course, a different pattern of eclecticism emerged. The starting point was existing discussions of the 'minor' 'decorative' or 'applied' arts, together with literature written for collectors. The limitations of such accounts were all too apparent: concentration on visual or stylistic features became a sterile exercise in classification once categories of objects were treated in isolation. In addition, connoisseurship encouraged a closed system of relation between monetary and aesthetic value, divorced from the conditions in which che objects in question were made and used. {...] Chatty social history, or a narrow sociology which abstracts functions appropriate to particular product types, were integrated into media-based work while 'social and economic context' remained an aspiration. [...]

We focus on three unresolved historiographical problems in design history writing: the nature of aesthetic evaluation; innovation and influence; and 'design itself'. In each case we attempt to expose and transform categories 'given' to design history by the circurmnstances in which it has been created.

## AESTHETIC EVALUATION

It is widely recognised that historians should make explicit their reasons for defning a subject as worthy of study. Anachronism is inevitable if what is presently considered significant cannot be contrasted and related to the orders of significance which have prevailed in other times and places. The crudest form which this problem takes in design history is the unrecognised intrusion of aesthetic evaluation. Historians have taste which cannot and need not be suppressed, but if this taste operates as an unknown and therefore arbitrary determinant of what is selected as good or signifcant design, then the result is indifferent design criticism rather than any kind of history

The influences of important traditions of design writing which are anti-historical in this respect have been exorcised to a certain extent. Connoisseurship knows the periodisation of design criteria intimately in one sense, yet typically lacks a sense of the constantly shifting boundary around what is worthy of attention by the connoisseur. It is now well understood that this lack of self-consciousness derives from the fact that connoisseurship operates within boundaries of current social cachet and market valuation which it does not need or want to see. [...]

The 'Modern Movement's' peculiar combination of functionalism and aestheticism is now recognisable as a profoundly anti-historical influence. [...] For example, Stephen Bayley's recent In Good Shape,' issued under the Design Council imprint, recognises the historically limited character of the 'Modern Movement', but bases its own selection of 'significant' modern design on whatever has 'style and wit'. A complex taste operates without being recognised or discussed as such. More consistent bases of selection, such as pioneering form or scale of production are surreptitiously introduced without being systematically employed. [...) Even if the principles of the ruling taste could be specified, we would still be left with little more than a document in the history of taste, circa 1979. Covert aestheticism then provides us with our first example of misplaced substance in design history. [...)

## INNOVATION AND INFLUENCE

Many monographs on great designers and schools of design are organised around a notion of fundamental innovation or extensive influence rather than an endorsement of visual values. Even here, however, where an apparently more historical criterion of significance and ordering is being employed, the choice of designer or design school as an organising category often interferes with the exploration of the problems raised. There is great temptation to treat the designer or school as the substance of the discourse, whose existence is not taken as problemaric, and to place the substance in context, following out selected lines of connection which are chen given the name of influence or innovation. [...] Accounts which take grear designers or schools as self-evident starting points [...] suffer from historical tunnel-vision. This point was made forcefully by Tim Benton in 1975, concerning the self-confirming nature of the status attributed to the Bauhaus.' Similar points have been made in the history of ideas and in art history.8 A second problem with this sort of account is that the substance is a subject, an individual or collective personality, which exercises creative or free, unconditioned agency. [...] There are serious problems with identifying designers as personal agents because their work is embedded in a complex social process of historically varying form. [...]

At the most basic level, one must be able to differentiate agency from situation. [...} This does not mean that designs are not produced by real individuals but that personal creative activity operates with and through a designer's culture. Designing draws on and refers forward to a stock of knowledge and external requirements. The analysis of this culture involves:

(a) Characterising the limits of variation of what designers do: to the extent, for example, that design is a theoretical as opposed to practical activity it will be capable of being described as a set of rules rather than as a set of improvisations made by drawing on a repertoire.

(b) How does one learn to be a designer? Learning by example is clearly different from formal pedagogy.

(c) What is the place of designing in the social division of knowledge and labour involved in making things? What are the means of specification and evaluation which connect designing with its external context?

(d) What are the available means for circulation of information to and for the designer in a general cultural context, apart from those specified directly in relation to (b) and (c)? [...]

Taking the notion of design as an activity seriously involves reformulating our ideas of who or what acts, and the nature of the what that is acted upon, because it is also the acted with. In other words, because the culture is drawn through the designers, innovation and infuence take place within the culture. These should be studied as processes in their own right and not employed as unproblematic criteria by which 'important' designers are selected as worthy (but necessarily incoherent) units of study. [...]

## THE NATURE OF 'DESIGN

The notion of designing as an activity may be pursued further, into the realm of 'design' the noun, which is supposed to exist in artefacts and in repfesentations. Designing is relational in character, and these relations fix on objects, but the objects are not then fixed with an immutable significance forever. The production of design increases its complexity as a social process; the designed object enters into new relations of valuation and of consumption. Therefore a given design passes through and is defined within a plurality of relations. [...] In this way, the meaning of design is continually being historically reconstituted; it is a persistent complex of activities rather than a once and for all creation, Therefore there must be multiple histories of design. [...]

Because much design history teaching takes place in courses which see themselves as medium based (in some sense, often left implicit) powerful forces are at work to objectify categories which may rest on nothing more substantial than the industrial structure of a particular country at a particular point in time. Much of the place occupied by the notion of medium needs to be reoccupied by an analysis of production processes which include material transformation (i.e. the interaction of medium in che narrow sense and physical processes), the social division of labour and knowledge (systems of manufacture), and economic calculation as applied to design and production decisions. [...]

In our view, it is crucial that categories derived fromn the world of production, embedded in functional technical-economic discourses, are not allowed to usurp discussion of the significance of design in use. [...] We would look askance, therefore, at any attempt to discuss the history of design in terms of social activities or needs which did not take the existence of those categories as an historical problem, or which failed to recognise that a fundamental characteristic of design is that it exists in a multiplicity of relations, which cut across each other.

[...] What is the historical significance of stylistic analyses? Several writers have emphasised that the most important considerations in histories of design are not visual, but concern the conditions in which objects are made and used. This seems an odd opposition, for visual properties are essential to an understanding of both the production and the consumption of design. Surely what is being opposed is a notion that the history of design may be conceived as a chronology of stylistic characteristics abstracted from these, indeed from any, relations. [...) Yet it is recognised that the perception of colour, proportion and perspective are historically and culturally variable, and that the ways in which stylistic characteristics have been recognised and significant discriminations made have varied enormously. How artefacts and their representation change significance as they pass out of the conditions of their conception and production ought to be a high priority problem in design history. The variability of significance rather than the persistence of qualities should be at the forefront of analysis. What does it mean to assert a stylistic identity between a 'Louis XV' chair in eighteenth-century Paris and a Louis XV' chair in a twentieth-century museum? {...]

An important object of research should be to uncover and articulate means by which significance is attributed to objects, in order to open up more dimensions in the history of styles, and pose questions about the relationships between changes in valuation and changes in patterns of production and consumption. The means by which these investigations are carried out may vary, but it is possible to see lines along which work needs to be done. As the history of valuation must be read to a large extent through linguistic evidence, there is a vast amount of research to be done to establish continuities and discontinuities in descriptions and evaluations of design existing at any time or over time. The patterns then derived may be compared with changes in other patterns of usage, and, outside linguistic media, with visual evidence, in order to establish changes in significance attributed to the perceptual qualities of design." [...]

Therefore, the analysis of style becomes the analysis of styles of life, of modes of use of the produced environment, both directly and indirectly. It is important not to lose either of these senses of use, although they are often, in fact, intertwined. Direct usage is what is often called utilitarian or functional; it refers to the sense in which designed objects may be said externally to constitute part of the objective conditions of a mode of living irrespective of whether they are seen as such fror within that mode of life.

Indirect usage is mediated symbolically; it refers to the sense in which discrimination berween design qualities is used to define boundaries between different social and cultural categories and also, within a way of life, between times, moods, activities and other dispositions. These two sorts of usage must be studied together in bounded circumstances in order to recover any convincing sense of design in historical actuality. The study of 'functions' in itself imposes a reality which has a one-dimensional rationality; the study of systems of meaning in themselves fails to recover the pattern of practical activities which make up characteristic styles of life – both types of analysis are prone to a-historical abstraction, because they do not place at the centre of the analysis the problem of how those people whose activities are being reconstructed actually ordered their lives.

[...] Research should concentrate on the relationship between visual evidence and the other sorts of evidence by which patterns of typical activities can be reconstructed. In many cases, oral history techniques will be found to fill a gap between written and 'visual' evidence, although there is a great deal of scope for reading illustration as model narrative and for culling habitual action from literary sources. Fixed systems of evidence better display the oppositions and part whole relations which seem to determine a universe of meaning but reminiscence often reveals better the real-time structure which shows how different activities were experienced as connected or disconnected. [...]

## CONCLUSIÓN

In this paper we have argued that the conceptualisation of the historical space in which design can exist for those making and using it is essential if the proto-discipline called 'design history' is to achieve maturity. It is important to recognise that this process of discussion and criticism is not an end in itself, but the means by which design history can meet its responsibilities in design education, evaluation and research, as well as make a contribution to the understanding of the produced environment, as the world we inhabit.

