# Rebecca Houze / FORM/female FOLLOWS FUNCTION/male: Feminist Critiques of Design / THE POLITICS OF EXPERIENCE / 'WOMEN-DESIGNERS'VERSUS A FEMINIST CRITIQUE / USE-VALUE AND FEMINIST CRITIQUE

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# Rebecca Houze

Gender influences the production and reception of designed goods in a range of ways, as a number of design historians have shown. Feminist design history has been influenced by pioneering works of second-wave feminist cultural theory and literary studies such as Betty Friedan's The Feminine Mystique (1963) and Kate Millet's Sexual Politics (1970). One approach taken by feminist design historians has been to recuperate and champion the work of women designers or traditional areas of women's production outside the accepted canon – an approach paralleled by visual artists Judy Chicago and Miriam Schapiro in the 1970s. Another strategy has been to offer gendered critiques of designed objects, design processes, and consumption practices, such as those collected by Judy Attfield and Pat Kirkham in A View From the Interior: Feminism, Women, and Design (1989). Several examples of chis approach have already been introduced in the Reader, including Debora Silverman's examination of Art Nouveau in section two and Nancy Troy's rethinking of Le Corbusier's early career in the decorative arts in section 3.

In her chapter 'FORM/female FOLLOWS FUNCTION/male: Feminist Critiques of Design', Artfield draws a distinction between feminist processes of historical inquiry and an emphasis on women designers. Attfield finds that the latter inevitably ends up confirming that women excel in soft' areas, such as textiles and fashion, reiterating the question first posed by art historian Linda Nochlin in her provocative 1971 essay 'Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?' Rather, Attfield writes, a more productive feminist critique 'suggests a mechodology for design history which is not based upon acsthetics or connoisseurship, but upon a concern for people'. Like Cheryl Buckley, in her influential article 'Made in Patriarchy: Towards a Feminist Analysis of Women and Design', first published in Design Issues in 1986, Attfield wants to examine a wider range of study based on more diverse criteria, one that challenges patriarchal interpretations of design, and which is characterized by a political position that seeks changes in the interest of women'.

Penny Sparke takes a slightly different approach wich her valorization of feminine pleasure in the colourful, decorative and sensuous spaces and objects that have been traditionally situated outside of 'modernist' design, but which have constituted arguably more prevalent parts of women's lives. In the extract included here, from her book As Long As It's Pink: The Sexual Politics of Taste (1995), Sparke describes the trauma of 'the architect's wife', who, confined to the marginal spaces of her own home, quietly weeps. Her children's room was the only one permitted' to deviate, with its softer curtains, from her husband's strict control over the minimalist interior aesthetic. Sparke alludes to Millet's work in the subtitle of As Long As It's Pink, which also opens with a quotation taken from earlier French feminist Simone de Beauvoir (see The Second Sex (1949)), an approach that combines elements of American and mid-century French feminisms in studies of design from an historical as well as psychological point of view. Sparke's case study of the American designer Elsie de Wolfe (Elsie de Wolfe: The Birth of Modern Interior Decoration (2005)) is one application of this method.

Traditionally, production and consumption have been gendered simplistically in a manner which accords with the contested notion of separate spheres, in which, as a function of industrialization, men occupied the public world of work (production), and women were confined to the private world of the home (consumption). ln response, gendered analyses of design have frequently been concerned with the feminine' realm of domesticity, as a way of redressing the imbalance favouring the 'masculine' public world of work. Attfield and Kirkham suggest, in A View from the Interior, that '[i]n order to validate the work of women in the field of production it is essential to assert the importance of the hand-made object produced in the small workshop or in the home itself'. In her article 'Humanizing Modernism: The Crafts, "Functioning Decoration" and the Eameses', Kirkham examines how modernist readings of Charles and Ray Eames have not accounted for the eclectic aesthetic of the couple's own home, as well as the craft influences in their furniture designs, often mistakenly attributing this aspect entirely to Ray, while refusing to acknowledge the more complex partnership that led to their many innovations. lronically, it was William Morris, Pevsner's first pioneer' of modern design, and the artists associated with che Arts and Crafts Movement who first championed the progressive nature of craft. This problem is further explored in section 8 of the Reader.

In the past two decades, promotion of the work of women in isolation has ceded to a more holistic understanding of gender, encompassing men and masculinity, and a study of homosexual and homosocial practices. Thus, women's studies and women's history have become gender studies and gender history; this trend has attracted criticism from some feminists for, once again, removing women from the focus of analysis

Christopher Breward questions presumptions about the 'great masculine renunciation' of fashion around the turn of the twentieth century in the extract reproduced here from his ground-breaking book The Hidden Consumer (1999), arguing instead that masculine identities were shaped within a complex and nuanced culture of sartorial consumption in which social and sexual anxieties were rehearsed. Breward presents this history through a reading of rich literary sources - nineteenth- and rwentieth-century novels, city guides, and trade journals, which were filled with descriptions of clothing and the character traits it was believed to represent. His study looks ahead to section 10, in which the role of consumption in design history is more thoroughly discussed.

In 'Self-Made Motormen: The Material Construction of Working-Class Masculine Identities through Car Modification', Andrew Bengry-Howell and Christine Griffin use ethnographic methods to explore this particular subculture of young British men, who inscribe their own identities upon cars by erasing the signs of their original brands and meticulously changing their shape and decoration. The cars, then used for cruising', are highly individualized expressions of gender, defined through a combination of labour, conspicuous consumption and performance. Aspects of gender and design are explored elsewhere throughout the Reader, for example, in Dick Hebdige's reading of the gendered Italian motor scooter in section 8, and in Alison 1. Clarke's historical account in section 10 of the Tupperware party in 1950s America.

# FORM/female FOLLOWS FUNCTION/male: Feminist Critiques of Design

Judy Attfield (1989)

It is impossible from a consciously female perspective to attempt any kind of survey of the critiques of design, its practice or its history without questioning the assumptions which have become an established orthodoxy. So I start from a definition of design legitimated by Pevsner's Pioneers of the Modern Movement (1936) and which places Giedion's Mechanization Takes Command (1948) in its bibliography together with the Open University's History of Architecture and Design 1890– 1939 (1975). What these texts have in common is a shared definition of design which was first formulated at the height of the 'Good Design' movement, based on a set of principles which decreed that in answering functional requirements correctly, Beauty would logically follow.

Design history still suffers from its provenance in the Modern Movement, where to some extent it remains, sealed in a time lock which still considers form the effect of function, and a concept of design – the product of professional designers, industrial production and the division of labour – which assumes that women's place is in the home. Feminist perspectives offer design history a range of historical/critical mechods which challenge the mainstream about how it defines design as a practice, about the parameters of what type of designed objects it should examine, about what values are given priority in assessing it, and even who it calls designers.

It is more difficult, but still necessary, to attempt a definition of 'feminist' in this context, although to do so might imply a dominant, single view of feminism. But the project here is to displace dominant definitions in order to make space for the normally silent, hidden and unformulared dimensions of design omitted in its conventional study or literature. Broadly speaking, I refer to a feminist perspective' as that which acknowledges that women form a group among many in a multicultural society, with different tastes, needs, values and orders of priority because of the roles they play, the type of jobs they do and the position in society they occupy through the accident of their birth. In this context, feminism is a political position which seeks changes in the interest of women. There is no ultimate agreement as to what those changes should be nor what strategies should be used to pursue them since different cultural groups of women have different interests. It is a sensitivity to this diversity which marks out the distinction between the women's liberation campaign centered in the United States in the late 1960s and early 1970s, from the wider, global women's movement.

To advocate design improvement in the environment and in products mainly used by women at present should not be taken as acceptance of the fact that such improvements can reinforce the traditional, subordinate place of women in society. (Many feminist critiques of design point out how a definition of women as a subordinate group is reinforced and made to appear natural through design.) In discussing history and applying a feminist analysis to it, it is particularly relevant to be precise about the historical construction of the term feminist' and the changes it has undergone. Without an awareness that change is possible there is little point in taking a feminist perspective in the first place.

[...]

## THE POLITICS OF EXPERIENCE

A fundamental starting point for feminist design historians is the fact that women experience the designed world differently from men. One of the most powerful and influential critiques of town planning, Jane Jacobs' The Death and Life of Great American Cities (1961), caused a transformation by introducing a critical element into the writing of architectural history which until then had glorified modernism without question.' It was precisely her female point of view which brought out new and valuable insights in the relationship berween design ideals and lived experience.2

Design shapes the environment and makes assumptions about women's place in terms of buildings, public spaces and transport. It also provides the imagery women use to form their identity through fashion, advertising and the media generally. It assumes that particular areas of the design profession are 'women's work'; thereby reflecting the predominant division of labour in society. Furthermore, it segregates the sexes through artifacts by endowing these with unnecessary gender definitions, while neglecting the special needs of women who want their own transport, places and spaces.3 And, as already explained, it excludes women from the determining spheres of science, technology and industry.

The role of design in forming our ideas about gender power relations often remains invisible, while at the same time it makes them concrete in the everyday world of materials goods. 'White goods' such as washing machines and electric cookers may reduce the heavy manual labour women perform and those designed by women may satisfy their needs better than those designed by men, but such goods are still manufactured with women in mind - the implicit assumption is that it is they who will be doing the bulk of the washing and cooking, not men - hence the division of labour by gender remains unaffected by product innovation and improvement

Design reflects our aspirations and arouses our expectations, but it is also a process and as such has a potential for transformation. Some professional feminist designers have attempted to reform gender relations through innovatory designs.' Feminist historians have been and are undertaking research to bring to light those designers' achievements as well as the achievements of women working in the field whose contributions remain unrecognized. It is also vital to consider the impact that women have had historically, and can continue to exert on design by means of individual and joint consumption.“

## 'WOMEN-DESIGNERS'VERSUS A FEMINIST CRITIQUE

Isabelle Anscombe's A Woman's Touch (1984) gives exclusive attentions to women designers who have participated in the history of the major design movements since the 1860s'. It helps to set the record straight by giving more emphasis to those women who did manage to penetrate the professional arena – some of them, like Charlotte Perriand' and Eileen Gray," already known in conventional design history – but who were often overshadowed by male designers with whom they associated through professional or personal ties. However, it soon becomes clear that chis womendesigners' approach does little except confirm the prejudice that women are inferior designers except in the so-called 'feminine' areas such as the decorative arts, textiles, interior design and fashion. Even where there was an opportunity to alter the emphasis by showing how some female designers were prevented from practicing in the more exclusively male areas of design, as in the case of Eileen Gray, Anscombe fails to do so."

There are other problems related to looking at women designers as the main focus. For instance, the restrictions of method in the conventional biography place them in a preset, hierarchical framework in which 'great,' usually male, designers appear. Is this really because there have been no great women designers? Since Linda Nochlin's essay on women artists, written in the early 1970s this has become a somewhat rhetorical question.'º Design is even less of an autonomous activity than art and needs to be examined in close relationship with the social, cultural, economic and technological conditions which have nurtured its development as a practice. However, the historiography which has produced sorme of the seminal works of design history has established a tradition of pioneers of modern design and an avant-garde aesthetic in which few women figure. There is an urgent need, therefore, to bring to light the work of women pioneers of design careers who, at present, face unwelcoming, male-dominated enclaves in architecture, engineering, product and industrial design, where all that is thought necessary to meet the needs of women is an equal opportunities policy."

A considerable body of work has built up around an object-based study of the history of design, which avoids some of the more overtly sexist problems by not focusing on designers.12 It also marks out for itself a methodology distinct from conventional art history in which the cult of the artist rubs off on the art work, thereby giving it a particular value distinct from the anonymous designed object. A women-designers approach is based on the traditions of such an art history and cannot cope with anonymous design. This is not to say that object-based study is innocent and neutral in matters of gender. On the contrary, a hierarchy has built up around types of objects which gives importance to industrial design and the 'machine aesthetic' - i.e. the more obviously masculine – while considering areas such as fashion as trivial and synonymous with 'feminine.' But the limitations of a women-designers approach not only diminishes women, it also devalues design history as a discipline by using a borrowed and inappropriate methodology.'

A feminist critique makes it possible to look at women designers in a new light and to assess their work in the context of the history of a profession which has consistently marginalized them. It also suggests a methodology for design history which is not based upon aesthetics or connoisseurship, but upon a concern for people

## USE-VALUE AND FEMINIST CRITIQUE

Some feminist design historians are not content to satisfy academic criteria. They want their research to be of value to practicing designers. They conceive of design history as contributing to an understanding of different groups' needs as part of the design process. Making Space (1984) by Matrix (a feminist architects' collective) is one example of an interventionist text which seeks to bring theory and practice together and to relate knowledge of the past to the present and the furure.

The problems of defining an object of study appropriate to design history have been fraught by precedents set by art history. Although feminist art history does present us with an excellent body of critique and methodology, it cannot be appropriated and applied directly to design unless we treat design as if it were art. There is some measure of agreement that it need not just be about the appreciation of something called 'good design,' nor the attribution of authorship to particular designers of certain cult objects, lest the whole exercise deteriorate into one of connoisseurship. But what it should be is less clear. Not only is chere confusion over whar should be looked at, but why.

A feminist perspective can be quice specific in its focus on use-value. By providing historical explanations for wormnen's lack of visibility at the production stage, it is possible to understand better why dominant masculine values are constantly reproduced in the material world. Thus a familiar critique of design history can become part of a more general movement of reform. It is at that particular intersection – berween what we think and what we do – that the transitive meaning of design as a verb, as an action, can take place.

An example of mainstream history of design, Penny Spatke's An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century (1986), avoids defining design because available definitions are varied, complex, contradictory and in a state of permanent Aux.' But by devoting her attention to industrial, mass-produced goods and the education and practice of professional designers, Sparke represents the conventional high ground of design history, traditionally associated with the mechanized and male-dominated areas of design where women only appear as passive consumers.

In her essay, 'Made in patriarchy,' Cheryl Buckley uses a critique of patriarchy and capitalism to formulate a method for a feminist history of design.' Parriarchy is a useful concept because it explains the dominance of masculine attributes transhistorically as a cultural phenomenon manifested by women as well as men. It serves to explain, for example, why some women contribute to the production of sexist ads which degrade women. Nevertheless, because patriarchy depends on stereotypical definitions of male/female and is basically a-historical, it represents many difficulties as an operative concept, pot the least of which is the contradictory task of reconciling rather crude male/female stereotypes with a history of changing gender relations.

In matters of sexual politics where the personal is political, gender neutrality has been proposed as a strategy. In Britain it occupies a central position in reéent anti-sexist education initiatives to degender activities such as sewing and woodwork, areas where design is taught in many schools. So gender neutrality has definite advantages, but there is a limit to which it can be used in the history of design when dealing with issues of sexual differentiation.

Part of the debate about what makes design different from art has been che distinction between the functional object and the merely beautiful. This value system, entirely based on the ideology of modernism, cannot be applied to non-functional or handmade objects, nor to those which do not conform to the rules of good design. This has made it impossible to deal seriously with a whole galaxy of objects, i.e. those falling outside the prescribed category of the 'modern classic.' Omitted are fashion, ephemera and many other areas of design in which women have been most prominent; chis omission therefore accounts for their lack of visibility. Contemporary cultural studies, social history and anthropology have provided a way in to a less hierarchical, non-aesthetic analysis of designed objects which allows inquiry in the kind of areas which put women back into the picture and make it possible to examine popular taste. So it is not just a case of looking only at women's concerns, but of using feminismn as a starting point, as a means of transcending the limitations of conventional design history.

The purpose of a feminist critique of design and its history should be to discuss women's concerns so chat women do not feel segregated or excluded in any way for reasons of gender. Though there are some radical feminists who choose permanent separatism as a form of refusal, this excludes many women as well as men. A gendered view, on the other hand, is a practical way of opening a space for discussion. It forms part of a wider move away from authoritarian, patriarchal values for both men and women. It also allows women to become involved as ungendered beings – as people who consider issues beyond those of gender: i.e. race, class, age, sexuality, religion, occupation and so on.

It should not be 'Woman' who is made the special case for treatment, but the culture which subordinates people by gender, class, race, etc.. and does nothing to question the attributes which position them as 'Other.'The concept of 'the Other’ is one used to define the category of 'woman' in a negative relationship to the category of 'man.' ('Man' enjoys the privilege of being the norm – 'the measure of all chings' - while 'womnan' is that which deviates from it.) The acknowledgment of such a presence with particular needs and interests contests the privileged position of the dominant power. This includes the challenging of mainstream art which insists on purity and preserves itself from contamination of the ordinary, the everyday and the common. It will also allow traffic across the borders and the entry of the 'minor' arts, the crafts, ephemera, fashion and the popular. By transgressing the normal defnition of art, it can redirect the search for an impossible, timeless 'classic' towards a more practical activity.

Design history presents a suitable case for treatment as it struggles to come to terms with its relationship to art and the all-pervasive postmodernism which threatens to shatter its confident, macho value system based on the prime importance of industrial production.

While post-modernism cannot replace the rules it shatters with anything nearly as comforting as the harmony and belief in technological progress offered by the myth of modernism, it does enable a decentered shift in the way in which we look at the world, and how we relate to it - not an unfamiliar experience to women who are accustomed to occupying the margins.'6 Feminist practice in design, history and critique offers a point at which a criterion can be constructed which doesn't refer everything back to market forces or abstract aesthetics.

