# Grace Lees-Maffei / FINDING POLAND IN THE MARGINS: THE CASE OF THE ZAKOPANE STYLE David Crowley (2001)

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# Grace Lees-Maffei

This section takes its title from a 1994 article by Anna Calvera, a design historian working in Spain. It is used here to denote some of the contexts within which design might be understood. The places in which designs, materials, images, objects, services and other behaviours are produced condition their characteristics to some extent. This is as true of designs intended to transcend local, regional or national contexts to pursue an international agenda, as it is of vernacular design, which is defined in part by the use of local materials, practices, markets and networks (see section 1 of chis Reader).

Design historians have produced a number of national histories of design that raise questions about the extent to which design can embody national tendencies and how typical the nation under analysis might be. The extract here from David Crowley's examination of Polish design shows something of the complexity of nationalism in design, as a group of amateurs and architects attempted to reconcile a local vernacular folk tradition with the need to find a national style, a tendency echoed in other countries at the time. In Poland, however, the effort to hone a design identity was informed by the country's history in relation to imperialist Central and Eastern Europe, and after the First World War, to capitalist Western Europe and the communist Soviet Union.

Because design history has concerned itself with a definition of design based on its separation from industrial manufacture, national design histories produced to date have reflected a bias towards Western industrialized nations. This tendency has been the subject of some critique, influenced by post-colonialist theorists such as Edward Said – whose 1978 book Orienralism deconstructed the Eurocentric pattern of intellectual and cultural history – and Homi Bhabha, who has employed the term hybridity' as an alternative to binaristic thinking about centre and margin, based around a more Auid understanding of identity and a refusal of metanarratives. Consequently, design history – like its neighbouring disciplines - has recently begun to recognize the imporcance of globalization as a useful focus for understanding design past and present. In the last decade, design history has benefited from the development of a number of international, cross-cultural, design history and design studies groups, conferences and symposia, facilitated through online networking tools and electronic mailing lists, which have helped to overcome geographical boundaries and spark fruitful collaborative studies.

The urgency of current efforts to globalize design history may give the erroneous impression that design itself has only recently become global. In fact, historic trade routes have ensured that designed goods have been physically transported around the globe, carrying with them international influences and enabling design dialogues between nations and cultures for centuries. For example, the silk routes used to import goods between China, North Africa and Mediterranean Europe developed from prehistoric trade and transport patterns. As well as silk and spices, blue and white porcelain was traded along the silk routes, and its history reveals the complexity of international influence trade routes engendered. Following Islamic precedents, cobalt was used in China, from the thirteenth century, to decorate white porcelain. Adorned with appropriate imagery, it was exported back to the Middle East, before becoming popular in China in the fifteenth century. Following the setting up of the British East India Company in 1600 (and the Dutch equivalent in 1602, among others), blue and white china was exported to Europe (sometimes as ballast), again using designs chosen for the export market. Persian-influenced Chinese designs became the models for European-made porcelain in manufacturing centres including Delft in the Netherlands. Delfeware itself became the influence for English Delftware', made in England and derivative of Dutch designs. The most startling example of historic trade routes is, of course, the triangular transatlantic slave trade, which developed from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries. Goods shipped from Europe to Africa were bartered for slaves, who were taken to the Americas for sale, before the ships returned to Europe loaded with commodities such as sugar and tobacco and the cycle started again.

In Furniture Design and Colonialism: Negotiating Relationships between Britain and Australia, 1880-1901', Tracey Avery provides a finely argued account of the distinctions discernible between furniture produced in Britain for a British and colonial market and furniture produced in Australia. Such distinctions may not reside in the appearance of designed goods – Australian furniture resembled that of its Brirish colonizer – but rather in the context of surrounding discourse through which the goods were understood.

Gennifer Weisenfeld demonstrates how Japanese designers negotiated and modified Western models of modern design. When Kaô soap was transformed from luxury product to everyday item, modernist design strategies were employed, with mixed results. While the new Kaō identity is now recognized for its importance in the history of Japanese design, it did not realize its aim of expanding the market for Kaō soap. Weisenfeld's text reverses familiar stories of Orientalismn: here, the visual techniques of the modernist West are fetishized for consumption in the East.

From the international style of the 1920s and 1930s, to the iconic architecture bristling across our 'global' cities in the twenty-first century, the extent to which design can transcend local cultures and communicate globally is debatable. Many branded goods are used across the world, from László Bíró's ballpoint pens to Matthew Carter's 'Verdana' typeface, Robin Day's 'Polyprop' chair to Boeing's aircraft. But just as global brands have found success with consumers internationally, so their ubiquity has engendered a desire for products with local, regional and national associations. In 'Land Rover and Colonial-style Adventure' Jeanne van Eeden critiques an unsuccessful attempt to engage local characteristics, in a racist and sexist stereotypical representation of a colonized subject aimed, purportedly, at a knowing, politically correct audience. Van Eeden draws attention to the way in which one image can embody and propagate iniquities both past and present. The fact that the advertisement van Eeden analyses was withdrawn, and her article was published without an illustration, due to permission being denied, makes it al the more important chat such material is subjected to critique.

In a global marketplace, local products and services are made available to an international audience, which alters their character and meaning. 'Swoosh Identity: Recontextualizations in Haiti and Romania' reveals how a global brand can be reinterpreted through a sociological process described by Fernando Ortiz as 'transculturation', in which an object or image acquires new resonance as a result of merging contexts. Paul B. Bick and Sorina Chiper offer a comparative analysis of cultural colonialism which goes beyond the meanings generated by the advertising and marketing campaigns of this global and controversial brand. Comparative methods are generally underused and yet they have the potential co overcome the blunt confines of national borders.

Design is not only determined by the conditions within which it is produced: design works to constitute those conditions, and it can be a tool through which to critique and alter them. The same is true of design history: critiques of the existing output of design history as having been dominated by the Europe/US nexus of industrialization remain pertinent and pressing. While the texts selected here range from Japan to Poland, Australia to South Africa and Romania to Haiti, they are not intended to provide an abbreviated global history, Rather the section showcases examples of design historical analyses that interrogate and overcome the tendency within design history to dwell upon the industrialized West, chereby contributing to both the content and methods of design history. And, as the texts in this section show, globalizing design history is important both as a way of filling in the gaps in existing histories that have ignored or excluded non-Western experience and as a way of more fully reflecting design activity, past and present. While the amount and variety of work in the existing literature that is attentive to processes of globalization is heartening, the globalization of design history remains a priority for all interested in the present and future validity of the discipline.

# FINDING POLAND IN THE MARGINS: THE CASE OF THE ZAKOPANE STYLE David Crowley (2001)

