# NOTES

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

## NOTES

Extracted from Troy, N., Modernism and the Decorative Arts in France: Art Nouveau to Le Corbusier, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991, pp. 103–58. Copyright © Yale University Press, 1991. Reprinted with permission.

1. Scholarly interest in Jeanneret's early career has been fostered nor only by major retrospective exhibits and publications designed to coincide with the celebration of the hundredth anniversary of his birth in 1987, but also by a widespread effort to re-examine the roots of twentieth-century modernism in general. In Le Corbusier studies this trend is demonstrated, for example, in La Chaux-de-Fonds, Musee des Beaux-Arts and Musee d'Histoire, La Chauxde-Fonds et Jeanneret (avant Le Corbusier), exh. cat. (May 19–July 31, 1983) (this publication is an enlarged, special edition of Archithese 13 [March-April 1983]); Luisa Martina Colli, Arte artigianato e tecnica nella poetica di Le Corbusier, Biblioreca di Cultura Moderna Larerza (Rome and Bari: Laterza, 1982); Eleanor Gregh, "The Dom-ino Idea," Oppositions, no. 15–16 (Winter-Spring 1979): 61-87; Mary Patricia May Sekler, The Early Drawings of Charles-Edouard Jeanneret (Le Corbusier) 1902-1908 (New York and London: Garland, 1977).

It has been shown that Jeanneret's advocacy of internationalism during the 1920s was in part determined by his earlier rejection of the regionalist implications of the Swiss Romande movement in which he had participated as a youth. However, the important role that French decorative artists played in Jeanneret's maturation process has not been appreciated, and the same is also true of che infuence char French decorative árt in general exercised on Jeanneret in the teens. Justice has, on the other hand, been done to the French as well as the German roots of Jeanneret's architectural ideas, but in that arena too the significance of his interests in design and his work as a designer during the teens - both of which fostered his involvement with contemporary developments in France at that time – have not often been acknowledged. Greater recognition of Jeanneret's activities in the feld of design and the decorative arts will enhance the understanding of him as an artist, architect, and thinker who, during the teens, pursued many avenues in order to insure his entry into the French design scene (where, as Le Corbusier, he would have a profound impact after the First World War).

2. Quoted in Joyce Lowman, "Corb as Structural Rationalist," Architectural Review 160 (October 1976): 230.

3. See Paul Poiret, En habillant l'époque (1930; repr. Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1986); Palmer White, Poiret (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1973).

4. See Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, "Carnet I, Paris Automne 1913," Bibliothèque de la Ville, La Chaux-de-Fonds [hereafter cited as BV/LCdF] LCms88.

5. Maurice Maignan, "A propos du XVIIIe Salson de la Societe des Artistes Decorateurs," L'Art Decorarif29 (May 1913): 231.

6. Roger Allard, pref., Salon d'Automne 1913. Art decoratif. Groupe Dresa, Jean-Louis Gampert, Andre Mare, Louis-Gustave Jaulmes, Andre Groult, Louis Sue, Jacques Palyart, Paul Vallois Paul Vera [Paris: 1913].

7. Several months later Claude Roger-Marx made a closely related point: "it is necessary – this is the essential condition of their success and of their diffusion - that modern pieces of furniture be able to relate to antique furniture without either suffering from this association. Wouldn't this be this best proof that our modern furniture ties in again with our tradition, by renewing it. and perpetuates its gifts of equilibrium and grace that, of all races, ours has received a share?" Roger Marx, "Interieurs modernes," Gazette de Bon Ton 2 (May 1914): 179.

8. See Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, "Carnet I. Paris Automne 1913," BV/LCdF, LCms88; Le Corbusier Sketchbooks, vol. 1: 1914–1948, pref. Andre Wogenscky, intro. Maurice Besset, notes Francoise de Franclieu, trans. Agnes Serenyi et al. (New York: The Architectural History Foundation; Carmnbridge, Mass.: MIT Press, in collaboration with the Fondation Le Corbusier Paris, 1981), Sketchbook A1.

9. Jeanneret's correspondence with Ernest Albert Ditisheim and Hermann Ditisheim (mostly from December 1914 through October 1915) is preserved in BV/LCdF, Nd-63. In addition to the sketchbooks mentioned above, see also Jeaneret's Carnet bleu of ca. 1912-14 (Fondation Le Corbusier, Paris [hereafter ciced as FLC], T.71), which contains sketches of furniture from a variety of periods, including examples Jeanneret saw in the Musee des Arts Decoratifs. The first page of the Carnet bleu lists the names and addresses of five contacts in Paris, including Rupert Carabin and Andre Groult. On page 10 is a sketch of a chair by Groult, the back of which is carved with a stylized basket containing three flowers (fig. 114). Other designs by Groult, including lamps, chairs, and settes, are depicted elsewhere in the sketchbook. Jeanneret's copies of his letters to Jules and Georges Ditisheim are in BV/LCdF, LCms89. On June 12, 1915, Jeanneret mentioned Groult's name to Georges Ditisheim with regard to designs for lighting fxtures in the vestibule of Ditisheim's home; see BV/LCdF, LCms89, 217. Earlier, on December 10, 1913, Jeanneret had written to the Maison Bagues in Paris to announce the impending visit of Georges Ditisheim, "whom I strongly advised to purchase for his vestibule, which 1 have just installed, a lighting fixture thar I noticed in your shop during my visit in November. It is a Pompeian tripod with a bronze basket filled with crystal fruits." Bagues's products, he continued, "made such a good impression on me that I would be pleased, I repeat, to make use of your creations, which are in perfect taste, very unusual." See BV/LCdF LCms89, 10.

It is unclear whether the November visit mentioned by Jeanneret occurred on the same trip to Paris he made with Salomon Schwob in late October or involved a separate trip the following month (which seems unlikely).

Jeanneret's "style" furniture has been discussed in detail by Arthur Ruegg, who notes that Jeanneret also selected Louis XIII furniture, but in that case rush-seated chairs intended for more informal settings, and not for the interiors of Directoire-inspired furniture, would have been considered more appropriate. In this distinction Ruegg discerns a developing interest on Jeanneret's part in the notion of types adapted to specific functions, and in general he describes Jeanneret's “style" furniture with a view toward his later, mature work of the 1920s. See Ruegg, "Anmerkungen zum Equipement de l'habitation und zur Polychromie interieur bei Le Corbusier," in Le Corbusier: la ricerca paziente, exh. Car. (Lugano: Villa Malpensata, 1980),

152–62; Ruegg, "Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, architecte-conseil pour toutes les questions de decoration interieure .." in La Chaux-de-Fonds et Jeanneret, 39–43; Ruegg, "Les Contributions de Le Corbusier a l'art d'habiter, 1912–1937: de le decoration a l'equipement," in Le Corbusier: une encyclopedie, ed. Jacques Lucan (Paris: Centre Georges Pompidou, 1987), 124–35.

10. See the discussion of the Theatre des Champs-Elysees in chap. 2, above. According to an article in Gil Blas, the gala opening of the theater was attended by "the elite of the Parisian worlds of high society, politics, finance, theater, literature and the arts." Jodelet, "L'inauguration du Theatre des Champs-Elysess," Gil Blas (April 1, 1913): 1. See also the report in Comoedia (April 1, 1913): 2.

11. Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, Letter to William Ritter, [Summer 1911], quoted in Gregh, "The Dom-ino Idea," 76.

12. Charles-Edouard Jeaneret, Letter to William Ritter, [postmarked November 3, 1913]. photocopy FLC, Box R3 (18), 217.

