# NOTES

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

## NOTES

Extracted from Gregson, N. and Crewe, L., 'Redefining Rubbish: Commodity Disposal and Sourcing', Second-Hand Cultures, Oxford: Berg 2003, pp. 115–42.

1. Of course in practice sourcing and disposal strategies don't follow one another in a neat and linear sequence but are commonly run together, as individuals and traders both acquire desired commodities and dispose of unwanted things at one and the sarne time. It is, however, difficult to convey such continuity and multiplicity through the written word, whose order and structure is, of necessity, linear.

2. Although less common, there are two other disposal dispositions which we encountered in our research. The first we term indiscriminate jettisoning. Exemplified by Louise, this strategy involves periodic chucking-out of anything and everything in sight, including books, men's, women's and children's clothes (much of it bearing designer labels), toys, electrical items and so on. In one particular week, for example, she cleared out a cupboard and threw away a bin-liner full of almost-new childrenswear (including hardly-worn Marese, Miniman and Gap items as well as more mass-market M&S, Adams and Debenhams labels), two cassette players, a record player, about 50 white cot and cot-bed sheets, pillow-cases and blankets, and a computer box full of sun cream, mosquito repellent and other holiday sundries. While it is interesting to speculate where Louise's junk may end up (in a landfill site to be raked over by refuse collectors perhaps), there is little more to say about this strategy in conceptual terms, save that it is indicative of overconsumption and the result of limited interest in, commitment to and time available for sorting and sifting through a range of commodities in order to evaluate their potential value to others. It is good housekeeping at its most radical and unrefexive, possession-purging on a grand scale. The final disposal disposition that we identify is the hoarder who has a reluctance to dispose of anything. This of course is not in itself a disposal strategy but it does nonetheless provide the opportunity for potential future rediscovery and revalorization. And given our comments, about the central presence of women in space-making good housekeeping practices, we suggest here that a number of men may fall into the hoarder category, using sheds and garages as repositories for you never know when you might need it' commodities.

3. It needs to be noted here that the philanthropic disposition connects to particular disposal sites - charity shops, charity car-boot sales and jumble sales.

4. Nicky Gregson, Louise Crewe, and Kate Brooks, 'Shopping, Space and Practice', Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, vol. 20, no. 5 (2000), pp. 597–617.

5. Alison Clarke, "Mother swapping": The Trafficking of Nearly New Children's Wear', in P. Jackson et al. (eds.) Commercial Cultures: Economies, Practices, Spaces, Oxford: Berg 2000, pp. 85–100.

6. It is important to acknowledge here that this argument may say rather more about the specificities of the second-hand sites we investigated, and cheir limitations/possibilities for money-making. Clearly, disposal through charity shops is the counter case to this disposition. But chere are other second-hand sites - such as dress agencies - that are spaces where disposal is governed by money-making. And our – admittedly limited – knowledge of these sites would suggest that they are for the most part frequented by women. Moreover, it needs to be recognized that, of the sites we investigated, it was primarily car-boot sales (and market stalls) that were associated with disposal as money-making. In the case of the former, it is entirely possible that some of the arguments we make in this section say rather more about the interweavings of masculinities with class at certain car-boot sales than about the gendering of this disposal disposition.

