# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# GUIDE TO FURTHER READING

On the development of British modernism prior to the Utility scheme, see Paul Greenhalgh's 1995 essay 'The English Compromise: Modern Design and National Consciousness, 1870–1940'. In addition to Urility, the British response to the Second World War was also notable in design terms for a particularly effective body of print propaganda; see Abram Games, Graphic Designer: Maximum Meaning. Minimum Means (2003). On exhibiting post-war British design, see Lucy Bullivant's "Design for Better Living" Public Response to Britain Can Make It', in Did Britain Make It? British Design in Context 1946–86 (1986); also Design and Cultural Politics in Postwar Britain: the Britain Can Make It Exhibition of 1946 (1997). On the Festival of Britain, see Adrian Forty, 'Festival Politics' in A Tonic to the Nation: The Festival of Britain 1951 (1976) and on the Festival Pattern Group, 'New Imagery', in Leslie Jackson, The New Look: Design in the Fifties, (1998). A characterization of the period is provided in Bevis Hillier, Austerity/Binge: the Decorative Arts of the Forties and Fifties (1975). Case studies of post-war British design and culture include: Frank Jackson, The New Air Age: BOAC and Design Policy 1945–60', (1991); Andrew Jackson, 'Labour as Leisure: The Mirror Dinghy and DIY Sailors'. (2006) and John Hewitt, 'Good Design in the Market Place: The Rise of Habitat Man' (1987).

For more by the Independent Group, see Banham's A Throw-Away Aesthetic' and Richard Hamilton's article The Persuasive Image', both from 1960. Reflective analyses include Anne Massey's 'The Independent Group as Design Theorists', (1985) and 'The Independent Group: Towards a Redefinition' (1987) and her book The Independent Group: Modernism and Mass Culture, 1945–59 (1995). Also, Nigel Whiteley's 'Pop, Consumerism, and the Design Shift' (1985) and 'Toward a Throw-Away Culture: Consumerism, “Style Obsolescence" and Cultural Theory in the 1950s and 1960s' (1987) and Ben Highmore's complex analysis 'Richard Hamilton at the Ideal Home Exhibition of 1958: Gallery for a Collector of Brutalist and Taschist Art' (2007).

As a comparative example of the politicizarion of design in national context see the studies of Germany by Eli Rubin, Synthetic Socialism: Plastics and Dictatorship in the German Democratic Republic (2008), and Paul Betts, The Authority of Everyday Objects: A Cultural History of West German Industrial Design (2004). By the same author, see The Politics of Post-Fascist Aesthetics: West and East German Design in the 1950s' (2003) and ‘Building Socialism at Home: The Case of East German Interiors (2008).

Banham's discussion of plastics may be further explored from a wide range of approaches, including Wiebe E. Bijker's 'The Social Construction of Bakelite: Toward a Theory of Invention' (1987); Penny Sparke's 'Plastics and Pop Culture' and Ezio Manzini's 'Objects and Their Skin', in The Plastics Age: From Modernity to Post-Modernity (1990). Jeffrey L. Meikle reviews sceptical opinions in 'Material Doubts and Plastic Fallout', from his book American Plastics: A Cultural History (1995), which is extracted in this Reader, as is Alison J. Clarke's Tupperware: The Promise of Plastic in 1950s America (1999). Also on Tupperware in social context, see Anath De Vidas's 'Containing Modernity: The Social Life of Tupperware in a Mexican Indigenous Village' (2008).

A contemporary account of the Khrushchev Kitchen is given in Harrison E. Salisbury, 'Nixon and Khrushchev Argue in Public as US Exhibit Opens; Accuse Each Other of Threats' (1959). Wider reading on Cold War design includes David Crowley and Jane Pavitt's Cold War Modern (2008). Also helpful are Sarah A. Lichtman's 'Do-It-Yourself Security: Safety, Gender, and the Home Fallour Shelter in Cold War America' (2006); Eli Rubin's 'The Form of Socialism without Ornament: Consumprion, Ideology, and the Fall and Rise of Modernist Design in the German Democratic Republic'; and Milena Veenis's 'Consumption in East Germany: the Seduction and Berrayal of Things' (1999). East Germany receives further consideration in Raymond G. Stokes's Plastics and the New Society: the German Democratic Republic in the 1950s and 1960s', in Style and Socialism: Modernity and Material Culture in Post War Eastern Europe (2000).

