# INTRODUCTION

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

## INTRODUCTION

In December 2000, a three-page advertisement for the Land Rover Freelander was published in a range of glossy magazines in South Africa. These magazines, aimed primarily at the leisure and so-called men's market, included African Environment and Wildlife, Car, Complete Fisherman, Complete Golfer, Getaway, GQ, House and Garden, Leisure Wheels, Men's Health, Out There and the international issue of Time. For the purposes of the arguments in this article, it is significant that the advertisement was not found in upmarket magazines such as Tribute or Ebony that are aimed primarily at a black market and that generally focus on luxury items, and cars not carried at all by the other black magazines."

Produced by the South African advertising agency TBWA Hunt Lascaris, the first page of the advertisement shows a Himba' woman from Namibia standing in a barren saltpan; the picture plane is divided into two equal horizontal areas, namely sky and earth, and forms the backdrop for all three pages. She wears traditional animal skin garments and ornamęnts, and is naked from the waist up. Although she is thin and conforms to westernized ideals concerning beauty, her elongated breasts are propelled sideways in a ridiculous manner. The second and third pages of the advertisement show that this distortion of her breasts has been caused by a rapidly passing Land Rover 4×4 Freelander that envelops her legs in a cloud of dust. She ostensibly ‘admir{es] the product" by allowing her eyes to follow the movement of the Freelander. The body copy on the second and third pages reads: "The new more powerful Freelander. The 130 kW, 240 Nm V6 or the 82 kW, 260 Nm Td4 diesel, both available with 5 speed steptronic transmission. The only thing tougher will be deciding on which one you prefer.' [...]

In capitalist societies, advertisements are considered to be instrumental in reproducing social structures and maintaining myths by establishing 'structures of meaning' chat reflect ideological ways of perceiving the world. Advertising images therefore stem from sets of power relations and enlist cultural codes, stereotypes, myths and ideologies in their social production of meaning. Alchough adverrisements generally 'depict particular mythologies or stereotypical ideals of "the good life" ... [based on] representations of gender, class and race',' the polysemic potential of representations should be borne in mind. Deborah Root states that che former colonies of the West are frequently represented by means of advertising images that are rich with colonial connotations, such as unbounded sexuality, luxury, power and adventure." I hope to show that the Himba advertisement is an example of how advertising can appropriate such discourses and keep certain representations in cultural circulation, even though these may be in the form of pastiche or parody. [...]

In order to understand the discomfort that the Himba advertisement elicited, it is necessary to understand some of the context of colonial rule in Namibia. Namibia, then known as South West

Africa, was colonized by Germany between 1884 and 1918, and this period is characterized by the usual iniquities perpetrated by the politics of imperialism. The majority of the Europeans who visited the region during that time did so in their capacity as explorers, missionaries and hunters. Colonial rule was characterized by the violent suppression of the indigenous peoples; it is estimated that as many as 65,000 Herero (who include the Himba) were exterminated during their revolt against the Germans between 1904 and 1907. It is significant, in terms of the Himba advertisement, that the Germans were subsequently accused of destroying tribal culture and of exploiting women and children for financial gain." In 1915, during World War I, South Africa ejected Germany from the region and Germany renounced sovereignty in the Treaty of Versailles. In 1920, the League of Nations granted South Africa mandate over the territory, which was surrendered with the gaining of Namibian independence in 1990.

The Himba are nomadic cattle herders who live in parts of Northern and Western Namibia, southern Angola and Botswana.'º Unlike other indigenous peoples in Namibia, the Himba generally had litdle contact with westerners. During colonial times, the region where they lived was declared a reservation and access was restricted by the subsequent South African apartheid government. Only when Namibia became independent in 1990 did regions such as Kaoko in Western Namibia become popular tourist destinations," particularly for South Africans. Because the Himba did not relinquish their traditions or mode of dress,'² they are considered one of the last so-called unspoilt, traditional peoples of Africa." [...]

