# Rebecca Houze / THE FETISHISM OF THE COMMODITY AND ITS SECRET, FROM CAPITAL

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# Rebecca Houze

Under the influence of anthropology, ethnography and material culture studies, and a desire to move beyond a canon of designers and manufacturers, consumption has been a core focus of interest within design history. We have explored several of these areas already throughout the Reader, from John Styles's study of eighteenth-century England to Thomas Hine's examination of 'Populuxe' in 1950s America. Indeed, there are few areas of design history chat do not touch upon consumption in some aspect. Within design history, srudies of consumption have tended to be informed by ideas about the role of the reader' (or viewer, or user) in making meaning for cultural artifacts (texts, objects), initiated by French structuralist and post-structuralist writers such as Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault, under the influence of early twentieth-century semioticians, Ferdinand de Saussure and Charles Pierce. Such studies have further been informed by Marxist critique of the role of objects within consumer society and by postmodern theory.

It is thus fitting to begin this section with an extract from Karl Marx's 1867 essay The Fetishism of the Commodity and its Secret' from the first volume of Capital. Marx begins, 'A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleries and theological niceties.' What is a commodity? Is it a thing? A symbol? The strangeness of the commodity, Marx demonstrates, results from che fact thar it is valued for exchange rather than use. Although Marx described the commodity fetish' as specific to industrialized capitalist societies, the fetish more generally can be understood in both anthropological and psychoanalytical terms, as an object invested with ritual power, on the one hand, and of displaced sexual desire on the other.

A half century later, Norwegian-American sociologist Thorstein Veblen identified conspicuous consumption' as the act of spending on things or in ways that signify social class. In earlier, pre-industrial societies, he writes, the patriarch's power was expressed through his own clothing, possessions and consumption of expensive food and drink – luxuries that were withheld from those in his service, including wife, children and slaves. Over time, this system transformed such chat a man's wealth became increasingly visible through the expenditures of his wife on household objects, clothing and leisure activities, the conspicuous wastefulness of which was reflected upon him, as provider. Although Veblen's theories were developed at the turn of the twentieth century and reflect late-Victorian spending habits, chey can also be used to help us understand mid-twentieth-century Western sociery in which women were also frequently viewed as the chief household consumers whose decorative and sartorial expressions signified their husbands' social standing.

Roland Barthes's semiotic readings of French advertisements and expressions of popular culture in the 1950s, such as dish and laundry detergents, new plastics and the stylish Citroën D.S. car, have been extremely inßuential as early examples of poststructural literary criticism. In his essay 'Myth Today', informed by Saussure's theory of language as an arbitrary and culturally constructed system, Barthes suggests that visual images can be read as a type of 'speech', which mythologizes their ideological underpinnings. His reading of these images and designed objects expands upon Marx's notion of the commodity as a 'social hieroglyphic', a form, like language, which is socially constructed and distinct from nature. For Barthes, myth is 'depoliticized speech' in which the troubled history of French colonialism in Africa, for example, can be obscured by the image of a young black man in uniform, saluting, we imagine, the French Alag. If myth obscures ideology, does design do so as well? In the rwo essays reproduced here, from Mythologies, the sleek and elegant 'D.S.', the new Nautilus, becomes the 'Déesse' (goddess) in our imaginations, just as the alchemical transformations of modern plastics evoke the world of Greek mythology and the futuristic realm of science fction. The selections here invite a comparison with the critique of consumption in section six offered by Vance Packard and Jeffrey Meikle, whose analyses of automotive styling and the plastics industry reveal the dangerous consequences of mid-century industrial design. Excessive and irresponsible consumption has proved to be increasingly problematic, a view raised by the collection of texts in section 6 on Sustainable Futures. There, Joel Makower, John Elkington and Julia Hailes propose more environmentally friendly modes of shopping in The Green Consumer Supermarket Guide (1991), while Nicky Gregson and Louise Crewe analyse the recycling and reuse of discarded objects, in ‘Redefining Rubbish' (2003).

Pierre Bourdieu's ethnographic survey of French consumers in the 1960s and 1970s has been useful in establishing taste' as a set of social relationships having to do with education, profession and family class origin. Complicating Veblen's understanding of 'conspicuous consumption', Bourdieu demonstrates that cultural capital represented by the artifacts we purchase, collect, or desire has less to do with one's own fnancial wealth than with one's understanding of the cultural value of music and literature, furnishings, clothing, and decorating styles, gained through education, experience, or privilege. The chree case studies we've reproduced here describe variations in consumption habits among the French middle class, from the 'Grand Bourgeois', dismissive of popular style, furnishing and décor, who enumerates his eccentric, idiosyncratic collection of antiquities and special objects acquired chrough inheritance and travels abroad, to the university professor who enjoys shopping for antiques with his wife, but who, for financial reasons, chooses to purchase simpler, less expensive and more practical furnishings, to the young advertising executive, compelled to dress in stylish, expensive, distinctive fashions for professional appearances but whose busy domestic life with working wife and two young children does not afford the luxury of a well-appointed home or car that might match his work clothes.

This section includes several 'primary texts' that have laid a foundation for further studies of consumption from a design historical perspective, especially related to economic and social class. The final two selections go beyond these pioneering srudies to make explicit the dimensions of gender and race within consumprion. In her entertaining and illuminating look at Tupperware in the 1950s, Alison J. Clarke explores the developing culture of suburbia in the United States, and women's ambiguous roles as both conspicuous consumers and as arbiters of domestic taste. In 'The Ascent of the Tupperware Party' we se how the plastics company captured an enormous market by employing housewives to sell the products at informal gatherings in their homes, combining entrepreneurial spirit with sociality. Robert Weems, Jr. explores strategies of companies in the 1960s that tried to cnter the African-American marker by appealing to a politicized expression of racial pride. Although this may have bolstered the influence of black entrepreneurs and black media, it is also clear during this period of increasing racial tension, with riots and 'white flight' to the suburbs of American cities, that 'while desired as shoppers'. African Americans were, 'often less desired by whites as classmates, co-workers, and neighbors'.

# THE FETISHISM OF THE COMMODITY AND ITS SECRET, FROM CAPITAL

Karł Marx (1867)

A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties. So far as it is a value in use, there is nothing mysterious about it, whether we consider it from the point of view that by its properties it is capable of satisfying human wants, or from the point that those properties are the product of human labour. It is as clear as noon-day, that man, by his industry, changes the forms of the materials furnished by nature, in such a way as to make them useful to him. The form of wood, for instance, is altered, by making a table out of it. Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that common, every-day thing, wood. But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is changed into someching transcendent. It not only srands with its feet on the ground, but, in relation to all other commodities, it stands on its head, and evolves out of its wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful than "table-turning" ever was.

The mystical character of commodities does not originate, therefore, in their use value. Just as little does it proceed from the nature of the determining factors of value. For, in the first place, however varied the useful kinds of labour, or productive activities, may be, it is a physiological fact, that they are functions of the human organism, and that each such function, whatever may be its nature or form, is essentially the expenditure of human brain, nerves, muscles, &c. Secondly, with regard to that which forms the ground-work for the quantitative determination of value, namely, the duration of char expenditure, or the quantity of labour, it is quite clear chat chere is a palpable difference between its quantity and quality. In all states of society, the labour-time that it costs to produce the means of subsistence, must necessarily be an object of interest to mankind, though not of equal interest in different stages of development.' And lastly, from the moment that men in any way work for one another, their labour assumes a social form.

Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of commodities? Clearly from this form itself. The equality of all sorts of human labour is expressed objectively by their products all being equally valued; the measure of the expenditure of labour-power by the duration of that expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value of the products of labour; and finally, the mutual relations of the producers, within which the social character of their labour affirms itself, take the form of a social relation between the products.

A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing. simply because in it the social character of men's labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour; because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between themselves, but between the products of their labour. This is the reason why the products of labour become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same cime perceptible and imperceptible by the senses. ln the same way the light from an object is perceived by us not as the subjective excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of something outside the eye itself. But, in the act of seeing, there is at all events, an actual passage of light from one thing to another, from the external object to the eye. There is a physical relation berween physical things. But it is different with commodities. There, the existence of the things quá commodities, and the value relation berween the products of labour which stamps them as commodities, have absolutely no connection with their physical properties and with the material relations arising therefrom. There it is a definite social relation berween men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things. In order, therefore, to find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious world. In that world the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, and entering into relation both with one another and the human race. So it is in the world of commodities with the products of men's hands. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour, so soon as they are produced as commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of commodities.

This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar social character of the labour that produces them.

As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only because they are products of the labour of private individuals or groups of individuals who carry on their work independently of each other. The sum total of the labour of all these private individuals forms the aggregate labour of society. Since the producers do not come into social contact with each other until they exchange their products, the specific social character of each producer's labour does not show itself excepr in the act of exchange. In other words, the labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the labour of society, only by means of che relations which the act of exchange establishes directly between the products, and indirectly, through them, between the producers. To the latter, therefore, the relations connecting the labour of one individual with that of the rest appear, not as direct socíal relations berween individuals at work, but as what they really are, material relations between persons and social relations between things. It is only by being exchanged that the products of labour acquire, as values, one uniform social status, distinct from their varied forms of existence as objects of utility. This division of a product into a useful thing and a value becomes practically important, only when exchange has acquired such an extension that useful articles are produced for the purpose of being exchanged, and their character as values has therefore to be taken into account, beforehand, during production. From this moment the labour of the individual producer acquires socially a twofold character. On the one hand, it must, as a definite useful kind of labour, satisfy a definite social want, and thus hold its place as part and parcel of the collective labour of all, as a branch of a social division of labour that has sprung up spontaneously. On the other hand, it can satisfy the manifold wants of the individual producer himself, only in so far as the mutual exchangeability of all kinds of useful private labour is an established social fact, and therefore the private useful labour of each producer ranks on an equality with chat of all others. The equalisation of most different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstraction from their inequalities, or of reducing them to their common denominator, viz, expenditure of human labour power or human labour in the abstract. The twofold social character of the labour of the individual appears to him, when reflected in his brain, only under those forms which are impressed upon that labour in every-day practice by the exchange of products. In this way, the character that his own labour possesses of being socially useful takes the form of the condition, that the product must be not only useful, but useful for others, and the social character that his particular labour has of being the equal of all other particular kinds of labour, takes the form that all the physically different articles that are the products of labour have one common qualiry, viz., that of having value.

Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into relation with each other as values, it is not because we see in these articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. Quite the contrary: whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products, by that very act, we also equate, as human labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon them. We are not aware of this, nevertheless we do it.² Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is. It is value, rather, that converts every product into a social hieroglyphic. Later on, we try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own social products; for to stamp an object of utility as a value, is just as much a social product as language. The recent scientific discovery, that the products of labour, so far as they are values, are but material expressions of the human labour spent in their production, marks, indeed, an epoch in the history of the development of the human race, but, by no means, dissipates the mist through which the social character of labour appears to us to be an objective character of the products themselves. The fact, that in the particular form of production with which we are dealing, viz., the production of commodities, the specific social character of private labour carried on independently, consists in the equality of every kind of that labour, by virtue of its being human labour, which character, therefore, assumes in the product the form of value – this fact appears to the producers, notwithstanding the discovery above referred to, to be just as real and final, as the fact, that, after the discovery by science of the component gases of air, the atmosphere itself remained unaltered.

To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism inherent in commodities, or by che objective appearance of the social characteristics of labour, is shown, amongst other ways, by the dull and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature in the formation of exchange value. Since exchange value is a definite social manner of expressing the amount of labour bestowed upon an object, Nature has no more to do with it, than it has in fixing the course of exchange.

The mode of production in which the product takes the form of a commodity, or is produced directly for exchange, is the most general and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. It therefore makes its appearance at an early date in history, though not in the same predominating and characteristic manner as now-a-days. Hence its Fetish character is comparatively easy to be seen through. But when we come to more concrete forms, even this appearance of simplicity vanishes. Whence arose the illusions of the monetary system? To it gold and silver, when serving as money, did not represent a social relation between producers, but were narural objects with strange social properties. And modern economy, which looks down with such disdain on the monetary system, does not its superstition comne out as clear as noon-day, whenever it treats of capital? How long is it since economy discarded the physiocratic illusion, that rents grow out of the soil and not out of society.

But not to anticipare, we will content ourselves with yet another example relating to the commodity form. Could commodities themselves speak, they would say: Our use value may be a thing that interests men. It is no part of us as objects. What, however, does belong to us as objects, is our value. Our natural intercourse as commodities proves it. In the eyes of each other we are nothing but exchange values. Now listen how those commodities speak through the mouth of the economist.

"Value" – (i.e., exchange value) "is a property of things, riches" – (i.e., use value) "of man. Value, in this sense, necessarily implies exchanges, riches do not."3 “Riches" (use value) "are the attribute of men, value is the attribute of commodities. A man or a community is rich, a pearl or a diamond is valuable ..." A pearl or a diamond is valuable as a pearl or a diamond.4

So far no chemist has ever discovered exchange value either in a pearl or a diamond. The economic discoverers of this chemical element, who by-the-bye lay special claim to critical acumen, find however chat the use value of objects belongs to them independently of their material properties, while their value, on the other hand, forms a part of them as objects. What confirms them in this view, is the peculiar circumstance that the use value of objects is realised without exchange, by means of a direct relation between the objects and man, while, on the other hand, their value is realised only by exchange, that is, by means of a social proçess. Who fails here to call to mind our good friend, Dogberry, who informs neighbour Seacoal, that, "To be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune; but reading and writing comes by nature."

