# SECTION 3 / INTRODUCTION / Rebecce Houze / INTRODUCTION TO MODERNISM IN DESIGN Paul Greenhalgh (1990)

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

## SECTION 3

Modernisms, 1908–50

# INTRODUCTION

# Rebecce Houze

The intense debate in the second half of the nineteenth century concerning the relationship between craft and industrial production continued unabated into the twentieth century. In the years leading up to the First World War, designers continued the search for a new language of form that had been initi ated with the Art Nouveau movement of the 1890s, and increasingly began to question the meaning of ornament, as well as the role of national identity, in the style of manufactured objects.

Expanding on the Jugendstil notion of the Gesamtkunstwerk, the total work of art', progressive painters, illustrators and craftsmen, such as Hermann Obrist and Henry van de Velde, associated with the Munich Vereinigten Werkstätten für Kunst im Handwerk, and Josef Hoffmann and Koloman Moser, members of the Vienna Secession and Wiener Werkstätte, engaged in practice thar spanned the fine and applied arts, creating organic spaces guided by an overarching aesthetic, in which buildings interiors, furnishings, art objects, utensils, and even their inhabitants' dress were united.

In his famous 1908 diatribe Ornament and Crime', Viennese architect and adversary of the Secession movement, Adolf Loos, attacked the decorative craft-based sryle of van de Velde, Obrist and others as antithetical to modern life, which in his opinion was better represented by well-railored English men's clothing and the industrial buildings and products of America. Loos's views were outside the mainstream when they were written but, during the course of the first half of the twentieth century, they came to dominate the understanding of modernist as ascetic, utilitarian, masculine and industrial, as opposed to decorative, feminine or primitive – an interpretation that we can find repeated in the writings of Le Corbusier, as well as in the objects produced by designers at the Bauhaus in the 1920s.

Paul Greenhalgh, writing from the postmodern vantage point of the 1980s, defined the 'Modern Movement' in the first half of the rwentieth century as a set of ideas and visionary goals, which by the 1930s devolved into the pervasive look and technology of the 'International Style'. Although the imaginative designs of the Italian Futurists, Russian Constructivists, De Stijl, Purists and early Bauhaus workshops did not set out to describe a particular look, these avant-garde movements' valorization of industrial production, emphasis on abstract forms and international collaboration inevitably led them. he writes, to explore the spare rectilinear forms that we see expressed in architecture, furnishings, fashions, and typography, which were indeed employed around the globe, and which persisted in some places even into the 1970s. Due to the inAuence of modernist institutions and scholarship. including the 1932 'International Exhibition of Modern Architecture' at the New York Museum of Modern Art, organized by HIenry Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, as well as architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner's canonical 1936 book Pioneers ofthe Modern Movement, the International Style and the functionalist theories that were believed to precede it have overshadowed the fact that a plurality of paradoxical design aesthetics co-existed in the first half of the twentieth century, all of which understood themselves as 'modern'.

The Deutscher Werkbund, founded in 1907, was an outgrowth of the German crafts workshops with a new goal of forging an alliance between art and industry. The 1914 Werkbund exhibition in Cologne showcased a diverse array of designs, including decorative Wiener Werkstätte furnishings, expressionistic coloured glass buildings designed by Bruno Taut and the industrial factory architecture of Walter Gropius. As the debate between Henry van de Velde and Hermann Muthesius reveals, it was not at all clear, on che eve of the First World War, which goals, ideology, and aesthetic direction would be most appropriate for twentieth-century designers to pursue. Whereas van de Velde argued for the necessity of individual artistic integrity, Muthesius prophesied a new architecture, like that seen in Gropius's model factory, which would be based on standardized forms and which promised to erase class boundaries while bolstering German industry and economy through international export.

The chapter 'From Workshop to Laboratory', taken from Gillian Naylor's book The Bauhaus Reassessed, examines this dynamic between craft and industry, standardization and individuality, within the programme of the German design school, which in many ways came to be seen as the face of modern design. Unlike Pevsner's didactic canonization of monumental buildings, objects and pioneers', however, Naylor's case study of the institution and personalities within, based on archival research, is a nuanced and subtle examination of this pivotal moment in the history of design.

Nancy Troy's insightful reading of Le Corbusier's early career and his deep involvement with the decorative arts in France further complicate the notion of the International Style' as a tendency that entirely rejected ornament or that was dominated by the successes of German industry. On the eve of the First World War, when he was still Charles Edouard Jeanneret, the Swiss architect later known for his radical city planning and buildings of reinforced concrete consciously crafted his career within a community of fashionable French furnishing and dress designers, the coloristes. Inspired by the colourful neoclassical products of André Groult and Paul Poiret, Jeanneret shaped his own vision of modern design, which was built on the new materials and technologies of the industrial age, while still remaining rooted in the historical forms of a national French tradition

The 1925 Paris Exposition des Arts Décoratifs et Industriels Modernes furthered the program of the coloristes and popularized the eclectic art deco style throughout Europe and North America. But the reception of Art Deco in the United States was mixed in the late 1920s and early 1930s. Whereas many architects incorporated art deco ornament into their design of skyscrapers, resorts, and movie theaters, much of the general public was wary of che foreign abstract style. Nicolas P. Maffei traces the efforts of American industrial designers in the 1930s, such as Norman Bel Geddes and Walter Dorwin Teague, to develop a distinctly American style, which would reflect the industrial technology of the modern age, while also expressing the necessary charm of domestic comforts. Their transformation of European Art Deco into native 'streamlined' designs of automobiles, trains and domestic appliances culminated with the sensational exhibits at the 1939 New York World's Fair, where Bel Geddes's Futurama' installation for General Motors offered a new vision to the public - the world of tomorrow.

# INTRODUCTION TO MODERNISM IN DESIGN Paul Greenhalgh (1990)

Viewed from the safe distance of the 1990s, we can perceive a chronology within the Modern Movement in design; it had two phases. The first I will fashion the Pioneer phase, this opening amid the deafening thunder of the guns of the First World War and closing with the demise of the key movements between 1929 and 1933. The second, opening in the early 1930s, I will label the International Style

[...]

Pioneer Modernism consisted of a series of movements and individuals who addressed themselves to the problem of an appropriate design for the twentieth century. They were very much concerned with three spheres of activity: architecture, furniture and graphics, the former of which undoubredly held sway.' They were not the first to ponder the idea of an appropriate 'modern' style, neither did they invent all of their own ideas, technologies and stylistic mannerisms. lndeed, they invented few of them. Rather, what made them different from anything which had gone before was the holistic world-view they constructed from earlier, disparate ideas, and the absolutist nature of their vision.

[...]

Berween 1920 and 1930 Modernists throughout Europe argued violently through letters, articles and personal confrontations and by 1935 they had drifted apart in terms of their actual design work. Accepting this, it is still possible to discern a core of common ideas. I have identified twelve, of which some are closely based on the published manifestos, some are distillations from broadly held (and voiced) ideas of the time and some are observations made from the safe haven of 1990. My aim, therefore, is nor to define in specific detail the nature of the Modern Movement (even if this were possible) but to identify the theoretical features which characterized the broad sweep of its activity before the advent proper of the International Style. I shall list the features and then I will go on to discuss them at some length:

[...]

1. Decompartmentalisation

2. Social morality

3. Truth

4. The total work of art

5. Technology

6. Function

7. Progress

8. Anti-historicism

9. Abstraction

10. Internationalism/universality

11. Transformation

12. Theology

The over-arching concern of the Modern Movement was to break down barriers between aesthetics, technics and society, in order that an appropriate design of che highest visual and practical quality could be produced for the mass of the population. Perhaps, this idea, of the decompartmentalisation of hurnan experience, was the single most important ideal.² Most of the points that follow relate back to this initial promise.

Design was to be forged into à weapon with which to combat the alienation apparent in modern, urban society. It was therefore construed to be fundamentally a political activity, concerned with the achievement of a proper level of social morality. It was meant to improve the conditions of the population who consumed ir: 'I have the unfashionable conviction that the proper concern of architecture is more than self-display. It is a thesis, a declaration, a statement of the social aims of the age."

By 1920, it was widely accepted by intellectuals on the left that the masses had been bruralized by the economic and political processes which shaped their lives: 'Owing to the extensive use of machinery and to [the] division of labour, the work of the proletarians has lost all individual character, and, consequently, all charm for the workman. He becomes an appendage of the machine ... Hence, the cost of production of a workman is restricted, almost entirely, to the means of subsistence that he requires for his maintenance, and for the propagation of his race." For Marxists, the combination of capital and industry had led to the alienation of the worker from the processes and objects of production, with far-reaching effects: "Thus alienated labour turns [Man) ... into an alien being and into a means for his individual existence. It alienated from Man his own body, external nature, his mental life and his human life. A direct consequence of the alienation of Man from the product of his labour ... is chat Man is alienated from other Men." Alienation thus became an intense psychological impoverishment, characterized as the negation of the spiritual essence of humankind: 'We arrive at the result that Man (the worker) feels himself to be freely active only in his animal functions – eating, drinking and procreating, or at most also in his dwelling and personal adornment – while in his human functions he is reduced to an animal."6 The subject was prevented from taking control of, and transforming, the circumstances he or she found themselves in. Because of this, the alienated masses were understood to have been perpetual victims of capitalism, spectacularly so in the form of the First World War.

Design was inextricably bound up with commodity production, which in turn was the driving force behind the creation of wealth. It was reasoned, cherefore, that it had the potential to cransform che economic and social conditions of the masses. By doing so, the spectre of alienation could be vanquished.

A question of Morality; a lack of Truth is intolerable, we perish in untruth." Truth as a moral value was transposed into being simultaneously an aestheric quality. Within the terms of the construction and appearance of objects, truth meant the avoidance of contrivances which created an illusion or false impression. The designer had to avoid 'formalistic imitation and snobbery' which often distorted the fundamental truth.'\* The way an object was made had to be apparent and its visual attractiveness had to come directly out of chose processes of construction. Truth as an ideal led, therefore, to a wholesale rejection of decoracion, especially when it was perceived to be an element added after the major constructional work had taken place. Decoration could only mask the structural and spatial honesty of the object. In the Fine Arts arena, with the rejection of the use of modeling, perspective and other devices for the creation of illusionary space, illusion or disguise of any kind in any of the visual arts was synonymous with a lie.

Following this idea to its logical conclusion, objects had to be self-consciously proud of what they were and how they had arrived in the world, much in the way that the democratized masses were encouraged to be proud of their origins and their status as workers. Indeed, an object had to reveal its mode of work and its ability to perform it in order to be fully Modern.

With themselves, the various arts had to work in conjunction in order that they created a total work of art (Gesamtkunstwerk).° The fine, applied, decorative and design arts should be a single continuum, allowing for their different practical functions and production techniques. All Modernists, particularly those at the Bauhaus, resented the privileged status enjoyed by some arts over others. Such privileging was perceived to mirror the class system at work in society. The Fine Arts, in a Modernist world, would integrate completely with other disciplines. It would be wrong to assume, however, that the Pioneer Moderns successfully addressed the design issue in every medium.

Technology had to be used in its most advanced forms in order to facilitate economy and, from this, availability. Mass production and prefabrication were embraced as being the means through which Modernism would arrive on the streets. Beyond this, the standardization of components would allow for the rapid erection and repair of objects. 'Mass production, the inevitable purpose for which the first power-driven machine, the modern tool, was invented, today can be utilized for the production of essential elements for the millions who at the moment lack them ... Mass production and prefabrication of all essential structural parts of the simplest dwelling could contribute some form of standardized architeccure."e It must be stressed, however, that amongst the Pioneers at least, mass production remained an idea. Virtually nothing that was designed in the first phase of Modernism went into mass production, or, indeed, was designed so as to be capable of adaptation to genuine standardization. It was an ideal the likes of Henry Ford being an exemplar of a designer they talked about but could not, at that stage, emulate. Mass-produced Modernism only became a reality when the International Style achieved legitimacy.

There was also a strong sense in some schools of thought that the application of new technology to objects gave them an appearance which the masses could understand. Technology functioned not only in a practical way then, but in a symbolic one also.

The successful functioning of all designed produce was deemed of great importance. Connected to the desire for technology expressed above, therefore, was a pronounced rationalism. 'In the conviction that household appliances and furnishings must be rationally related to each other, the Bauhaus is seeking - by systematic, practical and theoretical research in the formal, technical and economic fields - to derive the design of an object from its natural functions and relationships.'" Objects had to be planned in order to work effectively and when things were planned effectively, it was suggested, they tended to be beautiful. The proof of this aesthetic was in the machine, which was beautiful because its form had been largely determined by the way it worked: 'A good modern machine is ... an object of the highest aesthetic value – we are aware of that.'2 'Civilizations advance. They pass through the age of the peasant, the soldier and the priest and attain what is rightly called culture.'" The concept of progress was a central driving force. The world was perceived to have been in a chaotic, if not overtly evil, condition; every aspect of humanity had to be advanced towards a higher form, away from this previous state. The advent of democracy and the anticipation of socialism appeared, for many, to indicate social progress; indeed, it was a precondition for all Marxists that such progress was an historical phenomenon. Equally, social-Darwinism was a potent influence. Belief in the biological advance of humankind along Darwinian lines suited Modernists, despite its heinous implications for non-industrial societies." New technologies demonstrated a virtual model of linear advance in the sciences. Design could do the same. Modernists believed in the idea of aesthetic advance, rather than simply of aesthetic change.

Following from this, historical styles and technologies had to be eliminated wherever possible. If the human race was in a process of advance and if the past represented the unsatisfactory condition society was striving to move away from then past styles were both aesthetically and morally undesirable. As the majority of ornament was historical, anti-historicism was therefore synonymous with anti-decoration: 'The evolution of culture is synonymous wich the removal of ornament from utilitarian objects.' Compounded with the idea of aesthetic truth, this principle effectively eliminated the possibility of a Modern Movement decoration. Having said this, it would be wrong to assume that the Pioneers didn't use che ideas of the great designers and artists of the past. Rather, they were against the use of previous styles when these were intended simply to evoke memory of the past: 'Modern architecture has nothing but the healthiest lessons to learn from the art of the ... past, if that art be studied scientifically and not in a spirit of imitation.'6

Anti-historicism also led to a redefinition of the meaning of the word 'style.' Prior to the twentieth century, styles were associated with particular periods or cultural groups and used in order to reflect their meaning in the object. It had been previously inconceivable that a designer could have his own style, or that an object of aesthetic value could have no style.

Abstraction was the key aesthetic device employed by the majority of designers. The first pure, non-objective art was produced by painters in the wake of Cubism: Frantisek Kupka, Vasili Kandinsky, Sonia and Robert Delaunay all abandoned figuration during the course of 1911-12. Between 1914 and 1919, Piet Mondrian, Kasimir Malevich and many others took it to its logical conclusion.' Essentially, abstract art was understood to be that which eliminated figurative or symbolic elements in favour of the manipulation of 'pure' form. The search for purity was closely related to the idea of truth: 'Although one has always to operate more or less speculatively in the domain of abstraction, there is good reason to accept this latter manner of visionary thinking about plastic art as true."s

Obviously abstraction implied an outright rejection of figurative elements in design and, consequently, a severe reduction in the potential of the object as a conveyor of narrative or symbol. In European design, much of the narrative conveyed by an object had been via its ornament; the embracing of abstraction led therefore to a yet further assault on the viability of ornamentation. The abstract form of an object was normally developed within the parameters of the structure, rather than as an addition to it.

Internationalism and universality are two ideas which to all intents and purposes came to mean virtually the same thing for Pioneer Moderns If barriers between disciplines and classes of consumer were to be eliminated, and if historical styles as indicators of chronological divides were to be proscribed, then inevitably national differences had to go. The Modern Movement was cherefore unavoidably internationalist in outlook, chis being part of the quest for a universal human consciousness; 'The International of the Mind is an inner experience which cannot be translated into words. It does not consist of vocables but of plastic creative acts and inner intellectual force, which thus creates a newly shaped world.'9

The two ideas had both a political and an aesthetic rationale. The former is easily explicable in terms of che historical context. The First World Ward, fuelled by nationalism, raged while the various Modernist schools were forming. The humanitarian way of explaining the success of nationalism (which was largely irrational both historiographically and demographically)²° was that it could only be successful in a climate of alienation. By offering the masses a sense of belonging, ancestry and identity, nationalism was the ultimate false religion. Since nationalism was the spawn of, and a parasite on, alienated peoples, it was inevitable that Modernists would be internationalist in outlook. It was reasoned that if in its very appearance the new design was international, this would facilitate cuttural exchange and reduce the sense of Difference which often led to war. It would also encourage creativity in design outside of the hegemony of local politics.

The quest for a self-conscious internationalism was not new. Practitioners associated with Art Nouveau were the first to suggest it as an aesthetic solution to a moral discourse. They used nature as a common language. The substitution of nature with abstraction was the key to internationalism for the Pioneer Moderns, as it bypassed the need for the commonly held symbology and language which nature demanded. Abstraction would enable the various national schools to work intuitively and srill arrive at design solutions parallel with those of their colleagues broad. In its exclusion per se of language, abstraction was the aesthetic which enabled the ethic, internationalism, to be realised.

The aesthetic rationale also percained to the idea of universality. Many Modernists believed that beauty was a timeless, immutable value and that it could be exposed and utilized to produce a single, universal aesthetic. This could be (potentially) perceived by all. Geometric abstraction was the key device for the achievement of this universality, as it escaped immediate social contexts and contained the immutable truths of mathematics. Ancient sources were frequently cited to support the argument, giving weight to the idea of timelessness. For example, the catalogue of the exhibition, 'Machine Art,' held at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, in 1934, opened with a quotation from Plato: 'By beauty of shapes I do not mean, as most people would suppose, the beauty of living figures or pictures, but, to make my point clear, I mean straight lines and circles, and shapes, plane or solid, made from them by lathe, ruler and square. These are not, like many chings, beautiful relatively, but always and absolutely.'

Design was perceived to have the ability to transform the consciousness of those who were brought into contact with it. For example, if one were to redesign a city. this would not simply improve the environmental conditions of those who lived in it, it would have the potential to shift their psychological outlook. This attitude to visual stimuli was undoubtedly given additional credence by the ascendancy of Gestalt psychology in the first two decades of the new century. After this, Behaviourists produced evidence which seemed to support determinist ideas of design.

Design therefore could function as a 'great improver,' a sophisticated kind of mental therapy which could change the mood and outlook of a population. It followed, then, that once introduced to the right kind of design in the right conditions, the masses would come to accept it as being the only viable way of making things. One would not need many styles or methodologies if one had a single correct one.

The logic of this argument was first clearly articulated in the ninetcenth century by the more liberal of the unitarian philosophers, particularly John Stuart Mill, as a corrective to their otherwise stark Populism.2 Perhaps its greatest consequence was to naturalise the idea amongst all followers of Modernism that the role of the designer was central to the enhancement of the human potential of che masses. The Modern Movement was concerned almost wholly with means of production racher than with consumption; the perfection of production would lead to a higher form of society. Designers were in effect to be the equivalent of Plato's 'Philosopher Kings.

There was an atmosphere of a crusade amongst all Moderns. Their programme went well beyond that of making functional goods to economic ends and was deeply concerned with 'the aesthetic satisfaction of the human soul.'24 The Pioneer phase had a theological intensity about it: 'A great epoch has begun, / There exists a new spirit.'2 Indeed, in their intellectual and emotional allegiances, some of the Pioneers pushed their commitment into a realm analogous to a religion. Numerous members of the De Stijl and Bauhaus communities actually practiced theosophy and the Purists were infected wich a Platonism which bordered on the mystical. This simply reinforced the idea that design was not to do with styles, but was a way of seeing the world. That wouldview demanded singular allegiance and active commitment.

