# INTEGRATIVE PRACTICE: ORAL HISTORY, DRESS AND DISABILITY STUDIES Liz Linthicum (2006) / PLACING USER KNOWLEDGE AT THE FOREFRONT / INTERVIEWS AND SELF-REPRESENTATION / COMBINING ANALYTIC STRATEGIES / 'MUTUALLYINFORMATIVE DIALOGUE

> Section: body | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York\auto\The design history reader -- Grace Lees-Maffei, Rebecca Houze (eds_) -- New York.md

# INTEGRATIVE PRACTICE: ORAL HISTORY, DRESS AND DISABILITY STUDIES Liz Linthicum (2006)

Logic suggests that there has always been a history of clothing that has evolved around people who have been determined as 'disabled'. Bodies and psychologies, in all their variety, have always been accommodated in clothing in one designed form or another, yet studies of dress have yet to engage adequately with this subject area. There have been various perspectives that make their own reference to it, ranging from those that are dated and medically orientated – such as those from the occupational therapy,' ergonomics and nursing’ felds – to those that are primarily focused on consumer-oriented concerns. These [...) do need to be acknowledged and recognized as forming their part within this multidimensional aspect of dress history. It is also essential, however, that the actual experiential dimensions of disabled people's interactions with clothing be at the core of historical research in this area. The following outlines some methodological, ethical and interpretative issues that have arisen during the oral history aspect of a project that has begun exploring the fertile 'inter-discipline' formed between the fields of dress studies and disability studies. [...]

## PLACING USER KNOWLEDGE AT THE FOREFRONT

The oral history project centred on a highly personal aspect of people's lives that raised important issues of confidentiality. For instance, the project was more likely to benefit from a free flow of personal information if the interviewees were assured that they would nor be identifed by name, but by code and location. The knowledge that their identities would remain confdential also protected those who wanted to contribute to the project whilst also continuing to engage with their social circle - of which the interviewer was unlikely to have knowledge – that brought them into contact with the project in the first place. without undue pressure.

The effect of preparing and using roughly similar question plans for each interview provided a structure by which responses could potentially be compared. Often, though, responses to these initial questions – such as 'What's important to you about your clothing?' - directed each interview into a surprisingly diverse range of other enquiries, which formed the basis for many of the subsequent questions thar were asked, ad hoc, during the rest of each interview. Two interviewees interpreted the question Could I ask you to think back and tell me about the frst outfit you remember wearing?’ as a query regarding the clothing they first wore as newly disabled people, whereas the same question prompted others to talk about their childhood memories of clothing. Both response types offered fascinating insights into the interviewees' life views and approaches. Likewise, points of divergence echoed throughout the interviews, with specific garment types or dressing issues being mentioned by several respondents. [...]

The interviewees comprised six men and three women; three of the nine had always lived as disabled people and the other five had acquired impairments during their lives. The five in this latter group described – often by implication – a process of adjustment to life as disabled people, a process to which some of my interviewees were very accustomed whilst others were at the earlier stages:

I didn't really bother with clothes for about a year really, just wore old clothes – I was terrified of shopping." (Female respondent)

I progressed from pyjamas to tracksuit ... a sort of upper market tracksuit, but it was still basically a tracksuit, but I felt sort of dressed, I thought, you know, I sort of gradually got to wearing trousers and ordinary clothes.' (Male respondent)

Despite several similarities in clothing issues brought to the interviews by both groups, the interviewees often appeared to uphold a general sense of the coping-with-adversity approach to their clothing and dressing that is portrayed in many of the older published sources.8 This could be characterized by, for instance, this literature's repeated concern that clothing creates camouflage for that which has been determined as impairment, and by the strong emphasis on the 'functionality' of clothing intended for disabled people. A distinctly different attitude to clothing and dress issues was outlined by those with lifelong experiences of disability: 'My relationship with clothing is very much reflective of my relationship with myself and my self-discovery, my own self, my own identity, my own sexuality. And clothing is an important part of that journey, as it is for everybody else." [male respondent] [...]

Recognition of the contribution oral history can make in relation to reclaiming the cultural history of disability has been made by Karen Hirsch. She calls for disability issues to be included 'as an analytic category'o within the making of oral history. She also challenges the notion that it is ‘assumed that disabled people do not have an articulate view of their circumstances that differ(s] .. from other views'." These ideas, as well as her discussions that centre on the highly sensitive issue of 'interpretive authority'' in relation to disabled people's testimony, are examples taken from Hirsch's work that illustrate her contributions to oral history's potential to recover historical knowledge around clothing used by disabled people now and in the past.' The oral history material gathered for this project could be used as much for what it suggests methodologically as for what it contains. The process of oral history interviewing allowed for a more sensitive approach, enabling the research to be carried out outside now-discredited medically modelled perceptions of disabled people's realities. It also, crucially, enabled respect for individuals' own criteria for what issues mattered to ther. It has been argued that by 'introduc[ing] the emotionality, the fears, che fantasies carried by the metaphors, which historians have been so anxious to write out of their formal accounts' oral historians operate under accusations of unreliability, subjective narrative, conjecture and the essential fallibility of individual personal memory'." But it is these very human craits – the 'web of feelings, arcitudes and values that give meaning to activities and events'6 – thar determnine oral history as a highly suitable methodology which is able to capture and respect the type of complexities that are apparent in consciously reclaiming disabled people's clothing realities.

Very often, the most informative material gathered during oral history recordings has not necessarily formed near, accessible, broadcast-able narratives. One interviewee made a significant contribution to the project by demonstrating the ingenious adjustments – 'all my own work'' – he had to make to his footwear:

So I have to have this ghastly business of toggles and laces which I lashed up myself which is not totally satisfactory, but does work a bit ... you will notice that the loops on the shoe I have Snopaked to make them more obvious. As you look down under your knee everything becomes dark, of course, making it impossible to see.'\*\*

He carefully demonstrated how he puts on his foorwear and improvised leg support, moving his own left hand and arm with his stronger right hand in order to facilitate this complicated dressing process. The resulting two and a half minutes of recorded vocal physical effort interspersed with comment is hard to convey, in either transcription or written format and is eloquent testimony to how clothing can become not only a site for highly individual creative innovation but also a contested area which has little to do with standard, intended or medical 'solutions'. [...]

Fastenings, as a problematic issue in garment design for many disabled people, are further illustrated by another interviewee:

I have had terrible times. Once I couldn't undo a coat and I had no one around me at the time, so I had to go to bed in it. I just couldn't get it off. 1 don't know why 1 couldn't ... The material was too thick, couldn't cut it off." (Female respondent)

A concern to place user knowledge at the forefront echoes moves in both disability studies2º and dress studies²' to reincorporate the body, and the issues it inherently brings with it. Recording the resonating significance of thoughts, feelings and physical efforts of people operating in intimate embodied circumstances may profoundly challenge accepted concepts of design history by foregrounding experiential contexts. The above testimonies highlight how the very 'process' of dressing, rather than an over concentration on the stylistic result' that dress is often implied to be, is more likely to encompass how the human endeavour of interacting with clothing has operated over the past from the 'disability' perspective. [...]

## INTERVIEWS AND SELF-REPRESENTATION

The importance of planning an oral history approach at the initial stage of long-term research projects became evident after one interviewee suggested that oral history interviewing could be considered as a fundamental starting tool and a sign of good practice within disability-orientated research. The value of this insight steered the very direction of my research in ways more profound than could have been initially expected. Material gathered in this initial stage underscored the approach of the entire project, as is clear in this excerpt from one of my early interviews:

I think we should be looking at things from a completely different angle. And if we look at the functionality of clothing itself and look at the fact that it's not an issue just for disabled people, it's an issue for everybody ... there's a whole continuum [of approaches to/requirements from different types of clothes] which should include disabled people in a mainstream way, as opposed to this 'special needs' approach." (Male respondent). {...]

The material gathered during oral history interviews could allow sources themselves to influence the direction of research. [...] Comments made by two interviewees in relation to identity expectations and how they had been expressed through appearance and clothing had helped to steer the project towards considering the pernicious impact of institutional life upon disabled people in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries:

I mean now it's on the wane, the use of leggings for people with learning disabilities, everyone seemed to be wearing leggings or a large number. But it says noching about chem. Nothing about the fact they very often have real ideas about what they want to wear. [...] The look of a person wearing a woolly coat and a bobble hat ... it's all a process of disempowerment ... Your life is not shaped by you ... the food you eat, the clothes you wear, the money you use, etc. etc.2 (Male respondent) {...]

Further extracts referring to mundane, everyday clothing issues have the potential to clarify, even uncover, much larger historical themes. Some standard dress-related practices carried out in many institutions have had a profound effect on how disabled people have been perceived and on how it has been assumed they have lived their lives:

There is a whole culture of dressing disabled people as asexual; that's very strong in terms of institutionalised settings I think in many contemporaries' experiences, I remember mine particularly.'²1 (Male respondent)

The deliberate curtailment of sexual and gender expression within the old institutional settings is a deeply significant issue in the formation of institutionalized peoples' individual identities. It is an issue that recurs in other projects that have used oral history to recover disability history.25 This negative attitude towards the sexuality of the disabled, then and now, is a major contributing factor to the way in which our culture has come to view and deal with disability itself.

## COMBINING ANALYTIC STRATEGIES

[...] At an appropriate point during most of the interviews,26 a self-help manual²7 was shown to prompt interviewees. My intention was to grant interviewees distance – considering the often personal natúre of the topic – whilst they described their experience of clothing. This appeared irrelevant in practice, however, with interviewees keen to engage with the book in two very different ways. One interviewee was impressed with sore of the specific ideas the book contained:

I've never seen anything like this or heard about anything like this being available in this country. And I think it would be, there are thousands of people in wheelchairs ... there's a colossal market out there really, if someone could sort of latch onto it. I know everyone's got different needs and different sort of problems but you know, there are plenty of people that would benefit.28 (Male respondent)

Another interviewee with lifelong experience of living as a disabled person took an entirely different approach:

I mean it's very well meaning. I mean it's some kind of medical approach to people's clothing ... Let's have a look {turns to credits at the front of the book] Yes, it's done with an occupational therapist ... they understand the issues bur it's approached through the world of occupational therapists and rehabilitation and settings that actually say nothing about my home and my community and my fashion magazines and my television images and my whatever other things that inform and influence the aesthetic, design, shape of your world and your appearance within that world. And it's fine [indicating the book], but it's, it's – we need more, we [need] a lot more. A lot better. A lot more fun.2° (Male respondent)

[...] What was also apparent from using objects to elicit responses was what can be revealed by combining oral history methods with other merhodologies employed by dress studies historians, such as stringent object analysis. Another way in which the process of oral history illuminated object analysis occurred when attention was directed away from the actual content of the self-help manual during several interviews. I was struck by how inaccessible this object, and no doubt the other self-help manuals, had been: in order for it be read, assistance from another person was required to open, hold or steady the book for five out of my nine interviewees. This experience suggested that analysis of objects could be extended to consider how sources such as these operate beyond their content, in terms of how they materially manifest and interact with those for whom they are intended. [...]

## 'MUTUALLYINFORMATIVE DIALOGUE

The individual life circumstances of some interviewees highlighted the need to develop a range of more inclusively refined interviewing skills. Awareness of how the researcher can affect what is being researched was a continual factor throughout all the stages of the project. For example, it became apparent during a recorded interview with a blind interviewee that using body language to convey that the interviewer was listening was of little use. Unfamiliarity with ways of verbally affirming the interviewee without undue sound interruption resulted in an unfortunately short (but nevertheless valuable) interview. This is one of many experiences that suggested the need for alternative interviewing strategies.

Biddle-Perry rightly advocates a 'mutually informative dialogue berween clothing and oral historians and their research'.3º [...] Consciously building consultative approaches into oral history projects would encourage recognition of the points at which design historians can be brought in to contribute their particular specialist insights. At the very least, interdisciplinary dialogue throws a sharp light on the position of the interviewer, encouraging a conscious reflexivity on their part and dermanding clearly stated positions of expertise. My position as interviewer during the project referred to in this article was informed by several positions from within my own realm of knowledge. Fluxing between knowledge gained as a [care-giver], knowledge gained as a deaf studies student, and as a dress historian, afforded me several positions from which to begin my dialogue within that particular proces.

The process of interpreting oral history material is anything but straightforward. An example of this is the knowledge that our own interpretations of oral history can create and form 'secondlevel narrative[s]' which, although based upon the original material we collect, result in 'reshaping ... the first'" and original levels of narrative, as told by the interviewees. This layering can surface in many ways, but here I shall elaborate che echical, and the interpretative issues.

Firstly, it is vital for research of any scale to be infused with material contributed by those who are living disabled realities. The layering of a nondisabled narrative upon that which originated as a disabled one can be an obvious problem in work conducted by researchers who have no personal experience of non-standard interaction with the designed world around them. [...] [A] profound lack of development of wider, inclusive thinking - on a design level and beyond – has historically shaped our society in ways which have been profoundly negative and limiting for all of us."

