# A NOTE ON ART BOOKS I have made it a rule in the body of this book not to irritate the reader with repeated reminders of the many things that lack of space prevented me from showing or discussing. I must break this rule here and say with emphasis, and with regret, that it is quite impossible for me to acknowledge all the authorities to whom I am indebted in the foregoing pages. Our ideas about the past are the result of an immense co-operative effort and even a simple book like this may be described as a report on the work of a large team of historians, living and dead, who have helped to clarify the outlines of periods, styles and personalities. And how many facts, formulations and opinions one may have taken from others without knowing it! I happen to remember that I owe my remarks on the religious roots of Greek sport (p. 58) to a broadcast by Professor GtLBERT MURRAY at the time of the London Olympic games, but it was only on re-reading D. F. TovEY's book on The Integrity of Music, Oxford, 1941, that 1 realized how many of its ideas I had used in the Introduction to this book. But while I cannot hope to list all the writings which I may have read or consulted, I did express the hope, in the preface to this volume, that it may equip newcomers for consulting more specialized books to greater advantage. It therefore remains to show the way to these books. It may be useful to start with some rough and ready division to distinguish the many kinds of art books which crowd the shelves of our libraries and bookshops. There are books for READtNG, books for REFERENCE and books to LooK AT. By the first group I mean books we enjoy for the sake of their authors. These are works which cannot 'date' because, even when the views and interpretations they offer are no longer in fashion, they remain valuable as documents of their time and as expressions of a personality. To those who want to deepen their acquaintance with the world of art in general, without wanting to become specialists in any particular field, it is this type of book I would recommend for further reading. Among these, again I would single out the soURCE Books of the past, books by artists or writers who were in close touch with the things they describe. Not all of them make easy reading, but any effort it may take to get acquainted with a world of ideas so different from our own will be richly rewarded through a better and more intimate understanding of the past. Among these primary sources which exist in English versions I would list—in chronological order—The elder PL1NY's Chapters on the History of Art translated by K. J. Bleake, with a commentary by E. Sellers, London, 1896, our most important source of information on Greek and Roman painting and sculpture, compiled from older texts by the famous scholar who perished in the destruction of Pompeii (p. 77). Old Chinese writings on art are most easily accessible in a volume of the Wisdom of the East' series, entitled The Spirit of the Brush, translated by Shio Sakanishi, London, 1939. The most important document for the outlook of the great medieval cathedral builders (p. 13t f.) is the account of ABBOT SUGER of the building of the first great Gothic church, which exists in a model edition: Abbot Suger on the Abbey Church of St. Denis and its Art Treasures, edited, translated and annotated by E. Panofsky, Princeton, 1946. Those who are interested in the technique and training of late medieval painters can now turn to the equally scholarly edition of CENNtNO CENNINt, The Craftsman's Handbook, by Daniel V. Thompson Jr. (2 vols.), New Haven, 1932-3. The standard edition of LEONARDO DA VINCt's principal writings and notes (p. 214) is I. P. Richter, The Literary Works of Leonardo da linci, Oxford, 1939. His plea for the dignity of painting (p. 215) now exists in a special edition, LEONARDO DA VINCt, Paragone: A Comparison of the Arts, translated and edited by Irma A. Richter, Oxford, 1949. LEONARDO DA VtNCI's Treatise on Painting, translated by J. F. Rigaud, London, 1887, is based on an important collection of the master's notes made in the sixteenth century, some of which no longer exist in the original. The Literary Remains of ALBRECHT DURER (p. 254) exist in an English edition by W. M. Conway, Cambridge, 1889. DURER's Records of his Journeys to Yenice and the Low Countries (p. 256) exist in a separate edition by Roger Fry, Boston, 1913. By far the most important source book for the art of the Renaissance in Italy is GtoRGto VAsARI's Lives of the Painters, Sculptors and Architects, which exists in a handy (though not faultless) edition in 'Everyman's Library', London, 1927 (4 vols.). 'The original text was first published in 1550 and revised and enlarged in t 568. lt is a book that can be read for pleasure, as a collection of anecdotes and short stories, some of which may even be true. It will be read with even greater profit and enjoyment if we take it as an interesting document of the period of 'Mannerism', when artists became conscious and over-conscious of the great achicvements of the past that weighed on them (p. 265 f.). The othcr fascinating book by a Florentine artist of that restless period, BENVENUTO CELLINI'S Autobiography (p. 267), exists in various English editions; the latest is that edited by John Pope-Hennessy in the Phaidon Pocket Editions’, London, 1949. The academic tradition of the seventeenth and eighteenth centurics, tempered by much wisdom and common sense, is represented by SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS's Fifteen Discourses, Delivered in the Royal Academy, which also exists in the 'Everyman's Library', London, 1906 (p. 349). The Romantic point of view is most clearly reflccted in the wonderful Fournals of EUGÈNE DELACRo1X (p. 38t), translated by Walter Pach, New York, 1937. A source book on the Impressionists by an art dealer who knew most of them is T. DURET's Manet and the French Impressionists, London, 1910 (p. 387 f.), but many will find the study of their letters more rewarding. There are English translations of the letters of CAMILLE P1SSARRO (p. 394), edited by J. Rewald, New York, 1943, of DEGAs by M. Gnerin, Oxford, 1947, of CÉZANNE (pp. 405, 432) by J. Rewald, London, 1941. VAN GoGH's Lettcrs to his Brother (pp. 411, 423) were published in English in 1927 (2 vols.), Further Letters in 1929, and his Letters to E. Bernard (edited by D. Lord), London, 1938. J.A.MCN.WH1STLER's Gentle Art of Making Enemies (p. 401) came out in London, 1890. The point of view of modern architects is forcefully put in the writings of such pioneers as FRANK LLOYD WR1GHT (p. 404), whoSe London lectures and discussions were transcribed in a lively volume entitled An Organic Architecture, London, 1939, and whose Autobiography was published in New York, 1932, or LE CORBUS1ER, whose volumes Towards a New Architecture, London, 1927, and The City of Tomorrow, London, 1929, show the modern architect's ambition to reform our whole way of lifc. Among modern painters who have explained their artistic creed in print I may mention PAuL KLEE, On Modern Art (translatcd by P. Findley) London, 1948 (p. 439), and HILAIRE HILER, Why Abstract?, London, 1948, which eontains a elear and intelligible account of an American artist's conversion to 'abstract' painting. In conclusion two excellent anthologies must be quoted which supplement the books listed above and may also serve as an introduction to the whole ficld: E. G. HOLT, Literary Sources of Art History, Princeton, t947, and ROBERT GOLDWATER AND MARCO TREVES, Artists on Art, New York, 1945, both of which ean be opencd anywhcre and read for pleasure. This eategory of books which should be read just as much for the sake of their authors as for the information they contain should also include a number of works by the great critics and historians of art. Opinions about their relative merits are bound to differ and the following short list should only be taken as a first guide to those who are searching a library eatalogne or bookshop for reading matter on art. Those who want to clarify their own views on artistic matters and to benefit from past enthusiasm might do worse than sample the books of the leading ninetcenth-century art critics such as JOHN RUSKtN (p. 401 f.), WILLIAM MORR1S (p. 404), or WALTER PATER, the representative of the 'aesthetic movement' in England (p. 402). 'The French critics of the period happen to be a little closer to our own present outlook and the writings on art by CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, EUGENE FROMENTIN and the brothers EDMOND and JULES DE GONCOURT are related to the artistic revolntions of French painting (p. 385). The spokesman of 'Post-Impressionism'(p. 43o) in England was ROGER FRY; the most sympathetic interpreter of 'experimental art' in this country is HERBERT READ. Historians of art may conveniently (if somewhat superficially) be grouped intoconnoisseurs and students of stylistic trends. Among the first there are the towering figures of a passing generation whose word on matters of attribution' was (or still is) law. They include scholars such as BERNARD BERENSON, whose Italian Painters of the Renaissance (revised edition, Oxford, 193o) has become something of a classic; WILHELM BODE, whose Florentine Sculptors of the Renaissance, London, 19o8, and Great Masters of Dutch and Flemish Painting, London, 19o9, will always retain their importance as pioneer works; and MAX J. FRIED-LANDER, whose Art and Connoisseurship, London, 1942, provides the best introduction to the approach of this group. For theories of stylistic change and its connexion with historical developments we must turn to the academic art historians of Germany and Austria. The only examples of this important branch of research at present accessible to those who do not read German are two (rather imperfectly translated) books by the Swiss HEINRICH WÖLFFLIN, The Art of the Italian Renaissance, London, 1903, and Principles of Art History, New York, 1932, which form an admirable introduction into the technique of comparative description. The great school of French medievalists is represented by EMILE MÂLE, of whose indispensable studies on the themes of French art an anthology exists in English with the title Religious Art from the Twelfth to the Eighteenth Century, New York, 1949. The way to the books we want to read or to look up when we are in search of information on a particular period, technique or master is more easily shown though it may take a little trouble and practice to walk it to the end. There are a number of books which contain useful lists for further reading and if we proceed with these to a well-stocked library we may quickly find what we want. Among handy books containing such lists grouped according to periods I would recommend HELEN GARDNER, Art through the Ages, New York, 1948, and the second revised edition of DAv1D M. ROBB and J. I. GARRISON, Art in the Western World, New York, 1942. For their individual fields L. ADAM, Primitive Art, 'Penguin', 1940; PAL KELEMEN, Medieval American Art, New York, 1943; M. S. D1MAND, A Handbook of Muhammedan Art, New York, 1944; w. CoHN, Chinese Painting, London (Phaidon') 1948; C. E. MORE Y, Medieval Art, New York, 1942; F. J. MATHER, Western European Painting of the Renaissance, New York, 1939; JOHN REWALD, The History of Impressionism, New York, 1946; and N. PEVsNER, An Outline of European Architecture (Penguin’ Editions 1943 and 1945, enlarged edition London, 1948) contain up-to-date book lists. So much for books on periods. But it must not be forgotten that the easiest access to the art of the past is usually not through the study of comprehensive works but rather through the work of one representative master (MoNo-G R A P H s). If we occupy ourselves lovingly with Michelangelo or Rembrandt, we are likely to learn more about Italian or Dutch Art than if we read a good many surveys of the whole fields. The student in search of information on any major or minor master does not usually turn to such books for guidance. His happy hunting ground are the various PERIODICALS, the Yearbooks, Quarterlies and Monthlies published by various institutions and learned societies all over Europe and America. 1n these, specialists write for specialists, and publish the documents and interpretations out of which the mosaic of history is formed. The newcomer may find this at first a bewildering world but if he is interested he will soon learn to thread his way through the labyrinth of facts to the heart of the problem which he wants to solve for himself. This type of reading can only be done in one of the major libraries and there, on the open shelves, the student will be sure to find the two works which he needs as his constant guides. One is THIEME-BECKER, the largest and most complete dictionary of artists of all times and countries in thirty-six volumes. Though it is printed in German, the list of books and articles at the end of each entry comprises works in all languages and can also be used by non-linguists. Its full title is Allgemeines Lexikon der bildenden Künstler, herausgegeben von U. THIEME und F. BECKER, Leipzig, 19o7-47. As it took forty years to complete this vast undertaking, the volumes covering the early parts of the alphabet are now rather obsolete while the last letters show evidence of the war years and of somewhat mechanical compilation. Luckily there exists another useful guide to books and articles which have come out since 1929. This is an American Quarterly, called the Art Index, a cunulative author and subject index to a selected list of Fine Art Periodicals and Museum Bulletins. There are volumes covering three years each and if we are in search of any subject, be it the name of an artist, a technique, a country or a period, we can find it in the alphabetical list of catchwords. Though books are not directly listed, the index also helps us to track down any major work because it lists all reviews of books which were published in any of the periodicals it covers. For 1LLUSTRATtONS finally, we are less dependent on the language in which the books that contain them are written, for a caption can easily be understood. The most copiously illustrated history of art is the German Propyläen-Kunstgeschichte, Berlin, 1925 etc., the sixteen volumes of which (and several supplements) contain nearly 10,00o full-page illustrations. A less ambitious undertaking with many, but very small, illustrations was Ars Una, Species Mille (19oo-48), a series of small volumes on the art of individual countries. There exist English editions of all but the last two volumes: Great Britain and Ireland by stR W. ARM-STRONG; Northern Italy by C. RiCCt; France by L. HOURTIQUE; Egypt by G.D. MASPERO; Spain and Portugal by M. D1EULAFOY; Flanders by M. RoosEs; Ancient Rome by E. sELLERS; Hollande by L. HOURTIQUE; Grèce by L.HOURTIQUE. The standard history of Italian art are the twenty-five volumes of A. VENTURI's Storia dell'Arte Italiana, 1901-40. For Italian painting of the thirteenth to the fifteenth century there are also the eighteen richly illustrated volumes of R. V. MARLE's Italian Schools of Painting, 1923-38. For the painters of the Netherlands in the fifteenth and sixteenth century the fourteen volumes of M. J. FR1ED-LÀNDER's Die altniederländischen Maler, 1924- 37. A well illustrated history of Spanish art is JUAN DE CONTRERA's Historia del Arte Hispanica, 1931–45. OfC. R. POsT's A History of Spanish Painting (193o, etc.) nine volumes have appeared so far, which cover only the medieval period. For German art, G. DEHtO'sGeschichte der deutschen Kunst, 1919–34, is the most amply illustrated. For French art the relevant chapters of A. MtCHEL's Histoire de l'Art, Paris, 1905, may prove the best source of illustrations. Of the Oxford History of English Art, edited by T. s. R. BOAsE (planned in eleven volumes) only vol. v, on the late Middle Ages, by JOAN EVANS, has so far come out. Another convenient source of illustrations are the illustrated catalogues of collections and galleries. In the publication of these, the National Gallery and the Wallace Collection in London with their complete and handy volumes have taken an admirable lead. The National Gallery of Art, Washington, has published a large volume of coloured reproductions while the Museum of Modern Art in New York has published a number of exceedingly useful illustrated volumes on its special exhibitions. Of the principal collections of drawings, the Albertina in Vienna, the British Museum in London, the Royal Collection, Windsor Castle, and the Fogg Museum of Art, Harvard University, are publishing fully illustrated catalogues. The Uffizi in Florence have published large folders of their Italian drawings, the Louvre in Paris many volumes of its French drawings and the Berlin Kupferstichkabinett its German and Dutch drawings. These and similar works are listed in library catalogues under the name of the town where the collection is situated. For complete and handy editions of the works of the most famous painters and sculptors we turn to the series Klassiker der Kunst' (1906-37) with German introductions but English captions. They include (in alphabetical order) Fra Angelico by F. sCH OT T-MÜLLER; Botticelli by W. V. BODE; Correggio by G. GRONAU; Donatello by P. SCHUBRING; Dürerby V.sCHERER; Van Dyck by G. GLÜcK; Giotto by C. H. WEtGELT; Hals by W. R. VALENTINER; Holbein by P. GANZ; Leonardo by H. BODMER; Mantegna by F. KNAPP; Memling by K. voLL; Michelangelo by F. KNAPP; Murillo by A. L. MAYER; Perugino by W. BOMBE; Raphael by A. ROSENBERG; Rembrandt's Paintings by A. ROSENBERG, Supplement by W. R. VALENT1NER; Rembrandt's Etchings by S1NGER; Rembrandt's Drawings by W. R. VALENTINER; Rubens by A. ROSENBERG; Signorelli by R. DUSSLER; Titian by o. FIsCHEL; Velazquez by W. GENSEL; Watteau by E. H. ZIMMERMANN. The Phaidon Press have also published monographs on artists with many large plates: Giovanni Bellini by P. HENDY AND L. GOLD-S CHEIDER; Botticelli by L. VENTVRI; Cézanne by F. NovoTNY; Donatello and Ghiberti by L. GOLDsCHEIDER; Van Gogh by W. UHDE; Greco by L. GOLDsCHEIDER; Hals by N. S. TRIVAs; Leonardo; Michelangelo Paintings and Michelangelo Sculptures by L.G OLDSCHEIDER; Piero Della Francesca by KENNETH CLARK; Raphael by W. sutDA; Rembrandt's Paintings by A. BRED1us; Rembrandt's Drawings by O. BENESCH; Rodin by SOMMERVILLE STORY; Rubens by R. M. STEVENSON; Tintoretto by H. TtETZE; Titian by H. T1ETZE; Uccello by JOHN POPE-HENNESSY; Velazquez by E. LAFUENTE; Vermeer by T. BODKIN.