# LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS (The war and post-war years have resulted in much temporary and permanent dislocation of works of art. The locations given in this book are those last known.) Frontispiece. Velazquez: Las Meninas. Madrid, Prado. (Čopyright Medici Society, London) ## INTRODUCTION I. Rubens: Portrait of his son Nicholas. Drawing. Vienna, Albertina 2. Dürer: Portrait of his mother. Drawing. Vienna, Albertina 3. Murillo: Street arabs. Munich, Alte Pinakothek 4. Pieter de Hooch: Interior with a woman peeling apples. (From the original in the Wallace Collection, London, by permission) 5. Melozzo da Forli: Angel. Detail. Vatican oteca 6. Memling: Angels, Detail. Antwerp, 7. Guido Reni: Head of Christ. Detail. London, National Gallery 8. Tuscan Master: Head of Christ. Detail. Florence, Uffizi 9. Dürer: A hare. Water-colour. Vienna, Albertina 10. Rembrandt: An elephant. Drawing. Vienna, Albertina 11. Picasso: A hen with chickens. Illustration to Buffon's Natural History. (Photo: Jeanne Gérard, Paris) 12. Picasso: A cockerel. Drawing in the artist's possession. (Photo: Jeanne Gérard, Paris) 13. Géricault: Horse-racing at Epsom. Paris, 14. The same subject, as the camera sees it. Photo finish (Copyright Race Finish Recording Co. Ltd.) 15. Caravaggio: St. Matthew. Berlin, Kaiser-Friedrich Museum 16. Caravaggio: St. Matthew. Rome, S. Luigi dei Francesi 17. Raphael: The Virgin in the meadow. Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum 18. Raphael: Four studies for the Virgin in the meadow. Vienna, Albertina ## 1: STRANGE BEGINNINGS 19. The Cave of Lascaux in France. (By permission of M. Windels and Messrs. Faber and Faber Ltd., London, publishers of English edition of Lascaux) 2o. Bison, rock-painting in the cave of Altamira in Spain 21. Reindeer, rock-painting in the cave of Font de Gaume in France 22. A ritual mask from Alaska. Berlin, Museum für Völkerkunde 23. Carved lintel from a Maori chieftain's house. London, British Museum 24. Bronze head of a negro. Excavated in Nigeria. London, British Museum 25. Oro, God of War, from Tahiti. London, British Museum 26. A ritual mask from New Guinea, Elema District. London, British Museum 27. A Haida chieftain's house. (By permission of the American Museum of Natural History, New York) 28. Head of the death-god, from a Maya altar. Copan, Honduras. After the cast in the British Museum 29. The Aztee rain-god Tlaloc. Berlin, Museum für Völkerkunde 3o. Clay vessel in form of the head of a oneeyed man. Excavated in the valley of Chiama, Peru. London, British Museum, Gaffron Collection 31. Australian native drawing on a rock. Photograph. (By courtesy of C. P. Mountford; St. Peter's, Australia) ## 2: ART FOR ETERNITY 32. The Great Pyramid of Gizeh 33. Painting of a pond. From a tomb in Thebes. London, British Museum 34. Portrait of Hesire, from a wooden door in his tomb. Cairo, Museum 35. A wall from the tomb of Chnemhotep near Beni Hassan 36. Birds in a bush. Detail of Fig. 35 37. Portrait head oflimestone. Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum 38. Amenophis IV. Limestone relief. Berlin, eum 39. Tutankhamen and his wife, from the throne found in his tomb. Cairo, Museum 40. A dagger from Mycenae. Athens, Museum. (Electrotype reconstruction) 41. Fragment of a harp, found in Ur. London, British Museum 42. Monument of King Naram-sin, found in Susa. Paris, Louvre 43. Assyrian army besieging a fortress. Alabaster relief. London, British Museum 44. An Egyptian craftsman at work on a golden sphinx. Wall-painting from a tomb in Thebes ## 3: THE GREAT AWAKENING 45. The Parthenon, Athens. (Photo: Mar- 46. The mourning of the dead. From a Greek vase. London, British Museum 47. Statue of a youth. Delphi, Museum 48. Greek vase with Achilles and Ajax playing draughts. Vatican, Museum 49. The warrior's leavetaking. Vase-painting. Munich, Antiquarium 50. Athena Parthenos. Roman copy after Pheidias. Athens, National Museum 5t. Hercules carrying the heavens, from the Temple of Żeus. Olympia, Museum 52. Head of the bronze statue of a charioteer, found in Delphi. Delphi, Museum 53. Discus thrower. Roman copy after Myron. Munich, G:yptothek 54. Chariotcers. Detail from the Parthenon frieze. London, British Muscum 55. Horsemen. Detail from the Parthenon frieze. London, British Museum 56. Tombstone of Hegeso. Athens, National 57. Greek sculptor's workshop. From a Greck bowl. Berlin, Staatliches Museum 58. Maiden gathering flowers. Wall-painting from Stabiae. Naples, National Museum. (Photo: Alinari) 59. Praxiteles: Head of Hermes. Detail of Fig. 62 ## 4: THE REALM OF BEAUTY 6o. The Erechtheion. Athens, Acropolis 61. A goddess of victory. From the Temple of Victory in Athens 62. Praxiteles: Hermes with young Dionysus. Olympia, Museum 63. Apollo Belvedere. Vatican, Museum 64. The Venus of Milo. Paris, Louvre 65. Head of Alexander the Grcat. Probably after Lysippus. Istambul, Museum 66.‘Corinthian’ capital. Found in Epidaurus, Epidaurus, Museum 67. The gods fighting the giants. From the altar of Žeus in Pergamon. Berlin, Staatliches Museum 68. Laocoon. Vatican, Museum 69. Head of a faun. Detail of a wall-painting from Herculaneum. Naples, National Museum 70. Landscape. Wall-painting. Rome, Villa 71. Greek sculptor at work. Hellenistic gem. (By courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York) ## 5: WORLD CONQUERORS 72. The Colosseum in Rome 73. Interior of the Pantheon in Rome. Painting by G. P. Pannini. Private Collection 74. The Emperor Vespasianus. Naples, National Museum 75. Trajan's column, Rome. (Detail) 76. Portrait of a man, found at Hawara (Egypt). London, National Gallery 77. Head of Buddha, found in Gandhara. (By permission of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London) 78. Gautama (Buddha) leaving his home. Relief found in Gandhara. Calcutta, Indian Museum 79. Moses striking water from the rock. Wall-painting from the Synagogue in Dura-Europos. (By courtesy of Yale University Art Gallery) 8o. Christ with St. Peter and St. Paul. From the sarcophagus of Junius Bassus. Rome, Crypt of St. Peter 81. The Three Men in the Fiery Furnace. Wall-painting from the Priscilla Catacomb, Rome 82. Portrait of an official from Aphrodisias. Istambul, Museum 83. A painter of funeral portraits’in his workshop. From a painted sarcophagus, found in the Crimea. ## 6: A PARTING OF WAYS 84. S. Apollinare in Classe, Ravenna 85. Enthroned Madonna and Child. Byzantine painting. (By courtesy of the National Gallery of Art, Washington, Mellon Collection) 86. Christ as Ruler of the Universe, the Virgin and Child and Saints. Cathedral of Monreale, Sicily 87. The Miracle of the Loaves and Fishes. Mosaic from the Basilica of S. Apollinare Nuovo, Ravenna 88. Byzantine Iconoclast, whitewashing an image of Christ. From the Chludow Psalter. Moscow, Historical Museum ## 7: LOOKING EASTWARDS 89. The Court of Lions in the Alhambra of Granada, Spain 90. Humay and Humayun, from a Persian manuscript. Paris, Musée des Arts Décoratifs 91. A reception. Detail of a relief in the tomb of Wu-liang-tse, Shantung, China 92. Winged lion, on the road to the tomb of Prince Hsiao Hsiu near Nanking 93. Persian silk prayer carpet. Coll. Mme E. Paravicini. (From A Survey of Persian Art, Vol. vt, by permission of the Oxford University Press) 94. Head of a Lohan, from a glazed tone statue found in 1-chou, China. Formerly Frankfurt, Fuld Collection 95. Husband reproving his wife. Detail of a silk scroll, probably an old copy after Ku K'ai-chi. London, British Museum 96. Ma Yüan: Landscape in moonlight. Painting on silk. Chinese Government 97. Kao K'o-kung: Landscape after rain. Chinese Government 98. Fishes. Leaf from an album. Probably painted by Liu Ts'ai. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Museum of Art 99. A Japanese boy painting a branch of bamboo. Coloured woodcut by Hidenobu. (By permission of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London) ## 8: WESTERN ART IN THE MELTING POT 10o. The Church of Earls Barton, Northants, England. (Copyright: National Buildings Record) 101. A dragon's head. Wood carving found at Oseberg, Norway. Oslo, University Museum 102. A 'longship' of the Viking type, from the Bayeux Tapestry. Bayeux, Cathedral 103. Page of the Lindisfarne gospel. London, British Museum 104. St. Luke. From a Gospel manuscript. St. Gallen, Stiftsbibliothek 105. Interior of the Minster of Aix-la-Chapelle. (Photo: Marburg) 106. St. Matthew. From a Gospel manuscript. Vienna, Schatzkammer 107. St. Matthew. From a Gospel manuscript. Épernay, Municipal Library 108. Adam and Eve after the Fall. From the bronze doors of the Hildesheim Cathedral. (Photo: Marburg) 109-1o. King Harold swears an oath to Duke William of Normandy, after which he returns to England. From the Bayeux Tapestry. Bayeux, Cathedral. (By permission of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London) 111. A nonk writing the letter R. From an carly thirteenth-century manuscript. Sigmaringen, Library ## 9: THE CHURCH MILITANT 112. The Benedictine church of Murbach, Alsace, France. (Photo: Marburg) 113. The Fish vomits out Jonah upon the dry land. Detail of a stained-glass window. Cologne, Cathedral 1 14. The cathedral of Tournai, Belgium 115. Durham Cathedral, England. (Photo: Marburg) 116. 1)etail of Fig. 117 (Photo: Marburg) 117 The façade of St. Trophime in Arles, southern France. (Photo: Marburg) 118. Candlestick of gilt bell metal. Made for Gloucester Cathedral. (By permission of the Victoria and Aìbert Museum, London) 119. Brass font by Reiner van Huy. St. Bartholomew, Liége, Belgium. (Photo: A.C.L., Brussels) 120. The Annunciation. From a Swabian Gospel manuscript. Stuttgart, Landesbibliothek 121. Saints Gereon, Willimarus, Gall and the Martyrdom of St. Ursula. From a Calendar manuscript. Stuttgart, Landesbibliothek 122. Artists at work. From the pattern book of Reun Monastery. Vienna, Nationalbibliothek ## 10: THE CHURCH TRIUMPHANT 123. Notre Dame of Paris 124. Notre Dame of Paris from the air 125. Interior of the cathedral of Amiens. (Photo: Marburg) 126. Cologne Cathedral, interior view. (Photo: Marburg) 127. Melchisedek, Abraham and Moses. From the northern transept of Chartres Cathedral. (Photo: Marburg) 128. The death of the Virgin. From the southern transept of Strasbourg Cathedral. (Photo: Marburg) 129. Ekkehart and Uta. From the series of 'Founders' in the choir of Naumburg Cathedral. (Photo: Marburg) 130. The Entombment. From a Psalter manuscript from Bonmont. Besançon, Bibliothèque Municipale 131. Matthew Paris: An elephant and its keeper. (By courtesy of the Master and Feliows of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge) 132. Nicola Pisano: Annunciation, Nativity and Shepherds. From the marble pulpit of the Baptistery in Pisa 133. Giotto: Faith. Wall-painting in the Cappella dell' Arena, Padua 134. Giotto: The mourning of Christ. Wallpainting in the Cappella dell' Arena, Padua 135. Detail of Fig. 134 136. King Offa and his architect watching the building of St. Albans Cathedral. From a manuscript at Trinity College, Dublin ## I1: COURT1ERS AND BURGHERS 137. West front of Exeter Cathedral 138. The palace of the Doges of Venice 139. The Virgin. Silver statue. Paris, Louvre 140. Christ in the Temple; a hawking party. Page from 'Queen Mary's Psalter'. British Museum, London 14t. Simone Martini and Lippo Memmi: The Annunciation. Florence, Uffizi 142. Peter Parler the Younger: Self-portrait in Prague Cathedral 143. The Wilton Diptych, London, National Gallery 144. Paul and Jean de Limbourg: May. Page of a Book of Hours. Chantilly, Musée Condé 145. Pisanello: Monkey. Leaf from a sketchbook, Paris, Louvre 146. A sculptor at work. One of Andrea Pisano's reliefs on the Florentine Campanile ## 12: THE CONQUEST OF REALITY 147. Cappella Pazzi, Florence 148. Interior of the Cappella Pazzi 149. Masaccio: Wall-painting in Sta Maria Novella, Florence 150. Donatello: St. George. Marble statue from Or San Michele, Florence. Florence, Bargello 151. Donatello: Herod's Feast. Bronze relief. Siena, S. Giovanni 152. Claus Sluter: The Prophets Daniel and 1saiah. From the Moses Fountain, near Dijon 153. Jan van Eyck: The Righteous Judges and the Knights of Christ. Ghent, St. Bavo 154. Jan van Eyck: The betrothal of the Arnolfini. London, National Gallery 155. Detail of Fig. 154 156. Conrad Witz: Christ walking on the waves. (By courtesy of Musée d'Art et d'Histoire, Geneva) 157. Stonemasons and sculptors at work. From the base of a group by Nanni di Banco. Florence, Or San Michele ## 13: TRADITION AND INNOVATION: I 158. S. Andrea in Mantua 159. Palazzo Rucellai, Florence 16o. Ghiberti: The Baptism of Christ. Siena, S. Giovanni 161. Fra Angelico: The Annunciation. Florence, S. Marco 162. Uccello: The Rout of San Romano. London, National Gallery 163. Benozzo Gozzoli: The journey of the Magi to Bethlehem. Florence, Palazzo Medici-Riccardi 164. Mantegna: St. James on the way to his execution. Formerly in the Eremitani Church, Padua 165. Francesco d'Antonio del Cherico: The Annunciation, and scenes from Dante's Divine Comedy. Page from a liturgical book. Rome, Vatican. (Photo: Alinari) 166. Piero della Francesca: Constantine's dream. Wall-painting. S. Francesco, Arezzo 167. Antonio Pollaiuolo: The martyrdom of St. Sebastian. London, National Gallery 168. Botticelli: The birth of Venus. Florence, ffizi 169. Detail of Fig. 168 170. Painters at work. Detail of a Florentine print. London, British Museum ## 14: TRADITIONAND INNOVATION: II 171. The Court of the Palace of Justice (formerly Treasury), Rouen. (Photo: Marburg) 172. King's College Chapel, Cambridge. (By courtesy of Country Life) 173. Tavernier: Dedication page to The Conquests of Charlemagne. Brussels, Bibliothèque Royale 174. Fouquet: Estienne Chevalier, with St. Stephen. Berlin, Kaiser-Friedrich Museum 175. Rogier van der Weyden: The Descent from the Cross. Escorial 176. Hugo van der Goes: The Death of the Virgin. Bruges, Museum 177. Veit Stoss: Altar of the Church of Our Lady, Cracow 178. The good man on his death-bed. Woodcut from the Art of Dying Well, printed in Ulm 179. Detail of Fig. 177 18o. Stefan Lochner: The Virgin in the rose-bower. Cologne, Wallraf-Richartz Museum 181. Schongauer: Holy Night. Engraving 182. Stone-masons and the king. From an illumination of the story of Troy, by Jean Colombe. Berlin, Kupferstichkabinett 15: HARMONY ATTAINED 183. The Tempietto, Rome, S. Pietro in ontorio 184. Verrocchio: Monument to Colleoni. Venice 185. Leonardo da Vinci: Anatomical studies. Windsor Castle, Royal Library 186. Leonardo da Vinci: The Last Supper. Milan, Sta Maria delle Grazie 187. Leonardo da Vinci: Mona Lisa. Paris, 188. Ghirlandajo: The Birth of the Virgin. Florence, Sta Maria Novella 189. Michelangelo: A section of the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, Vatican 190. Michelangelo: Study for one of the Sibyls on the Sistine Ceiling. New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art 19t. Michelangelo: The Creation of Adam. Detail of Fig. 189 192. Michelangelo: The dying slave. Paris, Louvre 193. Perugino: The Virgin appearing to St. Bernard. Munich, Alte Pinakothek 194. Raphael: Pope Leo X with two Cardinals. Florence, Palazzo Pitti. (Copyright Medici Society, London) 195. Detail of Fig. 197 196. Raphael: The Madonna del Granduca. Florence, Palazzo Pitti 197. Raphael: Galatea. Rome, Villa Farnesina 198. Members of Raphael's workshop decorating the Loggie. Stucco relief in the Vatican Loggie ## 16: LIGHT AND COLOUR 199. The Library in Venice 200. Giorgione: The Tempest. Venice, Accademia. (Photo: Alinari) 201. Giovanni Bellini: Madonna with Saints. Venice, S. Zaccaria 202. Titian: Madonna with Saints and members of the Pesaro family. Venice, Sta Maria dei Frari 203. Detail of Fig. 202 204. Titian: Portrait of a man (so-called Young Englishman'). Florence, Palazzo Pitti 205. Detail of Fig. 204 206. Correggio: The Holy Night. Dresden, Gallery 207. Correggio: St, John the Baptist. Study for a wall-painting. Vienna, Albertina 208. An Orchestra of Venetian Painters; Titian, Tintoretto, Jacopo Bassano and Paolo Veronese. From the painting of The Marriage at Cana' by Paolo Veronese. Paris, Louvre ## 17: THE NEW LEARNING SPREADS 209. The old Chancellery in Bruges (La Greffe'). (Photo: Marburg) 210. The choir of St. Pierre in Caen. (Photo: Marburg) 211. Dürer: St. Michael's fight against the dragon. Woodeut 212. Durer: Piece of lawn. Water-colour study. Vienna, Albertina 213. Dürer: Adam and Eve. Engraving 214. Dürer: The Nativity. Engraving 215. 'Grünewald': The Crucifixion. From the Isenheim Altar. Colmar, Museum 216.'Grünewald': The Resurrection. From the 1senheim Altar. Colmar, Museum 217. Cranach: The Rest on the Flight to Egypt. Berlin, Deutsches Museum 218. Altdorfer: Landscape. Munich, Alte Pinakothek 219. Mabuse': St. Luke painting the Virgin. Prague, Rudolphinum 220. Bosch: Hell. Right wing of a triptych. Madrid, Prado 221. Detail of Fig. 220 222. The Painter studying the laws of foreshortening. Woodeut by Dürer ## 18: A CRISIS OF ART 223. The Villa Rotonda near Vicenza. Designed by Palladio 224. A window from the Palazzo Zuecari in Rome. Designed by F. Zuecari 225. Cellini: Salt Cellar. Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum 226. Parmigianino: The Madonna with the long neck. Florence, Palazzo Pitti 227. Giovanni\_da Bologna: Mercury. Bronze statue. Florence, Bargello 228. Tintoretto: The finding of St. Mark's remains. Milan, Brera 229. El Greco: The Opening of the Fifth Seal. Formerly Zumaya, Žuloaga Collection 230. Holbein: Anne Cresacre. Drawing. Windsor Castle 231. Holbein: Georg Gisze, a German merchant in London. Berlin, Kaiser-Friedrich Museum 232. Holbein: The Virgin with the family of Burgomaster Meyer. Darmstadt, Castle 233. Holbein: Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk. Windsor Castle 234. Nicholas Hillyarde: Portrait miniature. (By permission of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London) 235. Pieter Brucghel the Elder: A country wedding. Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum 236. Detail of Fig. 235 237. Pieter Brueghel the Elder: The painter and the buyer. Drawing. Vienna, Albertina 238. Jean Goujon: Nymph. From the Fontaine des Innocents. Paris, Louvre 239. Callot: Two Italian clowns. Etching. 240. Taddeo Zuccari at work. Detail of a drawing by F. Zuccari. Vienna, Albertina 241. Tintoretto: St. George's fight with the dragon, London, National Gallery 242. El Greco: Portrait of Brother Hortensio Felix Paravicino (By courtesy of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston) ## 19: VISION AND VISIONS 243. 11 Gesù in Rome 244. Annibale Carracci: The Virgin mourning Christ. Rome, Galleria Doria-Pamphili 245. Caravaggio: Doubting Thomas. Berlin, Schlösser 246. Reni: The Dawn. Fresco on a ceiling in the Palazzo Rospigliosi, Rome 247. Poussin: Et in Arcadia ego'. Paris' 248. Claude Lorrain: Landscape with the rest on the flight to Egypt. Leningrad, Hermitage. (Photo: Braun et Cie) 249. Rubens: The betrothal of St. Catherine. Sketch for a large altar-painting. Berlin, Kaiser-Friedrich Museum 250. Rubens: Head of a child. Vaduz, Liechtenstein Gallery 251. Rubens: Allegory on the blessings of peace. London, National Gallery 252. Detail of Fig. 251 253. Rubens: Self-portrait. Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum 254. Vandyke: Lord John and Lord Bernard Stuart. London, Lady Louis Mountbatten 255. Vandyke: Charles I of England. Paris, 256. Velazquez: The water-seller of Seville. London, Duke of Wellington. (By permission of the Victoria and Albert Museum) 257. Velazquez: Prince Philip Prosper of Spain. Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum 258. An artists' pub in seventeenth-century Rome. Drawing by Picter van Laar. Berlin, Kupferstichkabinett ## 20: THE MIRROR OF NATURE 259. The Castle (former Town Hall) of Amsterdam. (Photo: Marburg) 26o. Frans Hals: Pieter van der Broecke. London, Kenwood, Iveagh Bequest 261. Simon Vlieger: Mouth of a river. London, National Gallery 262. Jan van Goyen: A windmill by a river. London, National Gallery 263. Rembrandt: Self-portrait. Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum 264. Rembrandt: The parable of the merciless servant. Paris, Louvre, Bonnat Bcquest 265. Rembrandt: Jan Six. Amsterdam, Six Collection 266. Rembrandt: Christ preaching. Etching 267. Jan Steen: The christening feast. From the original in the Wallace Collection, London, by permission 268. Jacob van Ruisdacl: Wooded landscape. Oxford, Worcester College. (By courtesy of the College) 269. Rembrandt: The reconciliation of David and Absalom. Leningrad, Hermitage 27o. Vermeer van Delft: The cook. Amsterdam, Rijksmuseum. (Copyright Medici Society, London) 271. Willem Kalf: Still life. Berlin, Kaiser-Friedrich Museum 272. The poor painter shivering in his garret. Drawing by Pieter Bloot. London, British Museum ## 21:FOWER AND GLORY: I 273. Sta Agnese in Piazza Navona, Rome 274. Interior of Sta Agnese in Piazza Navona, 275. Bernini: Portrait of Constanza Buonarelli. Florence, Bargello 276. Bernini: The Vision of St. Theresa. Altar in Sta Maria della Vittoria, Rome 277. Detail of Fig. 276 278. Gaulli: The worship of the holy name of Jesus. Ceiling of the Jesuit church Il Gesù in Rome 279. Giovanni Battista Tiepolo: Cleopatra's banquet. Fresco in the Palazzo Labia, Venice 28o. Guardi: View of S. Giorgio Maggiore in Venice. From the original in the Wallace Collection, London by permission 281.Connoisseurs’ and antiquaries assembled in Rome. Caricature by P. L. Ghezzi. Vienna, Albertina 22: POWER AND GLORY: II 282. Versailles, garden front 283. Versailles from the air 284. The Belvedere in Vienna. (Photo: Austrian National Library) 285. The entrance hall and staircase of the Vienna Belvedere. After an eighteenthcentury engraving. (Photo: Schroll) 286. The staircase of Pommersfelden in Ger- 287. The monastery of Melk on the Danube. (Photo: Marburg) 288. 1nterior of the church of Melk Monastery.(Photo: Marburg) 289. Watteau: Fête in a park. From the original in the Wallace Collection, London, by permission 290. Art under royal patronage: Louis X1V's visit to the Royal Gobelin Manufacture ## 23: THE AGE OF REASON 29t. St. Paul's Cathedral, London 292. Interior of St. Stephen's, Walbrook. (Copyright National Buildings Record) 293. Chiswick House, London. (Photo: Kersting) 294. Hogarth: The rake in Bedlam. From 'The Rake's Progress'. London, Sir John Soane's Museum 295. Reynolds: Miss Bowles with her dog. From the original in the Wallace Collection, London, by permission 296. Gainsborough: Miss Haverfield. From the original in the Wallace Collection, London, by permission 297. Gainsborough: Ruralscene. Drawing. (By permission of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London) 298. Chardin: Saying grace (Le Bénédicité). Paris, Louvre 299. Houdon: Portrait of Voltaire. (By permnission of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London) 30o. Fragonard: The park of the Villa d'Este in Tivoli. Drawing. Besançon, Museum 3ot. The Life School at the Royal Academy with portraits of leading artists. Painting by Zoffany. Windsor Castle ## 24: THE BREAK IN TRADITION 302. Strawberry Hill, Twickenham. (By courtesy of Country Life) 303. Dorset House, Cheltenham. (Copyright National Buildings Record) 304. John Soane: Design for a eountry house. From 'Sketches in Arehitecture'. (By permission of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London) 305. Montieello, Virginia. (Photo: Wayne Andrews, New York) 306. Copley: Charles I demanding the surrender of the five impeached M.P.s. (By courtesy of the Trustees of the Boston Public Library) 307. David: Marat assassinated. Brussels, Museum 308. Goya: King Ferdinand VII of Spain. Madrid, Prado 309. Detail of Fig. 308 310. Goya: The giant. Etehing 311. Blake: The ancient of days. Metal eut, with water-colour. London, British Museum 312. Constable: The haywain. London, National Gallery 313. Constable: Dedham Mill. Oil sketch. (By permission of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London) 314. Turner: Steamer in snowstorm. London, Tate Gallery 315. Turner: The founding of Carthage. London, National Gallery 316. Caspar David Friedrich: Landscape in the Silesian Mountains. Munich, Neue Pinakothek 317. Charles X of Franee distributing decorations in the Paris ‘Salon' of 1824. Painting by F. C. Heim. Paris, Louvre. (Photo: Braun et Cie) ## 25: REVOLUTION IN PERMANENCE 318. The Houses of Parliament, London. (Copyright National Buildings Record) 319. Delacroix: Arabic fantasy. Montpellier, Musée Fabry 320. Millet: The gleaners. Paris, Louvre 321. Courbet: 'Bonjour, Monsieur Courbet'. Montpellier, Museum 322. Rossetti: Ecce Ancilla Domini'. London, Tate Gallery 323. Manet: The balcony. Paris, Louvre 324. Manet: The races at Longchamp. Lithograph 325. Manet: Monet working in his boat. Munich, Neue Pinakothek 326. Rodin: The sculptor Jules Dalou. Paris, Rodin Museum 327. Monet: The Gare St. Lazare in Paris. Paris, Louvre 328. Renoir: Danee at the 'Moulin de la Galette'. Paris, Louvre 329. Pissarro: The Boulevard Montmartre. (By courtesy of the National Gallery of Art, Washington) 330. Hokusai: The Fuji seen behind a cistern. Woodcut in two colours from the Hundred Views of the Fuji 331. Utamaro: Counting house, evening. Coloured woodcut. (By permission of the Victoria and Aíbert Museum, London) 332. Degas. 'Awaiting the cue'. Pastel. New York, Private Collection 333. Degas: Uncle and niece. (By courtesy of the Chicago Art Institute) 334. Whistler: 'Arrangement in grey and black'(portrait of the artist's mother). Paris, Louvre 335. Whistler: Nocturne in blue and silver: Old Battersea Bridge. London, Tate Gallery 336. The rejected painter. Lithograph by Daumier, (By courtesy of the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris) ## 26: IN SEARCH OF NEW STANDARDS 337. 540 Fairoaks Avenue, Oakpark, Illinois 338. Cézanne: Rocky scenery near Aix. London, Tate Ġallery 339. Van Gogh: The sun rising behind Mont Majours. Drawing. Winterthur, Oscar Reinhart Collection 340. Cézanne: The Mont Sainte-Victoire seen from Bellevue. Merion, U.S.A., Barnes Foundation 341. Cézanne: Still life. Paris, R. Lecomte 342. Cézanne: Portrait of the artist's wife. Philadelphia, H. P. MacIlhenny 343. Van Gogh: Landscape with cypresses near Arles. London, Tate Gallery 344. Van Gogh: The artist's room in Arles. Kobe, Prince Matsugata 345. Gauguin: Two Tahitian women. London, Home House Trustees 346. Van Gogh painting sunflowers. Painted by Gauguin. Amsterdam, Municipal Museum 27: EXPERIMENTAL ART 347. The Rockefeller Center, New York. (Photo: Thomas Airviews, New York) 348. 'The Bauhaus, Dessau (Germany). Designed by Walter Gropius. (By courtesy of the Museum of Modern Art, New York) 349. Munch: 'Shouting'. Lithograph.(Photo: O. Voering) 350. Barlach: Pity'. Sculpture in wood 351. Paul Klee: Mask. Water-colour. Berlin, Uhlmann Collection 352. Picasso: Ceramic. (By permission of French Copyright Ltd.) 353. Kokoschka: Children playing. Malmö, Theodor Woelfers 354. Kandinsky: Composition. Berlin, National Gallery 355. Hodler: Lake Thun. (By courtesy of the Musée d'Art et d'Histoire, Geneva) 356. Seurat: Bridge at Courbevoie. Londoa, Home House Trustees 357. Beardsley: Illustration to Oscar Wilde's Salomé 358. Toulouse-Lautrec: Poster. Lithograph in colours. (Photo: Braun et Cie) 359. Matisse: La Desserte'. Moscow, Museum of Western Art 36o. Picasso: Still life. 361. Picasso: Head. Lithograph 362. Picasso: Head. New York, J. J. Sweeney 363. Giacometti: Head. 364. Feininger: Sailing boats. Detroit, R. H. Tannahill 365. Henry Moore: Recumbent figure. London, Tate Gallery 366. Rousseau: Portrait of Joseph Brunner. Zürich, Dr. Franz Meyer Collection 367. Chagall: The musician. Laren (Holland), P. A. Ragnoult 368. Grant Wood: Spring turning. Mrs. Elon H. Hooker, New York 369. Dali: Apparition of face and fruit-dish on a beach. (By courtesy of Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford, U.S.A.) 37o. The painter and his model. Illustration by Picasso to Balzac's Le chef-d'æuvre inconnu. (Photo: Jeanne Gérard, Paris)