## Introduction In the last decade, and especially in the three years since the fi rst edition of Designing for Interaction was published, interaction design as a discipline has come into its own. Even people who have never heard of interaction design—which is to say, most people—understand that how their devices work is as important as how they look. A beautiful mobile phone that functions poorly will cause months of frustration. We know, and the popular press has celebrated, that the best products are those that are functionally— and aesthetically—beautiful. Th e past several years have also brought us some absolutely wonderful examples of interaction design that have sparked the imagination: Apple’s iPhone, Nintendo’s Wii, iRobot’s Roomba, Microsoft ’s Surface, Twitter, and social networks like Facebook. More and more, previously “dumb” products are being outfi tted with microprocessors, sensors, and networking capabilities, while the Web has matured to a sophisticated platform for applications of all sorts. Desktop applications have become interwoven with the Internet for interesting combinations. Devices can locate themselves in physical space and provide geo-located information. Exploding processing power, cloud computing, and cheap digital storage make all sorts of new products possible. All of these things mean the rules of interaction design (such as they are) are being rewritten. Th e paradigms of how we interact with computing devices, such as the desktop metaphor that we’ve used for around 40 years now, are changing and being added to. We relate to our products—and thus, to each other—in new ways. It’s an exciting time to be in this fi eld. Th is book is about the discipline that defi nes how digital products behave. It doesn’t contain any code; indeed, I’ve tried to be as technology and platform agnostic as possible. I’ve written this book for both new designers who are just getting started, as well as more advanced designers who might want to refi ne their processes or add to their set of design tools. ## What’s New in This Edition Th is book addresses a fairly serious fl aw in the fi rst edition, namely that while there was a lot of good information, there was no process to help new designers put all that information into an order, into practice. In this edition, Chapters 3 through 8 step through a general design process that can be used for a wide variety of projects. Not every step needs to be followed, and the process is in an ideal order that seldom happens in designing. But at least there is a process. Additionally, several signifi cant new topics have been added. Design strategy (Chapter 3) is brand new in this edition and I daresay does the best job I’ve seen in distilling this step (and growing fi eld unto itself) down to its essentials. In the fi rst edition, the translation of research into models and then into concepts was poorly done; this edition addresses that crucial stage. Likewise, there was no mention of design principles, and this was an unfortunate oversight. Service design, which was its own chapter in the fi rst edition, has been more integrated into the book for two reasons. Th e fi rst is that service design has become its own area of study. Th e second reason is that the line between services and products has gotten blurrier. It is difi cult to fi nd products, and especially the networked products interaction designers work on, that aren’t part of a service of some kind. Readers of the fi rst edition also asked for references and recommendations to dive deeper into the various topics, so each chapter now has a “For Further Reading” section at the end as well as footnotes to specifi c articles. I hope this book is a starting point for your work in interaction design. It is, however, only a book, and books alone can’t make you a great designer. Only designing will do that. I urge you to try out everything in this book for yourself, change it as necessary to fi t your working style, your company, your users, and the project you’re on. So get to it—there’s much to be designed. San Francisco June 2009 We become what we behold. We shape our tools, and thereaft er our tools shape us. —Marshall McLuhan