# Epilogue Designing for Good What responsibility do interaction designers have for what they design? Some designers think that the products and services they create are morally neutral, that users themselves and society, not the designer, should determine how a product should be used. But what if the user’s task is to injure someone? Or if the system being designed helps people do harm? Th e book IBM and the Holocaust by Edwin Black relates the story of a timber merchant from Bendzin, Poland, who, in August 1943, arrived at the Nazi concentration camp at Auschwitz as a prisoner. Th ere, the Nazis assigned him a fi ve-digit IBM Hollerith number, 44673. Th is number was later tattooed on his forearm. Th is number, and the thousands like it, were part of a custom punch card system specifi cally designed by IBM to track prisoners in Nazi concentration camps. (In the IBM system, the Auschwitz camp code was 001.) Th e Hollerith system tracked prisoners and their availability for work, their punch card numbers following them from labor assignment to labor assignment until most of them were put to death. Th e Holocaust was extremely well-designed. When we think of good design, we usually mean products and services that help users complete their tasks in an efi cient, ef ective, aestheticallypleasing manner. But there is another defi nition of “good” that should be considered when designing: the moral, the just, the life-afi rming. Th e good that protects human dignity. Interaction designers should design for this sort of good as well. ## Ethics in Design Any serious examination of interaction design has to include a discussion about ethics. Ethics are how designers can distinguish between good and bad design. It’s about how designers should respond when asked to do work that is questionable. In short, it’s about consequences; if there were no consequences to interaction design, there’d be no need for ethics. And with the dawning of the age of ubiquitous computing, mobile devices that can track our movements, and robots, wearables, and intelligent agents that have access to our homes and our most private secrets, the consequences for interaction design are becoming more far-reaching and more signifi cant than they have ever been. Ethics is about human decision making: why and how we make the decisions we do. It is about determining what is the right thing to do in given circumstances. Design theorist Richard Buchanan has noted<sup>1</sup> that this is the same activity interaction designers do all the time: determine the right thing to do considering the given constraints. To design is to make ethical choices. In other words, design is ethics. ## Principles To be an interaction designer requires principles, because interaction designers guide what the interactions between people should be via the products and services they create. Are some people more deserving of respect than others? Is it OK to make the product good for some people, but less so for others? Th ese are the types of issues that, knowingly or (usually) unknowingly, interaction designers deal with all the time, and it requires principles on the part of the designer to sort them out. Principles for interaction designers are made up of a complex set of guides, including the personal beliefs of the designer, codes of ethics from professional organizations like the Industrial Designers Society of America (IDSA), and governmental and societal standards for safety and usability. Without a fi rm set of their own principles, interaction designers can fi nd themselves adopting the beliefs and values of the companies they work for, and this can be a dangerous course, as shown above with the IBM-designed system for the Nazis. Th ere needs to be a balance between the ethics of designers and the ethics of the organizations that employ them. ## Deliberate Choices Interaction designers try to promote certain kinds of interactions between people. Th us, the fundamental ethical guide for interaction designers should be the quality of those interactions, on both sides of the equation— the person initiating the interaction (such as the e-mail sender) and the person receiving the action (such as the e-mail receiver). Th e content of the communication aside (e-mail spam, say), the quality of those interactions is strongly determined by the decisions the designer makes while designing the product or service. Th ought of this way, even the placement of buttons on an interface is an ethical act. Does the designer have respect and compassion for the users? Does this product or service give the users their human dignity? In short, is the design good? Good for the users, good for those indirectly af ected, good for the culture, good for the environment? Th e choices interaction designers make need to be deliberate and forwardthinking. Random choices (“Because I like it” or “It’s always been done this way”) are the death of design and an abdication of responsibility. Designers need to consider the consequences of their design decisions. Designers have a sacred trust with the users of their products and services. Every time users perform an action with a designed product or service, they are, indirectly, trusting the designer who created it to have done her job, and done it ethically. Users trust that not only will the task they want to do be accomplished (an e-mail will get sent and arrive at its destination), but they also trust that those products and services (and by extension the designers who designed them) will do them no harm. Users entrust designers (through the products and services they design) with intensely personal information—passwords, bank account numbers, credit card numbers, and so on—and, in some cases, with their lives. Designers need to recognize and respect that trust. It isn’t enough, however, to only do right by the individual users. Individual users (and the organizations that may be behind them) may not have the best interests of others at heart. Although people will always fi nd ways to use products and services in ways that they weren’t designed for, designers need to be cognizant of the negative consequences their designs may cause to those who aren’t users or who are forced users—like the timber merchant from Bendzin, Poland, Hollerith number 44673. But just as there are forces for evil in this world, so are there forces for good. Aft er the carnage and atrocities of World War II, representatives from 50 countries met in April 1945, only a few miles from where I’m writing this in San Francisco, to design a service to humanity, something that would help prevent anything like what had happened twice in the 20th century from ever happening again. Something that would facilitate and inspire dialog—interactions—between countries. Th eir work, their design, became the United Nations. And while the United Nations—like all things made by humans—is fl awed and imperfect, its goals of and actions towards international cooperation, peaceful confl ict resolution, human rights, and humanitarian aid are a force for good in the world. May the products that interaction designers create all be thus.