# Design Fiction: A Method Toolbox for Design Research in a Complex World

Simon Grand, University of Applied Sciences Northwestern Switzerland,

simon.grand@fhnw.ch

Martin Wiedmer, University of Applied Sciences Northwestern Switzerland,

martin.wiedmer@fhnw.ch

## Abstract

Current debates on design research, and its relation to other research fields and scientific disciplines, refer back to a fundamental distinction introduced by Herb Simon (Simon, 1996 (1981)): Design and design research do not primarily focus on explaining the world as it is; they share with engineering a fundamental interest in focusing on the world as it could be. In parallel, we observe a growing interest in the science studies to interpret scientific research as a constructive and creative practice (Knorr Cetina, 1999; 2002), organized as experimental systems (Rheinberger, 2001). Design fiction is a new approach, which integrates these two perspectives, in order to develop a method toolbox for design research for a complex world (Bleecker, 2009; Wiedmer & Caviezel, 2009; Grand 2010).

## Keywords

epistemology; science studies; design fiction; experiment

## Introduction

## Research Context & Basic Hypothesis

Design research looks back to several decades of debates concerning the practice, theory, methodology and epistemology of design research (Cross, 2007; Bayazit, 2004). Thereby, we can identify different approaches to defining and structuring the field: some scholars focus on mapping and structuring the multiple existing, self-declared research projects, identifying dominant clusters and research fields (Sanders, 2006; Laurel, 2003; Gray 2004), assuming that what identifies as design research actually qualifies as design research; some scholars argue for particular epistemologies and theories as a promising starting point to define possible approaches in design research (Cross, 2007; Fallman, 2003; Findeli & Bousbaci, 2005), suggesting that design implies particular ways of knowing and thus also particular epistemologies; some scholars characterize design research in relation to other scientific disciplines or a general pre-understanding of science, arguing for particular qualities of design as a scientific research discipline (Cross, 2006) or emphasizing the oxymoron inherent in any attempt to link design to scientific research (Frayling, 1993; Krippendorff, 2006).

One interesting observation thereby is, that implicitly or explicitly, these various attempts continue to refer to a fundamental perspective introduced decades ago as a root distinction in design research (Simon, 1996 (1981)): Design and design research do not primarily focus on the world as it is, like most scientific disciplines, trying to develop descriptions, interpretations, and explanations of existing objects, processes, and activities; design and design research share with engineering a fundamental interest in focusing on the world as it could be, on the imagination and realization of possible futures, as well as on the disclosure of new worlds. This implies a reflection of the contingencies of our world today, and of the practices for creating, imagining, and materializing new worlds. Another interesting observation is, that the controversies in the science studies concerning scientific research in general increasingly emphasize the inherently constructivist and imaginative nature of scientific practice (Galison, 1997; Knorr Cetina, 1999; 2002), the importance of improvisation (Knorr Cetina, 2002) and experimentation (Rheinberger, 2001) for the research process in general, or the primary role of artifacts (Knorr Cetina, 1999), images (Jones & Galison, 1998), or materiality (Galison, 1997) and their design in research practice.

Instead of arguing for design research as a particular approach to scientific research, or for design research as being systematically different from scientific research, it is much more appropriate to understand in more detail the close relation between design as the imagination and creation of possible future realities (Jonas, 2007; Bonsiepe, 2007) on the one hand, and the construction of reality and objectivity in scientific research (Daston & Galison, 2007) on the other hand. In this perspective, we argue for an approach, which understands research as design (Grand, 2010), and thus as a systematic extension of the current discussions in design research. Such an approach has two fundamental implications: First, it implies that the conceptualization of design and design research as a practice and research field, which particularly focuses on the world as it could be, should be taken as the actual core for defining and practicing design research: This is what we call design fiction (Wiedmer & Caviezel, 2009; Bleecker, 2009). Second, it implies that design is a productive approach to conceptualize scientific research itself as a design practices: This is what we call research as design (Grand, 2010; Jonas, 2010).

## Current Relevance & Open Issues

This characterization of design and design research, as well as of scientific research in the perspective of design, is particularly important and relevant today: As we learn from the recent science and technology studies (among others: Nowotny, 2008; Nowotny, Scott & Gibbons, 2001; Rheinberger, 2001; Bijker & Law, 2000; Biagioli, 1999; Latour, 1999; Felt, Nowotny & Taschwer, 1995; Bjiker, Hughes & Pinch, 1989), our societies are involved and engaged in fundamental debates and reflections concerning not only the world as it is, but concerning possible futures, in many areas. Thereby, those debates and reflections are characterized by a high complexity, due to the multiple perspectives, interests, concerns, issues, and approaches, which are represented by the multiple parties involved. From the perspective of the development of our contemporary societies, we can argue that these societies become increasingly knowledge intensive (Stehr, 1994), reflexive (Beck, Giddens & Lash, 1994), and experimental (Latour, 2004), implying that knowledge creation, scientific research and technological innovation are central to our societies. From the perspective of scientific research, we can argue that the sciences are social (Nowotny, Scott & Gibbons, 2001), technological (Bijker & Law, 2000), and commercial (Stehr, 1994).

Our world is increasingly involved and engaged in complex, collective political and economic debates and experiments (the current financial crisis is just one of the most recent examples), in which different actors including governments, companies, NGOs, social movements, virtual communities, … are engaged, and in which the differentiation between scientific research, institutions and laboratories on the one hand, and societal and political processes on the other hand, are blurring (Novotny, 2008). As the same time, this opens new opportunities for research as design, if design is understood as the creation, realization and materialization of possible future realities. In most cases today, the reactions and actions in those collective debates and experiments are not particularly imaginative and creative. We thus suggest that design and design research are pre-disposed to play a very active and important role in those controversies and collective experiments, and that design and design research should make its particular practices, tools and methods relevant to those debates, while at the same time developing new tools and methods, which are important for collectively dealing with possible futures in a complex world.

## Research Question & Argumentative Structure

In our paper, we develop a strategy for design and design research to contribute to those controversies and activities, which we call “Design Fiction”, asking the research question:

How can design research contribute to the collective controversies and experiments, in which our societies deal with fundamental current and future challenges and transformations of our complex world?

In order to answer this research question, we proceed in three steps: in Part 1, we discuss recent contributions on the epistemology of design research, which indicate productive building blocks and relevant insights into a re-conceptualization of design and design research as design fiction (Bleecker, 2009; Brown, 2008; Bonsiepe, 2007; Krippendorff,, 2007); in Part 2, we discuss some recent contributions in the science studies, which explore, describe and analyze the inherently constructive, creative, controversial, critical, material and imaginative nature of scientific research in general, thus allowing to re-conceptualize the research process as a design process (Latour, 1986; 2005; Galison, 1997; Knorr Cetina, 1999; 2002; Rheinberger, 2001; Nowotny, 2008); in Part 3, we identify current approaches in design and design research (as well as scientific research), which provide particular methods and tools to conduct research in this design perspective (Dunne, 2005; Dunne & Raby, 2001).

## Part 1: From Design Research to Design Fiction

The ongoing discussion regarding methodology in design research is characterized by a strong dualism between the assertion of what scientific research means and of what designers do (Chow & Jonas, 2009). In order to explore the current state of the art in this debate, as well as to introduce “design fiction” as a new possible perspective, we discuss some promising epistemological approaches in design research today.

In general, the debate is strongly connected to stereotypes of what artists, designers and scientists do. According to Frayling (1993), the stereotypes of an artist or a designer are typically anti-rational and inward looking; the designer practices hands-on experimentation, not based on systematic hypotheses or orderly procedures. The scientist, to the contrary, has “… conjectures on hypotheses and sets about proving or disproving them according to a set of orderly procedures. His subject exists outside himself […]” (Frayling, 1993, p. 3). Frayling dissolves these stereotypes through investigating the blurred zone between art, design and science.

The identification of the intersection between research and design is thereby a significant thread in many relevant perspectives. Frayling stresses the process of discovering as an important intersection between experimental scientific research and artistic creation. He is going even one step further and references the recent research into the philosophy and sociology of science: “Doing science is much more like doing design” (Frayling, 1993, p. 4) .

He is joined by other approaches, which emphasize for example the intersection of analytic and synthetic processes (Owen, 2007), of design-led and research-led practices (Sanders, 2006), of research-oriented design (focusing on the real) and design-oriented research (focusing on the true) (Fallmann, 2007), as essential for both, design practice and research practice.

Implied in this focus on discovery processes is an explicit focus on processes. “Tinkering” is one of the key factors for innovation in design and sciences according to Bonsiepe (2004). Science as a cognitive and design as a non-cognitive process shows a structural similarity and are both intentional (Joas, 1991). As consequence, Bonsiepe argues in favor of a particular school of reflexivity and thinking (“Schule des Denkens”) in the area of design and design research, nourished and inspired by the particularities of design experience. As a consequence, design research must involve designers, if we understand designers not as a disciplinary category, but as those people able to create and realize possible futures through their thinking and acting, generating new knowledge for design practice.

„Engineering, medicine, business, architecture and painting are concerned not with the necessary but with the contingent - not with how things are but with how they might be - in short, with design“ (Simon, 1969, p. xii). Design research and design can thus be seen as a discipline (amongst others) which deals with practices and processes in order to create preferable, future situations. Designers are aimed at discovering situations which are changeable and designed (Bonsiepe, 2004). They are motivated by challenges, opportunities and possibilities, not seen by others, to change something (Krippendorff, 2007).

When designers envision possible futures, they can rely on multiple ways, methods and strategies how to communicate and materialize possible futures. These „diegetic prototypes“ (Bleecker, 2009, p.7) or sketches in the figurative sense, are more than fully functional engineered prototypes or already finished designs. Design artifacts are an entrance point for critical thinking about the self evident, not only as the world could be, but rather to find a new, distant perspective on reality as it is. In critical design, artifacts thus „… should draw attention to how product limit our experiences and expose to criticism and discussion their hidden social and psychological mechanisms …“ (Dunne, 2005, p. 24).

In line with these prominent approaches in design practice and design research, “design fiction” can be interpreted as a new strategy for design research, trying to benefit from the qualities of a “designerly way of knowing” (Cross, 2007) and the current discussion of design research frameworks, by systematically questioning and deconstructing the self-evident, transcending it towards new, possible futures; concretely materializing, visualizing and embodying relevant controversies and perspectives in the form of artifacts, interfaces, installations and performances; asking “how the world could be” instead of discussing how