## Contents

Acknowledgments ix   
Introduction xi   
Series Editor's Preface xxiii   
1 Rethinking Critical Theory 1   
2Interpretation, Comparison, and Critique 43   
3 Cultural Difference and Historical Specificity 70   
4 Postmodernism as Pseudohistory: The Trivialization   
of Epochal Change 97   
5 Habitus, Field, and Capital: Historical Specificity in the   
Theory of Practice 132   
6 The Standpoint of Critique? Feminist Theory, Social   
Structure, and Learning from Experience 162   
7 The Politics of Identity and Recognition 193   
8 Nationalism and Difference: The Politics of Identity   
Writ Large 231   
Conclusion 283   
References 298   
Index 317

# Acknowledgments

One of the central arguments of this book is that the formation and reformation of identity is not given immutably by culture or history, does not stop with adulthood, and cannot be sharply divided into public and private elements. The same can be said of theory itself. This book started in reflections on problems that arose both in my other work and in my personal and political involvements. In early essays, I tried to think these issues through but never altogether satisfactorily. I kept at the task, benefitting from discussions with a number of colleagues and friends. Most important were faculty and graduate student colleagues in the Program in Social Theory and Cross-Cultural Studies at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and in the various working groups of the Center for Transcultural Studies (formerly the Center for Psychosocial Studies) in Chicago.

I also benefitted from chances to discuss these ideas in other settings. The second chapter was aired in draft as a presentation to the 1992 National Seminar of the Norwegian Sociological Association, and the American Sociological Association in 1993. The third began as a discussant's remarks in the conference on Prospects for General Theory sponsored by the Department of Sociology at SUNY Albany (later expanded for publication in S. Seidman and D. Wagner, eds: Postmodernism and Social Theory, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991). The fourth was first presented to the World Congress of Sociology in Madrid in 1990 (and published in an earlier version in Theory, Culture and Society, 1993). The fifth chapter was written for the Center for Psychosocial Studies conference on The Social Theory of Pierre Bourdieu, and published in Bourdieu: Critical Perspectives (edited by C. Calhoun, M. Postone and E. LiPuma; Cambridge: Polity; and Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993). Chapter 6 originated when - against my better

## Acknowledgments

judgment – I allowed Barbara Laslett to cajole me into participating in an American Sociological Association “author meets critics" session on the work of Dorothy Smith; an early draft of part of the chapter was also presented in a panel at the Tenth Anniversary celebration of the journal Theory, Culture and Society, on which occasion the audience debated for most of the allotted time the question of whether, as a man, I should have been allowed to speak on this issue (let alone to speak with any pretense or embodied manner of authority) and introduced me to Sandra Harding's description of the issue of men entering into feminist discourse as "the monster problem". A later discussion with the women's studies faculty and students of Uppsala University was also helpful. The seventh chapter started as the introduction to the miniconference on “Social Theory and the Politics of Identity" I organized as chair of the ASA Section on Social Theory in 1992 (published, under that title, by Blackwell in 1994); its revision benefitted from the helpful discussion after I presented it at UCLA and from the insights of a number of colleagues in Chapel Hill with whom I worked to develop a new course on"social theory and cultural diversity."The last chapter grew out of a series of discussions sponsored by the Center for Transcultural Studies, and was presented in multiple incarnations between 1991 and 1994; I am particularly grateful for the opportunity to present it as a Harney Professorship Lecture at the University of Toronto and in seminars at Copenhagen, Gothenberg, Lund, Stockholm, and Uppsala Universities.

In all these various settings – and others – I learned from those who asked me questions, challenged my arguments, and even claimed to support my positions in ways I found surprising. I am not sure whether my thinking was really public or private. None of the chapters now appears as originally written or previously published. All have been reworked in various ways; some have been substantially transformed, even in their basic arguments. Among the most important, and helpful, occasions for this has been my teaching in the Department of Sociology at the University of Oslo. Most chapters were presented as lectures there, and all received important commentary from students and colleagues. I am also grateful to Charles Lemert for helpfully reading a draft of the entire book and making useful editorial suggestions. I cannot name all the people who read one or more individual chapters and gave me helpful advice, but want to thank especially Peter Bearman, Rogers Brubaker, Nancy Fraser, and Moishe Postone. I owe a special debt to the Swedish Collegium for Advanced Study in the Social Sciences which gave me not only the time but the freedom from constant phone calls that enabled me to finish the writing, and the benefit of critical discussion with a group of colleagues who improved the thinking.

## I

The novelist Kurt Vonnegut studied anthropology at the University of Chicago after World War Two. He reports that "at that time, they were teaching that there was absolutely no difference between anybody."1 Before the war, anthropology more often taught that everyone was different.

Anthropology - and the human or social sciences generally - have indeed had these two messages throughout their history. Anthropology - at least socio-cultural anthropology - has perhaps been the paradigmatic science of otherness and difference, but sameness, ethnocentrism, and explicit universalism have flourished there on occasion as well as predominating in sociology, economics, psychology, and most of the other human sciences. Today, the debate continues with particular vociferousness. On the one side stand poststructuralists, postmodernists, some feminists and others who would base an identity-politics on the absolute otherness, the radical incompatibility of different intellectual traditions, and even sometimes the impossibility of full communication across lines of cultural or other basic differences. On the other side stand defenders of Enlightenment universalism, modernism, and rationality as a basis for communication; Jürgen Habermas is most prominent among them.

Eventually a judgment day may come when all social theorists are summoned before the pearly gates to declare their allegiance. Were you with Habermas, the Archangel will ask, or with Deconstruction? So far, however, Gabriel has not blown his horn, I have not seen St Peter, and I refuse the presumption that there is no middle path. My path, readers will probably find, is closer to Habermas's Scylla than Derrida's Charybdis (to switch mythic metaphors). That is, forced to choose between the attempt at a liberating social project and endless warnings that difference probably will be recuperated into sameness and order will turn into tyranny, I will take the risk of trying for liberation, for equality, justice, and all the other problematic terms that join with freedom (more generally favored but very divergently understood) to make up the most popular normative and political path for critical theory. But I think that Habermas and many colleagues are acting prematurely as though they have to choose, and very unfortunately sacrificing really serious attention to the problems of identity and difference in both social theory and ethical-political practice. There is more to learn from deconstruction, poststructuralism, postmodernism, and the less academic politics of identity (and, what is to say much the same thing, difference) before the end of this millennium or the Angelic summons.

In short, the tension between universality and difference has come to the fore once again as perhaps the central issue informing contemporary debates in social and cultural theory, and I want to find a way out of simple dualistic oppositions. Some postmodernists push their case sharply enough to run the risk of stepping onto the slippery slope of radical relativism; some, indeed, dive onto that slope head first. Habermas defends the Enlightenment project by means of a rationalism so thoroughgoing that it runs the risk of seeming vulnerable to the charges Hegel leveled against Kant's moral philosophy: excessive formalism, abstract universalism, impotence of the mere ought, and the terrorism of pure conviction.²

This is a debate in which social and cultural theory returns to face - and perhaps, with luck, to contribute to - the great classical and modern traditions in philosophy. Michel Foucault, for example, was at pains to point out everything he was not: not a structuralist, not a historian, not a philosopher. Yet, though there is ample evidence that his work can be read with great enthusiasm by those for whom it is suggestive without being understood, any deeper grasp of it - albeit a grasp that Foucault in certain moods might have resisted - must recognize his arguments with Hegel. His own great teacher Jean Hyppolyte, his philosophy teacher not just at the Lycée Henri IV but later at the Sorbonne, perhaps did more than anyone else to bring Hegel back into the forefront of French intellectual attention after World War Two (even if Hegel was fated to become more important as alter ego to the nascent structuralist movement than for his own positive theories).3 As Allan Megill has commented, it is no accident that Foucault's first major publication, Madness and Civilization, “should read like an oddly inverted Hegelian Geistesgeschichte."4 The Hegelian dialectic of the master and slave was and is among the most powerful representations of the non-autonomy of self-recognition.

This theme of the politics of recognition was all but ubiquitous in certain segments of postwar avant-garde culture. It informed Sartrean existentialism, for example, and the way in which structuralists made Sartre their definitive other. It had not lost its force by the end of the student movement. As a graduate student in the early 1970s, I was taken along with my sometime mentor Max Gluckman, to see “The Living Theater," that slightly dated performance icon of the 1960s. Max's wife Mary did the taking, and he was already a bit disgruntled. We “spectators" gathered, most of us on the floor, in a large room with a cleared space at the front for Julian Beck, Judith Malina, and their colleagues. Predictably, the members of the Living Theater leapt beyond the bounds of that space, confronting members of the audience with a variety of challenges, many turning on our putatively complacent sense of who we were amid the evils and exploitations of the world. The production sought to unsettle identities and provoke action - even revolution – in the world beyond the theater. Nominally improvisational, it seemed to work with fairly set ideas of what should happen. A young women, naked but for a dirty rag or two, stuck her face in Max's, saying with some sense of drama, “Am I your slave?"“No, I'm bloody well yours," Max yelled as he leapt up, "but no longer." Living for himself, Max strode all gangly six feet four across the (ironically) more respectful crowd on the floor towards the door. Were he alive today, Max would no doubt be on the side of the modernists against the postmodernists, but he was in no way inclined to think the specificity of identity could be addressed adequately through so general a trope, or by such an apparently easy self-recognition. The master/slave image could backfire because it lacked nuance and attention to differences outside the polarity it posited. Hegel's dialectic more generally could always be reduced to slogans of thesis and antithesis despite its more basic concern for relations among the multifarious parts of any historical whole.

## Ⅱ

A sense of complexity remains important. We do not come to the issue of difference in a world that encourages simple, unconditional endorsement.“Difference" appears as importantly in the forms of violent ethnic nationalism, racism, and religious fundamentalism as in movements and personal choices about gender, sexual orientation, and ethnic pluralism. Some lines of difference, like national boundaries, are used not only to distinguish one human group from others but to demand internal conformity. The very rhetoric of difference, in other words, can be turned to the repression of differences. Recognition of difference can be the basis for mutual engagement, or for failure to appreciate and respect common humanity. And not all differences are equally valuable.

Social theorists are challenged by issues of difference precisely because they do not admit of easy answers. It is not so hard to suggest that there must be some “both/and" approach to human difference and commonality; it is very hard to make consistent sense of the approaches that have been offered. The problem is an eminently theoretical one, for it calls for going beyond the surface appeals of various immediate agendas of affirming difference (appeals from ethnic or lifestyle minorities in the US, for example) and recognizing common humanity (acting responsibly amid the tragedies in Rwanda and Bosnia) to grasping how different ways of invoking difference and identity affect our understanding of the world and shape the categories through which we make sense of it. This is above all an issue for critical social theory since it exists largely to facilitate a constructive engagement with the social world that starts from the presumption that existing arrangements - including currently affirmed identities and differences - do not exhaust the range of possibilities. It seeks to explore the ways in which our categories of thought reduce our freedom by occluding recognition of what could be.

Critical theory has come under widespread criticism, however, for its universalist tendencies and its failures to consider the full impact of the cultural diversity of human existence. This is not altogether without merit. In order to establish a ground for critical engagement, critical theorists have commonly claimed the basis of a more or less undifferentiated human condition. Their view of this human condition has been deeply, but not always with acknowledgement, shaped by the specifics of the Western intellectual tradition.

Even where critical theory has been radical, its tacit universalism has often allied it to aspects of the liberal political tradition. It has been disposed to speak of humanity in ways that obscured the multiplicity of actual human beings and human possibilities. Marxists, for example, found it hard to make adequate sense of the commitment of members of the international working class to specific national cultures. Marxist critiques of bourgeois liberalism focused on incomplete universalism, the ways in which putatively illegitimate differences among human beings were maintained despite allegedly universal political freedoms. Yet this is not the whole story. The founders of the "Frankfurt School" who made "critical theory" a catchword in the mid-twentieth century were passionate critics of administrative normalization and alienation, admirers of artistic individuality and resistance to convention. Adorno sought to develop a “many-sided theory of non-identity, or rather of the forms in which the non-identical could, paradoxically, be given consideration."s Even Habermas's more straightforwardly universalistic theories owe a good deal to Adorno, especially in their persistent pursuit of a move beyond the philosophy of the subject.6

Part of the problem is that a great deal of modern social science has tacitly assumed that human beings normally live in one social world at a time. Modern social science has produced a notion of bounded and internally integrated societies and has treated both cross-border relations and subcultures as problematic. It has presumed that the individual consciousness is itself integral and that it requires a stable and consistent social environment. Monolinguality and religious orthodoxy have been taken as normal, and multilinguality and religious syncretism or variation as deviant cases to be explained. Yet in these and a range of other ways, it does not seem obvious that people usually live in one social world at a time, but rather that it is now, and throughout human history often has been, common to inhabit multiple worlds simultaneously and even to grow as a person by the ability to maintain oneself in connection to all of them. This means that anyone's horizon of experience, to borrow the phenomenological term, is unlikely to be fixed by a single collectivity or categorial framework.7

Even where the charge of universalistic inattention to the politics of difference is justified, it does not seem to me a reason to abandon the venture of critical theory. It does seem a reason to change it. The present book explores the challenge of taking seriously the differences among human beings - a challenge not only to critical theories but to more conventional social science theories. I do not think that this challenge admits of an easy answer. Too often, self-proclaimed multiculturalists offer a sort of cheap celebration of the existence of difference without a serious grappling with the challenges posed both by difference in general and by specific differences.

In this book, I do not attempt any sustained exploration of particular cultures or the differences among them. Rather, I try to sort out something of what the challenge posed by difference is, why it is basic, and how it might be confronted without sacrificing commitment to theory or critique. The challenge is one that runs through many sorts of theory and many sorts of difference. Gender, race, and nationality figure prominently, for example. But the problem is apparent in class differences, differences among regions within countries, and cultural differences that no one has ever claimed should demarcate nations.

At the same time, it is important not to accept too restricted a view of critical theory. The label is sometimes claimed for the Frankfurt School as though it could be a sort of property right. I shall only introduce briefly the powerful but sometimes problematic contributions of the Frankfurt theorists - both the first generation of Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, and their colleagues, and the second generation of Jürgen Habermas.8 Their work shapes much of my approach, and much of this book implicitly engages Habermas's theory. A critical theory of exceptional scope and many advantages, Habermas's work brings together themes I think are crucial. Much as Weber said he was "unmusical" in matters of religious belief, however, so Habermas is unmusical on the theme of cultural difference. Though my arguments implicitly engage and attempt to advance the lines of work initiated by the Frankfurt theorists, I shall focus more on suggesting some of the ways in which other lines of theory might inform the project of critical theory.

In particular, I shall explore feminist and poststructuralist theory because these two discourses (they are not really the unified theoretical positions sometimes implied) have done a great deal to open up the issue of difference as a basic categorial problem rather than a merely contingent empirical issue. I shall pay special attention to the work of Pierre Bourdieu and especially his ideas of habitus and field. Bourdieu is not always seen as a poststructuralist, though I think he should be. His approach to knowledge was formed in the structuralist crucible of 1950s and early 1960s France, and remains deeply shaped by it. Yet like his classmate and exact contemporary Derrida, he moved beyond structuralist orthodoxies partly by recovering elements of a phenomenology that had been suppressed and by resisting the complete enclosure of system. Like Foucault he sought to recover the significance of human embodiment. But unlike Derrida or Foucault, Bourdieu has remained consistently sociological. Though trained initially as a philosopher, he has neither stayed within an almost entirely cognitive argument, like Derrida, nor attempted to claim the body as an extra-social standpoint for critique, like Foucault. Although Bourdieu's work is ambiguous about its cultural and historical specificity, it offers important possibilities for developing an approach to the concretely social and embodied dimensions of human life that are frequently slighted by those poststructuralists who are takei, especially in the English language countries, as intellectual sources for “postmodernism.

Finding a variety of problems with modernity, many feminists and others attentive to the politics of difference have been drawn to postmodernist ideas. This move raises problems, however, for a critical social theory. First, as I shall try to show in chapter 4, the idea of postmodernism commonly involves a pseudohistorical claim to an epochal transition that in fact cuts theorists off from the necessary analysis of the conditions and possibilities for truly transformative change in modern society. Second, postmodernists too often write as though all knowledge is discursive and therefore cut themselves off from understanding much of culture and practice. Too often they focus on certain sorts of culture – especially those that seem most like language – without attending to the construction and organization of social relations. Feminists are generally more attentive to embeddedness in social relations and to embodiment, but even within feminist theory there is an unfortunate split between thinkers who focus overwhelmingly on “ideas, symbols and forms of consciousness," as Iris Marion Young describes the significance of the category of gender, and those who undertake the analysis of concrete social relations - whether within families or on larger scales of societal organization.9 Third, in many of its versions, postmodernist theory encourages a relativism that makes it hard to explain why feminist theories should be more persuasive than others, or on what basis feminists and other critical theorists can defend strong normative conclusions.

I shall try to show that we can draw on many of the positive achievements of poststructuralist thought without buying the problematic package sold as postmodernism. Likewise, then, we can avoid the notion of a forced choice between this postmodernism and a so-called modernism which turns out to be unusually rigid whether in outright universalism or in defense of certain essentialized differences. The problems of postmodernism have encouraged many feminists to stick to problematically fixed notions of standpoint (inherited from androcentric Enlightenment thought) as the basis for critique. For some, following Foucault and/or Lacanian psychoanalysis, this standpoint is an essentialized extrasocial and extra-linguistic notion of the body. It is very hard for such theory (as for conservative counterparts that rely on conventional biological determinism) to be opened to genuinely social and cultural argumentation. Feminist standpoints modeled on ideas of class standpoints are more readily sociological, but as I shall try to show in chapter 6, are not without serious drawbacks.

These different theoretical strategies have longstanding, if too often unrecognized, precursors. I shall also try to show something of the older roots of critical theory before the Frankfurt School, including the ways in which problems of cultural diversity and historical specificity have shaped social theory throughout the modern era.

## Ⅲ

Outside the realms of art, literature, and philosophy, the Frankfurt School's appropriation of history was largely (though not exclusively) a matter of knowing canonical European history - the product of good gymnasium educations, rather than a matter of involvement in actual historical research." Breaking with the givenness and immediate facticity of the social world, however, calls not only for historical knowledge as a precondition of theory but for a continual engagement with history and rethinking of historical assumptions. To take a simple example, thus, it is remarkable to what extent the understanding contemporary sociologists have of the industrial revolution is based on the syntheses incorporated into theoretical discourses by Max Weber, Emile Durkheim and Karl Marx - and how little needmost sociologists feel to allow their inherited ideas to be challenged by the enormous more recent production of historical research and analysis that puts the so-called industrial revolution in new light. Much the same could be said with regard to sociological neglect of anthropology and cross-cultural knowledge.

The lead of the classical social theorists has also been followed in the area of gender, though here the lead was more to ignore the significance of the matter than to appropriate any particular historical account. Developing ways to take seriously such fundamental categorial differences as gender is a basic and urgent project for critical social theory. There is no aspect of social life on which the contributions of Marx, Weber, and Durkheim are more strikingly unable to speak to current concerns. None of the most important sociological theorists at work today has written more than glancingly of gender - not Habermas, not Bourdieu, not Giddens, not Luhmann (though each has opened the door to serious gender concerns farther than most of their predecessors).1 The issue is not just that these theorists (and most others) have ignored women, but that they have ignored the extent to which the category of gender exerts a basic influence over social thought and social life. Gender is like race - but even more basic and pervasive - in its structuring of a host of forms and dimensions of social understanding. In realms that seem quite separate from biological differences between sexes (let alone from sexual relations) the category of gender helps to give meaning to the world, even encouraging cultures in their common proliferations of binary oppositions (male sun to female moon).

Feminist theory, in turn, remains remarkably disconnected from this disciplinary mainstream of sociological theory. This is less true in the broader, interdisciplinary discourses of social, cultural, and political theory, where feminist theory is itself an important organizing theme and where it is in close relationship to other thematic clusters such as poststructuralism and postmodernism. Sociologists are, however, remarkably underrepresented in both feminist theory and these cognate discourses. Poststructuralists and postmodernists have played a crucial role in bringing themes of difference to the forefront, and this combined with the failure of mainstream sociological theory to take gender seriously perhaps accounts for some of the affinity many feminists feel for the poststructuralist and postmodernist currents. Unfortunately, however, these currents are in many cases refractory to sociology; they encourage analyses of culture and power shorn of serious attention to the constitution of social relationships and especially to problems of societal integration.

Taking the constitutive centrality of categorial differences seriously within a genuinely social theory offers the possibility of a kind of bridge across discourses in which not only does sociology stand to gain from taking gender seriously, but there is potential for a stronger notion of the social to be developed in feminist theory. This is why opening up the possibility of a sociology written from a feminist standpoint is of more than strategic interest, why it is not just a way of remedying an absence in conventional sociological theory but an attempt to remake uncritical theory as critical theory. As Dorothy Smith puts it, "It is not enough to supplement an established sociology by addressing ourselves to what has been left out or overlooked, or by making women's issues into sociological issues. That does not change the standpoint built into existing sociological procedures, but merely makes the sociology of women an addendum to the body of objectified knowledge."12 Smith's point, rather, is to use the standpoint of women to reconstitute sociological inquiry as a critique of socially organized practices of knowing."13 Such a critique is, I think, deeply needed if sociology is to become truly adequate to the project of feminist theory. But, as I will suggest in chapter 6, there is some question about whether “the standpoint of women" is an adequate account of what makes feminist insights so pivotal, and about whether the experience of women can readily be claimed as a basis for knowledge without brooking a troubling essentialism. Whether standpoint theory is an unduly essentializing move or a way to recognize plurality and difference remains, in Charles Lemert's phrase, "the unsolved riddle of the standpoint."14

From Kant on, most critical theory has claimed, or at least aimed at, a standpoint of universal validity. This remains true of Habermas's theory of communicative action. But too often, the seemingly universal is the presentation of a partial view as though it were all encompassing.

Marx spoke in the “Theses on Feuerbach," for example, of the "thissidedness" of all thought. He sought elsewhere to show how the seemingly universal categories of early liberal political thought in fact reflected bourgeois interests. The emancipation of man as citizen could never be more than partial, therefore, while man as laborer remained in chains. And if the term citizen implicitly meant property-owner even while it claimed a sort of universality, so did it also implicitly mean men. In many countries only men of European ancestry were included in the seemingly universal category. And though Enlightenment thought about citizenship treated nationality in universal terms, as something that everyone might have, this internationalism which was present at the birth of nationalism all too rapidly faded after Napoleon into a much more persistent invocation of the priority of certain identities at the expense of others. Socialism seemed at times the answer, but workers shooting each other from the trenches of World War One suggested that in and of itself, this answer was inadequate.

Ironically, it may even be the case that this very rhetoric of universality predisposed thinkers to use categorical terms - man, citizen, worker - in ways that obscured their own partiality and prejudice. The logic of market equivalents also encouraged a semblance of identity that made it hard and even made it seem dangerous to recognize difference. So difference became constituted as “other" to universality. The logic of “both/ and," the possibility of recognizing simultaneously connection and distinction, was submerged. Advocates of difference became too often advocates of radical particularity, even while invoking universalistic rhetorics like the rights of national self-determination in support of their antiuniversalist positions. The sharp opposition represented only a seeming clarity.

We should be equally cautious about treating the Enlightenment without complication as the era of universalism, succeeded then by a Romantic epoch of particularism. Neither era was so simple. Indeed, the Enlightenment and early modern social thought generally were shaped extraordinarily deeply by the confrontation with difference. The attempt to construct universal truths or norms followed from the rupture in unquestioned, “doxic" acceptance of traditions that constituted not multiple truths and commensurable values but simply Truth and Value.15 This rupture was one made not merely by science or capitalism or industrialization, but by a whole congeries of factors that brought Europeans into new relationships across lines of difference. The Reformation and the later rise of deism and unbelief were crucial. Confrontations with difference were basic to the voyages of discovery and colonization, to the institution of slavery, to the expansion of interregional trade within what