were to become nations, to the mobilization of citizen armies, and to the spread of printing and literacy. Ruptures in doxic assumptions and engagements across distances and differences brought the corresponding challenge of building relations recognizing both distinction and connection.

Today the sharp opposition of universalism and particularism has returned to the fore. Some writers, indeed, see the very possibility of a critical theory as impugned by the impossibility of a benign universalism. This issue is not of purely academic interest. In the final two chapters, I shall turn in more substantive form to the challenges posed by the "politics of identity." These involve the creation of collective movements that aim to reconcile personal positions in cultural and historical space with broader patterns of social organization. Feminism, the gay movement, and a range of racial, ethnic, and subcultural movements all figure prominently. Less commonly seen in this light but as important as any, I shall argue, is nationalism. All these movements and discourses reflect the extent to which the problems of critical theory and cultural difference extend beyond the abstract and academic to shape the immediate and practical.

Can critical theory reach beyond the purely particular yet remain sensitive to culture and difference? The present book is an attempt to think through this issue, and to think the possibility of a critical theory imprisoned by neither universalism nor particularism, speaking with some general moment and yet attending to difference. This is not a comprehensive review of critical theory nor a book about all the many and inherently specific forms – let alone contents – of cultural diversity. It is about the challenge such diversity poses to the task of critical social theory.

## Notes

1 Slaughterhouse Five, p. 8.

2 Habermas, "Morality and Ethical Life," has recently noted the possible vulnerability but argued that discourse ethics is not much damaged by these criticisms.

3 Much of the French involvement with Hegel was based not on the original texts but on the powerful and more accessible readings of Hyppolyte and Kojève.

4 Megill, Prophets of Extremity, p. 187. Foucault's French title – Histoire de la folie à l'’âge classique - evokes a bit more than this accurate English translation which loses the other senses of folie, folly and unreason generally, and both more and less than the published English title of Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason – which is, in fact,

a very sharply abridged version of the French original, and one from which most of Foucault's structuralism has been expurgated.

5 Wiggershaus, The Frankfurt School.

6 See especially Habermas, The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity.

7 On the concept of social world, see Strauss, “A Social World Perspective." Aspects of this issue are discussed in several places in this book, but see especially chapter 2.

Several such reviews are available. Perhaps the best introductions in English are those of Martin Jay: The Dialectical Imagination, which is specifically on the Frankfurt School, and Marxism and Totality, which covers a broader range of thinkers with reference to one of the core ideas that has inhibited attention to difference. For a more detailed, indeed monumental, study of the Frankfurt founders of political theory, see Wiggerhaus's translated The Frankfurt School. One crucial dimension of critical theory which I do not take up in this book is political economy, including the role of technology in transforming the modern world and especially the role of capitalism in constituting it.

I draw both the quotation from Young's “Is Male Gender Identity the Cause of Male Domination," and much of the criticism of the privileging of the symbolic over the social in some recent feminist theory from Flax, Thinking Fragments, pp. 180–1.

By the Frankfurt School, I refer to the extraordinary cluster of scholars brought together at the Institute for Social Research in the 1930s under the direction of Max Horkheimer. The earliest members of the ISR under Carl Grünberg did focus largely on empirical research into the history of socialism and the labor movement.

[1 Giddens (Transformation of Intimacy) an'd Luhmann (Love as Passion) have each written on love and sexuality, topics that bring sexual difference to their attention, but neither makes the category of gender basic to his more general social theory.

12 Smith, Conceptual Practices, p. 13.

13 Ibid., p. 12.

14 Lemert, "Subjectivity's Limit."

15 See Arendt, Between Past and Future, ch 1; see also Habermas, Philosophical Discourse, on Hegel's reconstruction of these "diremptions" as the organizing problem of modernity, which his philosophy sought to overcome.

In the language world of social theory, "critical theory" is one of the most valuable coins of the realm. Among the more social scientific social theorists, the phrase stands for the important tradition of twentiethcentury German thinkers in the lineage of Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer. Among the more literary and humanistic scholars, "critical theory" represents the genus of enterprises by which literatures and other cultural works are subjected to rigorous theoretical examination. Also, behind these two local usages stands the fact that critical thinking has itself come to be one of the more essential attributes of modern, Western cultures. To be a modern is at least to possess a capacity for critical judgment, one that allows the individual to stand sensibly apart from the dehumanizing forces of social life. So ubiquitous is the term in its several senses that its appearance is a sure sign one is in the presence of some or another important discussion of the nature of modern society itself.

When in the far future the definitive intellectual history of the modern age is written, the list of our culture's most decisive controversies will surely include the current one in which critical theories are central antagonists. At issue is the question of modernity's end and the supposed emergence of a postmodern era. Though the nuances of this cultural argument can be at times unbearably complicated, the most basic questions are comparatively straightforward, and of exacting importance. Will the ideal of a universal humanity survive? Should it?

On the one side are those who interpret the appearance of fragmentation in modern cultural and political forms as evidence of a major historical transformation. Hip hop culture, Madonna, Disney World, MTV, the AT&T (now Sony) building in midtown New York City, the velvet revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe, the rise of identity politics and ethnic rebellions world-wide, the collapse of state Marxisms in the

West — these are among the evidences put forth to argue that we are now in a postmodern era. Whether or not a series such as this, however composed, points to a world revolution is an open question - one that, in principle, cannot even be answered from within a postmodern "logic".

On the other side are those whose moral, political, and aesthetic judgments cause them to recoil from the very idea that evidences such as powerful social (and political) differences and confusing cultural expressions suggest anything new at all. Those on the modernist side of the controversy argue that the modern world over the last half-millennium has been continuously engaged in a struggle to come to terms with its own internal differences. The changes taking place today are, they insist, at best attenuations of the nature of the modern world. Modernists argue that the postmodern fad plays light and easy with the precious property of modern culture. In particular, they complain with cause that some postmodernisms flirt so loosely with differences as to produce a debilitating relativism that eliminates all prospects of action and debate on principles of good societies, just legal orders, and emancipatory politics.

This is a serious argument that is taken up with different purposes, though a core of common concern, by both the left and right wings of political and cultural life in the West, particularly in the United States. Left-modernists are accused, even by their friends, of being today's conservatives, while, in their view of themselves, they are the defenders of the most viable principles of political liberation. The cultural wars among high-minded social theorists, as among politicians and media stars, become complicated whenever combatants are retrofitted into one of the familiar categories. Insofar as the postmodernists are correct in some things, one of these may be that the categories by which modernity classifies its cultural and political entities may have outlived their usefulness. Here more than a few left-modernists would agree.

Curiously, the term "critical theory" has played a role on both sides of the cultural wars, at least as they have taken place among academic social theorists. "Critical theory" in reference to the inheritors and affines of the German school of social theory has referred to those who apply their critical attitudes to modern life for the evident purpose of saving it, Juergen Habermas, to mention the most mentionable example, is surely critical of modern society. He is also one of modernity's most articulate defenders. At the same time, "critical theory" in its references to theories of culture is commonly, if awkwardly, associated with postmodernism. The severe limitations of the expression "postmodernism" are well illustrated by the fact that cultural critics come in as many varieties as may exist on both the modernist and postmodernist sides. Yet, it is surely the case that the emergence of critical theories of literature and culture as they have developed in the last quarter century has been foremost among the driving forces of postmodern social theories generally. The uses and abuses of the ideas of earlier poststructuralist thinkers like Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida, and Jacques Lacan have given life to fundamental changes in many academic fields. Whether or not those changes are somehow part of a transformation in world culture is a question yet to be answered. It may, at present, be unanswerable, just as it may be impossible to determine whether or not this new critical attitude in the study of culture is postmodern.

The feelings on these matters run deep because the issues at stake are so urgent. This may be why it is so painfully rare that one reads an account of the controversy in which an opposing position is given fair and coherent respect. Juergen Habermas's The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity (1987) is, however, one exception to this rule. Martin Jay's Downcast Eyes (1993) is another. Though it is a book of another kind, Craig Calhoun's Critical Social Theory: Culture, History and the Challenge of Difference is a welcome addition to a short list of writings that take their stand while evoking a nuanced and sensible, if not always friendly, view of those against whom they assert themselves. True to the tradition's founding faith in decent reason, these are among the books that come out more or less on the modernist side. Though there is foolishness on both sides, postmoderns are less inclined to read their theoretical Others with the same care, perhaps because they are on to other things.

Craig Calhoun is a man of many remarkable talents and energies. In his generation of social theorists there are few indeed who have embarked, as he has, on such a series of projects assessing the most important issues across the spectrum of current social thinking. The list of topics on which he has written is breathtaking — the new social movements, nationalism and ethnicity, civil society, radicalism in the industrial revolution, the public sphere, and more. It is clear that he is a social theorist more than willing to dig into the empirical depths many theorists deliberate only at abstract remove. This is a book in which Calhoun exhibits the breadth and depth of his learning to very satisfying effects for the reader.

Critical Social Theory breaks important new ground. Firstly, and most strikingly, it rethinks the tradition of German critical social theory in relation to subjects it is often accused of ignoring or, even, being incapable of handling. As the book's subtitle suggests, a major theme is the exploration of difference in respect to which Calhoun offers a truly original understanding of ways and means whereby critical theory both can and must consider social differences without giving up more fundamental commitments to principles of human emancipation. Secondly, and just as important, if slightly less striking, Critical Social Theory makes important connections among the major lines of social thought that for a good long while have called out for reconciliation. In composing his own social theory, Calhoun is one of a very few to draw as strongly on the work of Pierre Bourdieu and other cultural theorists as on the ideas of Habermas and the Frankfurt theorists. In this, and other, ways he demonstrates a certain grasp of the second important meaning of “critical theory" as a critique of culture.

But Calhoun refuses to keep within the safe precincts of sociology, his own disciplinary field. This book is one of the few in which a prominent sociological theorist gives serious and sophisticated attention to the contributions of feminist theory, in particular, and other theories associated with the New Social Movements that arose in the 1960s. This constitutes a third major contribution of the book — its encouragement to the revival of sociology's readiness to confront extra-sociological social theories.

Though there are still other riches to be mined in this wonderful book, these three alone make Critical Social Theory a book worth the time of its reading. Though Craig Calhoun is already widely recognized as a leading social theorist, this book will almost surely advance his strong reputation even more. Critical Social Theory is so compelling as to cause even those skeptical of the varieties of critical theories to think again. And, those who come to critical theory with an already warm appreciation will surely enjoy and benefit from the ways Craig Calhoun advances this important tradition of social thought.

Charles Lemert