## Rethinking Critical Theory

## I

A philistine has been defined as “someone who is content to live in a wholly unexplored world."1 The philistine is not necessarily passive, for he or she may be quite actively engaged in making objects or gaining position in the world, but the philistine is unreflective, primarily utilitarian in orientation. The Biblical association suggests an enemy superior in numbers and into whose hands one might fall, and Hannah Arendt tells us that the term was first used in its modern sense to distinguish between town and gown in the student slang of German university towns.² But if this reproach was initially just intellectual snobbery (combined perhaps with genuine fear of attack), the notion of the philistine took on more subtle colorings as nonintellectuals began to manifest a substantial interest in "culture," particularly as part of the construction of a new form of elite status.3 Nonacademic interest in the life of the mind and even in matters of culture more generally has been intermittent and uneven.

The fear that cultural objects and intellectual products would be reduced to mere use values or commodities through an insensitive appropriation by those outside universities has proved exaggerated. But at the same time, a certain philistinism has grown within universities themselves. Not only is academic life far from exclusively a life of the mind, the use of cultural objects (e.g. publications) as means of professional advancement exerts a distorting, perhaps even transformative effect. I do not mean to point to the crassness of this new philistinism, but to the way in which it undermines critical thought. To the extent that cultural production is remade into the means of accumulating a kind of academicprofessional capital, cultural producers are encouraged to accept commonplace understandings of the world. To challenge these too deeply would be to court detachment from those whose “purchase" of their products enables them to accumulate capital.4 The point, thus, is not that intellectuals lie to serve illegitimate masters, which they seem no more likely to do under contemporary conditions than at other times, but that in the spirit of professionalism they betray the calling truly and openly to explore the world.

Despite recurrent disappointments, one wants to hope that a social scientist could never in this sense be a philistine. Indeed, at some level all social scientists, like all novelists and a great many others, are engaged in exploring the world. Yet for most of us, and for social scientists more than novelists, our explorations are limited by the boundaries of the known world of convention. We discover new facts, to be sure, but they are already tamed within schemes of knowledge that we take as selfevident and beyond question. One of the enduring challenges for social science is to go beyond the affirmation and reconstitution of the familiar world to recognize other possibilities. New perspectives, new theories, and new empirical information all can enable us to see how things can be different from the ways they first present themselves to us, and how things even could be different from the ways they are. Seizing such possibilities, however, means rejecting the notion that either we must accept nearly everything as it is or we must enter into a radical disorganization of reality in which we can claim no bearings to guide us.⁵

Not just research but everyday life can be the source of challenges to complacency in our views of the worl. Our ordinary relations with other people provide us with occasions for seeing the world from different angles and thinking it in different rhetorics. Our practical projects - even the project of growing up - confront us not only with the need for some continuous sense of identity but with the multiplicity of the world and of ourselves as creatures of that world. Not least of all, as creatures who exist fully only in our relations with others, we can never see our identities altogether directly; they inhere in the many-sided relations of our lives and actions to those of others. As Arendt suggested, the "who" of each person "which appears so clearly and unmistakably to others, remains hidden from the person himself, like the daimon in Greek religion which accompanies each man throughout his life, always looking over his shoulder from behind and thus visible only to those he encounters."6

So too, neither intellectual nor cultural traditions exist in such autonomous and self-contained fashions as are sometimes suggested; they are not knowable simply through internal reflection."Cultural diversity" has recently become a hot academic topic, and “multiculturalism" has been discovered as though it was something altogether new in practical affairs.

Yet recurrent, sometimes everyday, dealings with cultural diversity have been common in human history, especially where that history has been marked by long-distance trade, cities, empires, and the great, literate religious traditions. It is the nationalist ideal of cultural homogeneity that is modern, a reflection of new forms of public life and new ideologies of solidarity.

Yet it is not easy to reach across these traditions and modes of understanding to grasp the relationship between our own thought or that of others, and it is especially hard to do so within the modality of theory. The modern venture of social theory - concerned since its origins in Machiavelli, Vico, and Hobbes critically to engage practical affairs - adopted at first a universalistic voice. However immediate and local theorists' inductions and concerns, they sought to speak to the general human condition. But with increasing emphasis, many recognized the challenges both historical changes and cross-cultural diversity posed for the unitary construct of the human condition.

## ⅡI

Most social science is description of the familiar social world with slightly differing contexts and particulars - like romance novels that rehearse fairly standard plots in new settings and with new characters. We industriously accumulate facts, test them to be sure of their solidity, sort them into identifiable patterns.7 For the most part this sorting is limited to taxonomy, rather like pre-Darwinian orderings of the biological universe in terms of phenotypic characteristics. Only occasionally do we systematize in a more theoretical way, one that argues for an underlying order that cannot be found in any of the surface characteristics of its objects. Nothing presses this theoretical venture on us more firmly than the experience of historical change and cross-cultural diversity.

Theory, in this sense, lies never in the facts themselves, not even those that demonstrate the statistical connection between various occurrences. In his distinction of mere correlation from true causality, Hume showed - almost despite himself, or to Kant rather than to himself - the essential place of theory and the limits of empiricism as a source of certain knowledge. At the same time he suggested the indeterminacy of theory, the impossibility of ever arriving at definite proofs based on empirical evidence. Hume turned away from theory to history as a guide for human understanding and action. Theory, after all, is not the only way to provide orientation to action; language and everyday culture provide us with enormous classificatory abilities, though as we move into analysis we become at least implicitly a bit theoretical. This is commonly equated with causal reasoning, but our idea of theory needs to make room also for the reasoning involved in narratives. Narratives need not be simply statements of progression or sequence. They can also be accounts of how prior events or actions limit and orient subsequent ones. Analysts can theorize variation of“plot"structures without introducing notions of causality per se.8 Theory is important as the systematic examination and construction of knowledge - in the case of social theory, knowledge about social life. This may be causal or narrative in form, with each form suggesting different approaches to generalization and specification. While causal reasoning may be applied to discrete events, it is more commonly used in social science to refer to classes of phenomena, treated as internally equivalent, that influence other classes of similarly equivalent phenomena (an instance of x can be expected to produce or increase y in the absence of intervening factors). Narrative, conversely, is often described as inherently particularizing but (1) the particularities may be global (as in narratives of world history), and (2) comparisons among narratives facilitate a form of general, cross-situational knowledge.

The world that social theorists seek to understand is not just empirical, constituted of facts and propositions; it is the world also of phenomenological experience, reflective judgment, and practical action. Recognizing this makes more difficult, but perhaps more interesting, the key challenge theorists have faced ever since Hume: to develop systematic ways of understanding the world that are true to that world as the object of experience and action as well as of observation, that recognize the place of other subjects in that world, and that are rigorous yet recognize their own embeddedness in history.

This suggests that some common conceptions of theory are misleading. It is a mistake in particular to imagine that theory is altogether abstract while empirical knowledge is somehow perfectly concrete. This is wrong on both counts.

First, social science theories are always partly inductive, they depend on at least some information about how the world works and also on an orientation to the world induced from the culture and experience of the theorists (but usually left inexplicit). More than this, many of the best theories are "empirically rich." That is, they are compilations not solely of formal propositions or abstract speculations but of concrete explanations and narratives. They work very largely by empirical analogies, statements of similarity and contrast, rather than law-like universal statements.9 The extent to which the most compelling theories are richly, densely empirical can be seen easily by a quick reflection on the theories that have proved most enduringly influential - those, for example, of Marx, Weber, Durkheim, and Freud.

Second, the idea of a theory-free, totally concrete empirical sociology is equally misleading. Even when empirical researchers leave their theoretical orientations completely inexplicit, and claim - like Sherlock Holmes - to be working with “nothing but the facts," they rely on concepts, ideas about causality, and understandings of where to look for empirical relationships that cannot be derived entirely from this realm of facts, and that are necessary to constitute both facts and explanations. One of the major jobs of theoretical sociology is to make explicit, orderly, consistent - and open to critical analysis - these “orientations" that are usually taken for granted by empirical researchers.

Perhaps it is useful to clarify the ways in which the term "theory" is used by sociologists - and indeed by social scientists generally - in order to see why our habitual ways of thinking about theory sometimes obscure understanding both of what is going on in academic science and how theory is important in the public sphere. First, "theory" is sometimes understood in a strongly empiricist fashion to refer to an orderly system of tested propositions. In such a usage of theory, the main elements are (1) potentially generalizable propositions, and (2) scope statements about where they do and do not fit. Generality and cumulation are key goals of theory thus conceived. This is often called positivism, by both critics and proponents, but that is really a misnomer. The "positivism" label comes from the scientism of early French social theorists like Comte, and Hegel's critique of “mere positivity" - seeing the surface existence of the world but not its internal tensions. The Frankfurt theorists, especially Horkheimer and Adorno, combined their appropriation of Hegel's dialectics (stressing the role of "determinate negation") with their critique of both social science empiricism and the philosophy of the Vienna Circle (which called its work “logical positivism").10

Logical positivism was far from a summation of tested propositions. It turned on the search for consistency and the power of logical (usually quite formal) expression, not just empirical generalization. Many logical positivists were (and are) interested in the theories of physics and mathematics, which are hardly empirical generalizations. The theory of relativity, for example, yields some testable propositions, but achieved recognition as a “beautiful"and powerful theory before very many of its key propositions could be tested. As Karl Popper, though only ambiguously part of the positivist grouping, summed up in a neat phrase, scientists should be interested in "conjectures and refutations,"not mere generalizations.11 This leads, then, to the second sense of “theory," a logically integrated causal explanation. It is only for this second sort of theory that criteria of praise like parsimony or power or completeness become relevant.

Finally, there is a third sense of theory, one Robert Merton tried to distinguish from the first two.12 He called this third sort theoretical orientations or perspectives, rather than theories. He meant, I think, something like approaches to solving problems and developing explanations rather than the solutions and explanations themselves. While Talcott Parsons tried to consolidate functionalism as an integrated general theory, thus, Merton's own use of functionalism in middle-range theories was as an orienting perspective; so too has been most use of the broad traditions associated with Max Weber or Karl Marx. During the last thirty years, however, we have become aware that this third sense of theory cannot be kept altogether in the background of the first two. This is so for two reasons. First, we realize that the language our so-called theoretical perspectives provide for talking about various issues is itself dependent on theories. In other words, if we say that we think power and conflict play a larger role than functional integration in establishing social order, we presume understandings of what social order is that can only be achieved on the basis of some level of theorization, and which may not be the same as other understandings. Second, and for partly similar reasons, most of what we take to be the “facts" of social science, and indeed the criteria for evaluating both facts and explanations, are themselves constituted in part through theory. Theory does not only follow from and attempt to explain an inductively pre-given world of empirical observations, theory enables us to make observations and thus convert sensory impressions into understandings we can appropriate as facts. Theories thus offer us ways to think about the empirical world, ways to make observations, and ways to formulate tests, not just ways to explain the results of the tests and the correlations among the empirical observations.

Each of these three widespread senses of theory offers us insight into the ways sociological theory informs both scientific research and public life and practical action outside academia. Theoretical writings offer repositories and syntheses of empirical knowledge; they offer explanations, and they offer methods for thinking up new explanations. But this makes things seem too simple, and it obscures the potentially transformative role of theory in both academic sociology and public life. The three conventional ideas about how theory works, to put this another way, assume that all science is normal science in Kuhn's sense.13 They leave no room for revolutionary science or even for smaller challenges to paradigms that we might not want to claim are revolutionary even though they bring significant changes to the way we see the world.

Consider, for example, the empiricist notion of theory I listed first. This rightly grasps the extent to which theory needs to be rich with empirical knowledge, but misleadingly presents empirical knowledge as though it could be simply an orderly summation of tested propositions. In the first place, this involves imagining that the empirical propositions can be constructed in ways that do not depend on theoretical (or metatheoretical) assumptions, that are not embedded within particular theoretical orientations and thus sometimes difficult to translate across theoretical discourses. More basically, this understanding fails to leave room for anomalies and lacunae that structure our knowledge alongside tested certainties and that perhaps do much more to drive knowledge forward. And last but not least, it misses the extent to which the best theories are not simply assemblages of propositions but analogical constructs comparing, contrasting, and identifying similarities among cases of various sorts, including narratives.

Even when we speak with more sophistication of theory as explanation and methods for constructing explanations, we fail to do justice to the role of theory in constituting our very access to the social world, including the facts about which we theorize and the practical actions through which we test propositions and understanding. Theoretical ideas - like for example the ideas of democracy or class – also become part of the world we study, changing it so that we are never able to achieve the complete closure envisaged by our conventional textbook notions of theoretical cumulation or the relationship between theory and research. And especially with regard to the relationship of social theory to the public sphere, but also in relation to the most academic science, we need to recognize that our theoretical innovations respond to problems in our efforts to achieve understanding or to offer normative guidance, but that in fixing one set of problems they may create new ones, or new ones may emerge as the social world changes. We do not move simply from false propositions to true ones; for the most part, we move from less adequate accounts to more adequate accounts, with our criteria of adequacy always shaped in part by the practical problems that command our attention.14 Weber's and Durkheim's theories, thus, cannot be compared simply on the criterion of truth, as though with some imaginable data we could decide that one is right and the other wrong. Rather, they are best compared in terms of their potential usefulness for achieving different kinds of understandings or understandings of different issues.15

In this connection, one of the most important roles of theory lies in enabling us to ask new and different sorts of questions. A host of important questions arise from Marx's theories, for example, that would not arise from those of either Durkheim or Weber. Marxist theory urges us to study to what extent interests rooted in material relations of production shape people's identities and actions, and whether recogni-