tion of such interests makes for an international class consciousness strong enough to triumph over nationalism. We may learn more from Marx's questions in some cases than from his answers. Moreover, theories enable us to ask questions that didn't occur to the originating theorists themselves - as for example Marx's theory of alienation produced such insistent questioning of the conditions of communist societies that allegedly marxist governments attempted to suppress its use.

But the fact that theories enable us to ask new questions is not just a sign that our knowledge grows progressively better. It is, rather, a result of the many possible vantage points that one might achieve in consideration of a single set of social phenomena. Theories remain multiple not because we are confused or have not yet reached correct scientific understanding of the problems before us, but because all problems - like all people – can be seen in different ways. Or put another way, it is generally not possible to ask all the interesting questions about any really significant phenomenon within the same theory or even within a set of commensurable, logically integratable, theories. Noting this was one of the breakthroughs of modern physics, linked to the theory of relativity. As Heisenberg remarked:

The most important new result of nuclear physics was the recognition of the possibility of applying quite different types of natural laws, without contradiction, to one and the same physical event. This is due to the fact that within a system of laws which are based on certain fundamental ideas only certain quite definite ways of asking questions make sense, and thus, that such a system is separated from others which allow different questions to be put.16

For this reason, we cannot expect theoretical cumulation to result in the development of the single, completely adequate theory. The field of sociological theory necessarily - and indeed happily – will remain a field of dialogue among multiple theories, each offering aspects of truth and none of them commanding truth entirely. This means also that theory needs to be seen crucially through its role in the process of interpretation, and that its empirical content is often best deployed not as universal truths or law-like generalizations but as analogies, contrasts, and comparisons.

## ⅢI

To combat the cosy contentment of the philistine (or positivist-empiricist cousins), critical social theory makes the very givenness of the world the object of exploration and analysis. This suggests another reason why theory has a complex relationship to facts. It cannot merely summarize them, or be neatly tested by them, since theory of some sort is always essential to the constitution of those facts. Theory is not only a guide to action in the way in which engineering principles guide the construction of bridges. It is an aid in thinking through changed circumstances and new possibilities. It helps practical actors deal with social change by helping them see beyond the immediacy of what is at any particular moment to conceptualize something of what could be. This is not only true of utopian or other normative theorizing, though the same capacity facilitates normative theorizing. Rather, this is a crucial analytic ability that shows the limits of sheer empiricism.

The point is conceptualized differently but equally clearly by dialectical theorists following Hegel and by theorists in the structuralist movement emanating from the work of the linguist Ferdinand de Saussure. For the former, the key is the tensions and contradictions that underpin existing reality and point both to its situation in a larger historical reality and to the possibilities of its transcendence. For the latter, the key is to be able to see an underlying pattern of causes and constraints, not merely the more contingent surface pattern of actual occurrences. Actual occurrences always reflect elements of chance and arbitrariness, and thus are imperfect guides to the underlying structure of possibilities. This is why empirical knowledge needs to be complemented with theory and why theory cannot be a mere summation of empirical knowledge. Social scientists are familiar with the difference between an anecdote and a statistical pattern - and sometimes frustrated with students, colleagues, and politicians who insist on thinking in terms of particular cases rather than overall patterns and probabilities. But even a well-constructed statistical sample does not necessarily reach to underlying causality; it simply represents accurately the empirical pattern at one point in time. Causality always depends on inference that goes beyond the “facts" or numbers themselves. And in the deeper, theoretical sense, it depends on recognizing that the facts could have been otherwise.

The old contrast between idiographic (particularistic or singular) and nomothetic (generalized or typified) reasoning doesn't quite capture this point. It grasps, accurately, the extent to which typical history writing gives the story of a chain of particular events that lead to a singular result. History, thus, is the story of what has happened. We seek in addition, however, an account of what could have happened because this is crucial information for consideration of our current decisions. But nomothetic reasoning doesn't offer this either. It offers - at least in most versions and in the terms of the Methodenstreit - a generalization of the many specific cases of what has happened.'7 An additional step beyond mere generalization is involved in the move from empirical history to theory. It is said of generals that, based on experience, they are always preparing to fight the last war. One of the roles of theory is to enable us to recognize in what ways our future wars may be different.

None of the complexity in the relationship of theory to facts should be taken as license to make theory less empirically rich. Reaching to underlying causality is not simply a matter of abstraction. Moreover, if theory is not constantly opened to revision in the light of empirical inquiry, it is likely to become brittle, or to fall into disuse, or to become simply a repository of ideology. But the same is true not only of empirical investigation as organized by social science, but of experience and practical action which are also sources of the inductive content, meaning, and flexibility of social theory. Using theory to challenge the givenness of the social world and to enable researchers to see new problems and new facts in that worldrequires recognizing that knowledge is a historical product and always at least potentially a medium of historically significant action.

Since to theorize is to open up vistas of understanding, it can never be altogether neutral; it is necessarily perspectival. This obligates the theorist to take seriously both the historical sources of her/his theory and its orientation to the future. Arendt invoked a parable from Kafka to describe this necessary situation of theory - indeed of thinking - in a tension between past and future. It posits an individual:

He has two antagonists: the first presses him from behind, from the origin. The second blocks the road ahead. He gives battle to both. To be sure, the first supports him in his fight with the second, for he wants to push him forward, and in the same way the second supports him in his fight with the first, since he drives him back. But it is only theoretically so. For it is not only the two antagonists who are there, but he himself as well, and who really knows his intentions? His dream, though, is that some time in an unguarded moment - and this would require a night darker than any night has ever been yet – he will jump out of the fighting line and be promoted, on account of his experience in fighting, to the position of umpire over his antagonists in their fight with each other.18

The protagonist gains his specific and determinate identity from his position in this conflict. The dream of being promoted to umpire over it is a somewhat dangerous one to which many thinkers have succumbed, the dream that theory can be set apart from both a retrospective analysis of the past - including its own past - and from a prospective engagement with the future. It is not surprising that theorists should have this dream, this hope of achieving perfect knowledge, but it is crucial that they should resist it. To leave the field of struggle for the umpire's chair is to try to adopt the Cartesian view from nowhere. Instead of a triumph of reason, this is simply a misrecognition. Instead of knowledge free from biased origins and undistorted by any practical purposes, it offers knowledge that cannot understand its origins or take responsibility for its effects.

A great deal of even very good social theory is produced and presented as though written from the umpire's chair. Its failure to take seriously both its own historical conditions of production and its implications as a practical action not only annoy those who call for more critical theory, but contribute to the frequent disappointments of traditional, mainstream or positivist theorists who expect a kind of straightforward cumulation in social science knowledge. Philosophical self-understandings rooted in empiricism or other metatheories of the sort loosely termed positivist actually lead many social theorists to keep bad faith with their own genuine accomplishments. Placing their hopes in the "discovery" of timeless and perspectiveless truths, they watch helplessly - or sometimes in bad humor lash out defensively and destructively - as their truths are overtaken by others. They are unable to appreciate the importance of their own work as more time-bound contributions to a process of practical reason rather than pure knowledge, to a conversation in which the construction of new understandings is continual. It is as though they identify only with the Socrates of the later dialogues (or the Plato of the non-dialogic writings) who insists on dominating the whole discussion and stating the whole truth; they don't see the virtue of Socrates' greater modesty in the early dialogues when his voice is only one, however brilliant, among several, each of which speaks aspects of the truth and alters the implications of what the others have to say.19

As this metaphor suggests, the issue is not only historical change but the multiplicity of voices, the differences among an indefinite range of different subject-positions and subjective identities. The very fact of natality, as Arendt called the unceasing renewal of the human world through the production of beings both mortal and unique, means that each child comes into the world as the potential source of radical novelty. In the common – but never fully common - world of human history, this is also the beginning of cultural diversity, though this flourishes only with the transmission of new ideas that allows some of them to become traditions.

Since so much theory seeks the umpire's chair, it seems useful to have a special term for theory that is self-conscious about its historicity, its place in dialogue and among cultures, its irreducibility to facts, and its engagement in the practical world. Deferring to Kant and a long tradition, not just to Horkheimer and Adorno, we can call it critical theory.

Kant firmly placed his philosophy in contrast both to Hume's skepticism and to the dogmatic rationalism of Leibniz. It was as untenable to reject the project of increasingly secure understanding and theoretical knowledge as to imagine it settled prematurely. Instead, Kant sought as systematically as he could to explore the limits as well as the grounds of different forms of reason, knowledge, and understanding, taking seriously not only pure reason but practical reason and aesthetic judgment. Kant was perhaps not fully successful in his quest, and indeed underestimated the extent to which his theory, like all others, was embedded in rather than able to leap beyond or beneath history and culture. Hegel sought to historicize - and socialize - Kant in one way; Durkheim in another. In our own day, it is no accident that both Pierre Bourdieu (in "The Categories of Professorial Judgement, or The Conflict of the Faculties") and Michel Foucault (in"What Is Enlightenment?") should have chosen to evoke Kant in their titles as well as aspects of their thought.20 And in his more recent work especially, Jürgen Habermas appears increasingly as a neo-Kantian ethicist.

Kant is a useful figure to remind us also of the error involved in drawing oversharp boundaries between the Enlightenment and the Romantic movement (or the modern and the postmodern). Kant, who helped to name as well as complete the Enlightenment, admired no one more than Rousseau, whose bust he kept on his desk. Yet of all eighteenth-century thinkers, Rousseau most anticipated Romanticism. In an era when self-declared postmodernists scourge the Enlightenment as the foundation of a repressive modern consciousness, it is worth remembering that in their day, the philosophes were as surely the enemies of philistine complacency as the Romantics were a generation or two later. And if critical theory has as its focus the exploration of the social world beyond the dimensions which can be taken for granted as part of the contemporary consciousness of any era, then it must be a broad enough house to welcome - albeit not uncritically - the descendants of Romantics and Enlighteners alike, while avoiding both utter skepticism with its suggestion that we have no sources of intellectual security but tradition, and dogmatism with its affirmation of the positivity of the intuited world.

At the same time, while Kant was not a Cartesian subjective rationalist, content with a "view from nowhere," neither was he fully attentive to the importance of cultural and interpersonal difference in the constitution of understanding. Arendt, keen to see the maximal interest in human plurality in Kant, did rightly detect an opening to this concern in paragraph 40 of the Third Critique in which Kant considers the nature of the sensus communis that makes possible our shared capacity for judgment.