But it is a minimal opening. Kant explores what it means to have a broad rather than a narrow mind. This involves seeing things from the standpoint of others, but as a method of achieving universality rather than multiplicity of perspective:

a man with a broadened way of thinking .. . overrides the private subjective conditions of his judgment, into which so many others are locked, as it were, and reflects on his own judgment from a universal standpoint (which he can determine only by transferring himself to the standpoint of others).21

Ultimately, the test of this broadness lies in the capacity to make judgments "universally communicable."22 Though Kant thus recognizes the existence of multiple standpoints, he in no way sees these as impeding or challenging the goal of universality. Though this section of the Third Critique was crucial for Arendt's consideration of Kant's political philosophy, in many ways it seems to evoke Habermas with his concern for universality and communication more than Arendt with her focus on plurality and action.23 Arendt's own interest in plurality, in any case, is an interest in the distinctiveness of individual human beings as a crucial, defining attribute of the human condition, not in the differences among cultures. The implications of the matter of plurality, the multiplicity and difference of human individuals and cultures, remain central, and pose a critical challenge to critical theory.

## IV

The idea of critique is obviously an old one in philosophy, but also a hard one to pin down. In many usages it stands on the side of “analysis" against “substance," on the side of discovering our limits rather than affirming our possibilities. I appropriate the term, however, not so much as to open these old discourses as to evoke and at the same time broaden a more recent one. Critical theory was the name chosen by the founders of the Frankfurt School in the period between two world wars to symbolize their attempt to achieve a unity of theory and practice, including a unity of theory with empirical research and both with an historically grounded awareness of the social, political, and cultural problems of the age. The attempt held an attractive promise, and remains important, but it also ran into problems that proved insurmountable, at least for those who initially undertook it.

Key figures in the first generation of the Frankfurt School included Max Horkheimer, the charismatic leader and academic entrepreneur who held the group together to the extent anyone did, Theodor Adorno, Herbert Marcuse, Friedrich Pollock, Franz Neumann, Leo Lowenthal, Erich Fromm, and - sometimes at arms length - Walter Benjamin. The prominence of these figures within the group waxed and waned, and some eventually severed ties completely. Other significant scholars were also linked in various ways to the core Frankfurt group, both in Germany and through its years of exile in America: Moses Finley, Alexander Mitcherlich, Paul Lazarsfeld, Karl Korsch. Aside from the endowment by which Felix Weil and his father created the Institute for Social Research, the group was held together by loyalty to Horkheimer and interest in a project that would bridge philosophy and the emerging human sciences.

The thought of the Frankfurt group combined influences from many quarters, including marxism, psychoanalysis, German idealist philosophy and theology, the Romantics, Nietzsche, and the nascent discipline of sociology. As Horkheimer suggested, they wanted to distinguish critical theory from the sort of “traditional theory" that accepted the selfdefinition of the familiar and failed to look more deeply at how the categories of our consciousness were shaped and how they in turn constituted both the world we saw and what we took to be possible.2⁴ In this sense, it is useful to recall that theology was among the important influences in their background, and to note how it too analyzed the existing world as the "proto-history" of a possibly better world to come, and as the surface reflection of contradictory underlying forces. But above all, the idea of critical theory as a distinctive project, and a project that would distinctively combine traditionally abstract and universal philosophy with historically concrete and empirical knowledge of the social world is rooted in Hegel and in the responses to Hegel begun by the “Young Hegelians," Marx and Kierkegaard.

It was Hegel, most specifically, who conceived of a “dialectic of enlightenment" in which reason that had turned against enlightenment might be deployed to redeem the potential of enlightenment. His philosophical project turned on achieving a reconciliation of internally contradictory modern life - as Habermas reminds us, “Hegel was the first philosopher to develop a clear concept of modernity."2 This encompassing reconciliation included several more specific aspects of reconciliation: among the competing sorts of reason, among the fragmented pieces of the social whole, and among the disconnected moments of individual identities. In Hegel's terms, modernity was constituted by several "diremptions" in what had been whole; there was no attractive way to go back to previous unity, and therefore one must move forward to create out of the conditions of the historical present a new kind of social totality.

Working through the dialectic of enlightenment, then, was a way to try to achieve a capacity to make sense of and potentially bring transformation (or unification) to the modern age. Central to this modern age, for Hegel, were a subjectivity which he conceived both on the plane of individual freedom and on that of the singular subjectivity of the ideal social totality, and a critical awareness based on the tensions and contradictions introduced into social life and consciousness by the basic diremptions. Although reason helped to produce these diremptions through Renaissance, Reformation, and Enlightenment (and implicitly through enabling the revolutions of increased material productivity as well), reason remained the necessary way out. It was reason that could transform the mere longing for previous unity into a recognition of all the basic changes that had severed people from each other and reason which could lead these alienated people to see how the nature of each was denied in the split-off existence of the other. The young Hegel approached this in a way close to that of later critical theory, seeking a resolution that would combine freedom with societal integration, and one rooted in a sort of intersubjectivity rather than a philosophy of the subject as such.26 But the mature Hegel accepted the necessity of one crucial social division - the differentiation of state and society. Granting the state a kind of higher level subjective rationality, he at the same time gave up the capacity for radical critique of existing conditions.

A number of other thinkers tried in various ways to recover the capacity for critique within schemes of thought influenced by Hegel. Karl Marx was undoubtedly the most important. Marx's critique of political economy followed the basic design of approaching the future through a history of the present which took the concrete specificity of its categories seriously - indeed, he did this more consistently than Hegel.27 Marx shared with the young Hegel an attempt to conceptualize the absolute creativity of the human being through the example of art, but unlike Hegel he extended this into a more general analysis of labor. This is not the place to try to work out the nature or implications of Marx's analysis. The crucial connection to the tradition of critical theory came through Marx's defetishizing critique (developed especially in chapter 1 of Capital) of the way in which the historically specific and humanly created categories of capital - labor, commodity, value - came to appear as quasi-natural, and indeed to dominate over the apparently more contingent quality of human life. The reified categories of capital transform qualitatively differentiated human activity into oppressive uniformities and identities. This is the crucial basis for Lukacs' early-twentiethcentury extension of Marx's critique, one which placed the emphasis more firmly on overcoming reification and which relied more consistently on aesthetic criteria for establishing what non-reified life could be like.28

The Frankfurt School pioneers drew on this line of critical theory, and retained the central reliance on aesthetics. To this they coupled Max Weber's analysis of bureaucracy as the completion of instrumental rationality. This aroused in them a fear of a totally administered society in which the very disunity and alienation that Hegel and Marx thought must lead to the transcendence of modern society would instead be stabilized."What is new about the phase of mass culture compared with the late liberal stage is the exclusion of the new."29 At the same time, Horkheimer and Adorno linked the notion of dialectical critique to a more positive appreciation of non-identity, not just as the tension in every subject's relation to itself, but as the source of creativity and autonomous existence for the human individual.

At both the level of theory and the level of biographical motivation, the Frankfurt theorists were deeply concerned that transcendence of alienated society not mean the fixation of the individual as mere moment of an administered totality."The perfect similarity is the absolute difference. The identity of the category forbids that of the individual cases. . . . Now any person signifies only those attributes by which he can replace everybody else: he is interchangeable, a copy. As an individual he is completely expendable and utterly insignificant."30 They challenged the traditional philosophy of individual consciousness, the reliance on the presumed absolute identity of the individual as knower embodied famously in the Cartesian cogito (“I think, therefore I am"). Influenced by Freud, Romanticism, and thinkers of the “dark side" of Enlightenment like Nietzsche and Sade, they knew the individual person had to be more complex than that, especially if he or she was to be the subject of creative culture. They also saw the individual as social in a way most ordinary theory did not, constituted by intersubjective relations with others, all the more important where they furthered a sense of non-identity, of the complexity of multiple involvements with others, that enabled a person to reach beyond narrow self-identity. They challenged the idea that works of art or literature should be interpreted in terms of seamless singularity of purpose or smooth fit with the patterns of an age, seeking instead tensions and projects that pushed beyond the immediately manifest. They challenged what they took to be the increasing and increasingly enforced sameness of modern society - both a conformism among its members and a difficulty in bringing underlying tensions, even contradictions, to public attention and action. They challenged recourse to ideas of human nature that were unmediated by understandings of what was specific to an era - above all the modern capitalist era - and to different pasts and social positions.

Most of the early key Frankfurt theorists were Jews. If this did not produce an acute enough interest in the politics of identity to start with - most of them coming from highly assimilated families and assimilating further themselves in the course of their studies - the rise of Nazism and broader anti-Semitic currents brought the issue home. Faced with the question why Jews were not just one minority group among many - for the Nazis certainly but also for most of modernity - Horkheimer and Adorno sought the answer in a characteristic way. Anti-Semitism represented the hatred of those who saw themselves as civilized, but could not fulfill the promises of civilization for all those who reminded them of the failures of civilization. "Those who spasmodically dominate nature see in a tormented nature a provocative image of powerless happiness. The thought of happiness without power is unbearable because it would then be true happiness."31 Jews, like women, were at once “overcivilized" and recalled a closeness to nature that preceded civilization. The logical rules of noncontradiction did not apply because the image of the Jew was formed not in simple observation but in paranoid projection. And what distinguished Jews as a minority from women, blacks, aboriginals, gypsies and so on was the combination of the radical otherness of the Jewish God, unmediated by a son become human, with the pervasive images of Jewish intellectuality and Jewish involvement in the “dirty" work of capitalism. Jews were seen not only as personally weak and putatively close to nature, but as illegitimately socially strong, situated in the universities and banks, gifted in abstraction and in finance.32 It was crucial that they be reduced to radical weakness, even destroyed, so that they would no longer bear implicit witness to the idea that the present civilization was both imperfect and impure.

The account was characteristic not only in its philosophical universality - the issue of anti-Semitism turns out to be the issue of the relationship between mind and nature - but in the extent to which a failure to conform becomes the source of persecution. This rang true existentially for the Frankfurt School founders, all of whom felt themselves to be in one way or another nonconformists and who remained deeply committed to ideas of individual distinctiveness, autonomy, and creativity. At the same time, this account of the Jews suggested to theorists who in the late 1930s and 1940s were still, in a sense, disappointed historical materialists, why "thinking from the standpoint of the Jews"

might offer the sort of radical insight into the totality of modern civilization Lukacs had earlier associated with thinking from the standpoint of the proletariat.

This was by no means at odds with a materialist position. Human nature meant the pursuit of happiness, the need for solidarity with others, and natural sympathies. From human nature in this sense emanated, according to Horkheimer, a form of reason implicitly critical of civilization. Marcuse would perhaps extend this line of argument most substantially by analyzing modern society in terms of the excess repression it required of its members. Capitalism and the instrumentally rational state posed demands against eros, against nature, that went beyond what Freud had theorized as general.33

The existence of such tensions made possible a critical theory that sought to expose them. But critical theory was (and is) more than that effort at exposure. It is an effort to show that such tensions are present not only between civilization and nature (human or external), but that they appear also as contradictions internal to civilization and its specific cultural products (e.g. philosophies). Indeed, basic to critical theory is the argument that a kind of non-identity, a tension with itself, is built into social organization and culture. One cannot have grasped the sources of events and dynamism without grasping this underlying level of contradictions and differences.

Such a view was and is predictably anathema to those who demand a straightforward empiricism or the kind of theory-testing envisaged by logical positivism. As Horkheimer wrote in 1936:

"The view that thought is a means of knowing more about the world than may be directly observed . .. seems to us entirely mysterious" is the conviction expressed in a work of the Vienna Circle. This principle is particularly significant in a world whose magnificent exterior radiates complete unity and order while panic and distress prevail beneath. Autocrats, cruel colonial governors, and sadistic prison wardens have always wished for visitors with this positivistic mentality.34

We are familiar with “traditional," non-critical theory not just from the past but from most contemporary "positivist" and “empiricist" accounts of the accumulation of knowledge and even from those hermeneutic accounts that make a sharp fact/value distinction and maintain faith in the notion that intellectuals can be set apart from or even above the ordinary workings of society. What Horkheimer calted traditional theory was a broad category including much of the Kantian tradition as well as more empiricist social science. What distinguished these many sorts of work from critical theory was the conception that theory - and science generally – should somehow be understood as a thing apart from the rest of social practice, the province of a group of free-floating intellectuals as Mannheim saw it or simply the province of the individual knower in the tradition of Descartes and Kant.

"The traditional idea of theory," Horkheimer wrote, “is based on scientific activity as carried on within the division of labor at a particular stage in the latter's development. It corresponds to the activity of the scholar which takes place alongside all the other activities of a society but in no immediately clear connection with them. In this view of theory, therefore, the real social function of science is not made manifest; it speaks not of what theory means in human life, but only of what it means in the isolated sphere in which for historical reasons it comes into existence."3s This view of theory is linked not only to social irresponsibility but to a misleading, if flattering, self-image for theorists. "The latter believe they are acting according to personal determinations, whereas in fact even in their most complicated calculations they but exemplify the working of an incalculable social mechanism."36 The most important result of such a self-misunderstanding, a failure both of reflexivity and of accurate empirical analysis of the conditions of theorizing, is a tendency to treat the existing social conditions as the only conditions that could exist.

Because the theorist is unable to see his or her own activity as part of the social world, and because he or she simply accepts into theoretical self-awareness the social division of labor with its blinders, he or she loses the capacity to recognize the contingency and internal contradictions of the empirical world."The whole perceptible world as present to a member of bourgeois society and as interpreted within a traditional world-view which is in continuous interaction with that given world, is seen by the perceiver as a sum-total of facts; it is there and must be accepted."37 The theorist, like most individuals within society, thus, fails to see the underlying conditions of social order (or chaos), and exaggerates the illusory coherence offered by the standpoint of individual purposiveness. The theorist is also led mistakenly to affirm the treatment of those basic social conditions that cannot readily be understood through purposive rationality, especially those results of human activity that are alienated from the control of conscious human beings, as though they were forces of nature. Theory accepts the products of historical human action as unchanging and fixed conditions of human action, and thus cannot articulate the possibility of emancipation from these conditions.38

Even the sociology of knowledge, derived from the tradition of more critical theory, could fall into the habits of traditional theory, Horkheimer argued. Mannheim reconstructed the sociology of knowledge as a specialized, disciplinary field with its own narrower objects of study, cut off from analysis of the totality of social relations. While this sort of sociology might produce more or less interesting findings - e.g. regarding the relationship between intellectual positions and social positions - it lost its capacity critically to locate either the theorist him(her)self, or the conditions of the production of the facts under study.

The project of critical theory, thus, became for Horkheimer the recovery for human beings of the full capacities of humanity; it was in this regard a direct extension of marxism. Drawing both on the early Marx and the first chapter of Capital, and influenced by Lukacs' analysis of reification, critical theory aimed to show how human history had produced an alienation of human capacities such that social institutions and processes that were creatures of human action confronted people as beyond their scope of action. The mode of critique was thus "defetishizing"; it located the recovery of human capacities and thus the possibilities for social transformation in the restoration of truly human relationships in place of inhuman relationships in which people were just the mediations between things, commodities. External nature had to remain “other"to human beings, but this "second nature" did not. Theory could play a central role because the reified relationships of capital were constituted and maintained by a form of consciousness. Seeing them for what they were was already a step towards overcoming their dominion over human life.

The reification and alienation to be combated were grasped by Horkheimer and his early associates especially in the “opposition between the individual's purposiveness, spontaneity, and rationality, and those work-process relationships on which society is built."9 This was linked to the critique of “positivism" which occupied Horkheimer and his colleagues through much of their careers.4 Positivist social science accepted the world as it existed, indeed even precluded recognition of the possibilities for fundamental change, by reproducing rather than challenging the reification through which the human content - the original activity of human creation - was removed from the institutions and processes of the social world. This reification made it possible to treat these aspects of humanity as though they were merely aspects of nature, to treat social facts as things, in Durkheim's pithy phrase.41

The exaltation of the apparently isolated individual subject - the idealized knower - and the reification of the social world were linked. Moreover, this was not just an academic problem, it was a systematic elimination of the sort of consciousness that might recognize the tensions, conflicts, exploitation, and oppression built into existing social arrangements. Critical theory would be different. "Critical thinking is the function neither of the isolated individual nor of a sum-total of individuals. Its subject is rather a definite individual in his real relation to other individuals and groups, in his conflict with a particular class, and, finally, in the resultant web of relationships with the social totality and with nature."42 To treat the individual as an asocial, ahistorical, objective starting point for knowledge, "an illusion about the thinking subject, under which idealism has lived since Descartes, is ideology in the strict sense."43

Writing in the 1930s, Horkheimer was still able to retain an optimism that this sort of critical theory would be linked to more or less marxist revolution. Narrowing the gap between intellectual understanding and concrete material practice was crucial to achieving the capacity for humanity to order its social relations in the new order that was about to emerge. Critical theory was not just an extension of proletarian thought, but a means of thinking about the social totality that would aid in the movement from the empirical proletariat's necessarily still partial view of society from its own class position to the achievement of a classless society, one not structured by injustice. Where fascists just expressed as ideology the underlying motives of certain segments of society, advocates of value-free science claimed to speak from an intellectual position outside all social conflicts. But, wrote Horkheimer, "critical theory is neither deeply rooted' like totalitarian propaganda nor 'detached' like the liberalist intelligentsia."44 Critical theory took the starting point not of the proletariat in itself, or of any other specific social group, but of the kind of thinking - necessarily done by individuals - that addressed the most categorially basic structure of the whole society, that which made it whole, gave it its basic dynamism, and pointed to the possibilities for its transcendence. "The critical theory of society is, in its totality, the unfolding of a single existential judgment. To put it in broad terms, the theory says that the basic form of the historically given commodity economy on which modern history rests contains in itself the internal and external tensions of the modern era; it generates those tensions over and over again in an increasingly heightened form; and after a period of progress, development of human powers, and emancipation for the individual, after an enormous extension of human control over nature, it finally hinders further development and drives humanity into a new barbarism."45

Horkheimer's critical theory, in short, remained at this point clearly a species of marxism. But the seeds of its later crisis were already apparent. First, applied to the contemporary empirical situation, the theory pointed more directly towards a new barbarism than towards its transcendence (and indeed, in 1937 this was perhaps not surprising). Second, Horkheimer steered clear of establishing a clear account of the agents of potential revolution just as he steered clear of active political involvement on the side of the proletariat or any other group. His marxism remained abstract. Third, while Horkheimer was able to give a clear positive account of the contributions of critical theory in most intellectual regards, when it came to locating the theory socially, he was able mainly to offer negative comments on what it was not.

All these problems would return to produce a crisis in critical theory after the war. The fear of barbarism would remain acute even after Nazism was defeated. Critical theorists would search in vain for social agents with the capacity to succeed in projects of real transformation - and after considering not only the proletariat, but Jews, students, and the Third World poor would remain convinced that whatever the justice on the side of each, none had the capacity, and possibly none even had the inclination, for such revolutionary transformation. This was, indeed, part of the crucial, disturbing significance of the early Frankfurt studies on authority, especially the collective work Studies in Authority and Family.46 Empirical research suggested that members of the German proletariat (and for that matter the supposedly free-floating intellectuals) were more prone to authoritarian attitudes than to opposition. Not least of all, the particular version of critical theory for which Horkheimer and Adorno were key figures retained a negative orientation that was only exacerbated as its leading figures gave up their early utopian ballast in the name of hard-headed self-discipline.

Part of the trouble was that Horkheimer and especially Adorno had largely abandoned the attempt to offer a historically and culturally specific account of the contradictions of modern capitalist society. In much (though not all) of their earlier work they had attempted to develop what Benjamin called "proto-histories," analyses of the present in terms of the historical dynamics producing it. These involved the location of crucial epochal changes, both at the large scale with the coming of capitalism and more specifically, as when both Adorno and Benjamin tried to work out the nineteenth-century origins of modernism. In his early work on bourgeois philosophy, as the term suggests, Horkheimer had sought to locate the specific relations of schools of philosophy to their social conditions and therefore to their periods - above all to the era of capitalism.47 But Horkheimer and Adorno were ambivalent about historical specificity in Dialectic of Enlightenment, and in Horkheimer's Eclipse of Reason, the last vestiges of this historically specific approach gave way to a more transhistorical, weakly periodized critique of the depredations of instrumental reason.48 Since instrumental reason in some form could be traced back intellectually to the Greeks, and in practice was presumably universal, it was hard to see from what historical groundings its progressive hyperdevelopment and growing dominion could be critically challenged.

If one were to speak of a disease affecting reason, this disease should be understood not as having stricken reason at some historical moment, but as being inseparable from the nature of reason in civilization as we have known it so far. The disease of reason is that reason was born from man's urge to dominate nature, and the “recovery" depends on insight into the nature of the original disease, not on a cure of the latest symptoms.49

At the heart of critical theory lay the notion of “immanent critique," a critique that worked from within the categories of existing thought, radicalized them, and showed in varying degrees both their problems and their unrecognized possibilities.50 “Philosophy confronts the existent, in its historical context," wrote Horkheimer, "with the claim of its conceptual principles, in order to criticize the relation between the two [ideas and reality] and thus transcend them.s1 Thus it was that Adorno spoke répeatedly of exploding bourgeois thought from inside and of bursting idealism open from within. As he praised Mahler's "symphonic reason,' "Mahler leaves what exists in its place, but burns it out from within. The old barriers of form now stand as allegories not so much for what has been but for what is to come."s2

Immanence by itself was not enough; one could not just trust to history to realize the possibilities embodied in the forms of culture or in material social relations. Critique was required as a tool for finding and heightening the tensions between the merely existent and its possibilities. For the first-generation Frankfurt theorists, this meant especially that critical theory depended on a dialectical analysis of the contradictions internal to every epoch, or social formation, or situation, or text. An immanent critique was particularly effective as a historically specific critique.

This is one reading of Horkheimer's and Adorno's famous exploration of the Dialectic of Enlightenment. Reason flourished in and through Enlightenment, but its development was contradictory. On the one hand, it brought the enormous progress of critical thought, including modern philosophy. On the other hand, it brought dehumanizing rationalization of society (more familiar to sociologists through Weber's image of the iron cage") and the progress of technology that both enslaved human beings, stunting their creativity, and distanced humanity from both internal and external nature. “In the most general sense of progressive thought, the Enlightenment has always aimed at liberating men from fear and establishing their sovereignty. Yet the fully enlightened earth radiates disaster triumphant."s Simply to defend the Enlightenment meant to defend bureaucratization, out of control technology, and even the horrors of Nazi science. A critical engagement with the Enlightenment required recognizing how reason could be deployed, as it were, against itself and against the human subjects of reason. Yet this did not mean simply abandoning reason, both because the irrational contained as many horrors as the rational, and because reason alone offered an approach to the recovery of an opportunity for coherent practice. Social and cultural forces - science, capital, mechanisms of political power - had become autonomous, according to Horkheimer and Adorno; they had gained the capacity to dictate the course of social stability and change. Extending the argument Marx had offered in the first chapter of Volume 1 of Capital, they showed how human subjects were reduced to objects by the very forms of social relations they had created.s4

This manner of reading Dialectic of Enlightenment suggests that Horkheimer and Adorno still thought that engaging capitalism (which they avoided naming out of political anxieties) and other specifically modern social conditions could offer some hope of transformation, even redemption. Neumann, Pollock, and other Frankfurt School associates who wrote directly on political economy were clearer in locating historically specific causes for current crises - the collapsing distinction between state and society, for example, and the èrosion of the autonomy of the market under state capitalism. Although Horkheimer and Adorno would continue a more historically specific criticism of “the administered society" that emerged after World War Two, at its deepest their critical theory worked after the war at the level of transhistorical tendencies of reason in relation to nature. At best, Dialectic of Enlightenment was ambiguous on this point. Was it enlightenment (the progress of reason) in general that had led down the path to disaster, or was it the Enlightenment, with its historically specific institutionalization of bourgeois reason that had caused the trouble? Passages support each reading, but one offers more hope of a way out.

The Dialectic of Enlightenment was written in exile at the end of World War Two by two German Jews, onetime lovers of Enlightenment and German high culture. Perhaps it is not surprising that the authors were not able to seize with any conviction on sources of optimism. "Enlightenment," they wrote, “is totalitarian."ss They meant not only the manifest political totalitarianism of Nazi Germany, but the reduction of human autonomy implied by a "culture industry" which mass produced what later thinkers would call the "simulacra" of art, music, and literature, reducing potentially creative human beings to passive consumers of entertainment. When Horkheimer and Adorno tried to find the basis for hope, the sources of a "better" enlightenment, a more positive concept of reason, they found themselves increasingly at a loss. They could not imagine a progress not guided by reason, yet rationality seemed to have betrayed its positive potential.

"When the idea of reason was conceived," wrote Horkheimer, "it was intended to achieve more than the mere regulation of the relation between means and ends; it was regarded as the instrument for understanding the ends, for determining them."56 But reason seemed to have abdicated the realm of ends; by common agreement, decisions about basic values - about value itself - could not be the result of purely reasonable understanding.57 Reason had been reduced to the merely instrumental; it - and even the specific institutions of science - could be placed at the service of the Nazi death industry as readily as turned to the task of eliminating poverty and suffering. As institutionalized, reproduced, and deployed not just by Nazi Germany but by modern society generally, reason seemed destined to nullify individual autonomy rather than to realize it. As Horkheimer remarked, the expression “to be reasonable" had taken on the meaning of adopting a conciliatory attitude rather than that of exercising one's capacity for rational judgment.58

The problem was not limited to politics. In religion, for example, an anti-theological spirit had challenged the value of reason as a source of basic insights (a view that continues today among many "fundamentalists"). This allowed religion to be compartmentalized away from the corrosive force of reason, the threats of science, because its truths were held to be based on sources other than those of reason. But this protection was achieved at the cost of radically reducing religion's capacity to engage critically with modern society let alone to apprehend its totality. The reduction of reason to a mechanism for subjective choice among means rather than objective determination of ends was no historical accident, Horkheimer argued; it reflected the material course of social change and accordingly could not be reversed simply by recognizing that it was a problem.

The existing state of society, Horkheimer and Adorno feared, allowed no truly transformative criticism, provided no bases for revolution or other practical action that would end the reproduction of a dehumanizing, repressive, and dangerous social order. The most they thought their theoretical work could do was to preserve critical thought - no longer in its strongly integrated form as critical theory, but as a “message in a bottle" for a future generation. This marked the onset of what has been called the "pessimistic turn" of the Frankfurt theorists.s9 Both in America - where McCarthyite anti-communism added to their gloom - and especially in the repressive environment of a Federal Republic of Germany where ex-Nazis could return to power and present themselves as mere realists while socialists and even left liberals were excluded - even from universities - as ideological, it appeared to Horkheimer and Adorno as though the most that could be done was to keep alive in purely intellectual form the seeds of critical thought so that they might grow anew if conditions ever became more favorable. Even this was not to be easy, they thought. The subjectivization of reason and for that matter the growth of “free enterprise" capitalism seemed to empower individuals, but this was deceptive. “All the monads, isolated though they were by moats of self-interest, nevertheless tended to become more and more alike through the pursuit of this very self-interest."60 Conformism as ideology was thus matched by a genuinely increasing sameness among people insofar as each responded strictly to the self-interests of a consumer in a world of corporate capitalism and mass culture. Similarly, modern psychology built on a tradition stretching back to the Thomists to declare “adjustment" the highest goal of an individual, rather than seeing Truth and Goodness as critical values that might motivate discontent and even social change, they were implicitly identified with existing reality by those who held adapting to that reality to be the basis of individual health.

No social group - proletariat, intellectuals, artists - seemed altogether immune from this deadening of capacity to use reason to grasp the ends of social processes. At first, Horkheimer and Adorno thought that some crisis might be extreme enough to lay bare the antagonisms of modern society (and between that society and the nature it attempted to dominate). Horkheimer spoke of “the possibility of a self-critique of reason" when he could no longer believe in such a critique being carried out by any specific agents. But even that possibility came to seem more and more remote as instead of lurching into crisis the society of the 1950s and early 1960s marched forward in its combination of prosperity and repression.

## V

When crisis came, in the 1960s, the aging critical theorists were generally unprepared. Of the first-generation Frankfurt theorists, only Herbert Marcuse was still able to think radical action possible when student protests thrust open politics back onto center stage. Though the media lionized Marcuse as a guru to the New Left, and though he did engage with student activists directly and positively, he also disappointed them.

For Marcuse did not see the potential for real revolution as lying in the hands of European or American university students; he did not even agree that they were really an underprivileged class. Theirs was not the standpoint from which to grasp the crisis of the social totality, the successor to the proletariat. If any social group could claim that mantle, and also claim the social strength to wage real revolution, Marcuse (like Sartre) thought it was Fanon's “wretched of the earth," the oppressed masses of the Third World and their counterparts, the permanent unemployed of the First World.61 He thought still within the Frankfurt paradigm that expected radical social change to emerge from radical negativity, from those most objectively disempowered by existing arrangements, those whose existence was most opposed to the established order. This had arguably been the proletariat at one time, and Horkheimer had argued it was the Jews in 1940; though students in 1968 might support the radically disenfranchised, they were not that group.

On the other hand, Marcuse had grasped as well as any contemporary theorist some of the sources of the student protest. He saw the ways in which certain forms of repression - including erotic repression - could become the basis for political action even amid affluence. Commodification, with its fetishizing reduction of human relationships to a single dimension, violated natural human potential in a way that necessarily occasioned resistance. Most centrally, perhaps, he expressed one of the key intuitions of the student protests in his more or less romantic argument that "to the denial of freedom, even of the possibility of freedom, corresponds the granting of liberties where they strengthen repression."62 This anticipated his more radical argument about the repression inherent in a tolerance that refused to engage the genuine needs and demands of human subjects.63

Student critiques of postwar society were varied, of course, combining systemic analysis with pacifism and psychological and cultural concerns or personal politics. In their condemnation of an abstract, impersonal, and violent society, students indeed followed the path of the earlier Frankfurt School critical theory. But at the same time there was a much more substantial concern with facilitating directly interpersonal relationships and profound immediate experience. As Oscar Negt (an activist who had been Habermas's assistant in Frankfurt and later became a sociology professor) summed up, “The anti-institutional and anti-authoritarian element in the revival of critical theory fused with the attempt, via politicization of interests and needs, to accomplish three things: (1) to break through the compulsive and pervasive mediations of commodity exchange; (2) to break through the violence latent in the mechanisms of instrumental reason and structurally inherent in the sublimation and repression of basic instincts; (3) to establish meaningful immediacy, in which the split between communication and experience is in turn eliminated."64 This critique drew on Wilhelm Reich and other radical inheritors of the psychoanalytic tradition in shifting the balance not only more towards the personal than the systemic, but also more towards an account of the virtues of immediacy itself. This was not without connection to critical theory's earlier account of abstract commodifed society, of course, but it also marked a shift in emphasis, anticipating the“new social movements"that grounded a personal politics in direct interpersonal relations and experience, with much less reference to high culture. This Habermas would come to analyze as the practice of resistance rooted in “the lifeworld" against impersonal, "delinguistified,”systemic rationality.65

While Marcuse's willingness to join directly in the passionate politics of the 1960s shocked and worried Adorno and Horkheimer, who preferred to stay not just on the sidelines but secluded from the fray, it was also true that the theory of the earlier Frankfurt theorists had helped to make possible the students'political and cultural analyses in both Germany and America. Frankfurt theory once again became all but synonymous with critical theory.

The theorist who perhaps mattered most, however, was not a member of the first Frankfurt generation, but a sometime protégē of Adorno's named Jürgen Habermas. Deeply influenced by the early work of Horkheimer and Adorno, Habermas had moved to Frankfurt after his Ph.D. and begun to work in the Institute for Social Research. He initially sought to take his Habilitation (a higher doctorate or university teacher's qualification) under Adorno, but was ·blocked by opposition from Horkheimer (and Adorno's own caution). The objections were that he was too left wing, insufficiently critical of Enlightenment and excessively willing to take critical theory directly into open political debate.

In his early work, Habermas pursued two basic agendas, each designed to re-establish the possibility of politically significant critical theory. Each was oriented, in other words, by the problem of linking theory and practice. The first sought to recover the resources of previous theory and to show how conventional social science failed to develop their critical potential.66 The second pursued an immanent critique of the actual historical institutions within which rational critical discourse achieved political significance.

Inspired by Hannah Arendt's The Human Condition and the transformations of the Aristotelian tradition, among other sources, Habermas sought to locate the possibility of a unity of theory and practice in the classical doctrine of politics. The issue was not just a use of theory in the service of political ends - a version of instrumental reason – but rather the development of a broader sense of political practice as the constitution of ways of living together that enabled the full realization of human potential. Critical theory, in this context, responded directly to political needs; it was “a theory of society conceived with a practical intention."67

All knowledge, Habermas argued, had to be understood in terms of the interests which led practical actors to create it.68 This meant that when a critical theorist examined earlier theory, his task was to locate the relationship among the knowledge-forming interests that led to theoretical production, the historical conditions within which the theory was set, and the epistemic content of the theory. This was an elaboration, worked out in a series of studies of major modern philosophies, of Horkheimer's argument in “Traditional and Critical Theory" and "The State of Contemporary Social Philosophy and the Task of an Institute for Social Research." Like the earlier Frankfurt theorists, Habermas drew on Freud as well as Marx to develop a conception of theoretical critique as a way of establishing how “objective" knowledge - that which approached the world as a series of external results, could be reconnected with intersubjectively constituted meaning and capacity for action. A psychoanalytic patient cannot at first recognize the full meaning of his or her own life-history, and cannot take fully responsible and effective action in regard to it, precisely because of systematic repression of key aspects of that meaning and of the interpersonally effective interests that constituted those life experiences. Psychoanalysis itself provides an intersubjective relationship in which physician and patient work through the barriers to communication and make previously repressed motivations accessible to conscious understanding and control. Analogically, critical theory - itself an intersubjective, communicative enterprise - was to perform this function for a society that was similarly trapped in a systematic incapacity to recognize the true sources of its own history. Human capacities were repressed without recognition and could be liberated with movement towards fuller and freer communication.69 Drawing on this image of psychoanalysis as a communicative process, Habermas envisaged "an organization of social relations according to the principle that the validity of every norm of political consequence be made dependent on a consensus arrived at in communication free from domination."o Moreover, "theories which in their structure can serve the clarification of practical questions are designed to enter into communicative action."71

In his second agenda, Habermas approached this same goal with a historically grounded, immanent critique of the institutions of the bourgeois public sphere. The key work here was the very Habilitationschrift that Horkheimer had resisted, seeing Habermas's orientation as entirely too optimistic.7 Indeed, one of the organizing features of Habermas's work was a determination not to fall into the same incapacitating pessimism as Horkheimer and Adorno. In The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere, Habermas examined the origins, development, and degeneration of the distinctive political institution that made bourgeois democracy genuinely radical in its day.73

The public sphere of bourgeois, liberal society came into being on the foundations of earlier literary public arenas, Habermas argued (somewhat surprisingly neglecting science and religion).4 Both salon culture and print media contributed. Discourse in the public sphere was, at least in principle, based on rational-critical argumentation; the best argument was decisive, rather than the identity of its proponents or opponents. Only relative elites were admitted to the public sphere, but these elites were of diverse statuses. Master craftsmen might rub shoulders with landed gentry in coffee houses, nobility mixed with commoners in parliament and salons alike. The discourse of the public sphere did not so much negate or challenge these differences as “bracket" them - Habermas specifically used the phenomenological term - making them irrelevant for the purpose of discourse itself. The public sphere addressed and could influence affairs of state and of the society as a whole, although it was not part of the state but of civil society. Citizens entered into the public sphere on the basis of the autonomy afforded them both socio-psychologically and economically by their private lives and non-state civil relations.

The importance of the public sphere for Habermas was that it offered a model of public communication which could potentially realize the rational guidance of society. The potential of this communication had not been fully realized, of course, but the categories of bourgeois democracy were not thereby made irrelevant as some marxists and more pessimistic critical theorists assumed. On the contrary, an immanent critique could make the ideals of rational-critical discourse, like those of rights, once again politically effective. These ideals had been reduced to ideology by their incorporation in a discourse designed to affirm rather than challenge existing institutions. But critical theory could make citizens aware of their still unrealized potential and enable them to use these ideals in struggle with those who nominally adhered to them but did not in fact want to build on them.

That Habermas's account of the public sphere presented an eighteenth-century golden age followed by decline and degeneration was thus not immediately incapacitating. Probing further, Habermas sought to locate the social roots of the transformations that had deprived the public sphere of its initial strength of rational-critical discourse. The procedure of immanent critique could then presumably be combined with the identification of historical subjects capable of putting into practice the possibilities uncovered by theory.

Heavily influenced by the mass society theories of the 1950s, however, Habermas's account of the twentieth century undermined his own initial optimism.75 He showed a public sphere that was not only deradicalized but fundamentally diminished by two major processes. The first was the progressive incorporation of ever larger numbers of citizens into the public. This followed the genuinely democratic logic of the early public sphere which could not sustain its own exclusiveness against recurrent demands that its democratic ideals be taken more seriously. But as the public sphere grew in scale, it degenerated in form. Even if the new participants had been as well prepared for its rational-critical discourse as their predecessors, which they were not on Habermas's view, their discourse would have been distorted by the necessity of reliance on mass media and the opportunities for manipulation of communication presented by advertising, public relations, and similar institutions. Secondly, the public sphere lost some of the basis it had once had in a civil society clearly distinct from the state. In the twentieth century, and especially after World War Two, the boundaries between state and society had been increasingly collapsed, Habermas thought, as government intervention in the economy increased, as welfare states were formed, as giant corporations took on political functions, and citizens were organized into (or represented by) interest groups. Social decisions were increasingly removed from the rational-critical discourse of citizens in the political public sphere and made the province of negotiation (rather than discourse proper) among bureaucrats, credentialed experts, and interest group elites.

Habermas followed directly in the footsteps of his Frankfurt predecessors in adducing the scale and mediated communication of mass society and the collapsed state/society distinction of “administered society"as the basic transformations in the structural foundations of the public sphere. Like his predecessors, this pushed him towards increasingly pessimistic conclusions, and the tone of the last part of his book differed markedly from that of the first. Though his immanent critique was able to locate unrealized emancipatory and rational potential in the forms of bourgeois democracy, he was unable to locate the material social bases for action to realize those potentials in the late twentieth-century public sphere.76

Accordingly, Habermas abandoned the project of an historically immanent foundation for critical theory. Instead of seeking critical purchase in the comparison of historically and culturally specific social formations, he sought it in the elaboration of universal conditions of human life. He grounded his critique not in historical developments as such, but in a broad idea of evolutionary progress in communication. During the years of the student movement he theorized potentials for concrete transformation, based especially on the idea that contemporary states were undergoing a legitimation crisis because they relied on cultural foundations that were undermined as more and more of social life fell under the sway of administrative planning."Habermas retained his interest in seeing the public sphere reinhabited by genuinely political discourse, and it was on this basis that he welcomed the student movement (even while he decried its more extreme tendencies as “left fascism"). But at a deeper level, Habermas did not base his critical theory on actual or historical social institutions of discourse, but on the potential for unimpeded communication suggested by the rationality implicit in speech itself. His “universal pragmatics" started from a primordial split between communicative and instrumental reason, and even within communication between speech oriented to understanding itself and speech oriented to practical effects. Though the increasing “autonomization" of instrumental reason - the treatment of utilitarian, use-oriented reason as self-sufficient and adequate to a range of practical projects - was the source of social disasters and alienation, countervailing tendencies were inherent in the transcendental characteristics of speech itself. Thus every communication was basedon the presumption of certain standards of validity - e.g. that speakers spoke not only the truth, but truthfully, without manipulative intent. Even where not articulated, these validity claims were always open to potential discursive redemption. Processes of social and cultural transformation could (and perhaps in evolutionary fashion would) move in the direction of making more and more communication live up to these immanent potentials.78

Habermas's later work on communicative action retained one crucial theme from his early work. He sought ways to realize the unfinished potential of the project of enlightenment or modernity." With the shift to universal pragmatics, he found a more reliable basis for an optimistic orientation to critical theory than he had in his historically specific account of the public sphere. This was, indeed, a path that Horkheimer had anticipated, though not in published work. "To speak to someone basically means recognizing him as a possible member of the future association of free human beings. Speech establishes a shared relation towards truth, and is therefore the innermost affirmation of another existence, indeed of all forms of existence, according to their capacities.