# Cultural Difference and Historical Specificity

## I

Two different ideas have been involved in the project of developing general" theory in sociology. The first of these is breadth, richness, or reach of application. The theories of Marx, Weber, and Durkheim, for example, are said to be general because they can be applied to so many areas or dimensions of social life. They are thus contrasted both with theories of the middle range (pace Merton) and with the very local theories which are proposed and tested in most sociological research (e.g. the “theory" of the demographic transition, or even more the basic building blocks in Stinchcombe's conception of sociological theory).1 Alternatively, theory is held to be general on more positivist grounds, because of its relative success in producing universally applicable, preferably law-like statements.

The first of these understandings points to a virtue of the classical tradition of sociological theory, the attempt to build theories adequate to the understanding of social life in its rich fullness. It accepts rather too easily, however, the claims of the classical theorists - or at least of most of them, most of the time - to be able to grasp with a single theory the sum total of instances of "society" or "social life." Even more, this understanding follows Parsons in exaggerating the extent to which the classical theorists were developing theory which was independent of specific historical and cultural contexts, and which was about a similarly abstracted notion of social life. In fact, Marx especially and in many ways Weber were quite attentive to the historical (if not always the cultural) specificity of social theory. This is one reason why their conceptual frameworks, although very broad in reach, were always developed in close relationship to specific empirical historical accounts;

their abstractions were not/free-floatingbut historically specific and determinate.

The second understanding of general theory derives from a widespread modern notion of science as discovery of universal truths. Durkheim was its main expositor among classical social theorists.2 This second understanding of generality does not have to do with reach so much as with universal validity, certainty, positivity. It shapes not only debates over general theory but sociologists'folk imaginings of what physical scientists do: (1) theorizing about universal phenomena; (2) making universally valid statements about restricted scopes of phenomena; (3) attempting to make specific empirical or abstract propositions add up to maximally general ones; and (4) attempting to deduce specific subsidiary theories as special cases of more general ones.

This project has been challenged in a variety of ways. It has been shown for example that putatively universal laws were either false or applicable only within a very narrow empirical scope. Thus innumerable claims about “human nature" have been shown to apply only or primarily to the American college students of the 1950s or 1960s who formed the population from which research subjects were drawn. This challenge, of course, strikes only at particular theories; although it complicates the inductive dimension of positivist theory-building, it does not in itself invalidate it. Similarly, the argument that sociology shows few, if any, cases of either the deduction of successful local theories from more general ones, or of the combination of tested propositions and/or local theories into more general ones does not demonstrate that the discipline cannot in principle do better in the future. In some ways, epistemological critiques are more damaging. The hermeneutic argument against the easy assumption of the pure facticity of observations (let alone survey or interview responses) suggests the fundamental impossibility of a theory pure in its empirical as well as its logical positivism. This challenge is often presented in such a radical way, however, as to make all research seem pointless because no secure grounds can be given for comparative evaluation of results. Paradoxically, perhaps, this encourages researchers to feel justified in ignoring the critique. In any case, theory of the sort challenged thrives, even where the challenges would seem on philosophical grounds to have been fatal. At least the beginning of an explanation for why lies in the very separation of “abstracted empiricism" from "grand theory" which C. Wright Mills critiqued two generations ago.3

I want to turn my attention in this chapter not towards further epistemological critique, but to the question of what sort of work should be offered as an alternative to both abstracted empiricism and positivist grand theory. One of the problems of many epistemological critiques is that they have seemed to endorse or entail a relativism so thoroughgoing as to make empirical research - and most scholarly discourse - meaningless. I want to argue not only for the importance of empirical work, but for the necessary mutual implication of theoretical and empirical work. Specifically, my claim is that most good sociological theories - especially those which attempt to grasp social life in something of its fullness - need to be attentive to cultural difference and historical specificity. My argument is not just for the virtues of history and ethnography or cultural interpretation, but for the virtues of a theory which can take each of them seriously. Yet, let me stress in advance, this is an argument for theory - including both empirical and normative theory, and theory of very broad reach - and against extreme relativism. It offers two cheers for particularism, but suggests that though theoretical groundings are always by nature incomplete, they are nonetheless achievable in some proportion and worth pursuing. The kind of theory I advocate would be continuous with cross-cultural and historical description, but not identical to them because the explanations the theory proposes would purport to anticipate or account for cases beyond those for which they were developed.4 The theory would recognize that actual cases are always an incomplete sample of possible cases, and seek to understand the production of cases, not just generalize from them.

Four sections follow. In the first, I shall elaborate on what it means to take cultural difference seriously. In the second I shall similarly explore the notion of historical specificity. The third section will take as given my claim that social theory should be culturally sensitive and historically specific, and ask just what such theories should look like. The final section will discuss briefly the relationship of the project suggested here to relativism, especially as raised by debates over postmodernism.

## ⅡI

We need to be attentive to problems of cultural difference in a way social theorists seldom have been. I do not mean simply seeing theories as embedded within cultural traditions and lacking resources for extending communication across cultural divisions. Likewise, I do not mean simply learning various supposedly basic information about those different from ourselves, and I do not mean indulging in an easy relativism that may amount in practice to refusing to take difference seriously. Such an easy relativism fails to recognize that some differences among social actors amount to conflicting or at least incompatible claims on our attention or action, while others involve claims to a kind of recognition that is only meaningful if it is based on seriously applied standards of judgment.⁵

Taking difference seriously is therefore a difficult and challenging proposition, and implies a never-ending task. The challenge of difference cannot be met by opposing any variety of relativism to an ideology of science based on decontextualized truth claims. Relativism of some sort seems a necessary starting point in the project of taking difference seriously - an opening to new knowledge and understanding - but it is not a satisfactory endpoint. Similarly, Enlightenment universalism has certain normative virtues, grounding aspects of liberalism which have not outlived their usefulness, but it also poses serious problems.

The very scientistic attempt to sever empirical theory from normative theory has contributed to normative theory's problematic over-commitment to a culturally insensitive Enlightenment universalism. Normative theory has continued to adopt an eighteenth-century view of human beings as essentially interchangeable individuals. Both the individualism and its usual corollary that individuals are or should be essentially similar are problematic and ethnocentric. This is somewhat ironic, since critiques of Western ethnocentrism are often couched in the language of liberal individualism; they are in essence arguments that the underlying similarities of individuals are more important than the apparent cultural (and other) differences among them. There are even cases where extreme relativism and strong universalism actually meet in a shared individualism. On the one hand, assertions that there are no generally defensible grounds for normative judgment make this individualism into a declaration of the inevitability of arbitrary subjectivity. On the other hand assertions that certain moral injunctions (like the Kantian categorical imperative) must apply to all individuals because all are intrinsically equivalent make an alternative individualism the basis for claiming to discover implicitly universal grounds for morality. In this sense, both that branch of modernity which has lately traveled under the name of postmodernism and the explicit Enlightenment modernism proclaimed for example by Habermas suffer from weaknesses of cross-cultural sensibility. The former strain of thought is apt to make cultural difference out to be an insuperable barrier to both general discourse and normative critique (ironically enough, since it thrives in such eminently crosscultural discursive fields as the post-colonial diasporas). The latter is apt to reduce cultural difference to mere positions in a developmental scheme, or grant it no theoretical significance whatsoever.6

Enlightenment universalism with its impoverishment of cross-cultural outlook informs not only the normative theories directly in its lineage but the bulk of universalizing empirical theoretical discourse. The idea that we can make significant general statements true of all human action, or human beings, or society at large is its heir. Such a notion is not false, I hasten to add, for I believe there are some such statements to be made. Rather, problems arise when theorists try to make such statements beyond a very narrow range of minimal and generally highly formal and highly qualified propositions. There is a long-standing critique of this sort of ethnocentric positivism, which is not worth reproducing here.

The recent struggles between self-proclaimed postmodernists, poststructuralists and similar thinkers, on the one hand, and adherents of the Enlightenment project of modernity as rationalization on the other, however, suggest that the normative dimension requires more comment. One of the virtues of the work of Foucault, Derrida, and a number of other fellow-travelers has been to thematize the importance of difference. Here I will only point schematically to two lessons to be learned, drawing them out by discussion of Habermas's more universalistic theory.

The first lesson I would call the importance of fundamental differences of value. Universalist thought tends towards the position that there can only be one set of fundamental values; others can be justified to the extent that they are derivative from these. These need not be concrete norms, as they might be in Aristotelian thought, but are commonly categorical or procedural injunctions. For Habermas, famously, these are held to be implicit in the validity claims of all speech (to intelligibility, truthfulness, rightness or appropriateness, and sincerity)." Since any responsible participation in communicative action must be open to redemption of these implicit validity claims, Habermas can claim an empirical basis for his normative theory, and indeed for expecting its developmental advancement. The relevant catch, for present purposes, comes with his decontextualized treatment of the giving of reasons.

Habermas seeks to combine a neo-Kantian philosophical approach with various sources of universal norms. Two of his most prominent approaches involve (1) reasoning from the norms implicit in all speech (hence, a communicative ethics), an approach rooted in the speech act theory of Austin and others, and (2) seeing progressively more universalistic norms as implicit in human psychological development, an approach rooted in Kohlberg's account of moral reasoning as a hierarchical sequence of stages in which justice is conceptualized in progressively more abstract and general ways. As the now famous Kohlberg-Gilligan debate makes clear with regard to the latter case, however, this understanding of moral reasoning privileges one mode over others.8 A priori, it grants greater validity and rationality to "postconventional" moral reasoning (that which is maximally universalistic and in which the giving of reasons for moral judgments is oriented to a decontextualized discussion of formal, general “rights" or other principles of decision). So, generally, do the courts and most philosophers and other arbiters of moral judgment in the West. But do Kohlberg or Habermas offer an adequate basis for denying that a partially particularistic, situated moral reasoning based on ideas of care rather than abstract justice should not be considered comparably “advanced"? I think not. Though Habermas does stress the importance of conceiving human beings intersubjectively rather than individualistically, he does not advance this approach to a fully social understanding of morality. Rather, he returns moral judgment to a Kantian realm of decontextualized individuals. He does not consider whether the best moral judgment might not begin with relationships rather than individual persons, for example. Indeed, if (as seems true) the very notion of individual is culturally and historically specific, this affects normative statements incorporating it. And human individuals may be nonequivalent in varying ways internal to cultural formations or historical epochs. The nonequivalence, noninterchangeability of men and women in our own and nearly every other culture is of major import for moral theory." More to the point of the present discussion, Habermas never questions that moral theory requires that all moral questions be rationally decidable, at least in principle, and that rational decision requires both that there be a clear and singular hierarchy of procedures and reasons for moral judgments and that the framework for decision be complete so that alternatives are exhaustively eliminated. In other words, within the scope of Habermas's theory (and not just where he bases his work on Kohlberg) there is not much room for recognition of a plurality of equally meritorious orientations to reason or action. Habermas's scheme can recognize conflicts between principles - between equality and freedom, say, or justice and nonviolence - though it presumes these principles to be ultimately commensurable. It cannot recognize basic conflicts over what counts as a moral decision.10

The second lesson is that we should appreciate not only differences of value but the positive value of difference. In other words, contrary again to Habermas's vision, cultural difference among human societies and differences among people within societies or communicative communities are in themselves desirable. In Hölderlin's words, quoted recurrently by Adorno and others of the first generation of Frankfurt theorists, "the differences are good." Like the multiplicity of species in the biological world, and like the plurality of individual human existence extolled by Hannah Arendt, there is an intrinsic advantage to the production of cultural variation; it is a source of possibility including the possibility of reflective self-awareness. This is, of course, not an unlimited advantage; like most others it can reach points of diminishing return and must be hemmed in by other fundamental values. Nonetheless, difference is good. It is the necessary concomitant of creativity, and as Arendt stressed, it is basic to the action that distinguishes human life from nature. Freedom entails difference, it seems to me, and creativity may well depend on diversity. Moreover, social integration and reproduction both depend on at least some sorts of difference." Empirical social theory that does not fully address cultural and interpersonal difference at the most fundamental levels reinforces the tendency of normative theory to devalue difference. Here we confront the complicity of theory in the normalizing process to which Foucault has drawn our attention.12

Related to these two points is the need for social theory to recognize the cultural construction (rather than natural autonomy) of putatively general categories. Race and gender, for example, need to be seen as socio-cultural organizations of roles and identities, not simple derivations from the alleged facts of biology. This much has been a staple of sociological wisdom for generations. The step that many sociologists do not take is to recognize the fundamental significance of such categories. Even many self-declared feminist sociologists, for example, address issues of gender only by adding the variable of sex to established research paradigms like status attainment. They do not consider how the cultural construction of a categorical opposition between male and female shapes the very way in which we conceptualize society and social hierarchies. Nor do they reflexively evaluate the place of gender in scientific practice as more than a problem of material opportunities for female graduate students and scientists. A genuinely culturally sensitive social theory has to analyze and ask about the implications of the fact that we live in a deeply gendered world. Similarly, such a theory must go beyond the opposition between seeing race as a biologically given category and, by deconstructing its biological foundation, acceding to a claim that it exists only in the eyes of the biased observer. The latter sort of liberal critique of racism returns to the Enlightenment notion of essentially similar individuals. Just as a really serious feminism includes rethinking the categories of gender, not just getting women to wear business suits, so a really serious approach to race must begin with the cultural production and reproduction of race as a socially salient category and involve basic categorial rethinking not merely reduction in objective consequences of racial sorting.'3 We must recognize the assimilationist bias built into the liberal critique of racism.

One of the implications of trying to take difference seriously is that theory must be contentful, not purely and exclusively formal. There is certainly room for purely formal theory, but it must be recognized that it cannot and does not stand alone as an enterprise.14 Social theory can only be constructed on the basis of some explicitly or implicitly induced knowledge of the world. The categories used in declaredly purely formal theory - categories like gender, race, class, individual - are always at some level culturally specific inductions. This is not simply a flaw which is to be avoided or minimized by maximally abstract and artificial definitions of the phenomena under study, but rather the occasion for making clear the immanent relationship of any theory to its own empirical context and history. Making this relationship clear is not simply a prolegomenon to theory construction, but the primary means of establishing connection between the most fundamental categories of a theory and the empirical world on which they purport to have purchase.1 The place of empirical content in theory, and especially the assertion that basic categories are always linked to such content, raises the problem of theoretical generality in a particularly provocative way. We can approach this by looking at the problem of translation and evaluation across cultural boundaries.

Peter Winch's The Idea of a Social Science set off a controversy about cross-cultural imputations of rationality which poses fundamental questions for the notion of general social theory.16 Drawing on Wittgenstein's notions of differences between forms of life and language games, Winch argued that it was irrevocably the case that different cultures had different standards of judgment, and that it was therefore necessary to admit of a plurality of standards of rationality. To judge beliefs or understandings internal to one form of life or statements internal to one language game directly by the terms of another was a “category error" much like mixing terms from two languages. This much I think has to be granted. Winch also argued, however, that it was impossible to translate among and compare these standards of rationality in a way that did justice to the internal meaning of each, or justified treating any one of them as superior to the others. Our preference for our own must be seen as purely arbitrary and accidental. It is primarily around these latter points that debate has raged, foreshadowing in some ways aspects of postmodernism."17 Most claims that there is a single universal standard of rationality are really claims for the absolute superiority of one standard, and are compatible with recognition that other people may act on other standards though arguers may wish to deny the label of rationality to those standards.18 The fundamental questions are: can we translate among very different cultures (or, at the extreme, among any differing discourses), and on what grounds can we claim superiority for one standard of judgment? These are very hard questions and I do not propose to attempt a full answer here. Rather, I want simply to raise certain implications of the debate for the practice of social theory.

The problem of translation arises at two levels. The first is the difficulty of rendering observations, interpretations, or propositions in language which is neutral and equivalent across cultural contexts. In other words, to take a simple example, sociologists are apt to use a single term like "person,""family," or "monastery" to refer to a range of concrete instances which are designated by varying and not entirely synonymous terms in different languages. This may be inevitable and even necessary, but we need continually to remind ourselves of its problematic nature. There is no self-evident warrant for treating a Buddhist "monastery" as a token of the same type as a Catholic monastery. Rather, our use of a single term to refer to both is an assertion about their commonality. The type is our construct; it does not inhere in some external reality, and like any construct it is language as well as referent dependent. We modern Western (and especially English-language) sociologists are remarkably prone to treat extensions of terms defined within our linguistic and institutional universes as though they were transparent, neutral, and able to fit precisely to referents in culturally variant contexts. But the problems which arise from the fact that “monastery"may not mean precisely the same thing as the terms from other languages which we gloss with it, or indeed that "class" and its putative synonyms may not refer to the same categorical constructs in all Western (let alone non Western) settings are ultimately the easier of the two sorts of problems of translation. The problems of translation in this sense begin with the potential looseness of fit in any linguistic exchange, even in conversation between competent speakers of the same language. Each speaker may refer to slightly different things by the same term, fix the term slightly differently in the web of intra-linguistic associations, and intend or experience slightly different emotional feelings or perlocutionary effects. Ordinary conversation allows a good deal of redundancy, as well as opportunities for checking and exploring understandings, as ways of dealing with this. The problem is similar, though much more complex, when cross-linguistic understanding is sought.

The second level of problem of translation arises when we seek to understand linguistic meanings that are not simply different from our own, but involve what have come to be called “incommensurable" practices. It is one thing, for example, to learn that dozens of shades and hues of blue have different names, and that recognition of the phenomenal differences may depend in part on learning the categories by which they are labeled. The misunderstanding that might have come from translating terms for azure, indigo, and turquoise all simply as blue can be remedied fairly straightforwardly. Indeed English has a great many color terms that are familiar to artists and not common in ordinary discourse; these may allow for progressively better translation. The situation is made simple by the fact that the English speaker and the speaker of the other language are usually engaged in similar practices when using names for colors. It becomes a great deal more complicated when translation is attempted among practices that are fundamentally different, and especially so when those different practices are “incommensurable" with our own.19

Practices are incommensurable when they are incompatible in principle, when they cannot be carried on simultaneously. One cannot play rugby and American football simultaneously, for example; the rules are not just different but in fundamental conflict such that actions would be understood quite differently in each framework. Each is organized according to a different set of rules, and the rules conflict in fundamental ways (e.g. with regard to whether a forward pass is a legitimate tactic or a foul). As this example suggests, we may know about and have the capacity to participate in a multitude of incommensurable activities within our own daily lives and cultural contexts. This does not mean, however, that we can easily translate among them. How would we make rugby understandable in terms of American football (literally, in terms of, not simply in relation to or to a player of American football)?

Arguably, one could construct a metadiscourse of games such that both rugby football and American football could be understood simultaneously. This is, however, an intellectualistic solution at best.20 Much would be lost in any attempt to reduce either system of embodied practice to mere discourse, "the mistake of enclosing in concepts a logic made to dispense with concepts," as Bourdieu puts it.21 The challenge becomes more complex and more theoretically salient when we take up the issue of translating between incommensurable practices in very different cultures - say, comparing traditional Chinese and modern Western medicine.2² One cannot simply translate from Chinese medical terminology into Western without missing the point of one or the other of these systems of practice, and no one has produced a metalanguage that does not do violence to one system (although it is one of the myths of Western science that it is such a metalanguage). The two medical systems not only include competing practices but offer competing and contradictory accounts of their practical concerns. Any claim to understand one from the point of view of the other must be evaluative – as a rugby player must understand a forward pass to be an invalid tactic so long as he is playing rugby. The Western physician cannot approach Chinese medicine solely with the attitude of learning from the other; she must see some prescriptions as mistaken and even potentially dangerous. The ideal of a full understanding of each discourse from within the other, thus, is impossible. If, in the medical example, the respective groups of practitioners were to achieve a full understanding of each other, it could only be by creating some new form of medical practice which incorporated elements of each tradition but was not reducible to either. Then, of course, the groups would have changed. They can only be fully and simultaneously understood if there is some transformation of the knower. In other words, translation is too static a model for the process of coming to an understanding across lines of deep difference. We must grasp how actors - even cultures, if I may be permitted that shorthand - change in becoming capable of understanding various others.

To the mere incompatibility among practices, thus, we must add a third level of difficulty. This comes when two sorts of practices are not only different in form and content, in mode of reasoning and material prescription, but also make competing claims to something of the same practical efficacy. When they are brought into relationship with each other, they are naturally apt to become competitors. It is, moreover, nearly unavoidable that some judgments of their relative efficacy will be made (at the very least by practitioners or consumers, if not by “disinterested observers"). Chinese traditional medicine is also at least as much different from Western architectural practices as from Western medicine, but it is not incommensurable with the former in the same strong sense, and indeed Chinese traditional medicine is happily practiced in Westernstyle buildings.

The point of all this is to suggest that overcoming ethnocentrism in social theory involves not just appreciating differences but coming to terms with incommensurable practices. The implications of this are somewhat surprising. It is commonly assumed that the appropriate approach to cross-cultural understanding, the antidote to ethnocentrism, is simply to suspend critical judgment. This is sometimes made into a ground for thoroughgoing relativism. The very task of understanding incommensurable practices, however, challenges this relativism.

To be sure, a first principle for understanding the practices of people very different from oneself is to suspend the sort of critical judgment one might apply to apparently similar practices in one's own culture. One should first attempt to understand just what the practice is, not categorize it immediately on the basis of its surface similarity to practices with which one is familiar. Unfortunately, too many sociologists do not take seriously the difficulty of this first step. As Taylor says:

The very nature of human action requires that we understand it, at least initially, in its own terms; that means that we understand the descriptions that it bears for the agents. It is only because we have failed to do that that we can fall into the fatal error of assimilating foreign practices to our own familiar ones.23

Because he saw this category error as nearly inevitable, Winch suggested that cross-cultural translation was so problematic that full understanding of a very different society was impossible. A variety of other thinkers have described principles of “charity" or "benefit of the doubt" by which would-be interpreters should approach strange customs. The attempt to grasp them in their own terms and/or in the meaning they have for those who practice them is one such principle. Another is Hilary Putnam's idea that we should always prefer those interpretations that encourage us to regard others as maximally human.24 This does not mean that we must justify all such customs or adopt the beliefs linked to them. "Interpretative success does not require that the translatee's beliefs come out the same as our own but it does require that they come out intelligible to us."25

Generally, however, at least as researchers and social theorists, we do not wish to stop with this effort to understand an action in its own terms. Indeed, where investigators claim that such an understanding is the sole object of their investigation, they are generally disingenuous. They are engaged in an investigation that is itself outside of the practice they are investigating; they try to render practical knowledge discursive; they write articles and books aimed at audiences not composed of participants in the practice (or else urging participants to take a somewhat distanced stance towards their own practice). More generally, researchers usually are quite explicit in their intention to achieve, minimally, a translation of the practice into a form understandable in some discourse outside of that practice - usually that of the researcher's scholarly associates. Anthropologists do not go to New Guinea simply to become Papuans, or Ilongat or what-have-you; they go in order to return and reveal something of what it means to be Papuan, or Ilongat, or what-have-you. Translation is thus a vital part of achieving social knowledge. We are able to begin this process because incommensurability and cultural incompatibility or difference are seldom complete. There is always some overlap in the practical problems of life, in the conditions of social structure, and in the understanding of each of these that provides a starting point for crosscultural discourse.

But is translation per se a good description of how the anthropologist or other investigator first achieves understanding? Largely, especially for the best fieldwork, I think not. In the first place, the knowledge of a practice is in many cases itself a largely practical, intuitive, even embodied sense not objectified in discourse. "Performing a rite presupposes something quite different from the conscious mastery of the sort of catalogue of oppositions that is drawn up by academic commentators striving for symbolic mastery of a dead or dying tradition (e.g. the

Chinese mandarins' tables of equivalences) and also by anthropologists in the first stages of their work."26 It is for this reason that Bourdieu suggests, contrary to structuralism, that "understanding ritual practice is not a question of decoding the internal logic of a symbolism but of restoring its practical necessity by relating it to the real conditions of its genesis."27

Even for purely discursive knowledge, however, the process of achieving understanding across lines of cultural difference does not seem to be one of translation as such but of a richer, more complex discourse and potential process of change. Interlocutors - anthropologist and informant, say – engage each other in a process of gradually improving understanding that must be conceived in dynamic terms. It involves dialogue, not merely one-way communication. Both the anthropologist and the informant are changed by it. They achieve the understanding precisely because they change into people who can understand each other, not because one translates the static, fully formed knowledge of the other into a form which he or she can appropriate without becoming a significantly different person. Since knowing is an activity constitutive of the person, not a mechanical storing up of data, gaining in knowledge always means changing somewhat. But specifically where there are basic incompatibilities in practices (and accordingly in practical knowledge and sensibilities) achieving understanding involves becoming a person who in principle can play two different games which cannot be played simultaneously and which cannot be translated directly into the terms of each other. The anthropologist may thus construct an ethnography of the Azande, revealing a good deal of what it means to be Zande, but doing so is not simply translating Zande life into Western anthropological (or ordinary) language.28 Moreover, the anthropologist is doing something which stands not only outside of but in a hierarchical relationship to what Azande generally do (since, for example, Azande do not send anthropologists to Britain).29 The transformations that are entailed by mutual understanding need not be symmetrical.

I chose the example above of Chinese traditional medicine confronting Western “scientific" medicine (and vice versa) precisely because this is not as starkly hierarchical a contrast as the one commonly used in the literature on cross-cultural translation and evaluation of rationality: that of witchcraft vs. modern science.3o While we do not imagine that the participants in Zande discourse on witchcraft attempt to comprehend Western science in Zande terms (though something of this might in principle be imaginable), there clearly is some such effort on the part of traditional Chinese medical practitioners. These not only attempt to understand Western medicine, they have appropriated aspects of it - both specific treatments and especially a quasi-experimental mode of research into and discussion of traditional medicine.31 Nonetheless, the existence of incommensurable practices forces on us the necessity of evaluation. Where two activities are simply different, we may (disregarding opportunity and resource costs) say“let a hundred flowers bloom" and enjoy the diversity without pretending to evaluation. Indeed, where difference is complete, comparative evaluation may be either impossible or a purely subjective, rationally arbitrary matter. But incommensurable activities are precisely linked by certain similarities; though they may be radically different, they pose related claims on the attention of observers - and, in the case of medicine, of potential clients. Possibly neither Chinese nor Western medicine is “better" in some overall way, but within certain domains where both claim efficacy, they are bound to be the subject of comparative evaluations. Moreover, it is not the case that such evaluations are merely arbitrary exercises of subjectivity or the will to power (as post-Foucauldian discourse might lead one to believe). Western medicine reveals sufficient technical effectiveness that it demands some combination of acceptance, explanation, or suppression (as, indeed, did Western science when it first began to achieve notable technical success in the West). In China itself, practitioners of Chinese medicine are, in fact, forced onto the defensive whenever they are put into direct competition with Western-style medicine on one of the latter's strong points. But of course the latter has weak points as well, and there is at least room for Chinese specialists to advance compelling practical claims of their own in these areas. Thus acupuncture and certain herbal remedies travel Westward where an attempt is made to appropriate them - an attempt which will continue to make Western specialists uneasy until their efficacy is fully explained on grounds internal to the Western scientific medical discourse.

Such an explanation - even if favorable to acupuncture - would not be produced from within Chinese traditional medicine. Neither would it be a neutral metalanguage for bridging incommensurability. It would be a new form of practice, perhaps more capacious than its predecessors, but surely with limits of its own. If it developed out of Chinese traditional medicine and Western “scientific" medicine, its very existence would mean that both those practices (and groupings of practitioners) had changed. The same, I would contend, is true of all the sorts of crosscultural discourses in which we engage and on which our theories' claims to generality rest.

Similarly, in the realm of science that first led Kuhn to formulate the notion of incommensurability of paradigms, it is generally not neutral metadiscourse but historical change that produces new cognitive capacities and orientations that enable scientists to grasp - perhaps distortedly - each of two incommensurable paradigms. We need not agree with Foucault that structures of knowledge - epistemes or large-scale paradigms - simply change, succeeding each other without gradual transitions or possibility of comparative evaluation.3² Practical activities bring such structures into simultaneous use and under some circumstances force comparative evaluations.3 But there is no guarantee that the historical changes that enable understanding across previously incommensurable paradigmatic divides are the only ones that could have taken place. Even if we agree that they brought epistemic gain - an advance of knowledge in some sense - this does not imply that they are the only transformations of thought that could have done so. Relatedly, we must be careful to avoid the presumption that cultures (or discourses) are inherently unitary. A practice from another culture may be subject to competing interpretations or evaluations within that culture. This can help the would-be interpreter, as Tambiah points out: “if there are internal criticisms and evaluations within a society, then its agents have to exercise some choice between alternatives and engage in debate about the 'rationality' of their rules and conventions. These internal critiques help sensitize the anthropologist and orient him for his own task of intelligible translation and structural evaluation."34

The doing of theory is itself a form of discourse which grows as it is transformed in changing historical circumstances and cultural contexts. It cannot achieve true generality simply by subsuming or being tested against data from a wide range of cultural settings and historical periods. Nor can it be translated transparently across cultures in a way which does not in some combination change the original, impose the original as an alien, dominating form, or simply fail to communicate. As a result, it will always be incumbent on social theorists - the more so the more they attempt to grasp fundamental social categories - both to situate their work in its cultural context, and to open themselves to reformation by confrontation with other cultural contexts.

At the same time, the would-be objects of understanding can hardly be presumed to remain unchanged. Both sides to any dialogue are affected. The relevant changes, moreover, are historical as well as biographical. The anthropological or sociological effort at understanding cannot be disengaged from the long historical process that created the occasion for cross-cultural contact and will continue to transform each party to it, however asymmetrically. This historical process includes that which formed the individual researcher and shaped her tools of analysis, but it is not summed up by that. It also made wars and colonialism and mass media, all of which helped to make the conditions for any cross-cultural understanding as well as to present historically specific obstacles to such understanding.

## Ⅲ

I have already introduced the issue of historical specificity by talking about processes of cultural and theoretical change. Indeed, many of the issues posed by historical change are similar to those posed by crosscultural variation - with the added difficulty of the impossibility of engaging in a proper dialogue to achieve mutual understanding. Cultural and historical specificity are thus inextricably linked, but there are some specific points to be made about the latter.

In advocating "historically specific" theory, I mean not merely "taking history into account," and still less claiming to explain all of history. Rather, I mean recognizing that (1) the production of theories is a historical phenomenon, (2) the categories used in theoretical discourse are often adequate only to specific historical epochs (partly because they are inevitably contentful as suggested above), and (3) theories exist in discursive fields, in relation to other theories, and are not self-sufficient statements of their meaning. Dialogue and historical change allow a bridging of cultural difference that has no equivalents for historical epochs.

That the production of theories is itself a historical problem is now widely, though hardly universally, recognized. At least within the discourse of critical theory, the need to ground a theoretical statement with an account of its own production (or the potential for such an account without performative contradiction) is generally accepted. This idea of grounding is more or less distinctive to critical theory, however; it does not figure significantly at all in "mainstream"social theory.35 Most selfproclaimed positivist theory is constructed without any attempt to make the act of theory construction itself intelligible within the theory.

The historical specificity of theoretical categories themselves is much less widely accepted. This is somewhat surprising inasmuch as both Weber and Marx worked in large part through historically specific conceptualization. Even devout followers of each, however, have often tended to ignore their (admittedly sometimes ambiguous) historical specifications and treat their concepts and theories as transhistorical timeless truths. Consider the use of the term "labor" in marxist theory. Most readings of Marx take labor to be a transhistorical category applying to all epochs and cultures. Others argue - correctly, in my view - that as a category in Marx's fully developed theory, "labor"should be treated as specific to capitalism. To be sure, work – in some general sense – may be understood to occur more broadly, but this is precisely because it is an untheorized term. The notion of labor is central to the mature Marx because labor as a form of abstract value - commodified and quantitatively measurable - is theoretically constitutive of capitalism, and it is a concept adequate and specific to a society in which capitalism as a set of cultural categories as well as material relationships can be said to exist.36

The historical specificity and contentfulness of all complex theoretical categories cannot be eliminated by analytic reformulation. It constitutes a reason why theoretical work cannot be strictly cumulative, in the positivist sense, and why deductive formulations are always limited and parasitic on inductive accounts. The hope for a theoretical millennium of deductive and cumulative theory is misleading at best.3" Among the effects of pursuing this chimera, I would contend, is a necessary impoverishment of theoretical categories and consequently theories. No effort to specify the “scope statements"for a theory solves (or even really addresses) this problem, for it presumes the adequacy of the accounts of the basic categories across the lines of contexts in which the theory's propositions are found to hold or not to hold.38

The need for historical specificity does not derive simply from the difficulty an omniscient author has of indicating which of his equally true statements apply at what moment in a narrative of dramatic changes. Rather, it is the need to recognize (1) the limited vantage points provided by the historical perspective of each and every theorist, and (2) the immanence of theoretical categories in the world of practice. With regard to the latter, I mean first off and quite simply that it is not imaginable that Marx would have developed his theory of capitalism had he lived in the ninth and not the nineteenth century. More specifically, even theoretical concerns which run through the whole history of social thought - the attempt to understand and specify what a person is, for example - are always only thinkable in ways which are inextricably tied to the nature of society (and hence of persons) within the realm of experience and learning of a given thinker. Scholarship may help to overcome the limits imposed by the reach of one's own experience; it may make one less ethnocentric and less historically naive. Nonetheless, personal experience must be assigned a central role in accounting for the understandability (and particular reference) of theoretical categories and concepts, and of the theories into which they are woven.

The issue of historical specificity arises at all levels of analysis. It also concerns all time periods. Thus, there are historical changes that distinguish the context of theory production from one generation to the next. But the most important application of this point comes in the demarcation of epochs in human history, and the construction of conceptual frameworks adequate to epochal changes. Thus historical specificity comes to be of special significance for debates about whether modernity is giving way to postmodernity, whether theories based on the economic strategies of individual capitalists explain much about contemporary capitalism, or whether normalization of power is a social process of distinctive significance to modern societies or more general application. To reiterate, the issue is not simply one of scope statements. It is more fundamentally a matter of how the conceptual construction of these basic historical demarcations determines what sorts of categories will be appropriate to the analysis of phenomena internal to them. This is particularly important for a theory which proposes to take a critical stance towards existing social arrangements. It is essential that such a theory be able to show that it stands in an immanent relationship to such social arrangements in order for its critique to avoid being merely an arbitrary subjective expression on the one hand, or an only slightly less arbitrary imposition of external, possibly universalistic values.

The importance of the fact that theories exist in historically and culturally limited discursive fields has partly to do with the impossibility of separating the evaluation of any theory from the range of possible alternatives to it. Choices are made with regard to epistemic gain, not absolute truth; political advantage, not political certainty, and so forth.³9 Such choices are always part of a process of projection and examination of possible future paths, thus, and inevitably of communication concerning the range of options. Such theoretical communication presents itself as being able to rise above the ordinary problems of communication, to offer not only greater clarity and precision, but in Habermas's terms to offer readier redemption of validity claims. There is, I think, some truth to this self-presentation of theory. Among discourses about society, theoretical ones have some particular advantages in enabling communication across lines of cultural difference. They have these advantages generally, because even where theory does not thematize reflexivity it nonetheless involves it. But the advantages are greatest where the theory can be clear about its historical grounding and application.

Under the best of circumstances, however, communication is never perfect. As Derrida in particular has stressed, language itself produces and makes inevitable the potential for infinitely ramifying interpretations and plays of difference.40 Because theory sets up an especially high standard for its own internal discourse, it makes an easy target for critique. In particular, it is easy to show that theory presenting itself as politically and otherwise neutral is strongly biased, and that theory claiming objective clarity and certainty can do so only by presupposing a foundation in the habitus of its practitioners and the tacit assumptions of