## Cultural Difference and Historical Specificity

This is also a point recognized more clearly by White, Identity and Control. In this theory, Blau never addresses gender in any very substantial way. Ironically, his main exemplification of how groups can be defined by the prevalence of in-group over out-group association is intermarriage rates. Needless to say, he does not show homosexual marriages outnumbering heterosexual, yet gender remains a salient category. This suggests some problems for his contention that there is no significance to culturally defined membership categories which are not characterized by such prevalence of ingroup association on all or most important dimensions.

52 Habermas, Theory of Communicative Action, vols 1, 2.

# Postmodernism as Pseudohistory: The Trivialization of Epochal Change

## I

The challenge of difference does not arise only between cultures, or only between genders, ethnic groups, classes, or other social and cultural categories or organized groups. Difference is basic and comes along infinite dimensions. By the same token, this means that differences are often cross-cutting and we cannot understand all problems of difference from the presumption that each raises the challenge of radical alterity, total otherness.1

In this connection, self-styled “postmodernists" are misleading to claim that the presence of ambiguity and ethnocentrism in all previous means proposed for overcoming breakdowns in communication constitutes grounds for their dismissal or radical relativization.² Some postmodernists are happy relativists - perfectly prepared to acknowledge that there are no certain truths and perhaps even no ways to be sure of meaningful communication across intellectual traditions or cultures, untroubled by the lack of grounding this leaves them for normative judgments and either scholarly or practical disputes. They eschew the gloom which the prospect of radical relativism suggests to Enlightenment thinkers and adopt instead a Rabelaisian carnival attitude, playful before the intellectual abyss.3 Others adopt an apocalyptic tone but offer no more way out. Though taken all too commonly in English-language discourse as an unambiguous partisan of postmodernism, Derrida has been as sharply critical of these attitudes as anyone. The necessary critique of the logocentricism of traditional philosophy, Derrida suggests, by no means demands - nor for that matter makes possible - escape from the necessity to proceed by means of serious critical thought, working through the possibilities for and limits to knowledge in a fashion not altogether distant from Kant, and insisting also on recognition that human life demands ethics as well as epistemology of our thought.4

It is not always realized that while the widespread postmodernist attitude avoids a tendency to intellectual domination characteristic of many Enlightenment theories, the way in which it recognizes otherness borders on the trivializing. The “other"may be omnipresent, difference intrinsic to the very possibility of knowledge, but if this is construed in a relativist direction, no other in particular gains strong intellectual or normative claims on us.

Relativism is not the only problem with this manner of thinking. Ironically, while extolling difference, much postmodernist thought actually fails sharply to make sense of real cultural or historical specificity. It is presented above all as though it is grounded in a historical claim, but in the first part of this chapter I will suggest that this is a pseudohistory. A kind of pseudo-specificity is introduced by the use of the prefix “post" and the proliferation of contrasts to putative modernity or modernism. Such contrasts sometimes point to significant variables differentiating social practices. They are seldom developed as very precise categories, however, or concretized in serious historical or cross-cultural analyses. Rather, the Enlightenment is evoked as though it were the archetype of a unidimensional and uncontested modernity. Or the nonWestern world or Third World is posed as a critical vantage point on the West in an ironic new Orientalism, without consideration of the enormous internal heterogeneity of those constructs. In each case, a crucial question is how a social change has shifted the conditions and capacities for human action. The broad postmodernist discourse obscures this issue, however, by positing an end to subjectivity or rendering it universally problematic rather than addressing the ways in which agency and subjectivity are constructed in specific historical and cultural situations.

In the present chapter, I want to question how much the genuinely dramatic social and cultural changes that are going on around us are a real departure from previous trends, and to the extent that they are, whether this is part of a social transformation sufficiently basic to warrant an argument that modernity is dead or dying. I will argue generally against the postmodernist view. Though changes are real and major, they do not yet amount to an epochal break. Indeed, many of them reflect continuing tensions and pressures which have characterized the whole modern era. Two counter-claims inform my account of problems with the claim that postmodernity is upon us: First, the two basic organizing forces in modernity - capitalism and bureaucratic power - have hardly begun to dissolve. Second, the problems of self and agency are neither new to a postmodern era nor obsolete because superseded either historically or theoretically; these problems continue to shape our lives and thought as they have shaped them throughout modernity. Rather than narrowing our notion of the modern in order to justify the use of the prefix “post," I will argue that we need to incorporate the insights of postmodernist thinkers into a richer sociological approach to the entire modern era.

In the second part of the chapter, I will argue briefly for reading poststructuralist theory, and especially Derrida and Foucault, apart from any argument about postmodernism. Derrida and Foucault are claimed as part of the movement though they never proclaimed themselves postmodernists. Moreover, too much English language appropriation constructs an illusory unity to the intellectual positions of Parisians commonly at odds with each other. Likewise, the structuralist background to poststructuralist theory is widely forgotten or misunderstood.6 While I will not rehearse this history, I will argue that we need to avoid exaggerating any emphasis on the prefix “post” and recognize the extent to which Derrida and especially Foucault write as inheritors of structuralism.

The third part of the chapter will address the difficulty postmodernism, and to some extent poststructuralism more generally, confronts in finding a vantage point for comparative analysis (as distinct from mere celebration of difference and/or syncretism). Closely linked to the last is the difficulty of reconciling the normative positions of postmodernism (e.g. extolling the virtues of difference and condemning the vice of repressive normalization) with its generally relativist theoretical orientation. Performative contradictions abound as postmodernists issue authoritative pronouncements on the basis of theoretical positions that deny any non-arbitrary basis to authority.

## Ⅱ

What then are we to make of the frequent declarations that we have entered a postmodern age? Is this something that has happened to architecture, but not to society? Or have cultural analysts noticed something that has eluded the attention of sociologists?7

Postmodernism is a confluence of several partially distinct trends:

1 Perhaps with clearest meaning, postmodernism is a rejection of artistic modernism (e.g. the international style in architecture) in favor of freeing the aesthetic from the functional, putting signification, intertextual reference, and self-reflexivity forward as independent goods. While architects like Venturi and Jencks have played a primary role in promoting the conceptualization of postmodernism, related changes are current and self-identified throughout at least the visual and dramatic arts (including cinema) and literature.

Postmodernism as a theoretical and/or critical position derives substantially from poststructuralism. This is a largely retrospective label for a series of French-led shifts in cultural (and psychological and social) theory, notably the critique of subject-centered reason, monological texts or readings, grand narratives, general truth claims, and the normalization of Enlightenment rationality. Central players include Derrida, Foucault (a little ambiguously), Lyotard, Baudrillard, and various British, American, and Antipodean epigones.

Closely related to poststructuralism in many accounts is the postmodernist critique of “foundationalism" in philosophy and theory. At a minimum, this is an extension of the Nietzschean and Heideggerian critique of metaphysics into an attack on all claims to an external standpoint for judging truth. In the work of Rorty, for example, a level of necessary theoretical indeterminacy is made the basis for a call to abandon repressive demands for certainty in favor of a "liberal" toleration of diversity on even the most basic epistemological and ethical points. In other hands, antifoundationalism becomes an attack on theoretical systematicity itself.8

4 Finally, postmodernism includes sociological and political economic claims to identify a basic transition from “modernity" to a new stage of (or beyond) history. These variously emphasize postindustrial, information or knowledge society as the new societal formation. A new centrality is posited for media, information technology, and the production of signification (e.g. culture industry) as an end in itself. Key figures in this line of argument (notably Bell and Touraine, and popularizers like Toffler and Naisbitt) are not directly a part of the postmodernist movement, but their arguments have influenced it substantially.

The four lines of influence are not strictly commensurate. In particular, the “post" prefix may oppose modernism as an artistic movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, foundationalism as a feature of early modern science and Enlightenment discourse, modernity as an epoch of much longer duration, or the very construction of a progressive historical narrative such as those used to identify “modernity" in the first place (primarily during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries). Nonetheless, the various strands of the phenomenon draw strength and significance from being intertwined.9

Postmodernism is a recognizable artistic and more generally cultural trend that can be distinguished from and indeed reacts against modernism. But this is not the same as saying that modernity has given way to postmodernity. Even in the cultural realm, it is hard to place postmodernism. Surely we can recognize it in recent video and performance art, in the architecture of pastiche, and in novels whose weight cannot be borne by the narrative of any subject. But are these extensions of early trends or something dramatically new? The period from the 1890s to the 1920s must be reckoned the glory days of high modernism. Bauhaus architecture, Russian formalist painters, the French and German novelists, and English poets of the day seem unquestionably modern. Brecht and Simmel, Joyce and Woolf are paradigmatically modern. Yet they also seem very close to the so-called postmodern. Baudelaire only coined the term modernism in the late nineteenth century, though drawing on the older figure of the struggle between ancients and moderns. Postmodernism in a sense issues almost immediately thereafter from the (more recently accelerated) effort to claim an autonomy for art, free from any justification in terms of its moral significance. The themes of fragmentation of consciousness, the distance between the intentions and ends of action, the severing of symbol from referent are all felt in the art and social thought of the high modernist era. Robert Musil's The Man Without Qualities, written mainly in the 1920s, is strikingly “postmodern," an anticipation of Kundera, in its account of the insufficiency of the self as bearer of the weight of “modernist" subjectivity.10 If these are all to be embraced as part of the postmodern, then (1) the postmodern must be understood as part and parcel of the modern, and (2) the label must be seen as essentially misleading, perhaps willfully so, perhaps simply conditioned by the general modern sensibility that the new is always better than the established.11

It is hard, in this connection, to distinguish the postmodern from the merely antimodern - that is, from the various sorts of oppositions to dominant themes in modernity which have accompanied modernization from its beginning. In this sense what is new is only the highly modernist stylization of conservatism, on the one hand, and the production of sometimes very unconservative antimodernisms on the other. But the issue goes one step deeper. Not just the antimodernism of Catholic conservatives and country squires, or of the scholastic defenders of artistic classicism and traditional iconic languages of representation, accompanied modernism from its inception. So did very modern, but in many ways antimodernist, figures like Nietzsche. Modernism, and modernity, have always been internally complex.

The postmodernist critique (and the defense of modernity mounted by figures like Habermas) tends to equate modernity with the rationalist Enlightenment.12 But the Romantics were as modern and as new as the rationalists. Characters crucial to modernity - most notably Rousseau but also Goethe and some of the English Romantic poets - combined elements of both rationalism and romanticism in their writing and their lives. The individualism we identify as so central to the modern experience and modern society and culture was shaped by both romantic and rationalist notions, by Enlightenment modernism and the other side of modernism represented paradigmatically by Rousseau, Goethe, and Nietzsche, but also, only somewhat more ambiguously, by Freud and Simmel.13 The complexity of interplay across rationalist and romantic lines is important to grasp. Shelley is certainly a paradigmatic Romantic, yet we might recall that Shelley was drawn to Godwin for the very rationalism of his anarchist political theory even before he eloped with his daughter. The late eighteenth century in many parts of Europe and America saw versions of the circle of connections which knit the Godwins, Wolstonecraft, Shelley, and Byron together. A not dissimilar confluence of influences - rationalist German idealism, Romanticism, Nietzsche and the dark side of Enlightenment (even Sade) shaped the thought of Horkheimer and Adorno. There may be an important battle between rationalist universalism and attention to the irrational, between the value of the particular and the repressive, disempowering, and deceptive side of individualism. But to equate that with a battle between modernity and its putative successor is to fail to recognize how deeply a part of modernity that whole battle, that whole frame of reference is. And this is only to speak of Western modernity.

Another sort of argument has been incorporated into the postmodernist position, however, which stems much more from claims about changes in the empirical world. This is the claim that we need a postmodernist theory because we live in a postmodern age. The proliferation of such labels was a particular feature of the 1970s and 1980s. Daniel Bell's and Alain Touraine's different accounts of postindustrial society marked early versions. The postmodernists posed much more radical claims about the implications of computerization, new communications media, and related socio-technical changes. Bell had already joined Habermas and other thinkers in suggesting that the advance of information processing and automating technologies meant that labor should no longer be privileged (in the marxist sense) as the basic source of value.14 Jean Baudrillard, among others, has argued that the whole form of social organization based on production relations and power has given way to a society and economy organized on the bases of consumption and seduction, for example by advertising.1 In such a postmodern society, the sign becomes the autonomous source and form of value, the signifier is detached from the signified. The structure of relations which now matters is not that by which capital dominates labor, or centers of power grow and eliminate the territorial organization of power. Rather, the structure of relations which now matters is among signs. The representations are more real than the things represented. People are “exteriorized" into a techno-culture of “hyperreality" where significance replaces reification and we know only the simulacra of mass existence. Or as Guy Debord put it in Society of the Spectacle, the alienation of the commodity form is experienced to such a degree of abstraction that the commodity becomes a mere image detached from its previous ground in human labor or concrete use value. As a result, the critiques based on use value and concrete labor are rendered impotent.16

But the positing of an epochal change is problematic. There has undoubtedly been an increase in the role of advertising and the media generally (and not only in the economic sphere, but also in politics and efforts to influence personal decisions - e.g. about abortion, cigarette smoking, or drug use). Consumption has indeed been thrust to the foreground of practical concerns, both for those who attempt to manage it in the business world and for everyone in the organization of everyday life. These genuine changes, however, and others like them, do not add up to a very conclusive case either that production has lost its basic importance or that signification has gained the status of self-production free from any need for creative subjects or material referents.¹7

This postmodernist argument against Marx depends on a rather rigid reading of Capital in which, among other things, Marx is treated as having underappreciated his own argument as to the importance of abstraction in the commodity form through which labor is rendered into capital, in favor of a naturalistic (and therefore transhistorical) understanding of labor.18 This issue, however, goes beyond a fight about marxism. The claim that material production is no longer central to the organization of economic and social life is meant to reveal the postmodern age to be free from a whole series of constraints discussed in nearly every version of economic theory; it is meant to have liberated culture from material social determinations..Yet even on the face of things it appears false, mistaking the rising importance of information technology within capitalism for a basic transformation of capitalism, not just into a new phase but into something altogether different. No evidence is presented that capital accumulation is not basic to economic activity and social power today (though it may never have been as exclusively fundamental as some marxists have claimed). And though industry employs a declining percentage of the population, this does not mean a decline in all measures of its importance. The very implementation of labor-saving technology requires an increasing capital investment, and the distributive (consumption, financial, etc.) orientation of business (which has been widely criticized in recent years by supplysiders and more conventional economists and business analysts alike) can still be understood as a response to the problem of utilizing productive capacity.

Our cultural orientation, moreover, seems still to be very productivist and very much focused on the acquisition of material goods. What are we to make of claims, like this from Frederick Jameson? “Henceforth," writes Jameson comparing the 1920s and 1930s in which Surrealism flourished with what he sees as the impoverished material world of the late twentieth century,“in what we may call post-industrial capitalism, the products with which we are furnished are utterly without depth: their plastic content is totally incapable of serving as a conductor of psychic energy. All libidinal investment in such objects is precluded from the outset."19 Who is the "we" here? Has Jameson never met someone who named their notebook computer or their car? Who wore a favorite shirt until it disintegrated? Who treasured the records they bought with a now-departed lover? Or does he mean to exclude the realm of ordinary life for a claim to aesthetic transformation evidenced only in the relation of artists to manufactured objects (and then dubiously)? Last but not least, the insight gained from focusing on movement away from productive industry - whether basic or minor - seems hardly able to make sense of any entire economy; at most it may have purchase on that portion of the international economy which is located in the rich - e.g., OECD - countries. And even there, the rush to generalize about the movement away from material goods and industry seems riskily to ignore the possibility that its observations are keyed to cycles both in economic activity (was “postmaterialism" dependent on the long growth wave that broke with the early 1970s recession?) and in consumer predilections (our interests in consumer durables are not consistent, but ebb and flow with saturation of desires and recognition of the burdens those durables impose on us).20

Lyotard has more plausibly suggested that postmodernity “is undoubtedly a part of the modern."21 Postmodernism in this view is a phase in modernism's constant push to negate the existent and produce the new. This makes sense (though it makes the label misleading). Indeed, in more recent work, Lyotard had more sharply challenged the utility of the label postmodern with which he is so inextricably linked. The phrase "rewriting modernity," he says (and I agree):

seems far preferable to the usual headings, like “postmodernity," "postmodernism,"“postmodern," under which this sort of reflection is usually placed. The advantage of “rewriting modernity" depends on two displacements: the transformation of the prefix “post-" into “re-” from the lexical point of view, and the syntactical application of this modified prefix to the verb “writing," rather than to the substantive “modernity."22

But of course the lexical and syntactical horses are already out of the barn. Lyotard's early work did offer, albeit not altogether consistently, the suggestion of a different sort of basic historical change which provides a grounding for postmodernism's currency.

On this account, postmodernity suffers from a loss of meaning, or a meaningfulness that can only be repressively imposed, because the great legitimating narratives of modernity have been exploded. Lyotard is hardly the only figure to stress this sort of argument. He gives it one of its most prominent expositions, however, suggesting that this is not just a possible intellectual stance but a basic social transformation:

the old poles of attraction represented by nation-states, parties, professions, institutions, and historical traditions are losing their attraction. And it does not look as though they will be replaced, at least not on their former scale.23

I think it is somewhat dubious whether the key modern collective identities and“poles of attraction" have been quite so completely displaced. On this point too, the very fragmentation claimed as distinctive of postmodernity has often been claimed as equally distinctive of modernity. Giddens has suggested, thus, that the sort of changes claimed in the quote from Lyotard's The Postmodern Condition are more plausibly read as the completion or radicalization of modernity than as the coming of postmodernity.24 The discourse does not, in any case, provide any but the most ambiguous of answers to the question of what constitutes an epochal historical transformation.

The distinction between modernity and postmodernity has the surface appearance of being a historically specific claim about the end of one epoch and the beginning of another. But in fact postmodernists split into two groups: those who seek to identify concrete changes in social history - e.g. the end of Fordism - and those who evoke Heiddegger's more primordial sense of crisis.25 As an intellectual project (or style), postmodernism is an internal product of modernity, not its true opponent. It is a counterpoint to the modernist project, but one generated from within modernity, a recurrent modern form of challenge to Enlightenment universalism and foundationalism (and thus not simply a sort of throwback to the premodern resistance to modernity). Though he is inconsistent, and sometimes reverts to treating postmodernity as a period, Lyotard is distinctive in recognizing at least at times that "postmodernity is undoubtedly a part of the modern.26 Postmodernists are quite modern, for example, in style, not least of all in constantly searching for the new, suspecting that which has been received.“A work [of art] can become modern only if it is first postmodern. Postmodernism thus understood is not modernism at its end but in the nascent state, and this state is constant."27 In nearly all material ways the modern tendencies continue: centralization of power, demand for economic productivity. Even the exploding and fragmenting of once more integrated cultural systems or communities is not “after" modern. It is, rather, something modernity has done throughout its existence.28

Elsewhere, unfortunately, Lyotard does tend to treat postmodernity as a historical period and postmodernism as a separable project.29 Thinner studies and popularizations exaggerate this tendency, and are replete with diagrams opposing the tenets of supposed modernity and postmodernity in the most modernist of dichotomous fashions.3º Nearly all accounts are vague as to postmodernism's beginnings (an aspect of their pseudohistorical character). Yet such treatments force us to ask when the postmodern era began if we are to be able to figure out whether the theory traveling under the name postmodernist is historically specific or transhistorical. There are a number of possible answers implied by various writings within the postmodern.tradition (this very vagueness is testimony to the nonspecificity of the theories):

With “poststructuralism" in the late 1960s. Derrida might be taken as marking this break most strikingly with his publication of three books in 1967.31 Poststructuralism itself is a move visible only retrospectively in the careers of former structuralists who decided they could decenter the subject and still reflect critically on the categories of thought, and thus could give up structuralism's denial of epistemology which was based on the belief that it could only be pursued in terms of a philosophy of the subject.

With "postindustrial society," computerization, and/or other sociotechnical changes taken to undermine the privileging of labor as the source of value. This is an idea put forward by Lyotard especially.

● With the ascendancy of consumption/seduction over production/ power, an argument launched by Baudrillard.

With nontraditional critics of modernity from Nietzsche (emphasizing the will to power) to Heidegger (who described Nietzsche's time and implicitly also his own as "the epoch in which the completion of the modern age begins") to Simmel (the fragmentation of society) to Musil (who in The Man without Qualities put forward a notion of the self as insufficient to bear the weight of "modernist" subjectivity).32

Underlying this concern is the problem of how to relate the intellectual current of “postmodernism" to change in social life. Identification of a new age “postmodernity" is postmodernism's main possibility for claiming a historical grounding.

The great pioneer of poststructuralist analyses of historical transformation was Michel Foucault. Unlike most of the self-declared postmodernists (many of whom claim him for their camp despite the fact that he did not explicitly join it), Foucault was, first and foremost, an analyst of modernity, indeed early modernity. He helped, however, to set the stage for postmodernism with his discussion of historical ruptures and his thematic stresses on the repressive character of modernity, its arbitrary construction of the subject as a disciplinary ploy, and the inescapable mutual imbrication of power and knowledge.33 Especially in his earlier work, Foucault lays great stress on the ways in which internally coherent modes of understanding lost their grip and were superseded, and by showing these breaks both situated modernity and implied criteria for judging what might constitute a fundamental intellectual transformation.34 At the heart of his most influential account was the distinctively modern production of knowledge from the standpoint of the individual knower, a standpoint constituted in turn through a fundamentally new play of power. If this marks modernity, then it is apparent that a loss of capacity for coherent subjectivity - and with it a certain production of meaning – would spell modernity's end.

Both Lyotard and Baudrillard want to go further. Baudrillard suggests forgetting Foucault as an account still caught in modernity's grasp, just as Marx was (on his view) caught in capitalism's.3 Elsewhere, he declares the death of the social, the end of true social relations and their replacements by the simulacra of hyperreality.36What is for Derrida the absence of an approach to the social becomes for Baudrillard an explicit devaluation of the social.37 Modernity has been ruptured, he asserts, by the collapse of normalizing power, expanding material productivity, and the possibility of grasping social life as a relation among subjects. The modern sense of the social had been dominated by the centralization and deterritorialization of power (by implication the effect of the growth of the state), and the production of commodities which gained their value from abstract human labor and the pattern of circulation of which could be criticized from the standpoint of concrete use value and concrete labor. In other words, modernity was the era of power and the production of commodities. Postmodernity is the era of the sign and the seduction of consumers. The structure of relations which now matters is among signs. People are “exteriorized" into a techno-culture of "hyperreality" where significant replaces reification and we know only the simulacra of mass existence. Baudrillard's vision is basically a tragic account of the completion of the abstraction of power suggested by the Weberian notion of rationalization, and of production (reconstituted as seduction) by the marxian commodity-based system of capitalism. But it takes him far from those masters theoretically. And it leaves him tacing nihilism squarely and advocating an attitude simply of “ironic detachment" - an attitude at least as lacking in capacity for positive critical engagement with the contemporary world as Horkheimer's and Adorno's belief that all they could hope to do was to leave "a message in a bottle" for a future era. Baudrillard almost celebrates the fear of mass culture which helped make Adorno and Horkheimer into such pessimists. As he asks:

Are the mass media on the side of power in the manipulation of the masses, or are they on the side of the masses in the liquidation of meaning. and in the fascination which results? Is it the media which induce fascination in the masses, or is it the masses which divert the media into spectacles?

At one level, Baudrillard retains within his tragic vision some sense of historical specificity: we face the abyss; our ancestors did not. A kev reason is because he ties his vision of postmodernist culture to a more general view of postmodern society; he does not make postmodernism something free floating, purely within the realm of ideas. But his theses of the implosion of meaning and the out-of-control production of signification suggest the impossibility of any theoretical grounding, and of crosscultural evaluation. And Baudrillard radicalizes Barthes' vision of the destruction of cultural difference by the media." His theory thus has an enormous amount in common with the views of mass society, mass culture, or the revolt of the masses which have been endemic to the twentieth century - if not all modernity. We might question, however, whether there is not a great deal of internal differentiation among "the masses" which might be addressed by an empirical theory more focused on cultural variation, and which might be valorized by a normative theory more respectful of differences.

On the other hand, there is in much postmodernist thought an interesting resistance to the very narrative bases for discussing historical specificity. In this sense (though not in its arguments for the importance of difference) such postmodernist thought is directly opposed to the program put forward here. Lyotard, for example, suggests that the core difference between modernist and postmodernist thought be seen in the tendency of the former to impose suprahistorical narratives on the concrete and ultimately directionless flux of history: Modern science relies on metadiscourses that appeal to grand narratives of history. Lyotard at one point defines "postmodern as incredulity toward metanarratives."40 But there is an enormous difference that Lyotard does not consider between such grand metanarratives - the Hegelian dialectical realization of spirit, for example - and actual historical arguments – say, about the transition from feudalism to capitalism. In more contemporary terms, one can meaningfully speak about the hoped for end to the cold war and enormous post-1989 realignment of world politics without resorting to the Hegelian fantasies of Francis Fukuyama's The End of History and the Last Man. Lyotard's idea of postmodernity is not far distant. Unlike Heidegger and Derrida, thus, who almost completely refuse to provide sociological grounds for their accounts of crisis, Lyotard at least hints schematically at one. If he is right, sociological analysis focused on these institutions or “poles of attraction" can no longer grasp the social condition very well.41 Instead we must look at the flow of communication through a social grid in the form of endless language games.

For Lyotard, not only the claim that society is a functional, systemic unity is a spurious modern view, so is its main opposite, the view that society is a conflictual field of struggles held together by power. Both of these accounts, on his view, represent unacceptable “metanarratives":

I will use the term modern to designate any science that legitimates itself with reference to a metadiscourse of this kind making an explicit appeal to some grand narrative, such as the dialectics of Spirit, the hermeneutics of meaning, the emancipation of the rational or working subject, or the creation of wealth.... Simplifying to the extreme, I define postmodern as incredulity toward metanarratives.42

Historically, grand narratives pursued (and to some extent achieved) legitimation of the social order, as the metanarrative either of a reflective subject (spirit, knowledge actualizing itself) or of a practical subject (humanity liberating itself).43 But in postmodern culture, such grand narratives have lost their credibility. Science seeks its own internal and external legitimation, sometimes in terms of old narratives of knowledge and emancipation. Other times it offers up simply its "performativity" achieving the best input/output equation for its sponsors.44 But increas-