ingly, science appears simply as playing its own language game, and therefore incapable of legitimating itself or other language games.45 It is first and foremost science which has challenged the hegemony of narrative, Lyotard suggests, because the pragmatics, the criteria of acceptance, are different for scientific and narrative knowledge.4 Yet, for a time it appeared that one might appeal to science itself to save a great legitimating narrative of modernity. But this is not so: since "science plays its own game it is incapable of legitimating the other language games"; in fact, “it is incapable of legitimating itself."4? So, though it is powerful, science is ultimately just one more game in a world in which “all we can do is gaze in wonderment at the diversity of discursive species, just as we do at the diversity of plant or animal species. Lamenting the 'loss of meaning' in postmodernity boils down to mourning the fact that knowledge is no longer principally narrative."48 The postmodernist is called upon to "wage a war on totality" because totality breeds terror.49 This much is reminiscent of Foucault. But where Foucault offered a historical account of this as a dimension of modernity, Lyotard's account is severed from any specific (let alone consistent) historical contextualization. Lyotard, moreover, tends to reduce the social almost entirely to the linguistic - "the observable social bond is composed of language 'moves'," but then fails to introduce any account of how participants in different discourses can ever be expected to reach agreements or even mutual understandings.50 Because these are competitive moves in language games, they cannot be grasped by a purely cybernetic theory, but must be seen in terms of their agonistic aspect. Society, then, has become “atomized" into flexible networks of language games; Lyotard claims that the prominence of bureaucratic and other institutional constraints or control mechanisms does not seriously challenge this view; these limits are merely the stakes and provisional results of language strategies.

## ⅢI

The greatest gain offered by postmodernism is not the analysis of any epochal historical change, but a refocusing of our understanding of modernity. There are some qualitative novelties in recent history, but so far these have not been sufficient to overturn basic organizational features of the epoch. Capital accumulation and centralization of power, thus, both continue on a world scale. Efforts to gain effective agency through collective action (including the reformulation of claims to identity and loyalty) must still confront the constraints imposed by the greater power of corporate and state organizations, for example. In the early nineteenth century the attempt of workers to reach beyond community to class organizations at the level of the nation-state and its domestic market was in part an attempt to catch up to the level at which economic and political power were already coordinated against them.52 By the late twentieth century capital was becoming increasingly globalized, and while the state remained both powerful and the crucial arena in which social movements could mobilize to pursue their collective agency, the internationalization of capital and new political forms like the European Community were putting a great deal of power once again out of the grasp of popular agency mediated through social movements. At the same time, Lyotard notwithstanding, large-scale collective identities like nation - with their metanarratives of both primordiality and development - continue to provide emotional weight to social movements and to offer individuals senses of location within the world-system even when they appeared out of synch with states and other organizations of power. Global flows of communication continue to produce both cross-cultural influences and challenges to cross-cultural understanding.

To reverse the trends towards capital accumulation, globalization of culture and social relations, and centralization of power would indeed be to bring on a postmodern condition. But we need to be careful not to mistake more superficial, if still important, changes for these basic ones. Consider for example the claim that information technology has fundamentally altered or even brought an end to the modern era. One argument for this claim is the evident dispersal of production relations and other important activities which coordination through telecommunications and computers makes possible. But note the importance of coordination; dispersal of activities serves centralization of power in many cases. When capital flows across borders this demonstrates rather than reverses centralization of power; it hardly puts an end to the basic drive of capital accumulation. Information technology facilitates further changes of other sorts as well, many of them momentous. But we need to recognize that power was based substantially on knowledge long before microelectronics, and the capacity to control others through organizations run through regularized information flows hardly waited for computers or constitutes a break with modernity.⁵3

All this is not to say that nothing has changed, but that changes have been overstated and poorly conceptualized. The expansion of an organizational and technological infrastructure throughout the modern era has, for example, both enhanced state power and transformed it. Revolutionary potential, for example, is diminished in the West, largely because of the spatial deconcentration of power. Whether one wants to call the recent transformations of communist societies revolutions or not, it is important to see the extent to which they depended on the concentration of the institutions of power in capital cities and the underdevelopment of the infrastructures which have dispersed its application in “more modern" societies. But the displacement of power from readily visible individuals into market systems and bureaucratic organizations does not mean that there cease to be social relations of domination, that they no longer involve active subjects, or that power is not centralized.

Habermas's conceptualization of a split between system and lifeworld suggests something of why these problems are hard to recognize and disempowering of collective agency.s⁴Social organization is undertaken simultaneously through directly interpersonal relationships, impersonal or systemic steering media, and large-scale (generally corporate) social organizations which appear from the point of view of everyday social life as autonomous and distant.s Both impersonal, notably market systems and corporate organizations have grown in importance throughout the modern era. While they organize more of social life - exerting more causal influence over the lives of individuals - they remain inaccessible to most forms of everyday (lifeworld) social knowledge. Large-scale markets can only be understood on the basis of statistical reasoning foreign to the conduct of everyday interpersonal relationships.

The omnipresence of “system" - that is of large-scale market and bureaucratic-corporate influences on our immediate lives - shapes some of the cultural responses problematically identified as postmodern. In relation to problems of collective agency specifically, it encourages two equally disempowering visions. One is of a world out of control, one which doesn't make sense. The other is of a world all too controlled, but only by distant, hidden actors. Modern consciousness vacillates, I think between the first, a schizoid chaos of radical and widespread incommensurability; and the second, a paranoid world view in which understandability is won only by belief in omnipresent conspiracy.s Both have roots in the basic split between the lifeworld experiences which give life its basic meaning and the systemic steering and bureaucratic-corporate power which upset the order of the lifeworld but are poorly grasped - indeed necessarily obscured - by the conceptual framework of the lifeworld. It is in this context, for example, that we can see the source of postmodernist critiques of “intentionalist illusions"- putatively spurious belief in the capacity of human subjects to organize significant aspects of their own lives in response to conscious decision. Given the antiuniversalism of postmodernism, however, it is ironic that instead of locating the source of commonly exaggerated faith in intention, and its problems, many postmodernists universalize a critique of intention as fundamentally illusory.

The vision that reality does not make sense, indeed intrinsically cannot make sense, or else only makes sense when remythologized on the basis of illusion and/or power struggles, is a widespread postmodernist theme. Those who pose claims to demonstrate an order to life and culture must either be paranoid or repressive, or both. Our only legitimate options are to simply accept disorder and uninterpretability or to make highly contingent, local, and ultimately only weakly defensible efforts to bring order to a small part of the world.

This vision of the chaotic, fragmented world is often traced to the break-up of a (implicitly once unified) modern economic and/or political structure. Yet even here, we should be cautious about seeing this as totally new rather than newly prominent. David Harvey thus has provocatively analyzed the culture of postmodernism as a response to a systemic crisis (but not supercession) of capitalism. Fordist production methods have brought on a crisis of overaccumulation; this has called forth a search for new regimes of accumulation (as well as new, post-Fordist production relations). This search fosters new aesthetic movements. Harvey's argument is schematic and somewhat reductionist on the relationship of aesthetics to economics, but powerful in its account of a variety of recent phenomena not as evidence of the end of the modern era but as aspects of a shift - not the first - in the internal organization of capitalism.58

The broad themes of postmodernism, then, are not new and do not mark any sharp break with modernity or modernism. What of the more specific claims postmodernism, most notably poststructuralism, makes within the realm of social theory? The poststructuralist turn, we need to remind ourselves, was much broader than deconstructionism or any other single approach, and includes a number of figures – including Pierre Bourdieu - who are not amenable to the label postmodernist. This poststructuralism was not really announced at its birth; it appears only retrospectively and most clearly as refracted through the appropriation of French thought in the English-speaking world. Structuralism had in a sense denied epistemology on the grounds that it could only be pursued in terms of a philosophy of the subject. The poststructuralists (who were all structuralists at some point) sought ways to do a sort of epistemology, an inquiry into knowledge, without basing themselves on such a theory of subjectivity.

The contributions of the poststructuralist tributary into the postmodernist current were first and foremost (1) the absorption of structuralism's critique of subject-centered thought, and (2) the argument that monological statements of truth - originary speech, in Derrida's term - were in some combination misleading, false, and/or repressive. In varying ways, then, the poststructuralists showed the tensions within seeming truths, the difficulties involved even in seemingly ordinary understandings, the constant effort of construction involved in accepted truths, as well as the constant tendency of those truths to break down and reveal their internal inconsistencies and aporias.s Some, like Bourdieu, made this crucially a social argument; the tensions involved in understanding derived not simply from textuality, but from interpersonal struggles and fields of power. For many others, materiality, physical embodiment, and social relations were lost in treating all aspects of culture and human action as texts. In all versions, the poststructuralist move was for the most part an essentially theoretical shift, not a claim that anything in the external world had changed to necessitate a new theory.

The theoretical roots to the special stress on difference in Derrida's work, thus, have nothing to do with claims about epochal transformations. Indeed, as Norris has suggested, Derrida's exploration can be seen in this regard as an extension of Kant's despite their different substantive arguments and conclusions.

Foucault's extreme epistemological scepticism leads him to equate knowledge with power, and hence to regard all forms of “enlightened" progress (in psychiatry, sexual attitudes or penal reform) as signs of an increasing sophistication in the applied technology of social control. Derrida, by contrast, insists that there is no opting out of the post-Kantian enlightenment tradition, and certainly no question of our now having emerged into a post-modern era where its concepts and categories lack all critical force. On the contrary: it is only by working persistently within that tradition, but against some of its ruling ideas, that thought can muster the resistance required for an effective critique of existing institutions.60

Derrida's work is particularly difficult to relate to sociology because he is among the most text-centered and least explicitly social of the poststructuralists.61 Derrida's stress is on the ways in which the basic phenomena of distinction and contraposition produce identity, as opposed to essentialist attempts to locate identity in the inherent attributes of any entity - either a subject or an object. Derrida positions his argument for the importance of difference (or différance) mainly within a dialogue with a Western philosophical tradition that approaches truth monologically, even often as substance.62 These assertions Derrida deconstructively shows to conceal the play of hidden dialogicality. In doing so he offers a defense of the very complexity of thought itself such that truth or knowledge becomes something much more difficult than we have thought, though not therefore something to be dismissed.63 Différance, for Derrida, is really a property of discourse, not subjects, and indeed (following on the structuralist tradition) subjects appear in his work mainly as creatures of discourse rather than speakers able to claim some primacy over it. It is important, though, that Derrida's approach draws attention to difference among subjects not just as multiplications of the same sort of identity, differently situated, but as radically singular.64

Difference is also crucial to Foucault. In the first place, he offers an account of the way modern subjects are constituted and disciplined as individuals who experience a simultanueous production of desire and its repressive normalization.65 This suggests a certain special priority to human difference. Foucault is ambiguous, for on the one hand he can be read as asserting only that certain kinds of difference among people were subjected to normalizing discipline in the historically specific production of modernity. On the other hand, however, particularly in his later work on sexuality, Foucault appears to ascribe to all humans a kind of natural propensity for resistance to the normalizing tendencies of social life (which also appear as increasingly general rather than historically specific, present in ancient Greece and in China as well in modern France).66 Throughout, though it is never clearly articulated in his major works (as distinct from interviews), Foucault implies a normative defense of difference against normalization. Foucault is ambiguous as to the grounding of this evaluation and thus as to the way large-scale collective processes can inform politics and personal struggles. At least in his early work, however, he is clear about the centrality of the radical epistemological ruptures that separate the understandings of different ages.67 Though he links these epistemic breaks somewhat to changes in social life, this is not his major theme and his argument does not rest on shifts in any underlying causal factors such as economy, military power or demography but rather on the transmutation of systems of knowledge such that they become incommensurable. In offering one of the most profound articulations of what it means for systems of knowledge to be radically different, and particularly of how such difference can occur historically within a "civilization," rather than only cross-culturally, Foucault augments an important discussion of incommensurability with roots in philosophy of science and hermeneutics.

This emphasis on difference is the most valuable and defensible of postmodernist arguments, though it is not defensible on postmodernist terms. Both Derrida and Foucault (and many postmodernist followers) mobilize their arguments about difference as bases for rejection of all grand narratives without any search for a substitute ground for normative discourse. In doing so, they introduce a particularism so extreme that it ultimately, ironically, results in a decontextualization, an incapacity to