place the particular in relation to other phenomena.68 A particularism so extreme - which is not, I think, what most postmodernists want but what a hastily espoused theory offers - cannot justify even the very value on difference with which it starts.

Faced with this, one might become pessimistic, become nostalgic for the old narratives, or - if one is a good postmodernist - simply accept that legitimation can only spring from people's own linguistic practice and communicative interaction.69 For Lyotard the most important result of such acceptance is rejection of the “transcendental illusion" - the fantasy of putting all the heterogeneous language games of the world together in a single whole.70 Totalization of this sort breeds terror (especially, we might add, the historically specific sorts of terrors of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, like genocide). Such material terrors are the counterparts of intellectual and aesthetic violence done by attempts to impose a single vision of reality or set of standards on the diverse experimenters of art, thought, and life. Lyotard thus joins Derrida and Foucault in wishing to show the agonistic element in all culture, but is left with a more or less arbitrary assertion. But even Foucault and Derrida, let alone Lyotard, are left with a program of pure critique, showing the dragons which lie the way of modernism but offering no real analytic purchase on the problem of analyzing the transformation of power and social structure as it bears on practical action in the modern world.

## IV

Treating variations and disputes in artistic style, social consciousness, and theory within the frame of epochal historical transformation produces a misunderstanding, even where the changes are of some signifcance. Postmodernism is a continuation of modernism in at least aspects of its style (e.g. the claim to be the latest avant-garde, the self-legitimation of mere novelty). More basically, the crucial dimensions of variation are mostly long standing, and postmodernism carries on basic themes of all modernity - which indeed produced an internal anti-modernity from the beginning, as well as splits of rationalists from romantics, realists from figuralists, etc.

Perhaps the most distinctive feature of postmodernist theory is the denial of any basis for critical judgment and moral responsibility that is not the arbitrary reflection of a tradition. This poses basic problems for the attempt (otherwise furthered by much postmodern theory) to take cultural difference seriously, since it precludes genuine learning from the Other. It opens postmodernist theorists (and political activists) who attempt to persuade others to the charge that either they are committing a performative contradiction or they are simply exercising a will to power no more legitimate than any other.

In relation to both critical judgment and historical transformation, postmodernist theory at the very least crucially overstates its case. As suggested in the previous chapter, accounts are needed of epistemic gain which does not imply a sharp opposition of truth and falsehood, and of historical change that does not mean epochal rupture.

Part of the problem comes from a tendency to focus on the evils of potentially authoritarian claims to adjudicate universal truths rather than on more moderate approaches to epistemic gain that do not claim perfection. As Habermas has remarked in a footnote to his critique of Derrida's and Rorty's contentions that the genre distinction between philosophy and literature cannot be maintained:

They are still battling against the "strong" concepts of theory, truth, and system that have actually belonged to the past for over a century and a half. . . . If reason were bound, under penalty of demise, to hold onto these goals of metaphysics classically pursued from Parmenides to Hegel, if reason as such (even after Hegel) stood before the alternative of either maintaining the strong concepts of theory, truth, and system that were common in the great tradition or of throwing in the sponge, then an adequate critique of reason would really have to grasp the roots at such a depth that it could scarcely avoid the paradoxes of self-referentiality.?1

Where there is recognition of something like epistemic gain in many postmodernist and cognate traditions (including, e.g., Rorty's adaptation of pragmatism) it is commonly held to be radically internal to intellectual traditions. In Nicholson's words:

the postmodernist need not abandon the distinction between legitimate and illegitimate claims to power as she or he need not abandon the more encompassing idea of criteria of truth. The difference between the postmodernist and the modernist on these issues is rather that the former and not the latter denies the possibility of such criteria external to any specific historical tradition.72

Presumably these claims can be seen as general in their proposed scope of application, though not in their openness to communication across traditions. Indeed, Nicholson suggests relativism is not so much an intellectual position as a "life-possibility," reflecting the prior breakdown of communication.

By implication, since communicative conflicts are to be solved by finding a common belief or value, the more “historical tradition" people share the better, and the less the worse. If this is so, then any grounding of theory only in cultural traditions (pace Rorty) confronts serious problems. Such an account recognizes difference, but it makes evaluating it positively an arbitrary choice outside the range of theoretical justification. With attention thus deflected from the search for practical ways in which to achieve communication, the path is open for the view that all ways of knowing are exercises of power. Rorty espouses liberal values, asserts that adherents of incommensurable ways of knowing should live together in mutual tolerance, but (1) this remains an arbitrary proposal, however attractive, one his theory cannot ground, and (2) this reduces the meaning of “together" in the phrase "living together" to mere spatial proximity or sharing a state but not the joint activity of citizens.

Of course, this is not to say that a theory offering genuine epistemic gain could not be elaborated, drawing on insights from so-called postmodernist thinkers, but generally speaking this has not occurred; indeed Foucault spoke prominently against the impulse to theorize."3 The effort to develop a postmodernist social theory (and in fact much of the postmodernist empirical literature) is prone to performative contradictions: asserting claims to rhetorical persuasiveness as more true or more adequate while denying the meaningfulness, legitimacy, utility, or interpersonal adjudicability of the notions of truth or adequacy.

It was Foucault, above all, who taught both the mutuality of knowledge and power and the extent to which all ways of knowing are exercises of power. "Truth is a thing of this world; it is produced only by virtue of multiple forms of constraint."4 This power is not reducible to interpersonal domination, but is constitutive of social life and culture generally.

If power were never anything but repressive, if it never did anything but to say no, do you really think one would be brought to obey it? What makes power hold good, what makes it accepted, is simply the fact that it doesn't only weigh on us as a force that says no, but that it traverses and produces things, it induces pleasure, forms knowledge, produces discourse."

Power is, in this sense, "decentered," not the property of any subject. Power is normalized, rendered into discipline, practiced routinely by subjects upon themselves insofar as they reenact the premises of their culture. This seems to grasp a dimension of the modern experience of power, but at the same time it obscures the specifically modern increase in occasions and resources for people to distinguish between what power is and ought to be. As Habermas points out, Foucault shares with Horkheimer and Adorno failure “to do justice to the rational content of cultural modernity that was captured in bourgeois ideals."76 One of the central problematics of power disappears in this formulation: there are no criteria for distinguishing legitimate from illegitimate power. Foucault's theory, indeed, may actually make such criteria internally impossible.

A fundamental challenge for most postmodernist theories is to offer bases for making critical judgments. I have argued above that such bases need ideally to be grounded in strong recognition of their cultural and historical specificity, and preferably to stand in an immanent relationship to the context of their development. Nonetheless, to be meaningful - both politically and theoretically - such bases need to allow for critical judgments to be arguable, defensible, in discourse across lines of cultural, ideological, or other differences. A position which cannot give reasons for why it should be persuasive to those who are not already a part of its "tradition" is a severely problematic political as well as scientific tool. Agreement must then be arbitrary, or imposed; if people are moved, there is no internal account of why. At the same time as discourse among people different from each other is vital to democracy and public life, so it is crucial that people within any one tradition (and for that matter individuals within their own lives) be able to give accounts simultaneously of how they have come to be who they are and how they want to become better in the future. That is, a critical historical consciousness implies an ability to express and defend not only one's interests but the project of developing better interests, wanting to have better desires."7 Foucault does offer social criticism, pervasively through his tone and choices of descriptive content, but also sometimes explicitly. It is not clear, however, that he - any more than Derrida or Lyotard - could ground such criticism without performative contradiction. The potential for doing so within his theory is weakened especially when it loses its historical specificity.

In his early and middle works (up through Discipline and Punish; originally published in 1975), Foucault emphasizes deep ruptures between historical epochs and focuses his attention on the birth of modern power in the reformation of institutions of carceral control in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. But in his later work on sexuality and some interviews and essays, he implies that the mutuality of power and knowledge is universal, not distinctive to modernity, and that similar analyses can be developed for all cultures and historical periods. Foucault does enunciate something of the distinctiveness of the power/knowledge implication in modernity, even as late as the 1970s:

It's not a matter of emancipating truth from every system of power (which would be a chimera, for truth is already power), but of detaching the power of truth from the forms of hegemony, social, economic, and cultural, within which it operates at the present time.

Foucault holds out the option of specific criticisms of the modern forms of hegemony, but he does not suggest any specific direction in which criticism should move. Like most of the "postmodernists" who claim him (though he did not explicitly identify with that label), he can advocate only resistance not emancipation. At extremes, he seems to imply that anything would be better than what obtains now. But this sort of account is in an odd tension with the historical approach he developed earlier. There he argued for recognizing the centrality of epochal transformations which made sense of many small changes (but made historically specific sense, within the context of a specific epochal transformation, not the sense which comes from imposing a single transhistorical narrative or set of categories on historically specific events):

In order to analyse such events [e.g. the introduction of a new form of positivity or other epochal shifts in consciousness], it is not enough simply to indicate changes, and to relate them immediately to the theological, aesthetic model of creation .. . or to the psychological model of the act of consciousness . . . or to the biological model of evolution. We must define precisely what these changes consist of: that is, substitute for an undifferentiated reference to change - which is both a general container for all events and the abstract principle of their succession - the analysis of transformations.79

It is curious that the advice informing the history and genealogy (though less so, perhaps, Foucault's earlier formulation, the archaeology) of forms of power/knowledge should not provide a different outlook, one with a normative direction, for the analysis of contemporary questions. Indeed, it is arguable that Foucault's whole enterprise was undertaken "to make politics possible."80 It may be that its politics is obscure because what had seemed before to block politics were great and rigid teleologies of history – Hegel's or Stalin's. But such a normative direction need not involve a "metanarrative" of history, a single moral to all stories. It could consist, rather, of suggestions of the direction which we should move from where we are, recognizing that new considerations will inform decisions about the appropriate directions to be followed thereafter. It seems to me that the nature of practical involvement in the world, especially political involvement, calls necessarily for confronting such questions of directionality. Our knowledge is always situated, but also framed in relation to action - starting even with projects of understanding - that orient us beyond our initial situations. Moreover, seeking understanding across lines of important cultural differences necessarily involves confronting contrasting normative directions because these produce incommensurable practices of the sort (discussed in chapter 3 above) that cannot coexist without posing competing claims for adherence. Foucault's approach to incommensurability did not confront such problems of action. Influenced by Bachelard and Canguilheim, Foucault sought to eliminate “humanistic" emphases on the subject in favor of studying abstract structures of knowledge. The famous “epistemological break" that, according to Bachelard, enabled the physical sciences to achieve true objectivity or scientificity was rooted in a similar overcoming of subject-centered thought. Foucault's emphasis remained epistemological, though his understanding of the breaks in knowledge-producing structures of thought no longer was linked to the notion of a historical progress towards scientificity as was Bachelard's (or Althusser's).81

At this point, where it cannot achieve historical specificity or confront the incommensurable practices of different cultures, Foucault's analytics of power loses its potential critical edge. Ironically enough, fashionable anthropologists have followed the lead of the later Foucault and begun to unravel ubiquitous subjectless power in all settings, while combining this with a self-declared critical orientation and affirmation of cultural difference.82 It seems to me that the postmodernist claim to historical grounding - indeed, even to historicity - is in important aspects spurious. The history which is introduced is often remarkably unsystematic.83 Like postmodernist architecture, its historical side consists of incomplete and decontextualized borrowings. Even in the hands of an extraordinary historical scholar like Foucault, this sort of (allegedly postmodernist) historical writing is often a bit like an Orientalism of the past - an appropriation of history for purposes of debating the contemporary condition directly, not an inquiry into the fullest possible understanding of another way of life which might indirectly or in later comparison shed light on our own. It is partly for this reason that Foucault, the great theorist of historical ruptures, in his later work began to find the same mechanisms of power/knowledge at work in ancient Greece, China, and modern France, and everywhere else he looked. Most importantly of all, the postmodernist position is not historically or culturally specific, either in grounding or in analytic purchase.

Foucault, of course, did emphasize the poststructuralist, postmodernist theme of difference: "What is found at the historical beginning of things is not the inviolable identity of their origin; it is the dissension of other things. It is disparity."84 This is the meaning of the "death of the author," an explicit echo of Nietzsche's death of god sounded by both Foucault and Derrida, but without a faith comparable to Nietzsche's in salvation through will. This theme, however, is especially associated with Derrida, for whom it has remained enduringly central. Derrida's différance is a“primordial nonself-presence."8sIt is transcendental, even prior to presence and the transcendental reduction; it is “not something which occurs to a transcendental subject. It is what produces it."86 The structuralist and poststructuralist displacement of the subiect from modernity's and philosophy's center is thus basic to Derrida; it is not the self that we presuppose in all thought and action, but différance. In Dew's words, "in the majority of his work, Derrida bases his analyses on the concept of absolute difference: of an essential logical priority of non-identity over identity."8" It is this which orients the deconstructionist project to the discovery of internal incoherencies within texts, rather than reading them more conventionally by “constructing"from them a meaningful whole.88

Not only the unity of a text, but subjectivity itself, the originating unity of consciousness, is for Derrida merely a thought, a fiction.89 This is the basis for viewing the world as a textual or discursive structure to be deconstructed, its incoherencies exposed. Derrida's opposition is to the notion of speech as transparent, self-sufficient presentation of truth. Knowledge starts with writing, with the attempt to fix the transitory; its textuality always embodies tensions and hence makes deconstruction possible (or perhaps even inevitable). Thus Derrida challenges the logocentrism" of Western thought. But left to itself this offers only a critical moment. It is a very problematic basis for social or political analysis. Even Derrida is unwilling to regard social institutions as merely textual or discursive structures (though some of his followers have not balked at this). Derrida insists on retaining the option of social and political criticism, but falls back on Heideggerian grounds for it. He is, in other words, forced to make ontological statements about the nature of life and what the world is “really" like. His own theory cannot ground a critical account of political antagonisms insofar as these cannot be reduced to logical antagonisms. Deconstruction can offer a certain sort of constant vigilance and attempt to escape mere positivity, but as theory or method it cannot in itself offer a political or ethical program, or a properly explanatory analysis.

Similarly, though Derrida attempts to avoid the radical relativism some of his followers embrace, he does not succeed in explaining theoretically why he should do so. His very attempt to absolutize différance produces incoherencies in his theory. Moreover, the theory offers no openings to sociality or to material factors in history and social relations. It severs cultural from social and political-economic analysis. The deconstruction of a text plays infinitely on its internal capacities for dissemination; it neither needs nor addresses other sources of meaning. Unlike some other approaches influenced by phenomenology (or hermeneutics) and despite (or perhaps because of) its idealization of différance, deconstruction offers no approach to historical or even cultural specificity. All texts have a life free from specific contexts; they cannot be grounded within them. There is, thus, no satisfactory basis for comparison. This, by the way, is part of the attraction of Derrida for those who regard all canons as mere exercises of power, rather combinations of power with more satisfactorily grounded judgments.

## V

Postmodernist reasoning makes it hard to justify any collective response, any attempt at agency, in the face of centralization of power and global capital accumulation accomplished through exploitation. Most postmodernist discourse is normatively incapacitating, even where it is profoundly normative in tone or motivation. Because processes of power and exploitation are increasingly systemic and removed from the everyday discursive grasp of the lifeworld, however, it is all the more important that a critical theory be developed through which to understand them. It is not enough to rely on play, intuition, and ordinary experience.

Postmodernist thought has generally been presented in a radical, challenging mode and rhetoric, as though it were a critical theory with clear implications for collective struggle. Indeed, the postmodernist movement has without question informed and in some cases invigorated popular struggles. But it is not equally clear that postmodernist thought can stand very clearly the tests which must be demanded of a critical theory.

Ideally, a critical theory ought to provide for an account of the historical and cultural conditions of its own production, to offer an address to competing theories which explains (not just identifies) their weaknesses and appropriates their achievements, to engage in a continuing critical reflection on the categories used in its own construction, and to develop a critical account of existing social conditions with positive implications for social action. Postmodernism contributes to some of these desiderata, but also falls short of them in varying degree. Most notably, the vagueness with which many postmodernists conceptualize what it might mean to transcend the modern epoch trivializes a basic concern. How, we want to know, can existing social and cultural conditions be critically engaged and transformed? Postmodernism doesn't tell us.