## II

The issue of how to understand differences in societal types, epochs, civilizations, or cultures is a central one for social theory. It figures at least implicitly in the modernist/postmodernist debate as the question of whether the contemporary era is, or is about to become distinct in some basic categorial way from that of the last three hundred or more years. The very idea of modernity, of course, posits a break with the premodern (usually conceived of as the medieval European, and/or as a category which collapses and obscures the wide range of variation in non-Western societies). Some such idea of the distinctiveness of the modern West has informed anthropology and sociology from their inception, despite recurrent criticism of various specific formulations: Gemeinschaft/ Gesellschaft, traditional/modern, folk/urban, etc.

The dual messages of anthropology (to which I alluded at the beginning of this book) have in part to do with efforts on the one hand to show that “primitive"people are rational, despite the manifest conflicts between their beliefs and practices and what we“know" to be true, and on the other hand an effort to maintain the otherness of the people studied either out of respect for their concrete way of life or as a mirror for our own. The post-Winch rationality debates were about just these issues, for example about how we can determine whether or not the people of a different culture are "rational." It seems to me that Bourdieu's work both reflects the general ambivalence about this issue and suggests a way to grapple with part of it. I will try to demonstrate the latter by developing an account of the transformation of the workings of the habitus involved in movement from a minimally codified “traditional" social organization towards on the one hand more complex civilizations outside the modern Western ambit, and on the other capitalist states in the modern West. More briefly, and with more attention to problems, I will look at Bourdieu's later argument about multiform and convertible capital. At stake is whether we should understand Bourdieu's analytic apparatus – his conceptual tools like habitus, field, and capital – as applying universally without modification or as situationally specific. Moreover, in either case, we want to know whether they help us to make sense of differences among situations, not just their commonalties. Bourdieu is concerned with both sides of this:

There are general laws of fields: even such different fields as the field of politics, the field of philosophy, and the field of religion have functionally invariant laws (it's because of this fact that the project of a general theory is not senseless, and that, therefore, one can make use of what one understands of the functioning of each particular field to interrogate and interpret other fields, thereby getting past the mortal antinomy between idiographic monographs and formal and empty theory).13

The issue is not, as critics have sometimes charged, whether Bourdieu neglects change or struggle; he does not, but rather pays attention to both.14 The issue is how to describe a change sufficiently basic that it calls for different categories of analysis. In his early work, Bourdieu contrasted Kabylia with France, the traditional with the modern. Starting in the 1960s, he embarked on a long-range trajectory of studies of France which used the categories he had developed in studying Kabylia and argued substantially for the similarity of the basic social issues across cases.15 Bourdieu does not conclusively decide between the two general stances, the emphases on similarity and difference. He has described his project as “uncovering some of the universal laws that tendentially regulate the functioning of all fields." But in the same interview, he also uses more qualified expressions: "one of the purposes of the analysis is to uncover transhistorical invariants, or sets of relations between structures that persist within a clearly circumscribed but relatively long historical period".16

Bourdieu is simply unclear as to how historically and comparatively specific his conceptual frameworks and analytic strategies are meant to be. He has not done much systematic comparative or historical analysis which would indicate how - or whether - he would make critical distinctions among epochs, or types of societies or cultures. His conceptual development is generally couched in the context of concrete analysis - part of his opposition to "theoretical theory"; this makes for an element of contextual specificity to his terms. On the other hand, it leaves the historical and comparative frame for such specificity relatively unexamined. Bourdieu's predominant presentation tends towards a transhistorical conceptual framework and analytic approach which partially obscures the specificity of epochs and types of society or culture. At the same time, much of Bourdieu's conceptual apparatus can be employed in an analytic approach which does a better job of achieving historical and cultural and social organizational specificity. In other words, we can use Bourdieu's conceptual apparatus to develop an account of breaks that distinguish social arrangements and cultures such that different issues arise and different analytic categories and strategies are appropriate to them.

Some of Bourdieu's categories may readily fit all social settings; for example, I would think that no one could be without a habitus. Others are trickier. Is the notion of capital altogether transhistorical? The issue is muddied by divergent readings of Marx and some ambiguity about how closely related to Marx Bourdieu means his conception to be. This is worth exploring in some detail.

## Ⅲ

Bourdieu appears to begin his analyses of capital with Marx very much in mind. In one major essay, for example, he introduces this definition in the first paragraph.“Capital is accumulated labor (in its materialized form or its 'incorporated,'embodied form) which, when appropriated on a private, i.e., exclusive, basis by agents or groups of agents, enables them to appropriate social energy in the form of reified or living labor."1" Bourdieu intends to take quite seriously this version of a labor theory of capital, describing the social world as “accumulated history,"and going on to argue that we can analyze the various forms of capital through the different means by which they are accumulated and transmitted to succeeding generations. “The universal equivalent, the measure of all equivalences, is nothing other than labor-time (in the widest sense); and the conservation of social energy through all its conversions is verified if, in each case, one takes into account both the labor-time accumulated in the form of capital and the labor-time needed to transform it from one type into another."18 Bourdieu's qualifier about the widest sense of labortime is appropriate, for unlike Marx, Bourdieu does not examine the historically specific conditions under which labor is abstracted into temporal units of measurement. As this passage makes clear, Bourdieu means by labor-time simply the amount of work. For a universal equivalent, this is somewhat problematic. We must wonder how the various concrete forms of work involved in the reproduction or production of capital are in fact made equivalent to each other where a process of abstraction (e.g. into commodified labor) is lacking. Bourdieu's account works well to show us how qualitatively different forms of work may contribute to the putatively common project of achieving or reproducing hierarchical distinction. It does not show us any way in which these qualitatively different forms of work are transformed into a quantitative equivalent. In certain ways, thus, Bourdieu adds to the account one can derive from Marx – for example by arguing that a much wider range of labor is productive of capital than Marx suggested, including the labor of familial reproduction of the embodied sensibilities which distinguish classes. On the other hand, by treating capital simply as wealth or power he sacrifices one of the linchpins of marxist theory, and despite his use of terms like universal equivalent loses the capacity to clarify the nature of a social system which produces universal equivalents.

What is of interest in this is not an argument over Bourdieu's choice among the many possible readings of Marx. Rather, it is the implications of this sort of account of capital for the analysis of a range of historical epochs or culturally different contemporary social arrangements. Certainly one could apply the idea of different forms of capital anywhere, so long as one simply meant to point out descriptively the existence of different resources of power, differently reproduced. But if the convertibility of capital is something more than a postulate, or a restatement of the definition of capital as power (and hence cultural or social attributes as capital only to the extent they yield power), then it would seem to be historically variable. At the very least, the extent and ease of convertibility must be quite different in different contexts. A high level of convertibility is, I think, characteristic especially of relatively complex, market-based, and above all capitalist societies. Capitalism, moreover, seems to have a logic of increasing convertibility. Where capitalist relations enter, traditional barriers to conversion of forms of capital are undermined. Bourdieu himself showed this accurately in his accounts of the behavior and relationships of Algerian peasants who had earned substantial amounts of cash outside the traditional village field of production.19 Their attempts to convert their economic capital to cultural and social capital were thwarted and made difficult by the traditional normative structure and habitus. At the same time, as their introduction of cash gained a foothold, it proved insidious, undermining customary patterns of practice. Paying for services in money rather than in accumulated social debt undermines a pattern of more or less stable reproduction and helps to bring about basic changes.

What Bourdieu's approach to convertible and multiform capital lacks is an idea of capitalism. That is, he is not in a position to give an account of what is distinctive to those societies that operate with a compulsion to expand their reach, and whose patterns of practice have a corrosive power over others. Bourdieu uses a number of shorthand expressions for the societies in which fields proliferate and are sharply divided and in which the convertibility among forms of capital is most central to social organization. Like the rest of us, he calls them variously “relatively complex,"“differentiated,"“highly codified,"etc. A marxian understanding of capitalism would be one way to clarify this opposition - or at least aspects of it - theoretically. I will want to suggest that Bourdieu's theoretical framework offers us additional ways potentially to make these sorts of terms much more precise and useful. First, though, we must examine the significance of the fact that he stays away from describing any of these complex societies as capitalist, and addressing the special role capital accumulation plays in their constitution.20 Where Marx stressed that capital was not simply wealth but a moment in the complex relations of production called capitalism, that it entailed a compulsion to intensify and expand the processes of exploitation by which it was produced, and that it turned crucially on the distinction of its constitutive category abstract labor power from mere work, Marx was laying the foundations for a historically specific theory of capitalism.21 Bourdieu, on the other hand, consistently sees capital simply as a resource (i.e. a form of wealth) which yields power.22 The link to Marx suggested by the common emphasis on capital and labor, a suggestion reinforced by aspects of Bourdieu's rhetoric, is misleading.

Bourdieu's considerable achievements in his work on cultural capital are linked to this difference from Marx. Bourdieu's key original insights are that there are immaterial forms of capital - cultural, symbolic and social - as well as a material or economic one, and that with varying levels of difficulty it is possible to convert one of these forms into the other. It is this notion of multiform, convertible capital that underpins his richly nuanced account of class relations in France:2

The social world can be conceived as a multi-dimensional space that can be constructed empirically by discovering the main factors of differentiation which account for the differences observed in a given social universe, or, in other words, by discovering the powers or forms of capital which are or can become efficient, like aces in a game of cards, in this particular universe, that is, in the struggle (or competition) for the appropriation of scarce goods of which this universe is the site. It follows that the structure of this space is given by the distribution of the various forms of capital, that is, by the distribution of the properties which are active within the universe under study - those properties capable of conferring strength, power and consequently profit on their holder.... These fundamental social powers are, according to my empirical investigations, firstly economic capital, in its various kinds; secondly cultural capital or better, informational capital, again in its different kinds; and thirdly two forms of capital that are very strongly correlated, social capital, which consists of resources based on connections and group membership, and symbolic capital, which is the form the different types of capital take once they are perceived and recognized as legitimate.²4

Economic capital is essentially that which is “immediately and directly convertible into money,"2s unlike educational credentials (cultural capital) or social connections (social capital). The most interesting parts of Bourdieu's work in this area are his treatments of cultural capital. He has made particular strides by recognizing how much of cultural capital presupposes embodiment of distinctive and distinguishing sensibilities and characteristic modes of action. Thus it is that he is able to show how the labor of parents is translatable into the “status attainment" of their children in ways not directly dependent on financial inheritance or even better schools. Such parental labor depends on the availability of time free from paid employment, however, which shows the dependence of the other forms of capital on economic capital.26 The importance of this sort of cultural capital is greatest, moreover, where for some reason it is advantageous to deny or disguise the inheritability of position.27 Bourdieu does not directly explore the social conditions and histories which make such “strategies of reproduction" particularly advantageous.

The issue is an important one. Bourdieu repeatedly urges us to see history and sociology as inseparably linked, but his sociology does not offer purchase on the transformation of social systems.28 It is geared towards accounts of their internal operation. The issue is not simply whether Bourdieu offers a “motor of history" in the crude marxist sense. Rather it is that his accounts of the general system of social and cultural organization always render it as essentially conservative; they suggest no reasons why a logic of reproduction would not work. There is nothing in his theory like the notion of contradictions in Marx's work (or Hegel's or that of the early Frankfurt School).29 Bourdieu's theory does imply dynamism, but crucially it does so at the level of the strategic actor (individual or collective, or, in those writings where he is more attentive to the problems of rooting his analysis in any positing of actors as fundamental, at the level of the strategy itself). That is, the motive force of social life is the pursuit of distinction, profit, power, wealth, etc. Bourdieu's account of capital is an account of the resources people use in such pursuit. In this sense, despite his disclaimers, Bourdieu does share a good deal with Gary Becker and other rational choice theorists. Bourdieu sharply and probably rightly rejects the charge of economism; he is not assuming that the interests" which are fundamental are basically“economic."He deals less with the charge that he fails to consider action which is not consciously or unconsciously strategic. He accepts the notion of interest, albeit as part of a "deliberate and provisional reductionism," in order to be able to show that cultural activity is not "disinterested"as Western thought has often implied since the development of the modern ideology of artistic production.30 He is quick and forceful in pointing out that: