of a collectivity, the claim involves a strong assertion that the members of the collectivity are as one - like the members of Marx's or Lukacs' proletariat or the participants in Rousseau's general will. To base this claim on what is shared in experience is to court refutation from an infinitely ramifying range of experiences. It is also to focus attention on what is held to be the source of the common experience constructive of the new epistemic standpoint - shared oppression, for example, or the same kinds of bodies. In the next chapter, I shall turn to the opposition of essentialism and constructivism in which arguments about such similarities and the differences that cross-cut them are played out. Is the claimed standpoint of women really the standpoint of middle-class white women, for example? This is a critique that directly extends the first lineage of standpoint critiques of false universals.

Somewhat more novel, however, is the further branching in the standpoint family tree that produces the argument that it is meaningless (or at least problematic) to give priority to any particular standpoint. Does not human life admit of – indeed necessarily produce – innumerable standpoints? Here there is a sort of culmination - and dialectical transformation – of the second, Hegelian, standpoint lineage. "Perhaps 'reality' can have ‘a' structure only from the falsely universalizing perspective of the master. That is, only to the extent that one person or group can dominate the whole, can 'reality' appear to be governed by one set of rules or be constituted by one privileged set of social relations.'12 To avoid the domination, suggests this postmodernist-influenced line of argument, it is necessary to forego the attempt at universalization. And this strikes, moreover, even at such partial universalizations as the standpoint of women (or of African-Americans, or gay men, or lesbians).

## II

The starting point of feminist standpoint theory is the observation that "women's different lives have been erroneously devalued and neglected as starting points for scientific research and as the generators of evidence for and against knowledge claims."13 A number of feminist researchers have drawn attention to the extent to which both natural and social science were not only predominantly male ventures but also failed to see that which became evident when women's lives were taken as a starting point and nonetheless presented themselves as gender-neutral. The idea of a feminist or women's standpoint theory has been a vehicle for both theorizing and overcoming this situation. Perhaps its most important pioneer has been the Canadian sociologist Dorothy Smith.

Smith has argued for and worked to develop a sociology “from the standpoint of women" and a “sociology for women." Women's standpoint offers Smith a starting point mainly because there is “a disjunction between how women experience the world and the concepts and theoretical schemes by which society's self-consciousness is inscribed."14 From such a starting point, feminist sociology can not only add new information - e.g. making gender a variable in research designs that previously studied only men – but also reveal aspects of social organization that tended to remain hidden by the reproduction of the standpoint of men as though it were gender-free and universal. Women's experience could challenge such reifications both when women became sociologists and when sociologists studied women's lives (and of course these two conditions were generally met simultaneously).

The constitution of public life and the discourses of power and economic systems as male in both their predominant membership and their operational character was won at the expense of (1) alienating men and therefore the discourse to which they were central from the realm of immediate, local, embodied experience, and (2) constituting as women's work not only the maintenance of this predominantly "domestic"realm but its articulation with the ruling apparatus. As Smith puts it, “In the social division of labor the work of articulating the local and particular existence of actors to the abstracted conceptual mode of ruling is done typically by women. The abstracted conceptual mode of ruling exists in and depends upon a world known immediately and directly in the bodily mode."1s A sociology from the standpoint of women thus brought into play a bifurcated consciousness that could fully recognize the split between the impersonal discourse of power and the personal realm of concrete relations. The tensions in women's lives became the basis for recognizing an aspect of social ontology obscured by the privileged but still alienated constitution of men's lives and discourse.

One problem, of course, is how to build on this recognition of historically constituted differences in typical male and female social positions without either introducing an ontological essentialism into gender identities or reproducing a troubling public/private dichotomy within feminist thought. It seems, for example, more accurate to suggest that rather than simply women and men there are a host of cross-cutting differentiations that make it hard to grasp gender categories in anything like a pure form. It is far from obvious that female gender has similar meanings for African-Americans and white Americans, thus, let alone for members of various different classes, ethnic groups, nations, or religions within Africa, say, or Asia. Likewise, there are a number of only partially overlapping regimes of power, a number of partially overlapping publics, and no single realm of directly "local and particular existence" or interpersonal relations but rather many.16 In fact, in order to grasp the distinctive place of women in making it possible for men to undertake their labors of abstraction and domination (by caring for them and their children), we have to abstract from the particularities of women's specific, immediate situations and experiences not simply have recourse to them. The very construction of a women's standpoint, thus, not only relies on the distinctive experience of women but on the creation of an abstract category of women that is not given by that experience but by theory.

Indeed, Smith saw that in order to establish and develop a feminist standpoint, she needed to go beyond mere reference to particular women or even women as a class; it was not enough that more and more women spoke or that some women spoke on behalf of all women. Smith's insight - along with several others - was that a feminist sociology needed women's speech not just to be the voice of the “other," but of the other speaking from within the immediacy of social life, from the center, rather than from some Archimedian point outside social life and not in the voice characteristic of archetypally male omniscient narrators. In order to achieve this insight, however, Smith had to develop a substantive analysis of the bifurcation of discourse and experience, ruling apparatus, and everyday life. This appears in her work largely as a necessary precondition to the feminist sociology of knowledge; it is accordingly not developed in as much detail as it might be. What is developed in detail is Smith's methodological argument about conducting research in which the researcher does not operate as authority or agent of bureaucratic power, but rather as participant in a dialogue of equals with those who possess from the experience of their own lives knowledge to which the sociologist wants access. I will return to this methodological argument later, because I think it holds the seeds of a different and more satisfactory theory of how all sorts of voices might inform our understanding than that of substantive standpoint theory. I want to focus first on this substantive theoretical project, however, as I think the questions it raises are not only of intrinsic interest, but of particular importance for critical theory insofar as it aims to establish a place for potentially transformative human agency.

## III

Although Smith sees her account of a women's standpoint as grounded in ontology, hers is not a simple biological essentialism, a recourse to the notion that “woman" is a transparently given category. At least in principle, Smith seeks a historically specific account of the construction of gender and the exclusion of women from many discourses of power in the modern world. The historical construction of gender is more Smith's premise than her project, and is addressed more by others and still with much debate, but since gender essentialisms still proliferate it is worth keeping in mind.17 Much feminist theory has relied on a relatively transhistorical account of male power, sexist practices, and androcentric thought.

Smith's historical account draws on Marx to identify the historically specific production of putatively neutral, impersonal, autonomous, and systemic realms that in fact exclude women and obscure the role of powerful agents in their own creation and continued operation. She is concerned to develop a critique of the “gender organization of the apparently neutral and impersonal rationality of the ruling apparatus."18 This sort of understanding is most easily illustrated, perhaps, in the case of the economy.

It is not simply a general pattern of male bias that leads to the devaluation of women's work in modern society. Rather, it is also (1) the constitution of “the economy" as though it were not a realm of human action but of abstract systematicity, and (2) specifically the reliance on a universalized category of labor tied to the capitalist commodity form. It is this distinctively modern construction that defines most of women's lives out of public realms and the attention of sociologists, as for example it defines women's work in the home as not really labor. Many versions of marxism have had a hard time recognizing this adequately because they are based on taking a transhistorical concept of labor as the basis for the marxist critique of capitalism. But as Moishe Postone has shown, and as Smith herself hints, this is not necessarily the best reading of Marx's position.19

In his mature work, Marx can be seen as using the category of labor to denote the historically specific process by which the products of human productive activity come to appear as external forces acting on humans. On this view, labor is a kind of social mediation; it is a process whereby indirect social relations are formed that are not and cannot be recognized from within the system as social relations, and that involve agency. Since labor in capitalism takes the form not of work in general but of incorporation into this system of abstract mediation, the sequestering of much work of social reproduction - such as child rearing - in the home and in the realm of women excludes it from the economy as an apparently self-moving, impersonal phenomenon. A partially, but not completely similar, process is at work in realms of administrative organization. This helps to explain why women and issues of reproduction have so commonly been invisible to social (including economic) theories developed to attend to the “important," public realms of life.

The counterpart to the invisibility of women and certain practices associated with women within much social theory and much public life is a bifurcated consciousness among women. That is, women both learn the established culture and develop a consciousness that problematizes it on the basis of their own experiences (recall DuBois and“double consciousness"). Men's experiences are more likely to be congruent with the dominant story (or theories) and so less likely to be the source of problematization. Of course these tendencies are not perfect correlations. One important line of critique starts by asking "which women?" and "which men?"noting that some women's lives are relatively privileged and some men's lives are very much at odds with the dominant order and theories. I want to put this aside for the time being (it receives more attention in the next chapter) in order to focus on the question of just what is involved in grounding understanding in experience and/or standpoint.

The awkward“and/or" in the previous sentence should be a clue that a conceptual ambiguity is involved. This is particularly clear in the work of Sandra Harding (and results among other things in shifts in her account of Dorothy Smith's work). Here is Harding in 1986 summarizing Smith (with approval): “we should regard women's subjugated experience as starting and ending points for inquiry that are epistemologically preferable to men's experience."2o Here is Harding in 1990 (with Smith again explicitly included as an exemplary standpoint theorist):

standpoint theorists are not claiming some kind of transhistorical privilege for research that begins in women's lives. Nor, it is worth recollecting, are they arguing that women's biology, women's intuition, what women say, or women's experiences provide grounds for knowledge. What women say and what women experience do provide important clues for research designs and results, but it is the objective perspective from uomen's lives that gives legitimacy to feminist knowledge, according to standpoint theorists.21

Now to be sure, Harding knows that there is some tension between her 1986 and 1990 books. She describes this as due to the recognition that in her earlier work she shared with many standpoint theorists a tendency to essentialism that she contests in the later book.22 In the later book, Harding sets out to demonstrate a “rapprochement" between standpoint and postmodernist theories, and to respond to various perceived problems with her own and others'articulations of standpoint theories. But by attempting to preserve the notion of standpoint theories while abandoning experience, she reflects rather than resolves a tension in the discourse.

The core idea of standpoint theory is that a determinate social structural position will create conditions for learning from experience that will be epistemologically privileged in producing certain sorts of knowledge. Standpoint theory is thus not equivalent to the general claim that certain orientations to knowledge are privileged. Many religious beliefs, for example, privilege knowledge based on personal revelation, sacred texts, or clerical authority. None of these is the same as a standpoint theory because none is based on the link between social structural position and learning from a determinate sort of experience.

On the one hand the idea of standpoint is rooted in the notion of concrete, experiencing subjects. On the other hand, the idea of standpoint employs a categorial logic to analyze positions in social structure. These are both crucial moments, for standpoint theories suggest a partial overcoming of the materialist/idealist antinomy. Thus Marx in the "Theses on Feuerbach" remarks on the "this-sidedness" of all knowledge. The social and material position of every knower (and by extension every culture, every generation, every class, and even every sort of scientifically trained researcher) makes some knowledge possible even while it inhibits or precludes other knowledge. We see what we see only from where we stand. But Marx also seeks escape from the limits of his immediate historical and social position by means of theory. Drawing especially on Hegel, he historicizes the Kantian problem of knowledge, and locates the standpoint of a more universal knowledge in a universal class which only appears in that dusk at which the owl of Minerva famously flies. What makes the proletariat universal is its categorial place in history, and in the totality formed by capitalist commodification of labor. But what leads the members of the proletariat to knowledge and practice reflecting this universality is their concrete and simultaneous experience of both exploitation and the social organization of production.

So too with feminist standpoint(s). Dorothy Smith seeks to bring out two themes. First, there is the idea of women as the (or a) category excluded by the way in which the apparatus of rule and the dominant discourse are constituted (in invisibly gendered terms). The female gender (women as a class but not so clearly as concrete individuals) takes on an epistemologically privileged status by virtue of its position within the societal organization constituted by a particular apparatus of rule. Second, there is the notion of women as concrete actors. This is a standpoint distinctively available to women because of their accustomed involvement with “everyday lifeworlds" of social relationships, childrearing, etc. and because of their distinctive importance in the work of cementing social relationships in such a way that they can be taken as given by the mostly male participants in the ruling apparatus. In this second sense, it is the experience of these concretely situated women that can be expected to lead them to deeper knowledge (perhaps with the aid of vanguard feminist sociologists).

In Smith's work as in Marx's, then, the question becomes one of how to reconcile the categorial claims with the notion of learning from experience. What leads the class in itself to adopt the standpoint of the class for itself? Smith rejects, rightly I think, the notion that we can get a good sense of the standpoint of women as the perspective of all women; it is no more a simple summation of women's experience than is the general will equivalent to the will of all for Rousseau. But at least implicitly Smith is nonetheless interested in appeal to a standpoint of concrete actors, not only to a category of the excluded. What Harding sees in her second book, then, is the difficulty of moving from unmediated experience to anything that counts as an objective or universal standpoint:

Some thinkers have assumed that standpoint theories and other kinds of justifications of feminist knowledge claims must be grounded in women's experiences. The terms "women's standpoint" and "women's perspective" are often used interchangeably, and “women's perspective" suggests the actual perspective of actual women - what they can in fact see. But it cannot be that women's experiences in themselves or the things women say provide reliable grounds for knowledge claims about nature and social relations. After all, experience itself is shaped by social relations: for example, women have had to learn to define as rape those sexual assaults that occur within marriage....

For a position to count as a standpoint, rather than as a claim - equally valuable but for different reasons - for the importance of listening to women tell us about their lives and experiences, we must insist on an objective location - women's lives - as the place from which feminist research should begin.23

It is easy to see why, drawing from a more developed reading of postmodernist writings, Flax suggests that “the notion that there is a feminist viewpoint that is more true and not just different from previous male ones seems to rest upon many assumptions uncritically appropriated from and dependent upon Enlightenment thinking."24 But I am not interested simply in Harding's unacknowledged reliance on now unfashionable Enlightenment thinking. The real point is the tension left unresolved between the immediacy and critical potential of experiences that are discordant with hegemonic cultures and the need for some source of shared understanding.