## IV

The issue of shared understanding has been loaded with double freight in most modern discourse. It reflects both the search for certainty and the search for commonality. For the most part, the early modern approach was to try to establish the truth with maximal certainty, and then to expect rational people to acknowledge it and therefore share it. The emphasis at the outset, therefore, was on establishing the right understanding; sharing itself was not seen as deeply problematic. Indeed, sharing might easily occur for the wrong reasons (the mere persuasion that gave the word rhetoric a bad name) without the necessary foundation in truth.25 As various problems developed for the pursuit of certainty and objectivity, the issue of sharing moved to center stage. Both political contests and social movements within seemingly common cultures, and difficulties of achieving cross-cultural understanding made sharing understanding seem increasingly difficult in and of itself. Indeed, so did a host of problems of “interpersonal communication" that arose especially in the spheres of intimate relations that proliferated and grew more emotionally loaded in the modern era.

Moderns tried in various ways to grasp how communication across lines of difference could work to restore confidence in mutual understanding and shared truth. In chapters 2 and 3, however, I argued that the most common metaphor, translation, is a problematic way to grasp cross-cultural understanding. The same goes for the notion that although simple translation cannot overcome deep differences the construction of metalanguages or metadiscourses can. Lyotard, for example, describes the “modernist" approach to incommensurable language games - e.g. deep cultural differences - as one of constructing a metadiscourse which appears as universal and neutral within which the competing claims can be adjudicated. The most powerful of these are the 'master narratives" of philosophy and history. And his "postmodernist" argument is that this procedure is either specious or does violence to the contending “games" or both.26 Indeed, both the translation and metadiscourse models are too static, too inattentive to the extent to which our mutual understandings are in fact constructed through processes of historical change, and too exclusively intellectualistic. But Lyotard's critical account in a sense shares all these faults; he does not have a grasp of the historical and practical processes by which people come to shared understandings without translations or metadiscourses; he simply reaches a different conclusion about the possibility of neutral metadiscourses.27

Looking at the character of practices rather than the character of subjects might help us address the linked problems of figuring out why we should have confidence in and share any particular “knowledge." Most standpoint theories share with Descartes and Kant an emphasis on the exploration of what it is possible or impossible for various sorts of subjects to know. They remain caught within foundational projects that seek to ground the accomplishments of modern scientific knowledge in some combination of empirical observation and rational deduction. These operations appear to depend on individual observers and deducers, and indeed on universal characteristics of generic observers and deducers who are relevantly distinguished perhaps by the level of their acuity but not the modality of their knowledge.

But let us ask whether this is an accurate representation even of the scientific revolution itself. Certainly the replacement of authority and tradition by reason and empirical observation as modes of validation of knowledge is a central part of the story of modern science and the Enlightenment more generally. In a sense, postmodernist critics contest this account from within when they argue that authority and tradition retain far greater roles than scientists' usual narratives about themselves allow. Even without postmodernists, we know from the history and sociology of science the extent to which various traditions (call them paradigms in some cases, but note also the influence of disciplines and national scientific cultures) shape the understanding scientists have of the problems before them and the possible ways of dealing with these. Science has ramified into so many branches that it is no longer conceivable (even if it was always a fantasy) for a single scientist to know everything relevant to his or her work on the basis of observation or rational deduction. Much is necessarily accepted on the authority of others and out of tradition. Contests over paradigms turn on power relations and the socially constructed relations of authority and communication among scientists.28 But the contest in these accounts has to do with the extent to which the subject's (the scientist's) new capacities for observation and deduction supplanted "unenlightened" reliance on authority and tradition.29 It underestimates another, crucial, aspect of modern science and the Enlightenment which perhaps can help us in the current problem.

The conventional narrative about science puts the experiment on center stage, but leaves in the wings the crucial matter of dialogue among scientists. That is, it conceptualizes the validation of knowledge in terms of the procedures of reason and observation that a paradigmatically individual scientist might use to produce knowledge. This knowledge is foundational because of the procedures by which it is produced and the characteristics of the subject who knows it. But wouldn't we grasp better the nature of the scientific revolution (and of the practice, though perhaps not the rhetoric, of contemporary science) by focusing on the nature of the public discourse among scientists by which putative new knowledge is subjected to the critical examination of a range of interrogations? Isn't the obligation to publish one's results honestly for peer analysis as fundamental as any methodological guideline for a scientist? What of the relations among teachers and students, collaborators in research projects, and colleagues in broader research programs? We need to refocus our attention away from the reification and hero-worship of the individual knower to recognize to collective practice by which knowledge is constituted and continually modified.

Obviously a variety of thinkers – not least of all Kant – have recognized that communicability is a key aspect of knowledge. One does not have to stretch Kant too far in a Habermasian direction to see the notion of universal communicability as an indication that knowledge would only be complete when all different (but clearly commensurable) standpoints were included in the conversation of knowledge.30 Kant explicitly saw taking the standpoints of others - and ideally of everyone else - as the way to “escape the illusion that arises from the ease of mistaking subjective and private conditions for objective ones."31 Equally, the example of the Socratic dialogues as well as the early modern proliferation of scientific societies, correspondences, and publications has alerted scholars to the importance of discourse among scientists. What is not so clearly recognized is that this dialogue - and I choose the term to emphasize that this is not just any sort of discourse but a specific sort which helped also to pioneer standards and practices for the political public sphere - has a bearing on the validity of scientific knowledge rather than just its encouragement, spread, or after-the-fact verification. We should not conceptualize the dialogue among scientists as simply an error-correction mechanism, or as a means of sharing that which is already known, but as one of the actual bases for knowledge.

This is not the place for me to pursue this as a general line of argument in either epistemology or the study of science. Rather, I want to draw three related implications of this “dialogical" view of science for the notion of standpoint.

The first implication is that the importance of the gendered production of knowledge need not be conceptualized primarily in terms of the foundational practices of observation and reason. Standpoint theorists get caught unnecessarily in a problematic foundationalism when they pursue arguments that a feminist standpoint must be legitimated as an objective source of universal truth. This makes claims hard to demonstrate both within typical rhetorics and understandings of science where the neutral (and perhaps neuter) observer and thinker is hypostatized and within the postmodernist debate over Enlightenment thinking where the feminist standpoint is prone to immediate deconstruction.

In order to understand the distinctive insights brought by women scientists (and male scientists taking nontraditional views of gender) it is important to recognize that they saw different things (e.g. in the study of reproduction and the relations between males and females in primate biology) without seeing them on a fundamentally different foundation of reason and observation. If the work of such researchers had depended completely on the alternative foundation of a women's standpoint, it is hard to see how it could have had the impact it has had in biology. But if there was enough shared basis in observation and reason for a meaningful conversation to ensue, then the epistemic gains of the new insights could be recognized even if the conversation was stiltedandbiasedby male dominated hierarchies and hegemonic consciousnesses. This is, in fact, what Donna Haraway has shown.32

Recognizing the extent to which science is a collective enterprise pursued largely through discourse allows one to make sense of the extent to which women scientists have had their views shaped by male teachers and male-dominated understandings as well as the ways in which their work sometimes challenged or modified these. It allows one to see the importance not just of different foci (or even modes) of observation or reason, but of different situations in the conversation. At the same time, science is not just discourse, nor just empirical observation and rational deduction. It is a much more complex congeries of practices that make possible not only “epistemic activities" but the creation and alternation of institutions and concrete interpersonal relationships. These are not only sources of bias (whether to be eliminated in the conventional account or analyzed in the recent critical views); they are sources of common understandings. It is sometimes in the not altogether discursive practices of working together in the field or at the paradigmatic bench that scientists come to common understandings that only later they are able to express articulately.

A similar argument can be made for grounding feminist theory not in concrete women or the category of women but in dialogical feminist practices. Thus Mary Dietz, for example, argues that seeing the experience of women as the source of a categorically different feminist subjectivity introduces a problematic essentialism." On the other hand, the feminist movement has developed a cluster of practices attentive to difference (and, we might add, to concrete experience). These may provide the setting for development of distinctively feminist knowledge, and it may be that dialogical setting that is crucial, not the standpoint of any singular subject position. On such a view, feminism could mark a more substantial break with the traditional understanding of science that locates the basis of knowledge in the characteristics or location of certain idealized subjects. We could extend this approach, without need for a specific standpoint theory, to include attention not only to the dialogic context of the women's movement but the whole range of practical projects which create interests in knowledge-formation for women (and for others).

In this connection, the crucial insights offered by Dorothy Smith's work lie not in the notion of a women's standpoint but in the methodological argument that researcher and research subject need to be seen as equals and enter into mutually informing dialogue. This conception of research (rather than the paradigmatic experiment with its ideal of control) is inherently intersubjective and also reflects the dialogical practices of the women's movement.34 Its implications include, as Smith suggests, recognition of how the fact that observation constitutes a social relationship introduces change into what is observed (a phenomenon noted famously in other sciences but resisted in “positivistic" social science) and shapes what we learn from it.35 This sort of feminist research actually challenges the notion of a singular objective standpoint that can be discovered “out there" by subjects constructed as ideal observers and reasoners.36

The second implication of the dialogical view of science for standpoint theory is that there is not necessarily a sharp and mutually exclusive opposition between taking seriously the notion of science as conversation and recognizing that reason and observation have a role to play in knowledge. The postmodernist “discovery" of discourse is often presented as though it proves the notion of truth based on foundational observation and deduction to be false, rather than as a qualification and relativization of such truth claims. To a large extent, the postmodernists (including in this case not only the French poststructuralists but Richard Rorty) see conversation as essentially arbitrary. Unlike his predecessors among American pragmatists, thus, Rorty suggests that we can only judge conversations to be more or less interesting, not claim practical consensus as a validation of knowledge. In the postmodern era, philosophers (and scientists) will be able only to “compare and contrast cultural traditions," not to claim epistemic gains.37 Somewhat surprisingly for a self-declared pragmatist, however, such a view assumes that either knowledge-claims are grounded in the perspectiveless universal truth of reason and observation or they must be fundamentally incommensurable; it recognizes no history of concrete social practices that encourage mutual understanding and even epistemic gain.

Standpoint theorists are prone to accept the same sort of either/or opposition, and thus to feel a need to claim an implausible fixity (and even universality) for certain standpoints in order to avoid the trivialization of all standpoints in a postmodern welter of incommensurable points of view.38 Yet this is at odds with one of the attractive features of many feminist standpoint theories, the attempt to introduce a critical self-reflexivity and historical self-consciousness into all scientific knowledge. As Harding puts it, "the sciences need to legitimate within scientific research, as part of practicing science, critical examination of historical values and interests that may be so shared within the scientific community, so invested in by the very constitution of this or that field of study, that they will not show up as a cultural bias between experimenters or between research communities."9 And as Harding goes on to argue, this means identifying the social sources of good as well as bad beliefs, of knowledge as well as error.4) A dialogic approach reminds us that these social conditions of scientific knowledge are built into the very project of science, they do not just come to it from outside. A feminist voice that reminds us of these social conditions is itself an interested voice within science, not a reversal of the interestedness of male-dominated science, and yet this does not imply that science must thereby cease seeking better knowledge because it admits to partiality and interest.

It is important for theorists who would help scientists to think from women's lives to see the stark opposition of subjective and objective as a trap (whichever side one favors). Consider, for example, how Harding incorporates the subjective/objective dichotomy into her own account, imagining that to accept a feminist standpoint as in any way subjective must be to admit wholesale relativism:

The leading feminist theorists do not try to substitute one set of gender loyalties for the other - “women-centered" for “man-centered" hypotheses. They try instead, to arrive at hypotheses that are free of gender loyalties.41

Harding seems to be describing exactly the gender neutrality claimed (speciously) by conventional scientific mythology. Feminism must correct for androcentrism, but knowledge need not be gendered:

It is true that first we often have to formulate a "woman-centered" hypothesis in order even to comprehend a gender-free one. But the goal of feminist knowledge-seeking is to achieve theories that accurately represent women's activities as fully social, and social relations between the genders as a real - an explanatorily important - component in human history. There is nothing “subjective" about such a project, unless one thinks only visions distorted by gendered desires could imagine women to be fully social and gender relations to be real explanatory variables. From the perspective of feminist theory and research, it is traditional thought that is subjective in its distortion by androcentrism – a claim that feminists are willing to defend on traditional objectivist grounds.⁴2

In order to maintain connections to “the real world," Harding feels she must defend objectivism and argue against the contention that knowledge is in significant part conditioned by the social situation of the subjective knower (and by implication, even the social organization of the scientific dialogue). In her subsequent book, she straightforwardly reverses this view, without abandoning the implied antinomy; her focus shifts to “the subject of feminist knowledge."43 Yet if we take the dialogical view seriously, we need not face this stark choice, but should be able to see that our subjective situation in the dialogue is not incompatible with epistemic gain based on intersubjective understanding and verifiable research procedures. This is, I think, close to what Haraway suggests with the language of “situated knowledge"- which includes situation within both history generally and the specific history of science - rather than women's standpoint.44

The third implication of a dialogical view of science is that it is not necessary to resort to an ontological account of a women's standpoint to ground a critique of the exclusion from the scientific conversation of either women as concrete actors, or the knowledge-generating concerns raised by women's lives. Smith, in her opposition to postmodernist approaches, unfortunately reaffirms her reliance on ontology as the ground for truth claims.45 This is of more than passing interest because it has, I think, an intellectual connection to her reliance on the notion of the standpoint of concrete experience, a reliance she shares with other feminists including those who would be hesitant to follow her attempt to ground it in ontology.4⁶ Smith proceeds in a way quite analogous to the marxian discovery of the“proletarian standpoint" that Lukacs saw as crucial to marxism's capacity to challenge the reification of ordinary social consciousness and theory.47

This very similarity suggests one of the reasons why some feminists closer to the postmodernist project have rejected Smith's approach as too close to the Enlightenment and marxist desires for a “true" theory; they prefer a rejection of all such claims to general truth in favor of the acknowledgment of an inescapable multiplicity of partial knowledges, contradictory discourses, and conflicting perspectives.48 Some of these others, like Dietz, have tried to preserve the notion of a theoretical standpoint by locating it not in the ontological category of women, but in feminism as theoretical orientation or set of political practices.49 In Harding's words, "having women's experiences - being a woman - clearly is not sufficient to generate feminist knowledge; all women have women's experiences, but only at certain historical moments do any of us ever produce feminist knowledge."so Rather than just women, the subjects who produce feminist knowledge are indefinitely many and varied. "The issue here is about the possibility of feminist, not female, science."s1 Donna Haraway goes much further, arguing against the idea of standpoint theory itself, suggesting that it incorporates the very presumption that women are all in crucial regards the same that was one of the most damaging products of the essentialist reasoning predominant since the Enlightenment.s² For Smith, as she argues in a reply to Harding, "such a degree of ontological tolerance defeats the essential character of inquiry as a project."s3 She is well aware of the imperfections of the truths we humans can claim, and of their imbrications in power relations, but she crucially affirms the practical importance of adhering to a stronger idea of knowledge. "We want to be able to know because we also want to be able to act and in acting to rely on a knowledge beyond what is available to us directly. We want to be able to have arguments about how things work that refer to an ontological ground in the world we have in common, and we want, therefore, to be able to arrive at an agreement on the basis of what is there for both of us." Smith affirms, in other words, that she intends the feminist standpoint as an ontological position.

Smith writes, again in response to Harding, that “in assessing the products of inquiry," we want to ask: “Has she got it right? Is this how it really works? Is it accurate? Faithful to the character of the organization and relations investigated? Such questions can be asked only if there exists the practical possibility of another account that can invalidate hers. . . . So the epistemology must also be an ontology."s The last sentence simply does not follow. It is attractive, I think, partly because of the notion of finding a ground in the realm of concrete experience. Among other things, however, it misses the possibilities opened by Gadamer's rejection of both finalistic and historicist hermeneutics in favor of an account of judgment enabling us to move from a worse to a better position (within some practical frame of reference) without claiming essential truth. Taking this approach encourages a more historically situated approach to knowledge without yielding to a sharp relativism.

At issue here is the potentially incapacitating result of affirming an incommensurability of experiences and understandings so complete that rational-critical discourse cannot bridge the gap.s" Where this is the case, there is no reason why feminist claims - e.g. that spousal violence is wrong and intolerable - should be persuasive to those who do not share the original "interpretive tradition." Instead of an argument as to why violence against women should not be tolerated, we are left with a declaration that such violence will not be tolerated by those who speak the slogan - a declaration that is not truly a critique of either the discourse or the physical actuality of power but rather an attempt to oppose it with a contrary power.58 Given the way power is structured in the world today, however, if material power cannot be opposed by rational-critical discourse but only by alternative powers - and if those alternative powers have the same theoretical status – then we are in an even worse position than what I take to be our sorry state when faced with sexual violence, racist attacks, and genocidal versions of nationalism.

## V

In different ways and with varying degrees of clarity, a number of feminist theorists have turned to the notion that better observation and reasoning will come not from invoking a fixed subject position but rather from recognizing the contradictions in many - perhaps all - subject positions. Julia Kristeva, for example, introduces her own polar distinction between characteristically male attributes to which women might aspire and unjustly devalued characteristically female attributes. She then argues that “one must try not to deny these two aspects of linguistic communication, the mastering aspect and the aspect which is more of the body and the impulses, but try, in every situation and for every woman, to find a proper articulation of these two elements....I think that the time has come when we must no longer speak of all women. We have to talk in terms of individual women and of each one's place inside these two poles. One of the gravest dangers that now presents itself in feminism is the impulse to practice feminism in a herd."s9 This is close to Smith's starting point, with her notion of women's bifurcated consciousness. After initial doubts, Harding has embraced an even stronger version of this idea: "the subject of feminist knowledge - the agent of these less partial and distorted descriptions and explanations - must be multiple and even contradictory.... the logic of the standpoint directive to start thought from women's lives requires starting from multiple lives that are in many ways in conflict with one another and each of which has its own multiple and contradictory commitments."60 With such arguments, as Smith herself complains, standpoint theory has been relativized dramatically. Nonetheless, they seem logical outgrowths of the attempt to invoke women's concrete experience(s) as the source of the feminist standpoint.

Smith's"bifurcated consciousness" contrasts women's direct experience to the abstract systems and ruling apparatus characteristic of hegemonic, androcentric thought. As we have seen, Harding and other feminists have tried more systematically to suggest that feminist theory must mediate such experience before it can constitute the standpoint of critique. I want to ask whether even in such mediated senses, the category of experience is entirely adequate to what is being asked of it.

Appeals to experience easily slide into appeals to a kind of phenomenological immediacy that has been popular in counter-rationalist arguments from the earliest Romantics. Enlightenment thought seems excessively distant from lived experience (and, for many of the critics, reason triumphs over will). In many Romantics, as in Nietzsche, appeals to an aesthetic consciousness (especially a sense of the sublime) against a more scientific-rational consciousness invoke this same sense of immediacy. This is a problem not only for the dominant currents of Enlightenment thought, but for many so-called postmodernists. It is at the heart of the “metaphysics of presence" that Derrida criticizes in many versions, and which he sees as an almost transhistorical intellectual problem dating from Socrates, not from the anti-Enlightenment. His critique of this cult of direct experience sets him apart from others in the Nietzsche-Heidegger lineage with whom in other regards he shares much.61 He argues, for example, that Heidegger's discourse is dominated by “an entire metaphorics of proximity, of simple and immediate presence, a metaphorics associating the proximity of Being with the values of neighboring, shelter, house, service, guard, voice, and listening."62 As anti-Heideggerian as Habermas is, somewhat similar ideas underpin his distinction of an attractively immediate lifeworld of interpersonal experience from the abstract, potentially threatening world of systemic integration.63

Nancy Fraser has made Habermas's version of the appeal to (more or less) unmediated experience the object of feminist reconsideration.64 In a good illustration of the intellectual advantages in starting analysis from consideration of women's lives (but without hardening this into a fixed standpoint), she points out how Habermas's idealization of the lifeworld is rooted in a conception of the family in which all communication is egalitarian, violence nonexistent, and labor equitably shared. Such a view is only possible, we might suggest following Smith, not just because Habermas is a man who doesn't see the ill-treatment of women in realworld families, but because failing to reason or observe from the standpoint of women's lives, he doesn't see the extent to which women's labor is marshaled to make possible the (putatively gender-neutral) systems of money and power.

At the same time, Smith's appeal to concrete experience seems important as a locus of agency. Here we need to distinguish between two dimensions that she sometimes conflates. On the one hand, she invokes the notion of women's direct experience. This has two faults. First, it is hard to see how one can get from the necessarily highly divergent experiences of different women to the categorial construct of a standpoint of women. Taken as the subjects of direct experience, women must appear immediately not only as different from each other, but as linked in different partial and particular solidarities: lesbians, for example, Christian women, mothers, or women of color. The last of these terms itself is a locus of difference that is too often denied - as when “women of color" is used to invoke a largely imagined or proposed solidarity among women very different in their experiences - and indeed in their colors.65 Second, the idea of experience commonly suggests a passive subject; women's experience, thus, is disproportionately presented in terms of action on women rather than women's active construction of their own worlds. One of the advantages of locating the "feminist standpoint" not in the experience of female subjects but in particular sorts of practices - e.g. those of the women's movement - is that it avoids this implication of passivity.

The other dimension of Smith's appeal to direct experience is more promising. Along with other feminist thinkers, she points us towards a recognition of everyday life as commitments to specific others in rich, concrete social relationships, to specific places and senses of place, to specific activities and organizations of the rhythm of life. These commitments are relatively neglected by sociology, even though they are a very large part of what most human beings focus their attention on. They are also a crucial source of a sense of agency, crucial loci for resistance and opposition to the dominance of abstract systems or ruling apparatus, and crucial antidotes to the apocalyptic panic sometimes engendered by the sense that the "larger world"of corporations, nation-states, capitalism and the like has become senseless. Much of the “politics of identity"is rooted in commitments to place and in general settings for meaningful direct experience.

In recovering an emphasis on everyday life, however, we need to be cautious about recreating the public/private dichotomy somewhat uncritically within feminist thought. This comes with equating everyday life (as Smith among others sometimes does) with.the local as against the supralocal, the global, or the systemic. It is, first of all, not sharply distinct from any of these. To take a simple example, television and broadcast media are now inescapably part of everyday life and experience for nearly everyone in nearly every country on the globe. The workings of broadcast media certainly involve indirect social relationships as against the directly interpersonal, but they cannot be opposed so neatly to either the notion of everyday life or of experience. One might be tempted to say that they can be opposed to “immediate experience," but though that makes a nice pun, I think it is wrong. In a weak sense, our experience of television itself is felt as immediate, even though it includes a highly mediated experience of that which television programs are putatively about. In a strong sense, little or no experience is unmediated, for nearly all - at least this side of madness and utter absorption in pain - involves language and cultural construction.

Relatedly, we need to be alert to oversimple and misleading comparisons to smaller-scale societies, a thin appropriation of anthropology that Smith shares with some other feminists and for that matter with Habermas.66 Thus she offers an example of Kalahari Bushmen in which all members of a small band are present when hunters distribute the meat they have brought home. She concludes, "the determinations of social existence are fully present to the experience of its members and are coterminous with it."67 This is at the very least a major overstatement. Not only are there links among Kalahari bands, including networks of kinship, descent, and economic exchange, but even in this small-scale society it is problematic to suggest that surface visibility is equivalent to a sort of unmediated presence to experience, as though the sheer sensory materiality of that experience could overcome the role of culture in constituting its specific forms.

Smith is cognizant of the complexities involved in the articulation between what she calls the “actual and immediate organization of the experienced world" and the “extended social relations" created by capitalist economic life, political-bureaucratic power, and the like. I think I am trying to push further in the same direction, not in a contrary one, when I push for distinguishing the dimensions of directness or indirectness of relationships (including their spatial reach) from the pattern of organization of knowledge (including as “experiential" vs. “abstracted conceptual"). The two are interdependent but not identical.68 Smith's basic model of the ruling apparatus emphasizes the reliance on an impersonal, conceptual mode of representation that disguises the actual personal agency involved in systems of power. This is clearly of central importance. Yet it leaves us with important questions. I shall raise two.

First, Smith's binary opposition of the world of direct experience to the world of abstracted relations and conceptualized knowledge relies on a problematic understanding of the “supralocal" world of social integration and systemic power. Smith shares here - and not in an extreme degree - a byproduct of the general and generally valuable feminist point about the importance of learning from experience. This is the opposition of experience (however it is understood) to a too simple notion of the regimes of knowledge and power that have marginalized and split women's experience. Thus the ruling apparatus for Smith includes at once and without clear distinction (1) corporations and other complex organizations that enter into the social world as putative agents or collective actors, (2) capitalism and other systematically organized processes, and (3) the abstracted, specially codified discourses by which social scientists and others address and speak of each of these.69 Aside from general issues of conceptual clarity, it is important to differentiate these different aspects of ruling apparatus if we are to develop a strong sense of how human agency rnay be deployed in action to change or resist any or all of them.

A second question concerns how we are to deal with those occasions where ordinary experience systematically misleads us about influences over our lives, especially because of the way the world is organized by supralocal powers. In Pierre Bourdieu's language, the potential for misrecognition is built into virtually all situations of social action.70 How we understand these issues has major implications for how we think about possibilities for agency and opposition. Flax has pointed out the possibility that our experience may actually undermine our ability to grasp what is going on, or to take appropriate action. The notion of a feminist standpoint, she suggests, "assumes that the oppressed are not in some fundamental ways damaged by their social experience."1 Even where subjects are in no sense “damaged," we need to ask about the possibility that hegemonic cultures systematically distort - or simply shape - the experience and even the self-recognition of subaltern groups. This is, of course, why (as Harding suggests perhaps in most detail) the feminist standpoint requires not just the existence of women, but both the women's movement and feminist theory. These enable a challenge to dominant ideologies and hegemonic cultures.

Smith recognizes that the everyday world is structured by forces it does not make immediately apparent. She rejects, for example, the notion that making the everyday world the locus of a sociological problematic is the same as making it an object of study:

In constituting the everyday world as an object of sociological examination, we cut it off methodologically from the ways in which it is actually embedded in a socially organized context larger than may be directly known in that mode.... For the everyday world is neither transparent nor obvious. Fundamental to its organization for us in this form of society is that its inner determinations are not discoverable within it.72