Or, a few pages later, "the present structure of local social relations is organized by social relations external to it."73 This is right, I think, but as I suggested earlier, it implies a sharper spatial separation than is plausible. The relations of large-scale administrative power, of abstracted discourse, of capitalism work within the most local of relations as well as beyond them. Neglect of this dimension has undermined a variety of attempts to ground a critique of those larger systems in the standpoint of "lifeworld" or locality. It is especially problematic for efforts to locate the standpoint of critique in the direct experience concrete groups have of such lifeworlds.

## VI

If neither an appeal to immediate experience nor an appeal to the established putatively universalistic discourse is satisfactory, is there a standpoint from which to recognize misrecognition? Harding argues for reasoning from the multiplicity and contradictions that characterize our “subject positions" and our very existence as human agents. As Teresa de Lauretis suggests, "differences among women may be better understood as differences within women."74 This makes sense, though only if reasoning from multiplicity and contradictions does not entirely displace recognition of struggles for more coherent individual and collective identities. Harding misleadingly tries to equate such a perspective with standpoint theory and claims simultaneously to achieve a rapprochement between standpoint theory and postmodernism. To combine gender with race, language, sexual orientation, concrete interpersonal relations, and a host of other dimensions of identity is no easy or uncomplicated thing. But it is from the recognition of this complexity and these contradictions that we must start.

Critical theory grasps its objects not in their simple identities but in their internal tensions. The idea of an immanent critique suggests that conditions in the world open possibilities for critical analysis. Capitalism only appeared to be - was historically constituted in the appearance of - an “identical, self-moving subject-object;" this afforded Marx the opening for his critique of classical political economy. To recognize and analyze this, Marx started not from labor as simply the class of workers or as the transhistorical phenomenon of work, but from labor constituted by capitalism as a category in an essential tension between the concrete particularity of the human beings whose lives were used up in it and the commodification process that rendered it an abstract form of social mediation (value). Similarly, the purchase of feminist theory derives in large part from the bifurcated female consciousness that Smith describes – and more generally from a range of contradictions not only in “objectively given” subject positions but in subjectively constructed identities and commitments.

This distinguishes critical theory - at its best - from the sorts of appeals to an Archimedian point that many feminists have rightly criticized in the theories generated by men and generated in part from the standpoint of large-scale systems of power and money. The Cartesian claim to a “view from nowhere" is to be avoided not just by invocation of the excluded other, nor even by the location of subjects within the realm of concrete experience and social relations, but by the recognition of a tension that opens up the possibility of critique and change. Read in this way, the invocation of a standpoint of women need not be an invitation to a new foundationalism, but rather an aspect of a knowledge-forming process. It can help us to recognize how gender may operate as a category constituting relations of inclusion and exclusion, of visibility and invisibility, particularity and generality even where it is most resolutely denied and the illusion of gender-free universality maintained. The historical constitution of putatively genderless but in fact exclusively or overwhelmingly male discourse of scientific understanding, public sphere, and economy is a contradiction literally engendering not only women's personal experience of split consciousness and struggle, but the categorial possibility for a critical challenge to the ways in which the institutions shaping our lives appear as immutable and impersonal forces.

The gendered construction of social life not only reflects but helps to produce a discourse in which the ruling apparatus, the economy, the state, etc., appear as though they were actorless systems – in other words, as though they could be studied as objective or even natural phenomena requiring neither a reflexive attention to the experience and knowledgeforming interests and processes of the observer, nor an account of how human agents exercise power in and through such modalities of ruling apparatus. The attempt to unmask the false impersonality of such putatively impersonal systems is of vital importance, and not just for the purpose of grasping the gendered nature of the world, but more generally for recognizing such systems of reification.

## Notes

1 This distinction is explored briefly in chapter 3.

2 Rousseau, “The Social Contract."

4 Kant, Critique of Judgment, p. 161 (para. 40).

5 Or man as embodiment of creative labor power; see especially Marx, "On the Jewish Question.

6 Marx and Engels, The Holy Family, p. 37.

7 See the essay “Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat" in Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness.

8 Postone has shown this nicely with regard to Lukacs and most varieties of traditional marxism, and developed an alternative reading of Marx that attempts to escape the subject-object problematic. See Postone, Time, Labor, esp. pp. 88 and 175 on Lukacs.

9 In Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit.

10 See the various volumes of Subaltern Studies, and especially Spivak's provocative essay,“Can the Subaltern Speak?"Compare Gilroy's useful reminder of the fact that Hegel was, after all, speaking of slavery (Black Atlantic, ch. 1).

11 Use of the Kuhnian term incommensurability reminds us that this attention to the possibility of deep differences in cognitive and/or ontological orientations was part of a broader intellectual current. It was, of course, also central to poststructuralist thought and is one of the bases for the affinity between poststructuralism and many varieties of feminist theory (see Nicholson, ed., Feminism/Postmodernism).

12 Flax, “Gender as a Social Problem," quoted from Harding, The Science Question in Feminism, pp. 28–9.

13 Harding, Whose Science? Whose Knowledge?, p. 121.

14 Smith, The Conceptual Practices of Pouer, p. 13. Two other feminist theorists began to develop standpoint epistemologies relatively early when Smith's work was still not widely known outside Canada. See Hartsock, "The Feminist Standpoint," and Rose, "Hand, Brain and Heart."

15 Smith, The Everyday World, p. 81.

16 On the issue of multiplicity of publics, see chapter 8.

17 The issue of essentialism is addressed in the next chapter. Perhaps the most important pioneering effort to show the historical production of a “sexgender system" is Rubin's “The Traffic in Women." Rubin's approach does not identify the range of variations in the working of gender as a category in different historical epochs or cultural contexts. Foucauldian accounts of the production of the individual "self" and sexuality suggest that a more historically specific modern form of gender needs to be explored.

18 Smith, The Everyday World, p. 4.

19 Postone, Time, Labor. Flax does not see that Marx can be read this other way, but sees how the transhistorical reading causes problems in socialist feminism: “Marxists (including socialist feminists) uncritically apply the concepts Marx should have used to describe a particular form of the production of commodities to all areas of human life at all historical periods. . . . In Marxist theory labor (defined as the transformation of natural or other objects into things with use or exchange value) is treated as the 'essence' of history and human 'being.' Under the influence of such assumptions, socialist feminists end up making reductive claims like the following: 'The family is definable exactly as property relations between men and woman, and the social relations of the family are those property relations in action.' Among other problems, such claims ignore the existence and sensuous activities of real people in families (e.g. children, for whom at least part of their formative and familial experiences have nothing to do with production). Few women would describe their experiences of pregnancy and childrearing solely in terms of the production of commodity labor power for the market" (Flax, Thinking Frangments, p. 154, quoting Kuhn, "Structures of Patriarchy and Capital in the Family").

20 Harding, Science Question in Feminism, p. 158.

21 Harding, Whose Science?, p. 167.

22 Ibid., p. 121, n. 19.

23 Ibid., p. 123; italics in original.

24 Flax, Thinking Fragments, p. 227.

25 It was precisely for failing to distinguish consensus based on persuasion from that based on truth that Habermas faulted Gadamer's hermeneutics; Habermas, On the Logic of the Social Sciences, ch. 8.

26 Lyotard, Postmodern Condition; see esp. p. 30.

27 Though the phrase sounds very strange, Lyotard is basically an anti-Enlightenment neo-Kantian. In addition to The Postmodern Condition, see The Differend and esp. The Inhuman.

28 I shall not attempt to trace the development of the history and sociology of science. The ideas noted above have become fairly commonplace since the 1960s, and especially since Kuhn's famous The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Many were, however, already implicit in the empirical work of historians of science since at least Sarton, though not thematized or theorized as such.

Recall the extent to which the Enlightenment, as a narrative and rhetorical construction, relied on the image of a superstitious, mystified, shadowy past - exemplified by many enlighteners by Roman Catholic Christianity. Developments in what we now consider diverse fields of natural and physical science, philosophy, and human or social science were not sharply differentiated and shared a broadly similar orientation. Gay, The Enlightenment, remains perhaps the best single introduction for those not familiar with this narrative.

Along with the closely related standards of publicity, this argument carried potentially anti-authoritarian political implications; see Laursen, "The Subversive Kant."

Kant, Critique of Judgment, p. 160 (para. 40). Both the Kantian and the Habermasian perspectives assume that the various different standpoints to be included in the potentially universally communicable discourse will all be commensurable, and indeed have no strong theoretical account of differences among subjects. Indeed, both regard such differences as something to be bracketed and kept out of the discourse of science - and for that matter the public sphere - rather than as a productive source of knowledge. This is

one of the problems that other sorts of standpoint theories set out to remedy. 32 Haraway, Primate Visions.

33 Dietz, “Context is All."

34 One can see similarities to a variety of similar arguments for dialogical approaches in other fields of study. A version of this was, for example, central to the "interpersonal school" of psychoanalysts for whom Harry Stack Sullivan and Clara Thompson were pioneers. Indeed, many other breaks with orthodox Freudianism emphasized the dialogic relationship between analyst and analysand and challenged the scientific objectivism of Freud as much as they differedover more obstract theoretical matters; Karen Horney is another example in the American context. The relationship between psychoanalysis and feminism has become, I think, overly fixated on the great European fights: over object relations vs. ego psychology in England and especially between Lacanian structuralists and more orthodox analysts in France.

35 Smith, Everyday World, pp. 111-16.

36 There have been a variety of attempts to explicate what such a dialogic approach to scientific investigation (generally not called that) might look like, and how it might produce knowledge in various fields of research. Evelyn Fox Keller's study of Barbara McClintock's work, A Feeling for the Organism, is perhaps the most prominent.

Rorty, "Pragmatism." See also Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, where he argues powerfully against correspondence theories of knowledge, but sees the Enlightenment heritage and modern science entirely in terms of such claims to mirror nature. I think this tendency to see as something new and radically threatening the discovery that science is discourse may be the result of understanding science too exclusively through the philosophy of science rather than the history of science or the actual practice of scientists.

38 Harding finds herself straddling precisely this “either/or," as I suggested above, when she decides to claim objectivity for a feminist standpoint while simultaneously claiming the postmodernist infinity of standpoints. In the latter chapters of her book she makes some steps toward the more promising idea of seeing a feminist standpoint as rooted not in certain subjects, or the lives of the category of women, but in practices historically advanced by the women's movement, but she does not relate this as an alternative approach to the unresolved duality of Dorothy Smith and Derrida that she has embraced.

39 Harding, Whose Science?, pp. 146–7.

40 In this, Harding follows directly on Horkheimer's claims for critical as distinct from traditional theory; "Traditional and Critical Theory."

41 Harding, The Science Question. p. 138.

42 Ibid.

43 Harding, Whose Science?, pp. 284ff.

44 See the essay “Situated Knowledges," which responds directly to Harding, in Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs and Women.

45 Smith's account of feminist standpoint also shares much with readings of

Marx's work as a social ontology, e.g., Gould, Marx's Social Ontology. In addition, Smith reads Marx's work as an approach that affords researchers a “method of exploring everyday social relations without constructing an alienated world of abstractions" (Smith, Conceptual Practices of Power, p. 61). This reading leaves unclear how Smith thinks we are to recognize the "real" abstractions of capitalism (as discussed in the first chapter of Capital) since these are not to be grasped through simple exploration of everyday social relations as she implies.

46 This reliance on concrete experience is central, for example, to what Aptheker and her colleagues construct as a feminist standpoint; see Aptheker, Tapestries of Life. It is also shared with a number of feminists who do not enter into epistemological debates.

47 Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness.

48 See Harding's more general considerations of such postmodernist arguments against feminist standpoint theories in The Science Question, chs. 6 and 7 and especially Whose Science?, ch. 7. A thoughtful attempt to bring standpoint theory into relationship with postmodernist insights is Flax, Thinking Fragments.

49 Dietz, “Context Is All."

50 Harding. Whose Science?, p. 286. See also Dietz, “Context is All."

51 Harding, Whose Science?, p. 298.

52 Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women; see especially Haraway's “Cyborg Manifesto."

53 Smith, Conceptual Practices, p. 34; the reply is to Harding's Science Question.

54 Smith, Conceptual Practices.

55 Smith, The Everyday World as Problematic, p. 122.

56 Gadamer, Truth and Method. This is what Taylor has nicely described as the process of seeking “epistemic gain," Sources of the Self; see discussion and other citations in chapters 1 and 2 above.

57 See chapter 2 above.

58 The most sophisticated version of this approach to a discourse in which positions are taken without arguments being developed is offered by Derrida; see esp. Positions.

59 Baruch and Meisel, "Two Interviews with Julia Kristeva."

60 Harding, Whose Science?, pp. 284-5. Much the same sort of issue - including the same tension between need for theoretical mediation and appeals to direct experience - arises with regard to DuBois's concept of double consciousness and ideas of race and identity more generally. See discussion in Gilroy, Black Atlantic.

61 See Megill's analysis of Derrida's relationship to this lineage in Prophets of Extremity, which is fairer and more sympathetic than Habermas's in Philosophical Discourse of Modernity.

62 Derrida, Margins of Philosophy, p. 130.

63 Habermas, Theory of Communicative Action.

64 Fraser, "What's Critical about Critical Theory”; see also her “Rethinking

the Public Sphere."

This is an issue more often alluded to than discussed seriously. Perhaps the best treatment lies in the work of Collins (Black Feminist Thought and Fighting Words), despite her tendency to assume that acknowledgement of overlapping “both/and" dimensions of difference adequately addresses rather than merely recognizes the underlying theoretical issue (and for that matter, despite her suggestion of an epistemological frame of reference as adequate to solving this problem).

See, for example, Harding's very troubling account of how the African world view is like the feminist world view - based heavily on a single, extremely non-authoritative source, and failing to distinguish such categories as “Africans," “Africanists," and “African-Americans"; The Science Ouestion in Feminism, ch. 7.

67 Smith, Everyday World, p. 92.

68 Compare Smith's formulation in Everday World, p. 75.

Smith and feminists taking similar positions are in famous if slightly surprising company here, for they are making equations similar to those effected by Parsons in The System of Modern Societies and Habermas (Theory of Communicative Action) in speaking of money and power as "non-linguistic steering media" organizing cybernetic systems of economy and administration that are logically on the same order (and that are mirrored in the systems theory and other abstracted discourses used to speak of them).

See Bourdieu (Outline, Logic) and chapter 4 above. “Misrecognition" is more apt than notions like false consciousness because it suggests (1) that reality is partially grasped not completely falsified, and (2) that the phenomena in question are more pervasive than the relations of subordinates to ideologies that serve the interests of superiors.

"On the contrary," Flax continues, "this position assumes that the oppressed have a privileged, unitary, and not just different relation to and ability to comprehend a reality that is 'out there' waiting for our representation" (Thinking Fragments, p. 141). Hartsock's version of feminist standpoint theory relies heavily on the notion of women's direct experience, and fits the epistemological privileging that Flax criticizes by turning Hegelian dialectic into a rather too simple notion of reversal. When experience is structured in fundamentally opposing ways for two groups, she says, "one can expect that the vision of each will represent an inversion of the other, and in systems of domination the vision available to the rulers will be both partial and perverse" (Hartsock, "The Feminist Standpoint," p. 285). Note how little room such an account leaves for the analysis of hegemonic culture or misrecognition.

72 .Smith, Everday World as Problematic, pp. 90–1.

73 Ibid., p. 94.

74 De Lauretis, “Feminist Studies/Critical Studies," p. 14.