# The Politics of Identity and Recognition

Plurality, as Hannah Arendt observed, is basic to the human condition.' We are distinct from each other, and often strive to distinguish ourselves further. Yet, as Arendt emphasized much less, each dimension of distinction is apt at least tacitly also to establish commonality with a set of others similarly distinguished. There is no simple sameness unmarked by difference, but likewise no distinction not dependent on some background of common recognition.²

Concerns with individual and collective identity, thus, are ubiquitous. We know of no people without names, no languages or cultures in which some manner of distinctions between self and other, we and they are not made. Though the concern may be universal, however, the identities themselves are not. Gender and age seem to distinguish people nearly everywhere, pedigree or parentage are of almost equally wide signifcance. Yet it is no accident that discourse about identity seems in some important sense distinctively modern - seems, indeed, intrinsic to and partially defining of the modern era.

This has to do both with intensified effort to consolidate individual identities, to increase identification with social and cultural categories, and to reinforce self-sameness. These efforts respond to social changes that both made the production and recognition of identities newly problematic and gave new opportunities to those who wished to change the contours of identities. This intense modern concern for identity is neither simply positive nor simply negative. Different aspects are grasped by Michel Foucault's analysis of how discipline produces a new sort of individual self, Charles Taylor's presentation of the sources of the self in transformations of religious thought and new valuations of ordinary happiness, and more conventional treatments of the rise of individualism as a narrative of freedom.3 A crucial common denominator is recognition of a new kind of stress on identity, that is, on the notion that self is integrally and immediately being and consciousness, name and voice. Descartes' cogito is a crucial index of the novel stress on identity: “I think, therefore I am." Not only does the person become a disembodied cognitive subject, knowledge is presented as dependent on this subject. In Fichte, the simple equation "I am I" is elevated to a philosophical claim to the self-sufficiency of identity, and in other parts of the German idealist tradition this is joined to an emphasis on the fundamental formative power of will. As the knowing and recognizing self is made to carry this philosophical weight, it is also more commonly seen as fixed, as reflecting itself in simple identity rather than complex relationship. The stage is set for Hegel's dialectical transformation of this tradition and for later thinkers, like Freud, Vygotsky, and Bakhtin, to rediscover notions of internal dialogue and contestation. Even as they and their successors have questioned simple self-sameness, however, most have retained a focus on identity in a relatively strong sense, on integral individuality.

At the same time, modern selves are called on to carry new sorts of moral weight. This weight was already assigned to the self in Augustine's Confessions. Augustine joined Judeo-Christian concerns with an individual god and individual salvation to Greek forms of intellectual exploration and ideas of recognition to create a new sort of morally charged introspection. Not until a thousand years after Augustine, however, did a similar synthesis re-emerge as part of the configuration of modern selfunderstanding. The same sorts of moral sources informed the crucial movements, largely on Christian motivations, to rethink the nature and significance of subjectivity in the era from the Reformation to the Enlightenment.4 That this morally charged subjectivity is not in all respects uniquely modern does not stop it from being distinctively modern.

The discourse of self is distinctively modern, and modernity distinctively linked to the discourse of self, not just because of the cognitive and moral weight attached to selves and self-identity. Modern concerns with identity stem also from ways in which modernity has made identity distinctively problematic. It is not simply - or even clearly the case - that it matters more to us than to our forebears to be who we are. Rather, it is much harder for us to establish who we are and maintain this own identity satisfactorily in our lives and in the recognition of others. This is why what Adorno called "the jargon of authenticity" has been so distinctive of the modern era in everyday life and in politics as well as in aesthetics and certain schools (especially Heideggerian-existentialist) of philosophy. Recall the form of Zola's intervention in the Dreyfus affair, his famous letter, “J’accuse," which presented not so much an argument as an intense expression of personal conviction.⁶

Both self-identity and recognition can pose challenges and difficulties. Self-knowledge – always a construction no matter how much it feels like a discovery - is never altogether separable from claims to be known in specific ways by others. But the two dimensions may not always be equally problematic. Many aspects of constructing or achieving identity, for example, can be fraught with obstacles without making the identity itself problematic for others to recognize. Upward mobility, say through the Church from the ranks of the common clergy to the episcopate, has always been hard to achieve and harder for some aspirants than others. But only rarely and intermittently have the identities of bishops been subject to dispute. Moreover, the Church offers – or at least has seemed through much of its history to offer - an all-encompassing scheme of identities. Bishops need not be validated in isolation but are consecrated through ceremony based on tradition and ideology and invested not only with the symbols of their office but with implicit recognition by a range of authoritative others. But this kind of clarity, rooted not only in cultural or ideological consensus but in the reinforcement offered by systematically organized networks of social relations is precisely what is challenged for most sorts of identity in the modern era. If the clarity of earlier identity schemes has never been quite perfect, and often characterized by more anomalies, doubts, and deceptions than we retrospectively imagine, it has nonetheless commonly underwritten a level of unquestioned acceptance of the apparent order of social categories that we no longer experience. In Bourdieu's terms, it has allowed schemes of understanding and normative order to appear as doxic, as simply given, rather than merely orthodox or authoritatively defended, let alone heterodox and implicitly contested.7

Modernity has meant in significant part the breakup – or the reduction to near-irrelevance - of most all-encompassing identity-schemes. Kinship still matters to us as individuals; we invest it with great emotional weight, but kinship no longer offers us an overall template of social and personal identities. When we meet strangers in an airport, we are unlikely to be able to place their relationships to us as part of a singular, overall system of kin relations which would offer clarity about both who we are in relation to each other and how we should behave. This distinguishes us from, say, Nuer who might meet while tending their cattle at a watering hole in the Nilotic region of Southern Sudan in the 1920s or 1930s.8 The Nuer might have faced complexities - they might have shared clanship yet come from rival villages, for example, or been joined affinally while consanguinally opposed – but though they had a multiplicity of identities to sort out, and quite actively to manage, they had a minimally disputed set of shared rhetorics for both self-identification and recognition of others. Without attaining perfection, they had a very high level of systematicity to their scheme of identities. This was problematic primarily at the fringes - and of course patterns of migration, intergroup conflict, and communication were complex and important throughout the African continent. I do not mean to suggest that all issues of identity were simply and stably settled for the Nuer, but rather that most appeared within a range of activity where a limited range of common rhetorics could organize the struggles for identity and recognition. Now, of course, as Southerners within an ethnically, religiously, and politically diverse Sudan, members of a tribe implicatedwithin a secessionist rebellion (itself internally divided), occasional Christians and widely labeled animists, construction workers in an increasingly city-centered economy, Nuer no longer can treat the categories of Nuer identity as doxically given but must face the modern challenge of deciding how to fit them into projects of collective and individual identity that presuppose inscription in a multiplicity of often incommensurable identity schemes. The change is not only one of scale; it is also one of complexity and especially of the extent of contestation over salient identities.

Kinship systems are not the only kind of all-encompassing identityscheme the world has known. Within European history, despite the considerable heterogeneity of institutions and local identities, the notion of a “great chain of being" long offered a kind of doxic background to contests over more specific identities.9 More generally, the point is not to contrast extremes of all-encompassing systematicity to the illusion of complete absence of pre-established rhetorical systems of identity, but rather to recognize a variable. The modern era brought an increase in the multiplicity of identity schemes so substantial that it amounted to a qualitative break, albeit one unevenly distributed in time and space. (Or, perhaps it is better to say that this transformation of identity construction helped to constitute the modern era as we know it.) In the modern era, identity is always constructed and situated in a heterogenous field and amid a flow of contending cultural discourses. In Cascardi's terms, summarizing an argument equally Weberian and Habermasian, "the modern subject is defined by its insertion into a series of separate valuespheres, each one of which tends to exclude or attempts to assert its priority over the rest."1o The motif is apparent in Kant's distinction of the realm of pure reason (truth), from practical reason (morality) and both from aesthetic judgment (taste) [especially when judgment is not seen as mediating truth and morality]. This is basic to the Hegelian idea of the diremptions of modernity, and to the search for reunification transmuted