into remythologization for Schlegel and Nietzsche and “fundamental ontology" for Heidegger. When postmodernists focus their attention on the rationalist Enlightenment, they borrow critical force from this tradition, but generally refuse its quest for reunification. The tension and even incommensurability among the various value spheres and discourses constitute not just a disunity of the larger social whole or “external" difficulties for individuals but also a series of contradictions within the “subject-self."

If George Herbert Mead was right, in other words, that our sense of self is constituted in relations to both significant specific others and a more generalized social other, we are presented with a serious challenge when it is impossible to assume congruence among the significant others or singularity of the generalized other.11 Since the story is one of selfformation and internalization of images and capabilities, it is not just our environment but our selves that are made more complex. This sort of complexity, let me be clear, is by no means uniquely modern; aspects of it inform identity-projects in a variety of highly internally heterogenous societies - like those of most of South Asia. It may be that family life is less marked traditionally by these inconsistencies among others, both significant and generalized, than is public life. Nonetheless, an Enlightenment understanding of both individual and collective selves in terms of a project of unification and integral wholeness combined with the reality of such multiform, contested, and potentially incommensurably heterogenous contexts makes a distinctive modern issue.

## II

A sociologist is apt to think that the new, poststructuralist rhetoric of "subject-positions" and “enactments" is an unnecessary reinvention of the familiar vocabulary of status and role. This is one result of the fact that so much of the most prominent recent social theory has been generated outside sociology and too often in ignorance of sociological theory. Nonetheless, while the older sociological approach to "roles" did provide a way to note that individuals bear multiple identities, it commonly obscured the full impact of this. Most versions of role theory tacitly posited a kind of ontological independence of the individual from her/his various roles. Individuals, thus, might experience “stress" stemming from the tensions among their roles.12 In strong versions of role theory, persons might be understood as partially constituted by their roles. But even within its own rhetoric, role theory did not adequately address the complexity of the problem of relating multiple roles to each other - or more precisely, of reconciling the expectations (including selfexpectations) based on multiple statuses. Attention was focused on how well (or poorly) individuals played socially prescribed roles - doctor, father, etc. There was correspondingly little attention to (1) the discourses which lent value to or withdrew it from various possible roleperformances, (2) dissent from or political contestation about those roles, (3) the kinds of performances through which actors went beyond or outside roles and/or created new ones, or (4) the possibility that a kind of fragmentation of self was a common, possibly ubiquitous, byproduct of apparently successful role-performance.13 The sociological analysis of roles was nonetheless a step beyond the essentializing of biological or psychological human identity; it facilitated recognition of the construction of self in social life.

Social constructionism has become extremely widespread, well beyond sociology. It challenges at once the idea that identity is given naturally and the idea that it is produced purely by acts of individual will. At their best, social constructionist arguments also challenge “essentialist" notions that individual persons can have singular, integral, altogether harmonious, and unproblematic identities.14 And by the same token subtle constructionist arguments challenge accounts of collective identities as based on some “essence"or set of core features shared by all members of the collectivity and no others. Thus, for example, Dyson writes of the need to move "beyond essentialism" in "expanding African-American cultural criticism":

Of course, I don't mean that there are not distinct black cultural characteristics that persist over space and time, but these features of black life are the products of the historical and social construction of racial identity.... These distinct features of black life nuance and shape black cultural expression, from the preaching of Martin Luther King to the singing of Gladys Knight. They do not, however, form the basis of a black racial or cultural essence. Nor do they indicate that the meaning of blackness will be expressed in a quality or characteristic without which a person, act, or practice no longer qualifies as black. Rigid racial essentialism must be opposed.15

Essentialist invocations of races, nations, genders, classes, persons, and a host of other identities nonetheless remain common in everyday discourse throughout the world. Pointing to the social and cultural histories by which they have been constructed has become the main way of trying to challenge the grip these essentialist identities have over us and the problems they create. Thus Hobsbawm and Ranger seek to weaken the grip of nationalist thinking by showing it to be based on "the invention of tradition."16 Simply showing a process of construction, however, may fail to grapple with the real, present-day political and other reasons why essentialist identities continue to be invoked and often deeply felt. At the same time, the language of construction minimizes the role of power and implies a multidirectional flow of influence and agency. This may be the case with regard to many identities, but it misleads where the imposition of stereotypes and labels is especially one-sided.17 It also implies a process happening “out there" in social life and not in the work of social science (and other science) itself. But ideas like racial difference - and indeed the special connection of racial difference to sexuality – flourished precisely on the basis of prestigious nineteenth-century evolutionary science; and in the present era too, labeling and the construction of identities and the demarcating of differences have hardly been social processes from which sociologists have kept their distance.

There is also risk that the "social constructionist" story will become a social determinism, too easily paired with an overly fixed, “essentialist" notion of society or culture. Thus sociologists who challenge essentialist approaches to individuals willingly speak of “the essence of community"18 and sophisticated role analysts unselfcritically employ terms like “deviance" to describe persons who do not fit normatively sanctioned roles.19 Within sociology, as Hewitt puts it, "the fundamental reference of identity is social location."20

Recent approaches to issues of identity have stressed the incompleteness, fragmentation, and contradictions of both collective and personal existence. They have shown how complex is the relationship among projects of identity, social demands, and personal possibilities. And in order to do so, they have commonly started with the deconstruction of "essentialist" categories and rhetorics. These discussions have been widespread and bear the general stamp of poststructuralism.21Derrida's challenge to essentialism is perhaps the most influential. But the exploration of this theme has been most far-reaching and sociologically substantive within the discourses of feminist and gay theory.22

This is not because feminists, gay men, or lesbians have settled the issue. On the contrary, each group remains deeply divided but the concerns are widely understood to be basic and therefore have drawn substantial theoretical attention. In a sense, the debate stems from a collision between the core practical political theme of both movements - claiming, legitimating, and valuing identities commonly suppressed or devalued by mainstream culture - and the poststructuralism that emerged as the theoretical discourse of choice for leading-edge feminists and gay or lesbian thinkers. Poststructuralism's attack on essentialism and "decentering of the subject" came into conflict with thinking and politics rooted in the standpoint of women or the experience of gays. This was not simply a conflict between theory and popular political practice, however, for the theoretical discourse was deeply involved in and shaped by political practice, and the practice often fissured along the same lines as the theory. The claim that a standpoint of women “essentialized" gender identities, for example, came not only from abstract or academic deconstructionist critiques, but from women of color and lesbians who argued that presumptions of white, heterosexual (and for that matter middle-class) experience structured both the women's movement and academic feminist analyses.2 As hooks'recent restatement of this point reveals, however, the issue runs deeper than simply biasing theory or practice towards one group or excluding others; it strikes at core matters of conceptualization:

The concept “Woman" effaces the difference between women in specific sociohistorical contexts, between women defined precisely as historical subjects rather than a psychic subject (or non-subject).... For ... only as one imagines “woman" in the abstract, when woman becomes fiction or fantasy, can race not be seen as significant.24

Behind this argument over “essentialism" lie a number of longstanding approaches to identity. Philosophical arguments rooted most importantly in Aristotle, for example, pursued identity in terms of the relationship between “essence" and "appearance," or between the true nature of phenomena and epiphenomenal variations. This appeal to nature was reinforced and transformed with the rise of both modern arguments about the biological roots of human identities and Romantic demands for individuals to express and be true to their inner natures.2 Nietzsche extended and radicalized Romantic naturalism, but also made the person more complex by showing how repressed human nature could turn against itself. Freud pushed Nietzsche's insight further, and psychoanalysis both constituted the individual in a newly complex way and showed that identity had to be achieved in development rather than merely discovered in direct reference to nature. At the same time, psychoanalysis continued a version of naturalizing discourse in its widespread approach to difference as pathology, and of essentialism in its argument that individuals must pursue a project of integral identity - e.g. must work to achieve an essentially coherent gender identity despite the ambiguities of early experience. Functionalist sociology participated in the naturalizing language of "pathology" and even non-functionalists pursued theories of "deviance" that reproduced essentialist notions of both normal and deviant identities. It was a crucial part of Derrida's intellectual project to challenge all such essentializing moves as reproductions of an illegitimate and imprisoning metaphysical tradition which needed to be contested even if it was not quite possible to escape through this contest.26

Critiques of aspects of these naturalizing and/or essentializing discourses did not have to wait for Derrida's radical formulation, however, but were developed early on, and in each case the discourse itself was amenable to reformulation away from essentialism. Thus psychoanalysis was reproduced as a theory of the social construction of seemingly natural identities and characteristics (as in Karen Horney's work and that of interactionists more generally) and later became (especially in "object relations" and Lacanian versions) a theory of fragmented and incomplete selves and one of the principal sources of the feminist critique of essentialism. Even sociologists who continued to use labels like “deviance" often committed themselves to radical social constructionist theories that insisted that unmediated nature had little influence on individual or collective identities while “socialization" processes were all-important.

Social constructionism proved, however, an ambiguous ally in the attempt to oppose the devaluing of various identities. Social constructionist approaches could be just as determinist as naturalizing approaches, for example, when they denied or minimized personal and political agency by stressing seemingly omnipresent but diffuse social pressures as the alternative to biological causation. The emphases on early socialization and on the power of social structure also led many social constructionists to treat identities in terms nearly as “essentialist" as those of biological determinists. The origins of various identities were seen as constructed and therefore potentially mutable, thus, so that in principle socialization processes and social structure could be changed. Boys might not brought up to be violent, or girls might be brought up to excel at math. But such programs of social change only operated on "sexroles," rather than on gendered thinking as such. More specifically, onesided social constructionism suggested variability in the correlates of male" and“female,"“homosexual" and “heterosexual" but then often treated the people addressed under these labels as essentially similar - i.e. similar to each other in terms of some true underlying identity or standard of equivalence. bell hooks made this point sharply in arguing against the term “sexual orientation."27 By the time she wrote, this was displacing the alternative "sexual preference."28 But hooks suggested that the notion of a singular sexual "orientation" was a reification. It suggested that individuals were somehow sexually open to or desirous of sexual interaction with all members of one sex or the other, minimizing both the autonomy of the individual and the differentiation of people within genders.29 In the same vein, Eve Sedgwick showed the implicit narrowing of agency in strong versions of constructionism - those that emphasize not what individual people construct for themselves, nor the histories which some construct for others, but the massive though diffuse impact of impersonal social processes - and Diane Fuss argued that “constructionism (the position that differences are constructed, not innate) really operates as a more sophisticated form of essentialism."30

In one of the most decisive arguments as to why merely labeling an opposing view “essentialism" settled little in this debate, Donna Haraway showed how the opposition between essentialism and constructionism had often been deployed in such a way as to reinforce a nature/culture division that should instead be deconstructed.31Reference to biology was commonly dismissed with the accusation“essentialist." Among other effects, this freed critics from the obligation to learn enough biology to engage it in really serious critique. It presented biology as itself, ironically, an essentialized category, neglecting the internal differentiation of positions, the possibilities for critical intervention and new thinking - including thinking with concepts that had been deployed in essentialist fashion but against the grain of the theories in which they had previously been invoked. Perhaps most incisively, Haraway showed how a rejection of all biological thinking as essentialist contributed to difficulties in taking biology seriously on the part of the very women's movement that played such a large role in returning the body to social and cultural discourse.

Rather than a simple opposition between essentialism and constructionism, it is important to see a field of possible strategies for confronting issues of identity. Several feminist thinkers, for example, have argued that it may sometimes be crucial to “risk essentialism."32 They do not have in mind a simple return to uncontested categories or uncritical assumptions of the biological determination of true identity. Rather, the point is to see that under certain circumstances - mainly identified as political but I think arguably also intellectual - self-critical claims to strong, basic, and shared identity may be useful. At its simplest, the argument suggests that where a particular category of identity has been repressed, delegitimated, or devalued in dominant discourses, a vital response may be to claim value for all those labeled by that category, thus implicitly invoking it in an essentialist way. Thus in the early years of the women's movement, it may have been vital for resistance to male domination and even for creative initiatives to construct a standpoint of women as such, to essentialize écriture feminine, to appeal to the presumed commonalities in the embodied experience of women. How much this need has been reduced is basic to strategic debates. But ironically, even the critique of how reliance on the general category “woman" obscured the variations among “women" itself has depended on the evocation of more specific quasi-essentialist categories - e.g. black women, lesbians, etc. In short, it may not be helpful to allow the critique of essentialism to become a prohibition against the use of all general categories of identity.

It is misleading to see essentialism as simply a historical stage, as though it is an error of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century thought out of which all “advanced" thinkers have grown. In the first place, the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were somewhat more complex than that. The roots of social constructionist arguments, after all, lie in Lockean behaviorism and such nineteenth-century inheritors as Owenite socialism (in which context some of their early applications to gender issues arose) and were in many ways extended by nineteenth-century social theory.³3 It is common to speak as though essentialism reigned throughout Western history until a new Enlightenment freed us in the postwar era. Sometimes the contrast is narrower - essentialism is seen as modernist and postmodernism has saved us from it. In many cases such views are supported by rather simplistic reflection theories of knowledge suggesting that successive stages of capitalism or of communications technology have unequivocally produced their fitting complements in the realm of knowledge.

A more accurate historical story might start by recognizing the special force essentialist reasoning gained during the modern era as part of several different but related intellectual and practical projects. It reinforced and was reinforced by the rise of individualism, the rhetoric of national identity, and appeals to nature as a “moral source."34 It participated in both the advance of universalistic moral reasoning - as for example the notion of human rights was grounded on a presumed essential commonality of human beings - and the advance of relativistic social explanation and moral construction - as from Montesquieu on the laws and mores of different peoples were understood as specific to their contexts. But this essentialist reasoning did not disappear. In the current clash between promoters of Western democracy and advocates of a neo-Confucian authoritarianism in Asia, for example, the competing essentialisms just mentioned come to the fore again as proponents of democracy are described as “human rights imperialists." Within the women's movement the matter is no clearer. For every critique of liberal rights talk,"there are two defenses of women's choice regarding abortion and childbirth that are rooted in essentialist claims to rights. There is no easy and clear-cut answer to Fuss's question, "How do we reconcile the poststructuralist project to displace identity with the feminist project to reclaim it?"Her question is addressed most immediately to Luce Irigaray, a French feminist theorist who absorbs much from Lacanian psychoanalysis but who also insists on a distinctive female imaginary rooted in female bodies. Irigaray's materialism has seemed simply an essentialism to many critics. Toril Moi, for example, reads Irigaray as fixing the representation of women in the metaphysical project of defining "woman."3s Others are troubled by her insistent focus on genital physiology. Yet Irigaray herself argues against an order in which only men have full subjectivity and therefore essential identities while women are defined by their lack and presumed non-self-sufficiency. Her work is full simultaneously of deconstruction of essentialist male logic and qualifed, strategic claims to female essence. This can be read negatively for its seeming inconsistencies, or positively for the suggestion that it is not productive to be simply for or against essentialism.

The road forward from the early predominance of essentialist approaches to identity lies not in simple reversal. Rather, it lies - historically in the last hundred plus years of Western thought and prospectively for each of us - in a proliferation of the theoretical and practical tools with which we can confront problems of identity and difference. To essentialist reason we add constructionism and to this dualism we add the possibilities of both deconstructing and claiming identities.3 Moreover, we can see that essentialism itself need not be essentialized, that there are a plethora of claims to "basic" or "root" or essential identities that stand on different grounds, that cohabit with different political bedfellows (or their female gendered equivalents), that open (or foreclose) different insights or coalitions or conflicts.

One implication of this is that the challenges posed by projects of identity cannot be averted simply by asserting that those projects are embedded in essentialist thinking. We cannot really stop thinking at least partially in categories - and therefore in at least something rather like an essentialist manner. Just as Derrida suggests we can never entirely escape from metaphysics however critical of it we may become, our task must be to remain seriously self-critical about our invocations of essence and identity. This means among other things paying attention to the agonistic, fractured, problematic aspects of identity. The politics of identity - politics either starting from or aiming at claimed identities of their protagonists - have to be taken seriously. The struggles occasioned by identity politics need to be understood, however, not as simply between those who claim different identities but within each subject as the multiple and contending discourses of our era challenge any of our efforts to attain stable self-recognition or coherent subjectivity.