## III

The background to identity politics thus lies not only in ideological and cultural changes but in transformations of social structure and societal integration. These change not only the nature of our individual and collective projects - as for example careers in global business corporations and worldwide mobilizations of environmentalists to save rain forests become possible - but also the nature of our relationships to each other. Theoretical attempts to grasp the new scale and forms of societal integration have often combined interest in “rationalization" with attention to structures of relationships themselves. But this can lead to some confusion and a relatively uncritical packaging together of aspects of social life - and the constitution of identities – that do not have to move precisely together. We can see the issue in Habermas's distinction of system from lifeworld. Grasping something basic to modern social life, this nonetheless leads Habermas into a problematic treatment of identity as basically prepolitical and correspondingly only a weak recognition of the importance of collective identity, into an idealization of the lifeworld and a presentation of movements of identity politics primarily as reactions to systemic incursions into lifeworlds, rather than as attempts to improve upon or respond to tensions and contradictions within lifeworlds, and into an emphasis on rationality and the differentiation of modes of life by cognitively defined forms of action that undermines adequate attention to structures of social relationships and the formation of practical projects.

It would be a mistake to give up on projects like Habermas's attempt to theorize the transformation and differentiation of modern life. Simply to deny the issues he tries to grasp with the opposition of system and lifeworld undermines the capacity of critical theory to come to terms with the structural background that frames the possibilities for contemporary action. The divergence between direct interpersonal relationships and of large-scale apparently autonomous social systems is basic to the modern era. But it works not just as an objective distinction of realms or modes of social organization; it is also constitutive of our modes of experience of and action in the social world. Weber sought to grasp this as a part of the general process of rationalization in which (identity based) communal action (Gemeinschaftshandeln) was replaced by (rationally regulated) social action (Gesellschaftshandeln).38 Though Weber did not focus much on patterns of concrete relationships as such (in the way that, for example, Simmel did), the Gemeinschaft/Gesellschaft dis-

tinction provided the rudiments of a relationally concrete background to the general phenomenon of the differentiation of value spheres. Habermas suggests a further split within the realm of rational action into "action oriented to reaching understanding and action oriented to success."39 It is on the basis of the former that he attempts to rescue the Enlightenment project of rationalization from entrapment in the Weberian iron cage of domination.

A key challenge for Habermas's critical theory is to find a way to maintain the momentum of communicative rationality in the face of systemic, instrumental rationality on the one hand and recidivistic calls for a return to some premodern form of community and traditional authority on the other. But Habermas runs into four difficulties.

First, as McCarthy has indicated, he tends to appropriate systemstheory and sociological functionalism rather too completely for the sake of the critical edge of his theory and its relevance to action.4" Though indebted to the marxist tradition he virtually abandons analysis of class and other fundamental social divisions.41 Power relations play little constitutive role in his conceptualization of society. Relatedly, he does not make conflictual collective action a significant part of his account of social change.

Second, the Enlightenment rationalism underlying Habermas's project leads him to reject too completely the importance of tradition to intellectual life generally, and traditional communities as bases for progressive popular action. His accounts of human action and reason are always abstracted from cultural or social particularities and identities. Sociologically and hermeneutically it is necessary to give greater weight to the unchosen foundations for action if we are to envision either a stable society or a deeply motivated radical challenge to established patterns and tendencies; this is one of the reasons why Bourdieu's theory appears in the present discussion as an important complement to Habermas's.4 If any form of lifeworld activity is to be defensible in the face of system world challenges, it will need to depend on strong social commitments, not simply contingent individual choices, however rational.

Third, Habermas's notion of pure communicative action, idealized in his account of the rationalized lifeworld, derives from institutional arenas that are hardly realms of perfect communication and freedom, including for example family relations that have generally been patriarchal.43 While Habermas's conceptual opposition between action oriented to understanding and action oriented to success makes sense, in other words, the idea that the lifeworld and system can be concretized as spheres of life (e.g. family and community vs. bureaucracies and markets) is seriously problematic. Habermas presumes a lifeworld that is (1)

separable in principle from systemic organization (e.g. not also constituted and given its specific organization by capitalism), and (2) somehow free from the reign of power and oppression and constituted - even in principle - by pure communicative action. In a world of compulsory heterosexism, family violence, and legal, economic, and cultural pressures that reduce women's choices about marriage and childbearing, it is hard to see the lifeworld - or the sphere of intimate and family relations that Habermas takes as its archetype - as unambiguously the locus of quality human relationships or to see all the problems of personal life as stemming from colonization by the system. Two forms of underştanding may be involved - one more concrete and phenomenological, the other more abstract – but neither constitutes a realm free of power relations. And if power relations, however personal and direct, involve an instrumental or success orientation, so real-world bureaucracies involve meaningful social bonds and communicative action.

Fourth, Habermas's account of system and lifeworld lacks an adequate social structural foundation.44 Not only does it not provide for an analysis of class conflict and power relations, it takes changing orientations to action as both the primary causes and primary results of the large-scale social changes of modernity. Little independent role is ascribed to demography, patterns in networks of concrete relationships, or capitalism's relentless expansion. Habermas takes changes in orientation to social action as primary, rather than seeing them as arising dialectically in relation to such social structural factors as the transformation in scale of social organization. It is in some part material changes in the scale and form of social relationships that necessitate adoption of instrumental or systemic orientations to action.

Habermas's theory posits two forms of societal integration, and indeed is important partly because it returns the issue of societal integration to the center of theoretical discussion in an innovative, not altogether functionalist way. But Habermas is ambiguous about whether system and lifeworld are to be understood as two spheres of life, or as two ways of looking at a social world which is always the result of constructive human action. The latter seems to me the more defensible view. There is no sharp demarcation between lifeworld and system. Rather, our experience in modern society leads to divergent ways of trying to understand the social world, and to an experiential and intellectual split between lifeworld and system (or such common sense analogs as "the people" and "the system," “everyday life" and "the big picture," etc.). This view is easier to maintain if we introduce a distinction between directly interpersonal social relationships (whether primary or secondary in Cooley's terms) and the indirect relationships which are formed when social action affects others only through the mediation of complex organizations, impersonal markets, or communications technology. Indirect relationships permit a societal scale unimaginable on the basis of direct relationships, and simultaneously encourage objectification and reification of their origin in human action.4 They are much more likely to be approached solely with an orientation to instrumental success than are directly interpersonal relations (though the latter may be similarly degraded).

Rather than focusing on kinds of relationships as such, Habermas begins with a qualitative distinction of forms of rational action: instrumental (oriented to success in relation to objectified goals) and communicative (oriented to reflective understanding and the constitution of social relations).46 In this view, both of these develop naturally in the course of human history. They come into conflict when they give rise to competing forms of societal integration - system and social (lifeworld):

Thus there is a competition not betueen the types of action oriented to understanding and success [which Habermas sees as complementary], but between principles of societal integration - between the mechanism of linguistic communication that is oriented to validity claims - a mechanism that emerges in increasing purity from the rationalization of the lifeworld - and those de-linguistified steering media through which systems of success-oriented action are differentiated out.47

Money is the paradigmatic example of the “de-linguistified" steering media to which Habermas (following Parsons) refers, but a wide range of statistical indicators (e.g. of productivity, public opinion, etc.) share many relevant features. These media allow social systems to be “steered" as though they were independent of human action. Through systems theory they may be understood in the same way. Indeed, the real complexity of very large-scale social processes may dictate that they can be grasped better in cybernetic and other relatively abstract academic terms, than in terms of the ordinary discourse of the lifeworld. Accordingly, Habermas uses systems theory in his analysis of system integration even while he attacks the reifying (and anti-democratic) tendencies of systems theory. What is unclear is whether or how he maintains in his theory the ability to show that such large-scale indirect phenomena remain nonetheless human social activities and relationships.

Heavily influenced by Niklas Luhmann, Habermas comes very close to losing the “unmasking" moment of a putatively critical theory and allowing the reifications of cybernetic theory - which actual social arrangements make convenient and predispose us to use - to be accepted as fully satisfactory accounts of social systems.48 It seems to me preferable to argue that very large-scale social organization based on indirect relationships is difficult of to understand without recourse to the kind of understanding Habermas describes as typical of the system world. This is a way of looking at social action well suited to large-scale phenomena, but nonetheless it is an intellectual choice. In other words, when relationships are directly interpersonal we are unlikely to fail to recognize the extent to which they are human social creations. But when they are highly indirect, mediated by technology, markets, and complex organizations, we are more likely to lose sight of their constitution out of human action - and thus their inherently political character. Indirect relationships sometimes assume a solidity that is less typical of those direct relationships in which action is more often and more clearly visible. Arendt remarked on the "notorious uncertainty not only of all political matters, but of all affairs that go on between men directly, without the intermediary, stabilizing, and solidifyıng influence of things.", Largescale systems of indirect relations appear as relatively stable partly because we - more or less of necessity - grasp their operation through aggregate statistics and systemic conceptions like those of cybernetic theory. These will tend to make it look as though the large-scale systems were somehow autonomously functioning entities rather than creations of human social action.

We see this each time economists talk about the economy as though it were a natural system to) be predicted and understood in the same manner as the weather and indeed, economists are increasingly called upon to play a role similar to that of weather forecasters on the television news,. It is almost impossible to see the manifold ways in which human actions create large-scale markets, for example, and certainly to) understand complex economic processes on the basis simply of aggregation upward from those specific relationships of buying, selling: making, using. etc. A categorial break is intellectually necessary in order to look at these holistically, on a collective level of analysis. This break is not a break in reality, however, but in our approach to understanding it. A critical theorist needs continually to remind herself or himself that it is provisional; it must be unmasked recurrently to reveal the actual human activity creating the larger system. "System" is not, then. a sphere of life so) much as it is a mode of understanding 'one which is particularly relevant to certain spheres of activity. That mode of understanding is made convenient 'if not necessary; for considering societal integration by the proliferation of indirect relationships on a very large scale.

A result of this, however, is that the economy. the state and other very large-scale institutions are likely to appear to most citizens as alien forces: bewildering, powerful beings rather than the abstractions critical thinkers may see them to be. They are reified, and the baffling way in which they confront us makes this reification not an easily escapable form of false consciousness but an almost unavoidable condition of practical thought in the modern world. Their functioning can be grasped well only through statistics, theories, cybernetic concepts, and other intellectual tools which are both poorly distributed among the population, and also at odds with the direct understanding which people gain of their immediate surroundings. The lifeworld, by contrast, can be understood intuitively; it is a "lived reality," not an abstraction.

Many of people's most basic values concern attachments within the lifeworld - family, home, standard of living, religious experience, etc. The fact that people have such deep commitments to lifeworld attachments is an important reason why they resist the encroachments of largescale institutions which seem to threaten them.º Habermas does not confront this issue very directly because he focuses on an extremely rationalized ideal of communicative action when considering the lifeworld, rather than on anything approximating contemporary lived experience.

The same immediate understanding of and high value on much of the lifeworld that supports communitarian, populist resistance to encroachments of impersonal systemic organization of everyday life is also a crucial source of the temptation to try to understand systemic integration through simple extension of lifeworld categories. As Castells puts it, "when people find themselves unable to control the world, they simply shrink the world to the size of their community."1 This is a fundamental misrecognition built into the bulk of localist, populist politics today.2 It also shapes and challenges movements and processes of identity politics. Not only may they misperceive the structural factors helping to reproduce culture or behavior they seek to change. More basically, the difficulties and opportunities to which they respond stem largely from the mutual implication of lifeworld and system in the social projects in which they are engaged. A feminist politics that stresses that “the personal is political" does not just defend the realm of the personal against colonization by systemic forces, but takes up the power relations constituting the most intimate and personal arenas of life. Some of these power relations are inextricably rooted in systemic patterns of social organization; so, however, are many of the resources – like law courts – by which personal power relations can be contested. Similarly, it makes no sense to see religious fundamentalisms as simply traditional or defenses of primordial lifeworld values or relationships; they arise precisely out of the simultaneous embeddedness in multiple projects that are hard to reconcile under existing conditions: economic advancement and family solidarity, moral rectitude and political power, clarity of identity and exchanges across lines of cultural difference.

The temptation to misrecognize a complicated and frustrating world is played upon by many politicians who offer illusory accounts of and solutions to social problems - accounts which make sense only on the basis of the denial of any basic difference between large-scale organization of social systems and everyday organization of directly interpersonal relationships. President Reagan, for example, told American television viewers that balancing the federal budget was really no different from balancing a family's checkbook. He capitalized on both the spurious intimacy of the television medium which made possible a jocular informality, and on the appeal of an account which falsely reassured his viewers that the workings of the federal government and the national and international economies were not deeply complex and difficult to master, but potentially as manageable as a routine of everyday life. The apparent complexity, he implied, was only obscurantism on the part of elites; the danger people sensed, while real, was only the result of stubborn foolishness on the part of a few people with highly particular vested interests. Though this sort of catering to public desires for a reassuring misunderstanding of systemic affairs may be particularly typical of mass-mediated executive branch politics, a similar mode of thought is important to much oppositional, populist politics.s3 It is because populist politics are in this sense a response to the divide between system and lifeworld that they are endemic to modern and modernizing societies. In modern societies, state and economy require and continually extend indirect relationships. The most powerful determinants of the general shape of society and of the web of relationships within which individuals will operate thus cannot be understood through extension of lifeworld ways of understanding to systemic social organization.

At the heart of Habermas's project is recognition that a future without instrumental rationality and impersonal systems of money and power based on it is fundamentally implausible. The lifeworld cannot be autonomous. If democracy rather than rule by experts is sought, the lifeworld must provide for some organization of analysis and discourse that enables people to understand and exert some control over the systems they have created. Habermas's understanding of the lifeworld, however, places the central emphasis on people's presumably primary orientations towards communication which is at least potentially full, free, and undistorted. It is not the lifeworld in general which he wishes to defend, but an idealized, purified form of communicative action aimed at interpersonal understanding. He conceptualizes this through the notion of an idealized speech situation, in which certain validity claims (to