comprehensibility, truth, appropriateness, and sincerity) which are always implicit in speech are universalized. All real historical societies fall short of this ideal, but they may be compared to it and evaluated in terms of an evolutionary scale of undistorted communication.4 Something closer to the ideal emerges from the lifeworld through a process of rationalization:

Correspondingly, a lifeworld can be regarded as rationalized to the extent that it permits interactions that are not guided by normatively ascribed agreement but - directly or indirectly - by communicatively achieved understanding.⁵

"Communicatively achieved understanding," for Habermas, refers mainly to communication among individuals who already have identities, and the removal of blockages that normatively sanctioned culture may offer to common understanding, but not to the production of meaning or the creation of culture and identity. The work of rationality is, in part, to allow rational challenges to established agreements maintained by cultural hegemony. It provides for critique. But it does not bring culture-forming and identity-forming processes to the forefront of attention. Rather, Habermas focuses on the ways in which people who have already constructed identities organize their action in relation to each other. Do they pursue further mutual understanding through communicative action, or do they pursue only instrumental action, especially in relation to systems of money and power?

Neglect of the culture-forming dimension of human activity places the matter of achieving common understanding under the guiding model of translation (as discussed critically in chapter 3 above). It diverts our attention from the ways in which histories of mutual engagement produce new culture and new identities such that shared understandings are easier or harder to achieve. It also diverts our attention from the ways in which the pursuit of identity - and recognition of identities - is commonly a matter of politics, not only normative ascription or communicative understanding.

## IV

Recognition is at the heart of the matter. No matter when and where one looks, subjectivity is perhaps best understood as a project, as something always under construction, never perfect. In varying degrees for different people and in different circumstances it may be more or less challenging, but it is never automatic. A crucial aspect of the project of subjectivity is identity. Identity turns on the interrelated problems of self-recognition and recognition by others. Recognition is vital to any reflexivity, for example, any capacity to look at oneself, to choose one's actions and see their consequences, and to hope to make oneself something more or better than one is. This component of recognition may be the aspect of identity made most problematic by the social changes of modernity.

Recognition may never have followed immediately on socially derived and/or sanctioned identities. There has probably always been some room for manipulation, some need for management or at least for successful presentation or performance. But with enormous nation-states, international diasporas, wide realms of personal choice, unstable and heterogeneous networks of social relations, mass media for the proliferation of cultural transmission, and the sheer multiplicity of discourses attempting to name or constitute persons, the social basis for recognition has come under particular challenge. The sheer scope and complexity of recognizable identities and competing social projects and identity-schemes makes recognition problematic and in need of specific establishment in various institutional and interactional settings.56

Problems involving recognition - or nonrecognition - by others are integrally related to issues in personal self-recognition. This is one of the reasons why the sometimes abused and increasingly criticized feminist slogan, "the personal is political," still merits attention. It is not just that others fail to see us for who we are sure we really are, or repress us because of who they think we are. We face problems of recognition because socially sustained discourses about who it is possible or appropriate or valuable to be inevitably shape the way we look at and constitute ourselves, with varying degrees of agonism and tension. These concerns frequently, though not uniformly, are expressed in and give rise to “"identity politics."

These identity-pursuits are “politics" for several reasons. These go beyond the general assertion that "the personal is political," even though that slogan helped pioneer the feminist version of these identity politics. The slogan accepted the implicit division of personal or private and public or social systemic realms in order or challenge the notion that power and politics did not operate in the family, intimate relations, and other aspects of "personal"life. But almost immediately, feminist theorists also began to challenge that very division, showing for example how the distinction of public and private had operated to marginalize women and to distort both the realms it helped to constitute.

The pursuits labeled "identity politics" are collective, not merely individual, and public not only private. They are struggles, not merely gropings; power partially determines outcomes and power relations are changed by the struggles. They involve seeking recognition, legitimacy (and sometimes power), not only expression or autonomy; other people, groups, and organizations (including states) are called upon to respond. Indeed, one of the most problematic effects of the new age, pop psychological and self-help rhetorics with which many identity politics movements have articulated their concerns and programs is a tendency to obscure their necessarily social, political, and public character. Finally, identity-politics movements are political because they involve refusing, diminishing, or displacing identities others wish to recognize in individuals. This is familiar in rethinkings of both gender and racial identities - and made particularly visible in the latter case by the recurrent replacement of collective labels (negro, colored, black, Afro-American, African-American) that had come to impose identities at odds with the identity-claims of those labeled. It is given a sharp focus in the difference between critiques of homophobia and of compulsory heterosexism. The former accepts the category “homosexual" and challenges the fears, attacks, and delegitimations visited upon homosexuals. The latter resists the particular version of sexual identity (and for that matter sexualization of identity) that undergirds a host of social practices, opening a space for other practices or sexual orientations (including but not limited to those commonly labeled as homosexual) without being rootedin a specific identity-claim.57

The issue of resistance to imposed or fixed identities has encouraged in many quarters a shift from identity politics to a politics of difference. This focus on a critique of identity - often extended in poststructuralist and especially Derridian circles through a critique of identity as such rather than merely specifically problematic identities - is sometimes presented as though it marks a transcendence of identity politics. As Christina Crosby remarks, however, "differences' work now more or less as identity' did before."8 Or, as I have suggested above, the choice between deconstructing and claiming identities (or identity as such) may be one that needs to be shaped by strategic considerations, not dictated by theoretical and normative first principles; to speak of identity is not always simply or only to repress. The operations of deconstructing and claiming coexist only in tension, but they may need nonetheless always to coexist and inform each other.

These various versions of identity politics have shaped and been shaped by a range of specific movements. Among the most commonly cited cases are the so-called liberation and lifestyle movements that have flourished in the relatively rich countries since the 1960s: women's movements, movements of gay men and lesbians, movements of African-Americans, Chicanos, Asians, youth and countercultural movements, deep ecology, and so forth. This list of examples is commonly associated with the idea of new social movements (NSMs).59

The new social movements idea is, however, problematic and obscures the greater significance of identity politics. Without much theoretical rationale, it groups together what seem to the researchers relatively attractive" movements, vaguely on the left, but leaves out such other contemporary movements as the new religious right and fundamentalism, the resistance of white ethnic communities against people of color, various versions of nationalism, and so forth. Yet these are equally manifestations of identity politics and there is no principle that clearly explains their exclusion from the lists drawn up by NSM theorists.60

The NSM idea is rooted in an opposition of the movements that began to flourish in the 1960s to the labor and socialist movements that had putatively previously dominated activism. The older movements were allegedly governed by a single dominant identity structure rather than allowing for the open play and legitimation of many identities. Perhaps this was true of the 1950s, but it is historically myopic.61 In the early nineteenth century, labor movements were engaged in identity politics, presenting the case that "worker" was an identity deserving of legitimacy, calling for solidarity among those sharing this identity, and demanding their inclusion in the polity. At the same time, socialism was dominated by utopian visions, calls for direct action, and attempts to reformulate fundamental ideas about human nature. NSMs have ebbed and flowed throughout modernity.

One could read the history of social movements as the story of efforts to bring “social" concerns into political contestation. As we shall see further in the next chapter, a key root to this was the claim that properly political concerns - and the legitimacy of political rule - could be determined "from the bottom up" and not only by rulers. In different ways, the Protestant Reformation, the struggles for liberal political institutions that brought both American and French Revolutions, and the struggles for socialism and democracy, all proposed to change the constitution of society dramatically and to use political means for novel pursuits. Identity politics have more generally been basic to a whole range of movements that sought to use the public sphere to challenge existing arrangements or bring forward new possibilities in religion, sexual relations, the human relation to nature, community life, work and economics, and a host of other dimensions of social life. T.o argue that wage rates or factory health should be a matter for state regulation was to bring "the social" into the political realm.

Different understandings and valuations of pressing social concerns were not just matters of fixed interests. They were - and necessarily are - matters of the constitution of identities. Neither identities nor interests neatly come before the other; the struggle to achieve what we believe to be in our interest shapes our identities as much as the identities determine what we see as in our interests. The point is that neither is altogether fixed. Both are produced and altered in the course of everyday social projects and collective mobilizations of varying scale. There is always some politics to this process.

The notion that identity politics is a new phenomenon is, in sum, clearly false. The women's movement has roots at least two hundred years old. The founding of communes was as important in the early 1800s as in the 1960s. Weren't the European nationalisms of the nineteenth century instances of identity politics? What of the struggles of African-Americans in the wake of slavery? What of anticolonial resistance? Neither is identity politics limited to the relatively affluent (the 'post-materialists"as Inglehart calls them), as though there were some clear hierarchy of needs in which clearly defined material interests precede culture and struggles over the constitution of the nature of interests - both material and spiritual.62 Throughout the modern era, the capacity of ordinary people to bring their interests and their projects of identity formation into the public sphere and the political process has increased enormously. The expansion of the state, and the intensification of its reach into everyday life, is one powerful reason. The state suggests, among other things, that it is a practical possibility to act on the organization of everyday life, to change how it is constituted. It also occasions resistance. Moreover, the modern era has been enormously productive of movements partly because each wave of activism is productive of new potentials for activism - both because of demonstration effects and because of the nurturance of experienced leaders and participants (whose participation will not be limited to the same issues and identities that moved them in the past) and networks and organizations. Partly because of the very history of movements themselves, as well as because of changes in state power, capitalism, media, and other social forces, the production of identity politics is an expanding as well as a pervasive feature of the modern era.

Identity politics has been part and parcel of modern politics and social life for hundreds of years. But it has had to contend with various more universalizing, difference-denying, ways of thinking about politics and social life, and these have shaped the nature not only of our polities but of our academic thinking. Social science has paid only intermittent attention to issues of identity and identity politics. They do not figure in strong ways in classical social theory (though the construction of the generic, identity-bearing individual does). More recently objectivism, systemic determinism, and instrumental, interest-based understandings of motivation have kept social theorists from appreciating the importance of identity and identity politics.

Identity formation is commonly brought into consideration, if at all, as a prior condition of adult participation in social life - e.g. in socialization theory (and note the special place of socialization in, e.g., Parsons' functionalism). This is so even with regard to public life: in conceptualizing the public sphere, Habermas presumes that the private sphere provides it with fully formed subjects with settled identities and capacities.63 Habermas discusses ways in which the literary public sphere helped to prepare the kinds of subjects needed for public political discourse, but once it has fulfilled its role as precursor to the political public sphere, the literary discourse drops out of Habermas's picture. He does not consider the continuing transformations of subjectivity wrought not only in literature but in a host of identity-forming public spheres.64 Neither does he consider how identity might be transformed through public political activity. Upon entrance to the essentially liberal public sphere, he suggests following the idealized practices of the eighteenthcentury bourgeois public sphere, differences of identity must be bracketed rather than thematized. On the other hand, of course, one of the problems that has led to the recent emphasis on a politics of the personal is that identity-forming discourses, even when carried out in public spheres of readers, cinema viewers, students, or self-help oriented radio talk shows, often fail to institutionalize attention to their own publicness and to recognize their implicit politics. Many of these discourses are "public" in the sense of being open to a variety of different participants, but not in the sense of thematically constituting themselves as about public matters. This has profound implications for the ways in which they can empower their participants and suggests an important politics about what discourses are either able or inclined to present themselves as being about matters of public significance.

Here Habermas's theory with its famous inattention to difference shares a problem with many forms of identity politics rooted in claims to difference. As Judith Butler puts it, "for the subject to be a pregiven point of departure for politics is to defer the question of the political construction and regulation of the subject itself."6 This is a problem with the presumption of woman or women as subject just as with the implicitly male universal subjects of Habermas's public sphere. Social science suffers from this inattention (even incapacity) at all levels of analysis from individuals through such larger units as nations and even the globe or species. The problem reaches to significant practical political issues. There is generally no attention to the constitution of individual subjects in the discourse of human rights, for example, and in consideration of self-determination, nations are commonly understood as always already existing.

The constitution of identities has not only been kept off center stage. It has been presented as a more or less harmonious process resulting in a normally stable and minimally changing identity. Thus we have been led by our theories often to underestimate the struggle involved forging identities, the tension inherent in the fact that we all have multiple, incomplete, and/or fragmented identities (and sometimes resistances), the politics implied by the differential public standing of various identities or identity-claims, and the possibilities for our salient constructions of identities to change in the context of powerfully meaningful, emotionally significant events - like many social movements.

Just as conventional social theory misleads us, however, and obscures the importance of identity and identity politics, the contemporary advocates who have brought identity politics into the forefront of our attention often present the phenomenon in misleading and problematic ways. The false novelty of NSMs is an example of this. Many advocates and sympathetic analysts falsely oppose the struggle for identity to the demands of society; they accept far too sharp a separation between the individual as locus of interior feelings that need to be expressed in identity-claims, and society as exterior source of pressures for conformity.

This obscures the extent to which social life calls forth or demands identity-claims and provides opportunities (albeit biased ones) for their assertion. Among other things, our various claims and resistances to identities make sense only against the background of other identityclaims and social valuations. As Charles Taylor has argued, we need to be wary of a kind of “soft relativism" that suggests that all claims to recognition have the same standing, and that recognition can proceed without judgment.66 To try to grant a priori equal recognition to all identity claims (or deconstructions) amounts to taking none seriously. Or as Rey Chow puts it, "since positions are now infinitely interchangeable many feel that postmodernism may be little more than a recompensatory 'I'm OK, you're OK' inclusion or a leveling attribution of subversive marginality' to all."67 Soft relativism also commonly obscures the extent to which identity claims are socially nurtured and constructed, not merely reflections of each individuals's inner (natural) truth. In some versions, it even and (somewhat ironically) reproduces tendencies to radically liberal individualism with its implied universalism. Those making identity-claims often present them within a rhetoric implying that everyone is equally endowed with identity, equally entitled to their own identity, and equally entitled to respect for it. But this liberal conception can at best provide a ground for tolerance, not for mutual respect or acceptance, and not for understanding the phenomenon of identityformation itself.

A particularly troubling version of this impulse to find universally acceptable grounds for distinctive identities is the recurrent - and currently resurgent - urge to naturalize in the sense of finding a fixed biological basis for human identities. For all the critiques of essentialism that figure in gay theory, thus, many gay men are drawn to research suggesting a genetic foundation for homosexuality and to claims that gays should be accepted not because they are free to choose their own identities, but because they had no choice in the matter. While the naturalizing arguments advanced on the basis of genetic research and examinations of brain structure have been advanced by and I think have appealed mainly to gay men, a number of lesbian thinkers have advanced their own naturalizing arguments. These are more often rooted in phenotypic physiology than in posited underlying genetic or neural structures, and have been advanced with more theoretical sophistication (as for example by Irigaray with her account of natural female autoeroticism based on the “two lips").68

Advocates of identity politics too commonly opt in the same arguments for a "soft relativism," a rediscovery of the philosophy of will that glorifies choice as such, and an exaggeration of difference. Such arguments cannot quite make sense of identity politics, however, since claims for legitimacy or recognition are more than claims for tolerance. It is crucial analytically to recognize that common frames of significance are implicitly claimed even in arguments emphasizing difference and denying shared moral discourse beyond the level of "you do your thing, I'll do mine."69 This is so in two senses.

First, the significance of the identity struggled over is almost always claimed not just against other identities but within a particular field of shared relevance - e.g. a polity. Proponents of identity politics offer claims to have difference recognized as legitimate within a field like employment or legal treatment where people with many different identities are making similar claims. This is even so for the identity of nations, which normally involves a rhetoric of cultural difference yet is in large part a claim to equivalent standing with other nations - i.e. to be the same sort of thing that they are.70

Second, internal to the various identities on behalf of which political claims are made are various differentiated subgroups. Thus within the gay community there are gay men and lesbians, and many different sorts of communities of each. For identity politics to work, these must not all accentuate their differences but rather adopt a common frame of reference within which their unity is more salient. The claim that their shared identity is salient and even somewhat obligatory - as suggested by those who would “out" others - thus, cannot be entirely coherent with a tacit relativistic ethics as an account of how we ought to deal with difference.

## V

Underlying much of the pressure towards repressive sameness and essentialist identities is a tendency to think in terms of what Harrison White has called categorical identities rather than either more complex notions of persons or networks of concrete social relations."1 This is particularly pronounced where large-scale collectivities and mobilizations havebeen facilitated by new forms of systemic organization (capitalism, the modern state) and new infrastructures of transport and communication (from paved roads and railroads to telephones, TV, and computer networks). While telephones and sometimes computer networks may be used to transcend space within relationships that are still person-to-person (narrowcasting), many others are used primarily to address large categories of people constituted by their similarities and not by networks of interpersonal relations. Gun owners may know other gun owners, thus, but the National Rifle Association mobilizes them not on the basis of their network ties but by their membership in a category of people who will respond to common calls for action.'The same goes for Muslims, to the extent that this category is invoked not just on a local or even a national but an international scale. And for national identities, class identities, and a host of others. The large-scale categories may be complemented in varying degree by local networks, and these may be crucial to some mobilizations, but at the level of the category as a whole, network density will almost by definition be low.

Most identity politics involves claims about categories of individuals who putatively share a given identity. This allows a kind of abstraction from the concrete interactions and social relationships within which identities are constantly renegotiated, in which individuals present one identity as more salient than another, and within which individuals achieve some personal sense of continuity and balance among their various sorts of identities. Categorical identities can be invoked and given public definition by individuals or groups even where they are not embodied in concrete networks of direct interpersonal relationships. Indeed, they are quintessentially objects of such public address. The abstractness of categories encourages framing claims about them as though they offered a kind of trump card over the other identities of individuals addressed by them. This encourages an element of repression and/or essentialism within the powerful categorical identities.

This struggle to achieve a “trump card" salience for a categorical identity - in the face of a modern world where there are always many possible salient identities - often encourages an ironic in-group essentialism. Such in-group essentialism is implied by the example given above of claimed biological determination of homosexuality, and the battles within the gay movement over this argument on the one hand and "queer theory" on the other would be well worth research.72 In-group essentialism - ironically often juxtaposed to strident attacks on the essentialism of dominant categorizations of identities - is linked to portrayals of identities as more singular and/or fixed than they easily can be. Even while pointing to agonism about identity, in other words, such views often imagine their complete resolution: If only Serbia were autonomous and not subject to the threats of Croats, Catholics, and Muslims, thus, there would be no identity politics, only the one, true, correct model of Serbian identity. No Serbian women's movement, no Serbian gay movement, no Serbian debate about being inside or outside of Europe, or about pan-Slavic identities. In the American context too we can see how in-group essentialism is linked to suppression of some identities - like a distinct black feminist voice within black nationalism - and in general to pressures to conform to standard views of the identity in question and often to dependence or experts authoritative sources as to that identity.

As the previous two examples suggest, every collective identity is open both to internal subdivision and to calls for its incorporation into some larger category of primary identity. This is not only an issue for alternative collective identities, but for individuals who are commonly treated in this discourse as though they were unitary and internally homogenous. The capacity for an internal dialogicality is erased.

Tension between identity - putatively singular, unitary, and integral - and identities - plural, cross-cutting, and divided - is inescapable at both individual and collective levels. Individuals face the challenge of knitting together the different phases of their existence, their different social relationships and roles. Groups never wholly.supersede the individuals who make them up (any more than individuals exist altogether apart from groups and social relations). Attempts to subsume any set of relations under a categorical identity or to invest any category with definitive meaning are always to some degree tendentious and invite resistance. To say that, as lived, identity is always project, not settled accomplishment points to the necessary temporality of existence, to the fact that in living we invest ourselves in identities not statically but with an orientation to the future and to action. Of course, various external ascriptions or recognitions may appear to be fixed and timeless. In the projects of our personal (or group) identities we may take on or resist the attempt to live up to such external idealization. Being Jewish, for example, is thus always a project (or an occasion for resistance) for every modern Jewish individual and community, even if stereotypes about how to be Jewish are maintained or presented as fixed by anti-Semites or the ultra-orthodox. Or, to change the example radically, "black unity" in South Africa can only be understood as a political project pushed at one level by the ANC, challenged at that level by Inkatha which claims a different unity, and both pushed and challenged by various factions within each. “Black" is not a settled, pre-theoretical or pre-political position from which to grasp practical affairs or achieve knowledge any more than Zulu is.

Rather than addressing this problem head on, much mainstream sociological theory tries to find a way to fix identity by appeal to some more "objective" underlying variable or factor. The most common candidate is rational self-interest. But identity cannot be collapsed satisfactorily into interest or made to reflect it except as part of a personal and/or political project. In the first place, identities can and to some extent, indeed, always do change.73 More than merely externally determined change, one can seek to transform oneself - wanting, for example, to have better wants. Whether or not weakness of will hinders such a project, its very possibility necessarily means that we cannot understand individuals well as fixed bearers of interests. Finally, there are always internal tensions and inconsistencies among the various identities and group memberships of individuals. These are not always open to simple averaging solutions (as utilitarianism generally requires) because they often lack common denominators for such quantitative compromises. Thus acting on certain identities must frustrate others.

This is a key reason why the politics of personal identity and the politics of collective identity are so inextricably linked. In many settings it is not possible to make even an expressive, individual choice for the primacy of, say, an independent female identity (let alone to enter into active feminist politics) without running afoul of nationalist assumptions about gender. As Collins has pointed out with regard to black nationalism, this is painful because many women really understand themselves to be fundamentally - “essentially" - both feminist women and African-Americans.74 They necessarily experience the hostility of conventional black nationalist discourse not simply as an external constraint but as an internal tension. Similarly, Bosnian Muslim feminists and other advocates of Bosnian women faced in 1993 a horrific version of the way nationalism and gender can collide. Serbian men raped thousands of

Bosnian women individually and in large, public groups as part of their project of ethnic cleansing. This was a specifically gendered violation equally specifically deployed against a nationally defined group. Yet some Bosnian men added to the calamity by treating the women who were raped as defiled and impure. They were defiled not only in the general sexist discourse of female purity, but in a specifically nationalist discourse in which they had been inscribed in proper roles as daughters, wives, and mothers. To think of themselves as either women rather than Bosnian Muslims or Bosnian Muslims rather than women made no sense. They were raped because they were both, and to condemn the Bosnian Muslim culture equally with the Serbian project of ethnic cleansing (as some American feminists rather shockingly have done) is to condemn those very women. Yet the obvious claim to be both women and Bosnian Muslims was only available as a political project (however implicit) to refigure the discourses of gender, religion, and nation within which their identities were inscribed and on the bases of which their bodies and their honor alike were violated.

To see identities only as reflections of “objective" social positions or circumstances is to see them always retrospectively. It does not make sense of the dynamic potential implicit - for better or worse - in the tensions within persons and among the contending cultural discourses that locate persons. Identities are often personal and political projects in which we participate, empowered to greater or lesser extents by resources of experience and ability, culture and social organization.

But the puzzles lie not just in invocations of strong collective identity claims. They lie also in the extent to which people (and not only in the West) are not moved by any strong claims of identity - or communality - with others and respond instead to individualistic appeals to selfrealization. These two are not altogether mutually exclusive in practice. The same unwillingness to work in complex struggles for social transformation may lie behind both a preference for individualistic, psychologistic solutions to problems and a tendency to accept the illusory solutions offered by strong, simplistic identity claims on behalf of nations, races, and other putatively undifferentiated categories. In any case, as hooks puts it:

Just as Nancy Hartsock's new work urges us to question why we are being asked to surrender a concern with the subject at this historical moment, when women have been struggling to move from object to subject, we must ask why it is women are being seduced by models of individual change that imply that no change has to occur in larger political and social realities.75