# Nationalism and Difference: The Politics of Identity Writ Large

## I

The politics of identity has often appeared as a new politicization of everyday life, a shift away from some more traditional politics of interests. Not only is the personal increasingly politicized, some analysts note, politics is increasingly aestheticized. It turns on dramatic performances rather than instrumental struggles.

These are fair observations about contemporary politics, but they are misleading insofar as they posit an “old" politics that stuck narrowly to instrumental struggles over interests, that was not in large part identity politics, that was not about the politicization of everyday life, that did not work in significant part by aesthetic production and performances. At least during the modern era, and arguably to some extent more generally, this has never been the case. That it could seem to be the case was the result of hegemonic ideologies differentiating the “properly political" - and therefore most explicitly contestable - dimensions of life from others, and accordingly obscuring the workings of power and power struggles in other realms of life.

The long modern history of increasing popular participation in political processes, rooted not only in early republicanism but in the political mobilizations and rituals of the absolutist era, has both brought everyday life concerns to the fore and made issues of identity basic. Though tied closely to the project of democracy, this increasing popular participation has not been limited to it. It has been manifest wherever regimes - even sharply undemocratic and dictatorial regimes - saw their legitimacy as based on serving the interests of ordinary people, improving the conditions of their everyday lives, and saw the conditions of their continued rule in terms of capacity to mobilize ordinary people for military, industrial, and civic projects. This was, for example, the rhetoric of all communist states, regardless of differentiations in how democratic they were and how well they seemed in fact to serve the interests of their citizens.

Where ordinary people are drawn into such mobilizations and into the discourse of legitimacy, politics must involve struggle over salient identities, as is manifest in the spread of the ideology of citizenship. Identities like "citizen" are in actual or potential tension with others, from "subject," through "worker," “woman," and "priest." Each of these can be equally ambiguous and equally subject to struggle (though the extent of ambiguity and struggle are both variables reflecting the stability and efficacy of hegemonic consciousnesses). To create the modern politics of class required identity struggle that persuaded workers that their common identities as workers should overshadow their differences on lines of craft or field of production, region, religion, gender, etc., and also should define a clear distinction from middle-class or elite identities. The quintessential politics of interest, in other words, was rooted in a politics of identity. It was also grounded in a politicization of everyday life, a call to see economic welfare and relations between employers and employees as matters of public, political concern rather than purely private interests.' This was in part an aestheticized politics from the outset, carried forward by dramatic performances and rituals from the mobilization of the traditions of the French compagnonnage,² to the political theater of the Luddites,3 the spread of union songs, the retreat into factional identities, the idealization of workers' accents and styles where more broadly transformative politics were not availale, and the replacement of active workers struggles by aestheticized images of the proletarian in communist societies.

In short, class politics was, partly but also necessarily, identity politics. Though it was rooted in very local workers'identities as well as the notion of class linked to the concentration of capital, it was carried out on a very large scale. But the politics of class was not the only or the most successful such venture in large-scale politics of identity. Indeed, it met its most decisive crises precisely in confrontation with commitments to national identities. Nationalists had produced, among other things, a more effectively aestheticized politics, a politics which could often appear as prepolitical or apolitical precisely in its aesthetic forms - national mythology and folklore, poetry and plays, folk music and grand symphonies, the very identification with the national language. Nationalism - the discourse and political programs of national identities - even shaped what was made of class identities, located workers' selfconsciousness of themselves and conceptions of class politics generally within nation-states, despite the international organization of capital and calls like Marx's and Engels'for the workers of the world to unite. Nationalism showed its greater strength decisively in the disastrous era of World War I. If further evidence were needed of how the politics of everyday life, the aestheticization of politics, and the struggle over identities were already central to the modern era and not just waiting for invention in the 1960s, one would only have to look to fascism, national socialism, and the next world war.

It is not obvious what interests will move people in – or into – political struggles. Since each of us is typically involved in a range of personal commitments, projects, and aspirations, and each of us attempts to navigate multiple social worlds, we present at least partially indeterminate identities to the political process. But because our various identities may be contested, and because a range of agents seek to reinforce some and undermine others, there is always a politics to the construction and experience of identity, not just following from it. The present chapter explores this in relation especially to national identities, not just because they have so much impact but because they are so easily seen as natural and prepolitical in our contemporary world. They call, in other words, for critical theory precisely because the manner of their institutionalization and reproduction make them so commonly immune to critical reexamination.

Nationalism is not simply a kind of political policy or social movement. It is a rhetoric that has become enormously widespread and powerful in the modern world. It is used to shape and legitimate state policies, secessionist movements, and attempts to join existing states. It is the most prominent rhetoric for constituting or arguing over the “selves" at stake in political self-determination. It is thus implicated in the very idea of democracy, both as a claim about the internal integration of the political community and as a claim about its boundaries and relations to people and powers outside. The rhetoric of nationalism thus helps to constitute not only violent programs of ethnic repression or civil war but more commonly praised ideas of citizenship and patriotism.

Nationalist thinking also pervades social science, which is one reason why developing an adequate critical stance towards it is difficult. Our very ideas about what “a society" is are shaped by understandings developed under the influence of nationalism and European statemaking. Not least of all, we make national identities seem natural, or at least primordial, by building them into our very sense of history. Modern history has been constructed first and foremost as national histories. Disciplines are organized and texts constructed in a way guaranteed to produced a Whiggish outcome - the idea that the nation was always already there to have its history written. Thus a recent Stockholm museum exposition on Swedish history began with fur clad cave dwellers who, it confidently assured its viewers, were Swedish cave dwellers. And as Benedict Anderson has noted, English history presents William the Conqueror as a founding father of England in a way that neutralizes his status as a foreign invader. Some national historiographical traditions are more self-conscious about acts of founding, especially revolutions, often presented in mythologized, heroic terms. But in America, which is one of the primary examples of this, it is still the case that colonists appear commonly (especially in popular history) as always already Americans and efforts at more inclusive history appropriate Indians ("Native Americans") to the same model. Even in Third World countries where the boundaries (and in some cases the very idea) of the state were imposed arbitrarily, history texts commonly claim the precolonial inhabitants of the territory as nationals.

How well these historiographical claims work may be one of the great, half recognized factors behind differences in how well democratic institutions work. The settled, established democracies of the world are - to a worrying extent - those countries where long processes of national integration preceded the establishment of democratic political institutions. If the United States of America seems an exception to this rule, consider not only the extent of genuine social, economic, and cultural integration among the founding colonies (compared, say, to precolonial Sudan), but the fact that national integration had to be ratified and strengthened by an extraordinarily bloody eivil war.

Commentators like Samuel P. Huntington thus offer prime examples of uncritical theory when they claim that the potential for democracy is rooted largely in Western civilization and minimal in other broad civilizational categories.4 They echo the claims of Asian authoritarian leaders who argue that they have no obligation to respect democratic ideals because that is not the Asian way. They give succor to African strong men at a time when many Africans hope for an end to the traditions of rapacious rule characteristic of the postcolonial states. And they encourage us to accept quasi-naturalized categories of “civilizations" in place of genuine historical or social science analysis. Huntington fails to recognize, thus, how much the conditions for democracy were created in Western Europe by bloody repression and forced cultural assimilation, by projects of centralizing political power and state building that show few signs of being part of a civilization destined to support democracy, and by a history of military conflicts within as well as between states as disastrous as any anywhere. He is not alone in this, and it is indeed part of how the nationalist system of affirmative consciousness works. Nationalism is rooted not just in historical memory and myth, illusions of great continuity, and glorification of martyrs and heroes. It is, as Ernst Renan recognized in the last century, rooted also in the capacity not to remember those events and processes which would fester like sores and bring disunity:

Forgetting, I would even go so far as to say historical error, is a crucial factor in the creation of a nation, which is why progress in historical studies often constitutes a danger for [the principle of] nationality. Indeed, historical enquiry brings to light deeds of violence which took place at the origin of all political formations, even those whose consequences have been altogether beneficial. Unity is always effected by means of brutality.

The “brutality" Renan has in mind is exemplified in France by the massacres of Protestants and putative heretics, but the cultural or symbolic violence involved in forging unity could also be brutal. Forgetting could even be a part of it.

The point is not that we must encourage such forgetting in the interest of national unity, but that we need to see critically the problem any theory of democracy must face in giving an account of the constitution of the political community within which it is meant to apply. I do not in the following pages attempt to interrogate the concept of democracy more generally or to give a full-fledged theory of nationalism. Rather, I want to develop this issue of the creation of political community with an eye to how democracy has come - in theory and practice alike - to depend tacitly on nationalist constructions. This gives us a chance to explore the ways in which more critical theory can aid us in looking behind seemingly natural or primordial categories without falling into the opposite trap of imagining that showing those categories to be constructed settles much of anything, reduces their force, or provides us with an analysis of how they work or why they are reproduced. It gives us a chance also to see the politics of identity at work on a large scale, yet to note it is not within connection to the very self-recognition of individuals.

## Ⅱ

Political discussion commonly starts with the state. It is, indeed, the creation of states as quasi-autonomous organizations (or actors) that produces most clearly the differentiation of politics from other aspects of social life and of discourse.7 As a result, it is not surprising that we are led to assume state-centered views of the constitution of political communities. Modern political communities are given their boundaries in the first instance by common subjection to a state. The outcomes of past struggles - conquests, inheritances, civil wars, revolutions, anti-imperial revolts - are ratified through administrative centralization and integration. States define political communities not only domestically but in relation to other states, for example by issuing passports and visas, by sponsoring shared educational institutions that maintain linguistic homogeneity internally and heterogeneity externally, and by encouraging domestic and restricting foreign markets. Not all states are equally effective, but the effectiveness of some reinforces the assumption that states are the necessary objects of political communities, even where they are not their source.

There is, however, a paradox in the use of states to define political communities. States may distinguish political communities from each other in various ways, and states and their personnel may also occupy a great deal of the public sphere within each. Yet in modern usage, states are not in themselves political communities.

A state is not merely a country, but also a specialized apparatus of rule. A state is thus distinct from the people subject to its rule. The Roman state was not equivalent to the Roman people even in the Republican era, and still less was the state of imperial Rome equivalent to the peoples of the Roman Empire. In empires and in many other historical forms of rule, the relationship between state and people has commonly been distant and/or arbitrary. Hereditary elites were sharply distinguished from those they ruled. "Peoples" came under one or another state as a result of royal marriages, inheritance, or the conquest of the territories on which they lived, but neither their character nor that of the state that claimed them was necessarily altered by this. Some ethnic of other relative broad groupings within such states might have special claims on office or special capacity to influence rulers, as for example Romans did retain a special political access even as imperial Rome became more far-flung and multicultural. The Mughal state in India thus favored Muslims and Urdu speakers and indeed its British successor favored Englishmen and English speakers, but in neither case was being a member of the favored group a guarantee of jobs or power. These groupings were not coterminous with the state apparatus but had to relate to it through discourse and action; the state was not constituted by its relationship to any such broad category of people. In these and most other cases, the relevant political community was not "the people," nor even any very large segment of the people, but rather the networks of elites given voice and influence by heredity or military and administrative position.

This narrower political community gave identity to the state. Even where the state was tyrannical, some such political community existed and carried on some level of discourse, offering advice to the ruler and working out how to interpret his directives. Such political communities were always at least somewhat differentiated; courtiers and noblemen spoke with different backgrounds, interests, perceptions, and strategies.8 But in and of itself, this sort of political community did not necessarily constitute a public. Take the scholar-administrators of imperial China. They acted neither to influence a state from which they were distinct (as did Roman citizens) nor in place of a differentiated state apparatus (as in certain periods the citizens of Athens constituted themselves as the government). Rather, this sort of political community was contained within the state.

In none of the cases mentioned was the relevant political community simply “the people," not even the people of the most favored ethnic classification. It was always a narrower elite. But the distinction could still be made between those settings in which the political community was basically contained within the state and those in which it included a public conceptually and practically outside the state apparatus (even if many of the members of this public were insiders to the state). The extent and kind of distinction between the political community and the state is thus a crucial variable.

Also important is the relationship between the political community and the broader population. Modern states distinguished themselves from empires and other earlier forms of state largely by claiming and building a more intimate relationship to the populations they ruled. This was partly a matter of changing patterns of taxation, military mobilization, trade and production, communications, and transportation infrastructure.9 States penetrated more deeply into the daily lives of ordinary people, and did so more evenly throughout their territories. At the same time, three different sorts of ideological shift made the relationship of peoples to states seem more intimate.

The first, and most widely recognized in political thought, was the extremely broad influence of republicanism.1º In this tradition, modern Europe saw itself as the heir of ancient Rome. Republicanism turned crucially on the notion of public, and granted public discourse a powerful role, though it often retained a limited notion of the range of people who constituted the political community that might carry on this public discourse.

Second, the Protestant Reformation encouraged a rethinking of the state that put the emphasis on the people - constituted first and foremost as God's chosen people or the people who shared religious revelation or understanding - rather than on the public. Here ancient Rome was not so much the proper ancestor of modern Europe as were the theocratic communities of the patristic era." It is thus no accident that the Puritan influence on the English Civil War should offer us some of the first really modern invocations of the people as the source of legitimacy for the state.

Third, ethnic, cultural, and localist solidarities began to be invoked as the basis of political communities. Versions of this appeared alongside republicanism, as in the Florentine patriotism of Machiavelli, and alongside religious invocation of the chosen people, as in Cromwell's English nationalism (to some extent foreshadowed by Luther's letters to the German nation, though this was not quite “nation" in the modern sense). But this marked a distinct mode of claiming loyalty or legitimacy, as was evident in the successes both English and French kings found in using invocations of the alien other to help in the increasingly broad military mobilizations of the absolutist era.1² In particular, nationalist rhetoric commonly employs certain tropes: The nation is presented as prepolitical, as in any contemporary instance prior to political deliberation, as the basis for recognizing a public rather than as subject to constitution or redefinition in public (even when the roots of the nation are claimed to lie partly in glorious political acts). The individual is understood as directly and immediately a part of the nation, and undifferentiatedly so (membership being a status defined simply by in or out criteria rather than ranks and orders). National identity is understood to be inscribed, as it were, in the very body of the individual, and not the contingent result of membership in intermediate groups. The nation is understood as at once a unitary and integral being and a sharply bounded and discrete set of members.

In short, three different but interrelated modes of claiming a broader political community, one outside the state apparatus, became influential. I am designating these by the names people, public, and nation (though it should be noted that in everyday political rhetoric each of these terms has been used to refer to each of the three concepts I am trying to distinguish). Of these, "public" posited a differentiated citizenry; "people" emphasized a difference between rulers and ruled but the unity of the ruled; and "nation" implied a unity of the whole. Though neither ethnicity nor any other pre-existing similarity altogether explains nationalism, ethnic, linguistic, and other commonalities gave it a special force and aided those who would invoke it. It alone also provided an account of the boundaries of the polity, and it became the most influential of the three.

These new notions of political community reflected expansion in the nature of political participation and in the role of the state in various forms of social mobilization and regulation. They also figured centrally in a changed understanding of legitimacy. During most of previous European history, the notion that legitimate right to rule ascended from the people to the rulers had been subordinate to an understanding of power as descending from God and other authorities through the various ranks of the nobility to lower levels. Claims based on the “ascending theory" were generally claims against efforts to translate papal authority into state building or against the efforts of monarchs to institutionalize central states.13 In the early modern era, a conceptual revolution helped to reconcile ascending theories of legitimacy, rooted in recognition of the political rights of the public, the people, or the nation, with centralized state-building.

This transformed understanding of the nature of political community and legitimacy depended in turn on the growth of ideas about nonpolitical social organization. These were articulated prominently in the early discourse of civil society. This term, adapted in part from an image of free medieval cities, referred both to the capacity of a political community to organize itself, independent of the specific direction of state power, and to the socially organized pursuit of private ends.14 This selforganization might be accomplished through discourse and decision making in the public sphere, or through the systemic organization of private interests in the economy. The Scottish moralists emphasized the latter in their account of early capitalist markets as arenas in which the pursuit of private ends by individual actors produced in aggregate an effective social organization not dependent on the intervention of the state. The market was thus a model for claims to the capacity for selforganization as well as the realm of specific interests to be protected from improper manipulations. Markets demonstrated, for thinkers like Adam Ferguson and Adam Smith, that the activities of ordinary people could regulate themselves without the interventions of government. Such claims were linked to rejections of the absolute authority of monarchs and assertions of the rights of popular sovereignty. Following Locke, these arguments placed a new emphasis on the social integration of society as such rather than merely on the aggregate of subjects. In such a view, the state no longer defined the political community directly, for its own legitimacy depended on the acquiescence or support of an already existing political community.

These changes powerfully shaped both political discourse and the most material sorts of politics for succeeding centuries, including our own. They were also crucial in the production of a discourse of “society,"for they made politics increasingly a sociological problem rather than a matter of statecraft, princely wisdom, or sheer power understood solely in terms of relations among members of the state apparatus or its competitors. The political community had escaped the bounds of the state apparatus as such, and a new tension between the broad ideas of people and nation and generally narrower ideas of who constituted the