proper custodians of the public good came to constitute more and more of political struggle.

The close relationship between the ideas of public, people, and nation warrants further exploration. Each influenced the other from the time they took on their characteristic modern inflections. In looking at these ideas here, however, my emphasis will not be on the history of these ideas as such, but on the ways in which recognizing their interlinkage helps to shed light on the modern discourse of nationalism. Nationalism has appeared recurrently as one of the greatest challenges to the ideal of rational collective decision making through peaceful discourse that has joined the term public to the projects of republicanism and democracy. Yet in many ways nationalist ideas are presumed by the more “successful"democracies, and nation-building has been closely related historically to the very rise of public life that has helped make modern democracy possible.

Even in academic analysis, too easy acceptance of the view that nationalism is a problematic but fading inheritance from primordial history has obscured recognition of its centrality to our modern ideas of publics and more generally of politically salient identities.' Most basic is the notion that there is some one people that constitutes the proper referent of public discourse and the ground of democratic claims to selfgovernance. On such a view, American public discourse is - or ought to be - about the public goods appropriate to the American people. This implies, among other things, that this people is sufficiently unified that it can be adequately represented by a single, authoritative public discourse. Such views work to privilege certain definitions of the public at the expense of others. Not only are certain speakers given wider attention, recognition, or influence; certain topics are defined as properly public and others as merely private. At stake throughout this discussion is the issue of difference - that is, of the extent to which discourse involving the notion of public or the identity of nation recognizes or represses the plurality of identities that shape the lives of individuals and the constitution of communities, societies, and even civilizations. Nationalism becomes the most frequently troubling instance of identity politics writ large, thus, but it is not the only one. Similar issues are involved in many invocations of legitimate publics and non-nationalist representations of peoples.

## III

The very distinction of public from private took on new meaning in the early modern era with the notion that outside the immediate apparatus of state rule there existed both the private affairs of citizens that were legitimately protected from undue state regulation or intervention and a realm of public discourse and action in which citizens might address or act on the state. Persons existed in dual aspects, just as the private affairs of office holders came increasingly to be distinguished from their public roles.16 The notion of a public realm is accordingly almost always ambivalent, referring to the collective concerns of the political community and to the activities of the state that is central to defining that political community. This two-edged notion of the public inscribes its parallel notion of the private. The private is simultaneously that which is not subject to the purview of the state and that which concerns personal ends distinct from the public good, the res publica, or matters of legitimate public concern.

The idea of "public" is central to theories of democracy. It appears both as the crucial subject of democracy - the people organized as a discursive and decision-making public - and as object – the public good. This has become a focus of intense critical theoretical attention recently, especially in the English-speaking world, partly because the English translation of Jürgen Habermas's major book on the subject coincided with the fall of communism and attendant concern for transitions to democracy.17 As Habermas develops the theoretical problematic of the public sphere, for example, the basic question is how social self-organization can be accomplished through widespread and more or less egalitarian participation in rational-critical discourse.

Yet, as analyses of the exclusion of women from public life have shown most sharply, the conceptualization of public has also worked in anti-democratic ways. In the first place, women were simply excluded from the now-idealized public spheres of the early bourgeois era. They were excluded from the English Parliament and the French National Assembly in ways they had not been excluded from aristocratic salon culture and were not excluded from popular political discourse.18 The issue of "democratic inclusiveness" is not just a quantitative matter of the scale of a public sphere or the proportion of the members of a political community who may speak within it. While it is clearly a matter of stratification and boundaries (e.g. openness to the propertyless, the uneducated, women, or immigrants), it is also a matter of how the public sphere incorporates and recognizes the diversity of identities which people bring to it from their manifold involvements in civil society. It is a matter of whether in order to participate in such a public sphere, for example, women must act in ways previously characteristic of men and avoid addressing certain topics defined as appropriate to the private realm (the putatively more female sphere). Marx criticized the discourse of bourgeois citizenship for implying that it equally fitted everyone when it in fact tacitly presumed an understanding of citizens as propertyowners. The same sort of false universalism has presented citizens in gender neutral or gender symmetrical terms without in fact acknowledging highly gendered underlying conceptions.

All attempts to render a single public discourse authoritative privilege certain topics, certain forms of speech, and certain speakers. This is partly a matter of emphasis on the single, unitary whole - the discourse of all the citizens rather than of subsets - and partly a matter of the specific demarcations of public from private. If sexual harassment, for example, is seen as a matter of concern to women, but not men, it becomes a sectional matter rather than a matter for the public in general; if it is seen as a private matter then by definition it is not a public concern. The same goes for a host of other topics of attention that are inhibited from reaching full recognition in a public sphere conceptualized as a single discourse about matters consensually determined to be of public significance.

The alternative is to think of the public sphere not as the realm of a single public, but as a sphere of publics. This does not mean that the flowering of innumerable potential publics is in and of itself a solution to this basic problem of democracy. On the contrary, democracy requires discourse across lines of basic difference. It is important that members of any specific public be able also to enter into others. Political efficacy in relation to highly centralized states requires some organization of discourse and action on a very large scale. But even the most centralized states are not unitary; different branches of their bureaucracies can be addressed independently and often are most effectively addressed by publics organized on a narrower scale than the polity as a whole. Thus an environmentally focused public discourse better monitors what governmental regulatory agencies do with regard to the environment than could an altogether general public discourse. This does not eliminate the need for a broader discourse concerned among other things with the balancing of different demands on states or different interests. But this discourse can be conceptualized - and nurtured - as a matter of multiple intersections among heterogenous publics, not only as the privileging of a single overarching public.

Once we begin to think in terms of such alternative understandings of publics, however, we confront resistance stemming from the way notions of the public sphere have been rooted in the discourse of nationalism. Ideas of the public commonly draw from nationalist rhetoric both the capacity to presume boundaries and an emphasis on the discourse of the whole. As a way of conceptualizing political communities, nationalist rhetoric stresses, among other tropes, an understanding of the individual as directly and immediately related to the nation, so that national identity is experienced and recognized as personally embodied and not the contingent result of membership in intermediate groups. Because the nation is understood as unitary and integral, nationalist thought discourages notions of multiple and multifarious publics; it typically rejects claims to the quasi-autonomy of subnational discourses or movements as divisive. To the extent that our commonplace and politically effective understandings of public life depend on nationalist presumptions, a bias towards a homogenizing universalism is apt to appear. Where nationalism or any other cultural formation represses difference, however, it intrinsically undermines the capacity of a public sphere to carry forward a rational-critical democratic discourse.

The problem arises largely from an inadequate appreciation of the extent to which difference - what Hannah Arendt called “plurality" - is basic not only to human life in general but specifically to the project of public life and therefore to democracy.¹9 Plurality is not a condition of private life or a product of quotidian personal tastes, in Arendt's view, but rather a potential that flowers in creative public achievements. Arendt accepted the classical Greek restriction on public participation precisely because she thought few people could rise above the implicit conformity imposed by a life of material production to achieve real distinction in the realm of praxis. But we need not agree with this exclusionary premise in order to grasp that the reason for a public discourse lies partly in the potential that various members will bring different ideas into intellectual consideration.

Part of the point of linking the distinction of public from private to that of praxis from mere work or labor is to present the public sphere as something more than an arena for the advancement or negotiation of competing material interests. This image is carried forward in Habermas's account with its emphasis on the possibility of disinterested rational-critical public discourse and his suggestion that the public sphere degenerates as it is penetrated by organized interest groups. To presume that these will proffer only different policies for achieving objectively ascertainable ends - let alone ends reducible to a common calculus in terms of a lowest common denominator of interest - is to reduce the public sphere to a forum of Benthamite policy experts rather than a vehicle of democratic self-government. This is clearly not something Habermas intends to praise. Yet it is not as sharply distant from his account of the public sphere as it might at first seem. One reason is that Habermas does not place the same stress as Arendt on creativity. He treats public activity overwhelmingly in terms of rational-critical discourse rather than identity-formation or expression, and somewhat narrows the meaning of and significance of plurality and introduces the possibility of claims to expertise more appropriate to technical rationality than communicative action.2º Part of the background to this problem lies in the very manner in which public was separated from private in the eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century liberal public sphere which is the basis for Habermas's ideal-typical construction.

The liberal model of the public sphere pursues discursive equality by disqualifying discourse about the differences among actors. These differences are treated as matters of private, but not public, interest. On Habermas's account, the best version of the public sphere was based on "a kind of social intercourse that, far from presupposing the equality of status, disregarded status altogether."2iIt worked by a “mutual willingness to accept the given roles and simultaneously to suspend their reality."22 This "bracketing" of difference as merely private and irrelevant to the public sphere is undertaken, Habermas argues, in order to defend the genuinely rational-critical notion that arguments must be decided on their merits rather than the identities of the arguers. This was as important as fear of censors for the prominence of anonymous or pseudonymous authorship in the eighteenth-century public sphere. Yet it has the effect of excluding some of the most important concerns of many members of any polity – both those whose existing identities are suppressed or devalued and those whose exploration of possible identities is truncated. In addition, this bracketing of differences also undermines the selfreflexive capacity of public discourse. If it is impossible to communicate seriously about basic differences among members of a public sphere, then it will be impossible also to address the difficulties of communication across such lines of basic difference.

The public sphere, Habermas tells us, is created in and out of civil society.23 The public sphere is not absorbed into the state, thus, but addresses the state and the sorts of public issues on which state policy might bear. It is based (1) on a notion of public good as distinct from private interest, (2) on social institutions (like private property) that empower individuals to participate independently in the public sphere because their livelihoods and access to it are not dependent on political power or patronage, and (3) on forms of private life (notably families) that prepare individuals to act as autonomous, rational-critical subjects in the public sphere. A central paradox and weakness (not just in Habermas's theory but in the liberal conception which it analyzes and partially incorporates) arises from the implication that the public sphere depends on an organization of private, prepolitical life that enables and encourages citizens to rise above private identities and concerns. It works on the hope of transcending difference rather than the provision of occasions for recognition, expression, and interrelationship.

The resolution to this issue depends on two main factors. First, the idea of a single, uniquely authoritative public sphere needs to be questioned and the manner of relations among multiple, intersecting, and heterogeneous publics needs to be considered. Second, identity formation needs to be approached as part of the process of public life, not something that can be fully settled prior to it in a private sphere.

Recognizing a multiplicity of publics, none of which can claim a completely superordinate status to the others, is thus a first step.24 Crucially, however, it depends on breaking with core assumptions that join liberal political thought to nationalism. It is one of the illusions of liberal discourse to believe that in a democratic society there is or can be a single, uniquely authoritative discourse about public affairs. This amounts to an attempt to settle in advance a question which is inextricably part of the democratic process itself. It reflects a nationalist presumption that membership in a common society is prior to democratic deliberations as well as an implicit belief that politics revolves around a single and unitary state. It is normal, however, not aberrant, for people to speak in a number of different public arenas and for these to address multiple centers of power (whether institutionally differentiated within a single state, combining multiple states or political agencies, or recognizing that putatively nonpolitical agencies like business corporations are loci of power and addressed by public discourse). How many and how separate these public spheres are must be empirical variables. But each is apt to make some themes easier to address and simultaneously to repress others, and each will empower different voices to different degrees. That women or ethnic minorities carry on their own public discourses, thus, reflects not only the exclusion of certain people from the "dominant" public sphere, but a positive act of women and ethnic minorities. This means that simply pursuing their equitable inclusion in the dominant public sphere cannot be either an adequate recognition of their partially separate discourses or a resolution to the underlying problem. It is important to organize public discourse so that it allows for discursive connections among multiple arenas.

Recognizing the existence of multiple public spheres thus is not an alternative to asking many of the questions Habermas asks about the public sphere, i.e. about public discourse at the largest of social scales and its capacity to influence politics. It simply suggests that these questions need to be answered in a world of multiple and different publics. It is a political exercise of power to authorize only one of these as properly "public," or of some as more legitimately public than others which are held to be “private." In other words, determining whose speech is more properly public is itself a site of political contestation. Different public discourses commonly invoke different distinctions of what is properly "private" and therefore not appropriately addressed in the public discourse or used to settle public debates. There is no objective criterion that distinguishes private from public across the range of discourses. We cannot say, for example, that either bank accounts or sexual orientations are essentially private matters. Varying public/private distinctions are potential (and revisable) accomplishments of each sphere of discourse.

A great deal of the discourse that takes place in public, and that is accessible to the broadest public, is not about ostensibly public matters. I do not mean simply that people take very public occasions such as television appearances to talk about what is customarily considered private, like their sex lives. I mean that many topics of widespread concern to the body politic - like childbearing and childrearing, marriage and divorce, violence of various sorts - are brought into discussions that are public in their constitution but that do not represent themselves as public in the same way the newspaper editorial pages do, and are not taken equally seriously by most participants in the more authorized public sphere. These matters are discussed in churches and self-help groups, among filmgoers and on talk-radio, among parents waiting for their children after school dances and those waiting for visiting hours to commence at prisons. How much the discourse of these various groupings is organized on the rational-critical lines valorized by Habermas's classical Enlightenment public sphere is variable - as is the case, of course, for any other public discussion. But it would be a mistake to presume a priori that one can only be rational-critical about affairs of state or economy, and that these necessarily comprise the proper domain of the public sphere. Conversely, relegation to the realm of the private can be in varying degrees both a protection from public intervention or observation and a disempowering exclusion from public discourse.

The differences among public spheres are important. Simply to treat all these different more or less public discourses as public spheres in Habermas's sense would be to miss the center of his theoretical project, to treat as entirely arbitrary his emphasis on discourse that attempts to work on a rational-critical basis, to include people different from each other while making arguments rather than the identities of arguers the basis of persuasion, and to address the workings of the state. It would fundamentally undermine the contribution of the analysis of public spheres to democratic theory. Habermas invites some of this problem by employing a problematic distinction of public from private. Intimate relations, family life, and civil society are all located on the private side of this too-sharp dichotomy. The arenas and discourses in which people form identities and constitute or recognize interests are all thus presented as separate from the potentially rational-critical discourse of the public sphere. In biographical terms, Habermas implies that they are temporally prior. But rational-critical public discourse can work only if people are adequately prepared for it through other aspects of their personal and cultural experience. Thus Habermas briefly discusses how the rise of a literary public sphere rooted in the rise of novel-reading and theatergoing publics contributed to the development of the political public sphere, but he does not follow through on this insight. He drops discussion of the literary public sphere with its nineteenth-century incarnation, that is, as soon as it has played its role in preparing the path for the rise of the Enlightenment political public sphere. He does not consider subsequent changes in literary discourse and how they may be related to changes in the identities people bring into the political public sphere.

More generally, Habermas does not adequately thematize the role of identity-forming, culture-forming public activity. Though he treats identity-formation as intersubjective and hence social, he keeps it separate from rational-critical deliberation. If, however, we abandon the notion that identity is formed once and for all in advance of participation in the public sphere, we can recognize that in varying degrees all public discourses are occasions for identity formation. This is central to the insight of Negt and Kluge in their appropriation of the phenomenological notion of “horizons of experience" as a way of broadening Habermas's approach to the public sphere.25 Experience is not something exclusively prior to and only addressed by the rational-critical discourse of the public sphere; it is constituted in part through public discourse and at the same time continually orients people differently in public life.26We can distinguish public spheres in which identity-formation figures more prominently, and those in which rational-critical discourse is more prominent, but we should not assume the existence of any political public sphere where identity-formation (and reformation) is not significant.27 Identityformation and topical debate are hard to keep entirely separate.

Excluding the identity-forming project from the public sphere makes no more sense than excluding those of "problematically different" identities. Few today would argue (at least in the .broadly liberal public spheres of the West) against including women, racial and ethnic minorities, and virtually all other groups clearly subject to the same state and part of the same civil society. Yet many do argue against citizenship for those who refuse various projects of assimilation. It is not just Germans