with their ethnic ideas about national citizenship who have a problem with immigrants. The language of the liberal public sphere is used to demand that only English be spoken in Florida, for example, or that Arabs and Africans conform to certain ideas of Frenchness if they wish to stay in France. And for that matter, many other arguments - e.g. that only heterosexuals should serve in the military - have much the same form and status. They demand conformity as a condition of full citizenship. Yet migration continues, making it harder to suppress difference even while provoking the urge. In a basic and intrinsic sense, if the public sphere has the capacity to alter civil society and to shape the state, then its own democratic practice must confront the questions of membership and the identity of the political community it represents. These cannot be left to the“prepolitical."

Once we acknowledge that the definition of a political community is not immutably given by nationality or any other putatively natural or historically ancient factor, then we may approach it as a matter of civil society - that is, of the actual construction of social relationships (alternatively, it becomes a matter of pure will). But we must be clear that this always involves culture and choice; civil society does not simply exist prior to the construction of meaning and the politics of identity.

Nor is it enough that we criticize "bad nationalism." Participation in a democratic public sphere obligates us to develop a good account of the identity of our political communities that faces up to necessary problems of inclusion and exclusion. This is not just a matter of letting "them" mingle with “us." A public sphere, where it exists and works successfully as a democratic institution, represents the potential for the people organized in civil society to alter their own conditions of existence by means of rational-critical discourse.28 As a result, participation always holds the possibility not just of settling arguments, or planning action, but of altering identities. The “identity politics" common to “new social movements" is thus a normal and perhaps even intrinsic part of a successful democratic public sphere. Even the very identity of the political community is at least partially a product, not simply a precondition, of the activity of the public sphere of civil society.

## IV

Throughout much of European history, discussions of legitimate rule focused on arguments about divine or natural right, on questions of succession, and on debates about the limits which should be imposed on monarchs. When this was the case, the question of national identity either did not arise or was marginal. Reference might be made to a monarch's rule over a "people" or various "peoples," but only rarely before the modern era was any attempt made to treat sovereignty as "rising" from the people.29 Calling such peoples “nations" initially carried no particular political significance. But when questions of sovereignty began to turn on appeals to the rights, acceptance, or will of "the people," this changed. Though the term "nation" (rather than “people") was not necessarily invoked, the modern notion of a popular will always assumed the existence of some recognizably bounded and internally integrated population.30 This led political theory to depend on social theory; it was necessary to conceive of the society which a monarch ruled, not just the territory or feudatories.³1 Arguments turning on some notion of people or popular will were not introduced simply in response to the pre-existing “nationhood"·of various peoples - e.g. as a result of their high extent of common ethnicity - but rather were linked to increasing state administrative capacity in the “absolutist" era, decline in the acceptance of spatially dispersed (as opposed to compact and contiguous) territories, and the growth of market relations.32 They were also the products of political struggle and political thought.

The new sorts of claims on behalf of peoples figured prominently in and around the English Civil War, a conflict distinctively productive of theory. Just before the war, Hobbes offered a sharp and novel version of the argument that absolute monarchy was justified by the fact that it served the interests of the people rather than solely by inheritance or divine authorization.³³ Leviathan was a book about the commonwealth, by which Hobbes meant the res publica of Roman law. There was no public to enjoy public goods, Hobbes argued, without the pacifying rule of a monarch. This transformed the several and separate individuals who were originally doomed to incessant war among competing private interests into a socially organized body, a people. So while monarchy served the interests of the people, the latter had no status as a society without the monarch and hence no group claims against the monarch.

Similarly, in the language of this chapter, Hobbes had little interest in the discourse among the people that might qualify them as a public. This does not mean that Hobbes had no conception of the unity of the people, their existence as a people. Hobbes is commonly misrepresented as a completely asociological thinker appealing only to the interests of discrete individuals. But he did have a notion of the body politic that both anticipated functionalism and reflected the organization of the cosmos as a system of resemblances in the manner that Foucault has described as typical of the period.34 This is embodied not just in the text of Leviathan but in its remarkable frontispiece in which the Great Body of the State is depicted, down to the chain mail armor of hundreds of tiny people.

Hobbes thus recognized social differentiation; he simply saw it as deriving its overall meaning and potential for peaceful continuity from the state. Similarly, Hobbes clearly recognized the existence of families, and local relationships like the hierarchies linking small farmers to gentry, squires to knights. Social life at this level did not depend on the monarch in the same way as the social organization of large-scale collectivities: counties, regions, nations. Influenced like many others of the early modern era by the traditions of Roman law, he distinguished those sorts of relationships that might be established by private contract or connection from those entirely conditional on the institution of a public realm. The monarch or state might provide enforcement for the directly interpersonal relationships of the private realm, but it crucially brought into being the indirect relationships of the public realm; these existed only through its mediation. They were public, thus, not because of discourse among the different members of the political community, but because the state itself made them so.

Hobbes' argument transformed from within a tradition of seeing political community defined entirely by subjection to a common ruler. Instead of locating that subjection in a hierarchy of intermediate authorities (e.g., as the inhabitants of a given region might fall into a different political community with the conquest or shifting allegiance of a superordinate nobleman) Hobbes treated each individual as directly a member of the state.35 The political community thus became the whole people, though this people was deprived of the political capacities offered to the publics of most republican theory.

Hobbes'arguments were challenged almost immediately by others that, despite their predominant liberalism, appear in retrospect to anticipate nineteenth-century ethnic nationalism. They attempted to show the priority of political community to particular power structures. The theoretical device of social contract thinking, for example, was expanded with the idea of a “dual contract" in which a first contract bound prepolitical agents into a political community and a second bound that community (more contingently) to a ruler or a set of laws. The main initial development was to locate more and more of the political initiative and basis for evaluation in the socially organized people. In the long run, such arguments were often integrated with claims to ancient, even primordial peoplehood as parts of nationalist political programs of various stripes. But "the people" at this juncture meant mainly the politically active elites. After the Civil War, for example, Locke published a political theory (written earlier) that appealed not only to the interests of the people as a collection of discrete individuals with different roles to play in the body politic (Hobbes'image), but to the citizenry as a body laterally connected through communication, a public.36 This prefigured aspects of democratic theory, but was also well suited to the context in which Locke published it: a monarchical restoration (which the English perversely call their Revolution) which in fact accorded a leading role to a revitalized, open, and internally communicative aristocracy. It was arguably among this aristocracy that English nationalism had its origins, encouraging a conception of a political community strongly distinct from and able to challenge the monarch.37

With the rise of claims to popular sovereignty and republican rule, the notions of “nation" and “people" were increasingly intertwined. In the first place, claims to nationhood offered a cultural basis for the demarcation of potentially sovereign political communities. The importance of this was not always explicit in democratic theory. Locke, for example, took the existence of discrete “peoples" more or less as a given. His treatments of conquest focused on the legitimacy of the subjection of conquered peoples not the possibility of their absorption into an enlarged nation. In general, democratic theory was written as though its province was simply to formulate procedures and arrangements for the governance of such communities, not to address their constitution as particular peoples. Discussions of constitution in democratic theory tend either to imagine a world without established communities or to imagine that the boundaries of a political community are not problematic. In the real world, however, peoples were and are always constituted as such in relation to other peoples and out of the refractory stuff of pre-existing communities and claims to loyalty and peoplehood. Democratic theory could ignore this only because it tacitly assumed what certain nationalist ideologues (like Fichte) explicitly asserted: that everyone is a member of a nation and that such nations are the relevant political communities. In practice, however, there is often no obvious or uncontested answer as to what the relevant political community is. Nationalism then is not the solution to the puzzle but the discourse within which struggles to settle the question are most commonly waged (too often with bullets and bombs as well as words). As such a discourse, it marks nearly every political public sphere in the contemporary world as an inescapable, if often unconscious, rhetoric of identity-formation, delimitation, and selfconstitution. Nations are discursively constituted subjects, even if the rhetoric of their constitution is one that claims primordiality or creation in the distant, seemingly prediscursive, past.

It is only as nationalist discourse becomes institutionalized in a public sphere that “nation" or "people" are constituted as such. Thus nationalist rhetoric shapes the internal discourse of nearly every state, not just those marked by empire, alien rule, or ethnic conflict; it operates to constitute the nation (the public, the people) as a putative actor - the claimant to ultimate sovereignty - in relation to the state. "Nationalism," Gellner has thus averred, "is primarily a political principle, which holds that the political and the national unit should be congruent."38 But as Durkheim noted long before, it is usually the apparent disjunction of people and state which brings the category of nation and the phenomenon of nationalism into play."9 Grounding political legitimacy in notions of the people allows nationalists to assert a disjuncture between even a domestic government and its society if that government fails to serve the putative needs or interests of the nation. Thus in Eastern Europe during the last years of communist rule, a rhetoric appeared for speaking of the state (or government) as sharply separate from society (or civil society). This both conceptualized a realm in which people could organize their activities untainted by a corrupt and corrupting state, and a basis for challenges to the legitimacy of that state. This understanding, indeed, marks a stronger similarity to the great modern revolutions than any of the actual processes of political transformation in 1989 or just after.40 This rhetoric grows in the sphere of public discourse within which intellectuals help to produce the national identity and engage arguments about the public good. But (as the post-1989 transformations have shown) it is also linked to the sorts of nationalism that distinguish society from state but represses rational-critical public argument in favor of conformity to the national mission, destiny, or identity.

The issue arose sharply in the French Revolution of 1789. The development of an active public sphere, a strong exemplar of both rationalcritical discourse and creative thought about matters of the public good, was a crucial precursor to revolution and it flowered enormously in the early phases of the revolution itself, as public debate spread from salons and the National Assembly to innumerable neighborhood clubs and public gatherings.41 Flourishing in print as well as oral debate, this public sphere presented “the people" as a capable political force to be counterposed to the king and to ancien régime elites more generally. But the very invocation of the people also threatened the institutions of the public sphere. It fueled both the illusory ideal of direct democracy and the rise of Jacobinism. The ideas of nation and sovereign people fused, encouraging the notion that the people ought to speak with a singular voice. Similarly, the people as assembled in public gatherings displaced both broader ideas of representation and occasions for reflective discussion.

Article 3 of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen declared "The principle of all sovereignty resides essentially in the Nation. No body, no individual can exercise any authority that does not expressly stem from the nation."42 Though the crucial term changed, the discourse of nationalism continued to dominate the construction of the comparable article in the Constitution of 1793: “Sovereignty resides in the people. It is one and indivisible, imprescriptible and inalienable."43 Such ideas linked the revolution directly to the tradition of Rousseau and the idea of general will.44 Rousseau (like Ferguson in another tradition) also developed ideas of the social cohesion of the members of a nation far beyond Locke. His Considerations on the Government of Poland emphasized patriotic education capable not only of binding citizens to each other and imbuing each with love of la patrie, but also of making each a distinctively national person, giving each mind a “national form."4s Montesquieu's appeal to the “spirit"of laws had presaged a modern discourse of national cultures and characters.4 In the French Revolution, especially as it was interpreted on the European continent and celebrated in successive French political struggles, the nation had actively constituted itself as a sovereign being. One catch was that appeals to this sovereign being could often be deployed as "trump cards"against other loyalties and against critiques rooted in various internal differences among the members of the nation. Only the properly national interests could be legitimate or authoritative in the public realm; more specific identities – e.g. those of women, or workers, or members of minority religions-could at best be accepted as matters of private preference with no public standing. Too often the pressure for national unity became a pressure for conformity even in private life.47

## V

The rhetoric of nationalism is sometimes described as inherently "collectivistic" rather than “individualistic," but this is a misleading opposition. In its most characteristic modern employments, the idea of the nation depends very much on individualism. It establishes the nation both as a category of similar individuals and as a sort of “super-individual."As a rhetoric of categorical identity, nationalism is precisely not focused on the various particularistic relationships among members of the nation. But here a crucial differentiation among nationalisms arises. To what extent do nationalist rhetorics depend on the recognition of differences among members of the nation (both as individuals and as members of smaller collectivities) and thereby gain constitution through the discourse of this differentiated public? Or, conversely, to what extent do nationalist rhetorics posit the nation as a singular people in which the identity of each is merged into that of the whole? As Arendt put it (with a somewhat different example in mind):

This unitedness of many into one is basically antipolitical; it is the very opposite of the togetherness prevailing in political or commercial communities, which - to take the Aristotelian example - consist not of an association (koinonia) between two physicians, but between a physician and a farmer, “and in general between people who are different and unequal."48

The equality attending the public realm is necessarily an equality of unequals who stand in need of being“equalized"in certain respects and for certain purposes. It is citizenship that produces an “artificial" equality among the members of a public who are natural unequals as private persons. Nationalism may, thus, draw on and reinforce the classical division between a public realm in which individuals are equivalent as citizens and a private realm in which they are distinguished by various differentiations of family, contractual relations, or personal characteristics.49 But, conversely, where nationalist rhetoric stresses oneness at the expense of a notion of a differentiated public, it becomes repressive not just of minorities, but of all citizens. One or the other pattern need not be a perduring characteristic of different national traditions; it may also reflect experiences forged in different practical circumstances. Generations less worried about the basic sovereignty and identity of the nation - perhaps because of the very success of earlier nationalist struggles - may find it easier to accept differentiated identities and even new sorts of identity politics.

Modern individualism (to which I can hardly do justice here) is tied to distinctive conceptions of the world, conceptions that abandon the notion of an implicate order or encompassing hierarchy as the basic source of identity.so It is also tied to material reductions in the extent to which identities constructed in webs of direct interpersonal relations are sufficient to organize people's lives.

In the main modern Western view, individuals exist in and of themselves. This modern idea of the individual as the locus of indissoluble identity - at least potentially self-sufficient, self-contained and self-moving - is a powerful factor in nationalism. It is no accident that the modern notion of nation arises in tandem with modern ideas of the “punctual self" or individual.s1 The modern idea of the person was forged partly in the context of political philosophy and law. It was closely linked to the notion that certain social conditions prepare individuals for entrance into the rational-critical discourse of the public sphere. Thus when Locks asks under what circumstances people can be autonomous citizens, he is probing the nature of responsible personhood at the same time as he is exploring how sovereign power might be distributed among citizens.s2 Rousseau's idea of the general will presumes a social whole, like a nation, and at the same time embodies his radical idea of the integrity and freedom - the absolute inalienability - of the individual.s3

However paradoxical it has seemed to later analysts, Rousseau captures something basic to the discourse of nationalism in asserting simultaneously the indivisibility of the individual person and of the whole community, and in claiming the possibility of an immediate relationship between the two. The links between the histories of individualism and nationalism are perhaps most strikingly clear in Fichte.54 Fichte's notion of self-recognition, of the person who seemingly confronts himself (or herself) in a mirror and says “I am I," is inextricably tied to the notion of the nation as itself an individual.s5 Just as persons are understood as unitary in prototypical modern thought so are nations held to be integral. In general, each nation is understood as indivisible (literally, thus, individual) and as the bearer of a distinctive identity. As Anderson has indicated, the unitary conception of the nation involves a special sense of time as the history through which the nation passes.s6 This renders the nation a perduring and singular being rather than one with a differentiable internal history. Marx's contemporary, Friedrich List, "pronounced nations to be ‘eternal,' to constitute a unity both in space and time."57 Yet List also thought that modern nations made themselves - a kind of collective Bildungsprozess that produced true individuality out of heterogeneous constituents and influences.

To be a "historical nation," in Fichte's phrase, was to succeed in this process of individuation and to achieve a distinctive character, mission, and destiny. Other nations lacked sufficient vigor or national character; they were destined to be failures and consigned to the backwaters of history. Not surprisingly, this is typically how dominant or majority populations thought of minorities and others subordinated within their dominions. This showed another side to the Springtime of Nations. It was the period when France took on its mission civilisatrice, Germany found its historical destiny, and Poles crystallized their Romantic conception of the martyr-nation.58 Each nation had a distinct experience and character, something special to offer the world and something special to express for itself. “Nations are individualities with particular talents and the possibilities of exploiting those talents."s9 Individualism is important not just metaphorically, but as the basis for the central notion that individuals are directly members of the nation, that it marks each of them as an intrinsic identity and they commune with it immediately and as a whole. In the discourse of nationalism, one is simply Chinese, French, or Eritrean. The individual does not require the mediations of family, community, region, or class to be a member of the nation. Nationality is understood precisely as an attribute of the individual and the whole, not of the intermediate associations. This way of thinking reinforces the idea of nationality as a sort of trump card in the game of identity. While it does not preclude other self-understandings, within most nationalist ideologies it is held to override them at least in times of national crisis and need. In Foucault's sense, therefore, nationality is understood as inscribed in the very body of the modern individual.60 A person without a country must therefore be understood to lack not only a place in the external world but a proper self.61

The discourse of nationalism not only encourages seeing identity as inscribed in and coterminous with the individual body; it also encourages seeing individuals as linked through their membership in sets of equivalents - classes, races, genders, etc. - rather than their participation in interpersonal relationships.62 It promotes categorical identities over relational ones. The constitution of such categories depends in part on adopting quasi-universalistic standpoints such as those discussed in chapter 6. These offer the capacity to grasp society from a decentered point of view rather than from within webs of interpersonal relations and local groups.

Categorical identities flourish in nationalist discourse partly because it addresses large-scale collectivities in which most people could not conceivably enter into face-to-face relationships with most others. The increasing reliance on categorical identities manifest in nationalism reverses, at least to some extent, the weight of competing loyalties from the premodern era (and those contemporary settings where social integration is accomplished more through directly interpersonal relationships). National identity, thus, in its main Western ideological form, is precisely the opposite of the reckoning of identity and loyalty outward from the family. Where the segmentary lineage system suggests "I against my brothers; I and my brothers against my cousins; I, my brothers, and my cousins against the world," the discourse of nationalism suggests that membership in the category of the whole nation is prior to, more basic than, any such web of relationships.63 This suggests also a different notion of moral commitment from other modes of understanding existence. The discourse of nationalism offers the chilling potential for children to inform on their parents' infractions against the nation precisely because each individual is understood to derive his or her identity in such direct and basic ways from membership in the nation. This is sharply different from the discourse of kinship and the ideology of honor of the lineage. There children derive their membership in the whole only through their relationships to their parents.

Of course nationalist ideology can extol the virtues of the family and nationalist movements can be rooted in the manifold interpersonal relations of traditional society. Indeed, as we have seen following Chatterjee, anti-colonial nationalists in India emphasized the family and local community in order to constitute the indigenous nation outside the officially political realm dominated by the colonial state.64 Likewise, the idea that the Chinese are not individualistic but family-oriented can be an internal claim to national distinctiveness as well as an external attribution. And though seemingly endless discussions of “Chineseness" sometimes point to the power of tradition, programs for saving or strengthening the nation have also involved a stress on forging a new kind of Chinese person.65 Once again, even in the case of nations, culture-forming and identity-forming discourses are inextricably part of, not simply preconditions to, the creation of a political public sphere.

In some versions, the account of the nation continues to include strong favorable references to family and community. These are not necessarily contradictory to the idea that nationalist discourse addresses a large category of equivalent individuals. Family and community can be treated rhetorically as things that all members of the nation have. On the other hand, many nationalists have found the grip of traditional patriarchal families and kinship groups too powerful, and sought to free individuals from their grasp both for their own benefit and so they could better serve the nation. Where the claimed priority of the nation confronted other categorical identities - race, class, gender, religion - there has almost always been conflict. Each of these raises the prospect of a fundamentally divided nation in a way that relational identities like family and community need not. On the Indian subcontinent, thus, Hindu and Muslim especially, and in some places Sikh, Christian, and other religions, have appeared as large-scale categorical identities, not just social networks. They could be invoked even by people only loosely woven into webs of interpersonal relationships with their coreligionists. The communities coincident with these religions have split the posited nation and become the basis for competing nationalisms. The situation in Northern Ireland has some similarities. By contrast, where family and community relations are organized in accord with divisions of categorical identities - that is, where category and network coincide, in the sense of Harrison White's term "CATNET"- this gives each collectivity greater capacity to mobilize and reduce the chances of bringing them harmoniously together.66

While nations can also be CATNETs - and to a small extent generally are - their very scale means that they are first and foremost categorical identities. Indeed, they become prominent in the construction of identity partly because of the dramatic expansion in the scale on which social life is organized. In other words, more weight is placed on the individual actor precisely as the organizing capacity of his or her direct social relationships - e.g. family, community - is rendered inadequate by largescale, seemingly distant structures of indirect relations.67 Local relations may remain important to people; communities are still often vital. But these local relationships are not capable of organizing the large-scale activities wrought, for example, by capitalism. Capitalism, as Marx argued, pulls individuals out of constitutive communal bonds and declares them to be autonomous. But of course the autonomy is illusory; people find themselves subject to forces - like global markets - operating on a very large scale, and must confront these as individuals not only as members of communities. Reliance on large-scale categorical identities like nation is partially a response to this. Similarly, the individual experience of movement among nations, and among territorially circumscribed states, reaffirms that significance of belonging to a nation (whether the movement is a matter of tourism, migration, or military mobilization).

Capitalism expanded the importance of very indirect social relations on a large scale - paradigmatically through the market, but also through large administrative organizations like multinational corporations. Capitalism also facilitated and encoufaged, though it does not by itself explain, the development of other forms of communication. Both Anderson and Habermas, for example, have called attention to the importance of such early business and business-supporting ventures as newspapers, journals, and eventually novels - print capitalism as Anderson calls them.68 These not only supported the emergence of public spheres, but facilitated nationalism by helping to spread nationalist ideology and culture. In addition, both their very form and the practice of reading them helped to reinforce a notion of social interconnection among the members of large-scale categories linked by only weak and not very dense social relationships.69 Thus, as Anderson notes, readers of newspapers could imagine themselves as engaging in an activity which they shared with thousands or even millions of others. By helping to create public spheres joining diverse members of the putative nation such media provided for a whole range of discourses that were not explicitly about the nation nonetheless to reproduce it culturally. Small-scale businesses, adjuncts usually to the main dramas of capitalism, thus played an important role in promoting nationalist discourse by providing important bases for public life: coffee houses, publishing houses, etc. Communications infrastructures facilitated space-transcending linkages which encouraged people to give up the narrow outlooks of their native villages for an understanding of themselves as (individually) members of the nation.70 Through such a sense of categorical identity people could situate them-