selves in relation to the enormous, distant, impersonal forces (economic above all) that shaped their lives, establishing a sense of commonality without tracing specific connecting relationships.

## VI

Nationalist rhetoric has generally stressed the essential similarity of the nation's individual members.71 It is rare to find comparable emphasis on the constitution of the nation through the discourse of a public of highly differentiated members.72 This is a crucial implication of the rhetorical appeal to presumed ancient ethnicity or peoplehood that was invoked in struggles over political sovereignty. But of course this is not “mere rhetoric," it reflects significant social changes in the modern era. The rise of the state and the capitalist transformation of trade and production relations had brought increasing integration to large collectivities of people. The raising of citizen armies had not only reinforced national identity against the nation's enemies, but brought together soldiers from different regions and occupations. Roads and later railroads provided an infrastructure that both joined the various parts of the nation and linked regions more strongly within state borders than across them. Proliferation of print (and later broadcast) media, schools, and administrative offices all encouraged linguistic standardization and both directly and through common language helped to produce national patterns of culture and behavior. This notion is rooted in positive historical developments; it is not ideologically arbitrary. Tocqueville, for example, wrote of how the eighteenth-century expansion of state administration had paved the way for the French Revolution by rendering France "the country in which men were most like each other."

Behind such diversities as still existed the unity of the nation was making itself felt, sponsored by that new conception: “the same laws for all." ...Not only did the provinces come to resemble each other more and more, but within each province members of the various classes (anyhow those above the lowest stratum) became ever more alike, differences of rank notwithstanding.73

This extended even to such putatively private matters as childbearing. Fertility rates, which once varied from locality to locality, became strikingly uniform within nineteenth- and twentieth-century European nation-states.74

All these changes helped to create a new discourse of public affairs, the affairs that represented the interests of the integrated nation. It was in this discourse, not in any material reality of exchange networks, that national economies, for example, were constituted. The description of the economy as a self-regulating system of exchanges, thus, did not in itself constitute the unity of domestic vs. foreign trade. Such inner/outer distinctions were produced in a public discourse organized at the level of states, and then reproduced in state administrative policies and accounting procedures. In maintaining boundaries in this way, states were innovating, not simply protecting the interests of long-established national communities. So long as discourse (and identity) remained overwhelmingly local, most people invested relatively little in large-scale boundaries.75Concepts like“the wealth of nations"or“trade surplus or deficit" could only be developed in a supralocal public sphere. It was precisely on the basis of the perspective afforded by the constitution of the British and French publics, and in works addressed to those publics, that Adam Smith and the physiocrats could constitute their competing accounts of how national economies work and relate. In these discourses, the national and the international were always intertwined. The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries indeed saw an increasing organization of exchange relations and capital accumulation at the national level. But as mercantilist arguments suggest, this came at the expense of some international organizations and processes as well as at the expense of local autonomy. The innovation was driven largely by the emergence of spheres of public discourse which addressed the relationship between aggregated private interests and state institutions.

Not all states were in comparable positions to exercise central power, and not all could claim to have integrated “their nation" within their borders. The dominant modern story of state formation, that epitomized by French history, is thus not typical. There, over an extended period of time, disparate duchies and other feudal territories were transformed into provinces and knit into an increasingly effective centralized power structure concentrated in a primate city. Ironically, the very successful integration of the French nation-state may have predisposed France to its succession of republican revolutions - all of which not only claimed popular legitimacy but were made possible by the concentration of state power in a handful of spatially centralized institutions that could be seized by revolutionaries. To the east, the process of state formation worked out somewhat differently. Only late in the nineteenth century did German state-builders achieve even partial integration of the culturally similar German peoples, and only briefly under the Nazis did this unification reach nearly completely throughout German Europe.

In France, a growing national integration was spearheaded by a central state of long standing. In Germany, the central state was added fairly late on top, as it were, of a variety of regions more or less widely understood as “German" in their language and culture. But despite their differences, both French and German stories thematize nationalism as an aspect of amalgamation of disparate regions into a superordinate state. In the territories of the declining Austro-Hungarian Empire, by contrast, nationalist discourse was generally invoked by separatists against the more central power. This is in part because the Habsburgs self-consciously maintained an empire of the old style; they did not attempt to integrate their dominions into a modern nation-state. That is, they did not attempt to treat their subjects as more or less interchangeable memhers of the polity, to impose linguistic uniformity, to build an infrastructure rendering communication and commerce easy throughout the realm, to replace narratives of conquest with those of primordial ethnic commonality, or to base claims to legitimacy on the interests or will of "the people."

Imperial rule - in the Austro-Hungarian case or those of most of the rest of the world - is precisely not the attempt to forge a unity between nation and state. Empires are organized through the coexistence - albeit often hierarchically structured - of a number of distinct “peoples" or "communities." These need not enter into any public discourse with each other, nor indeed into many collective activities. Their economic relations are typically matters of market exchange, not cooperation in production, and while imperial armies may mobilize members of different ethnic groups, they are generally organized more on the model of mercenaries than citizen-soldiers.

Parts of empires can be transformed into nations by the creation of quasi-autonomous public spheres. This is as characteristic of metropoles as peripheral regions. As the Ottoman empire declined, for example, it was just as novel a project to engender a national consciousness and project of state formation in Turkey as in Egypt, and early projects for pan-Islamic nationalism grew in the same soil. Among the most problematic settings are the frontiers between former or declining empires. The disastrous contemporary situation in the Balkans, thus, is not simply the result of ancient ethnic hatreds, nor entirely produced by the forced integration of Yugoslavia under communism, nor conjured out of nothing by the ideological and military manipulators who have turned the discourse of nationalism into the project of ethnic cleansing. It is rooted in the long history of the region as a frontier in which neither of the relatively stable imperial regimes - Ottoman or Habsburg - achieved clear hegemony. Local ethnic groups were not only divided by religion and military enlistment, they were in some cases resettled precisely to serve as buffers and prevent both socio-political and military consolidation. As empires receded from this frontier, they left behind not spatially compact and socially integrated nations but fragmented and interspersed ethnic communities. Pockets of Serbs, for example, were located in the middle of Croatian farm districts because their reputation as fighters made the Habsburgs think they would stiffen defense against the Turks. Even tiny cities like Mostar were miniature metropolises, housing a range of religions and ethnicities. Once they were no longer ruled from distant imperial centers, however, the members of these different ethnic groups were called upon to form their own public discourses to organize collective affairs. In such cases, elites who were previously subordinates in larger imperial hierarchies helped to promote national culture (including language and literature as well as nationalist ideology) partly as a project that would put them on top of the new or newly independent nation. Either the new public spheres would incorporate diverse cultures into regionally compact polities - as attempted most recently by Bosnia-Herzegovina – or the public spheres would be defined on ethnic lines and offer implicit bases for projects of ethnic nationalist reorganization of territory and population – as in the Serbian counterpart. But note that in either case the institutionalization of a public sphere was at the heart of the project of defining the nation, whether in terms of the civic institutions of a territorial polity or in terms of ethnic unity.

In many other cases, imperial rule involved the appropriation or development of subordinate state institutions that encouraged nationalism by making the contrast between alien, imperial rulers and indigenes powerful. Such contexts frequently nurtured ideologies that represented the colonized as unitary peoples joined by common membership in a single national category (not least because colonizers so frequently justified their rule by claiming that the locals were internally disunified and needed outside help to keep the peace). This representation of “natives" as a single category combined with the stunting of careers in the imperial bureaucracies to make ideas of legitimation by consent or participation of the governed attractive to colonized elites, thus further reinforcing links between the project of instituting a single public sphere and gaining national autonomy. Rendered subalterns in such a situation, for example, non-imperial elites might find attractions in the political strategy of forging closer links with peasants and others whom they could claim to represent as a nation against the imperial power. Displaced by new regimes, traditional elites who might otherwise have supported other, more elitist, doctrines of legitimacy often adopted and/or reinvented the notion that legitimacy should depend on the will of those governed. This happened in both India and China, for example, and in varying degrees in much of Latin America and Africa.

The “modernizing" elites who were active in the development of both early public spheres and anti-colonial nationalist movements pursued similar projects in a variety of settings – increased literacy and freedom of publication, for example. In a wide range of late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century contexts, they pursued nationalism and internationalism simultaneously in a way reminiscent of Europe's “Springtime of Nations," and as part of a project of replicating Europe's Enlightenment. This was true of such otherwise diverse movements as Spain's “generation of 1898," Turkey's “Young Turks" and secular nationalists under Ataturk, and China's student and intellectual protesters of May 4, 1919 and the “New Thought" movement. These examples suggest (1) how nationalism thrived as a modern discourse, not simply an ethnic inheritance, (2) how nationalism and the creation of cultural publics and political public spheres went hand in hand, and (3) how much global discourses and material factors affected these processes, helping to produce such similar movements nearly simultaneously in widely dispersed and culturally diverse settings.

At the same time, anti-colonialism and anti-imperial secessionism depend on the internal organizing capacity of the would-be independent nation. They cannot be understood as attempts simply to protect or restore traditional arrangements, even where that is their manifest ideological purpose, for they pursue a new, national form of mobilization as a more or less necessary concomitant of anti-imperial struggle. Such anticolonial movements also often rebel against domestic elites who have entered into accommodationist agreements with imperial powers (as was the case in Korea's March First movement and China's May Fourth movement, both of 1919).

In both Korea and China, nationalist discourse remained extremely state-centered despite movements that attacked both traditional elites and imperial powers. There were only halting efforts in each case to develop national integration outside the purview of state power. In India, these efforts went much further. Indian nationalists brought forward in both ideology and practice a nation that was defined in social-relational and cultural terms as against the political terms monopolized by the colonial state."7 In different but comparably dramatic ways in all three cases, the extent of material (social-relational, economic, infrastructural) as well as cultural national integration was insufficient to sustain completely the integrity of the nation after the departure of imperial powers and/or the collapse of accommodationist domestic regimes. The partition of India and Pakistan (and later independence of Bangladesh as well as communal separatism in India), the division of the two Koreas, and the warlords era in China all suggest the limits to the national integration that could be accomplished in opposition to the prevailing state power.