In each case, one of the key problematics of the post-independence states was to resume the struggle for national integration, equating the nation now increasingly with the state.

If one maior source of nationalism is the new levels of national integration forged, it is also true that secessionist nationalisms are often forged from failed projects of broader national integration. Several East European countries and the former Soviet Union offer enough examples.78 The post-colonial states are particularly vulnerable to challenges from subordinate national groups, since these can employ the very rhetoric that the anti-colonialists used in winning their independence struggles. This is why the discourse of nationalism encompasses both fissiparous or secessionist movements and unificationist or“pan-"nationalist movements.79 Croatian or Ukrainian nationalism and pan-Slavic nationalism arise from the same discursive formation. Neither secessionist nationalisms from India to Ethiopia nor attempts to reunite divided nations from Germany through Yemen or Korea can claim clear precedence. Efforts to forge a more unified national state often inspire contrary efforts on the part of subordinate groups or neighbors. The formation of a larger unity is accompanied by rearrangements of national identities that create new lines of tension while overcoming some established ones. Thus programs for the unification of Europe draw on new histories that emphasize the commonality of the European experience and identity; the specificity of Europe is counterposed to the rest of the world, rather than the specificity of France being counterposed to Britain or the Netherlands. At the same time, fringe nationalist movements (and claims for regional autonomy) flourish within the European Community. Conversely, the pressure to break up the former Soviet Union came not just from pre-existing national groupings, the loss of legitimacy of the central regime, or the evolving regional structures of alliances (all important), but from the fact that there was never a strong national integration capable of sustaining economic and social transactions on a very large scale in the absence of the coercive force of the central state. In this sense the appellation “Soviet empire” was apt.

## VII

No state or nation ever existed entirely unto itself. European states grew and intensified their administration in the context of a web of interstate rivalries.80 These were played out in economic as well as military and diplomatic arenas (though the politics of dynastic kinship and inheritance did not disappear until fairly late in the process). A European public sphere, larger than that of any constituent state, debated the identities, rights, and relationships among states, the implications of multinational economic activity, and the prospects for peace and justice of wars. From even before the Enlightenment, the public spheres of different European countries were always embedded within this broader European (and eventually Euro-American) discourse. This international discourse established nationalist rhetoric as the crucial basis for addressing questions of identity and legitimacy. Those who would establish claims to sovereignty or self-determination staged performances before an international public sphere including not only diplomats and policy makers but the consumers of international news and culture. Representatives of other states and certain international organizations held the capacity to bestow formal recognition; the broader public offered a more diffuse but not insignificant prospect of recognition and support. The expansion of the international media has only expanded the role of this international public sphere.

From early in the era of nationalist discourse, the world was in principle divided into formally equivalent national states, each of which was or should be sovereign. The discursive principle became normative well before the Hapsburgs and Romanovs were finally forced to abandon their very different sorts of states, and paved the way for the still problematic efforts to align states and nations within their former domains. But gradually, at least, older political organizations like empires, quasi-autonomous principalities, and free cities did give way to a more standardized system. This was effected by international public discourse, as well as military power or diplomatic negotiation. By the second half of the twentieth century, it was clearly anomalous for any state to remain under the explicit political tutelage of another, and where such relations existed they were commonly subjected to campaigns to undo them. But of course the equivalence of the national states recognized in this international public sphere was a formal property of the discourse not matched by material equivalence of power, internal organization, or loyalty of citizens. The discourse of nationalism demands that San Marino, two dozen square miles with 24,000 citizens, be seen as formally equivalent to China or the United States. It is, for example, a full member of the United Nations. The equivalence of states is emphasized especially in arenas like the UN, not only because the discourse of nationalism predominates, but because attention is paid to the whole system of states at once. Even in interstate relations where disparities of power and scale matter substantially, however, the rhetoric of equivalence is commonly observed. This establishes, among other things, a new version of the old public/private division.81 The international affairs of the presumptively equivalent states are public and addressable in the international public sphere while their internal, domestic affairs are treated as private. Attempts to challenge the formal equivalence of states by suggesting that international recognition should be linked to democratic institutions or by condemning domestic human rights abuses are as problematic within this division of public and private as attempts to intervene in families on behalf of the rights of children or spouses have been. Appearing as actions of the powerful against the weak, they have often backfired and rallied popular nationalist sentiments to the cause of elitist governments.

At the same time that formal equivalence confers a certain dignity on a nation, this is unlikely to substitute for power and stature among nations; nationalism can turn to militarism, economic insularity, and concerns for slighted honor.82 This can of course lead to war, and to a cycle of injuries, resentments, and new conflicts (such as that in the Balkans). But the domestic, largely discursive, consequences of such international pursuits should not be ignored. International conflict generally, and military mobilization in particular, can help to confer (or enforce) unity on a disparate domestic population. As Sheehan writes of Germany after World War I, "military defeat brought national humiliation and called into question the very existence of the nation which many in the middle strata saw as the ultimate political value and the last hope for political cohesion."83 The claim to a singular match between each state and its nation, reinforced by international jealousies, humiliations, and fears, has often been the basis for both repression of difference within the nation and attempts to exclude or subjugate all “foreign" elements within the state. The language of national humiliation (or international abuse more generally) provides a discourse in which people can respond to felt problems, like impoverishment, without recognizing the extent to which their interests conflict with others of their countrymen. This misrecognition (in Bourdieu's sense) is not simply manipulated from above but built into the discourse of nationalism.84

Even the pan-Islamic or pan-Shia nationalist variants of contemporary Islamic fundamentalism are products of a global production and reshaping of culture and movements; they are not simply local reactions. Not only do they knit together various predominantly Islamic countries, they are nurtured in part by the experience of life in Islamic enclaves within parts of the West. Thus the message of the Ayatollah Khomeini was honed in French exile as well as in the holy city of Qom; his messages spread more widely through the world by tape recordings and travelers than those of the Communist Manifesto even did in Marx's lifetime, or than the arguments of "Young Europe." They found, for example, receptive audiences in South Asian Muslim enclaves in Britain as well as in Islamic countries from Sudan to Pakistan. Khomeini's addresses reached an international Islamic public sphere - and in doing so threatened national governments in some predominantly Islamic countries. The message was perhaps reactionary in relation to much of the modern West and to the forms Westernization had taken in Iran and the rest of the Islamic world. But it was also universalizing and in some ways cosmopolitan within the Islamic world. It addressed Muslims as individuals wherever they might be, and as members of the great community of Islamic faith, but not primarily as members of intermediate ethnicities or local polities. Though Islamic fundamentalism challenges existing national boundaries, and challenges many Western ideas about what is proper to the relationship between state and religion, it does not break with nationalism so much as promote a redefinition of the crucial categorical identity or political community for devout Muslims.

That the discourse of nationalism is available in an international public sphere for adoption in disparate settings is made clear by the history of anti-colonial nationalisms. As Anderson has argued, nationalism may even have originated in colonial experience - that of Spanish America - but wherever it started it was immediately "modular," transportable into very different material and ideological contexts.85

Colonialism was a great source of nationalism for several reasons. In the first place, the presence and power of the colonial regime placed a premium on the affirmation or development of a national identity as its counterweight and a basis for resistance. In many cases, colonial ideology also carried the view that the colonized were essentially disunited (except for the peace maintained by the colonizers) and incapable of self-organization; nationalism was both the visible evidence against this and in some cases part of the actual achievement of capacity for self-organization on a large scale.8 Third, colonial rule was itself more sharply incapacitating, in a crucial sense, once the world was organized in a system of states. Regardless of the difficulties in achieving either international efficacy or domestic self-organization, both opportunities were effectively limited to those who could mount a successful claim to state sovereignty. Whatever the actual form of government claimants anticipated, no matter how elite the anti-colonialists and how elitist their agendas for post-colonial rule, their claims to sovereignty came by definition from"below,"from"the people," rather than from the rulers above. Nationalism was (and remains) the most readily available discursive form for such claims. Though it is in part imported from an international discourse, the very colonial situation leads also to its indigenous reinvention and reinforcement.

In anti-colonial movements it is easy to see the deep mutual interdependence of culture-forming, identity-forming, and political discourse.

This challenges the separation of these realms suggested in Habermas's account of the public sphere, and invites us to wonder whether the European experience may not have been more similar to many of the anti-colonial replications of the Enlightenment than to subsequent European idealization of it.87 Much of the early activity of nationalists has been focused not on directly contesting state power but on efforts to reform culture, to undo traditional family forms and communal loyalties, and to create a “new person" combining aspects of Western individualism with distinctively indigenous cultural content. Such projects have commonly involved the production of a public sphere, even while much of the discourse in the public sphere invoked a rhetoric of essentialist national identity.

In attempting to account for the strength of imperial powers while demonstrating the continuing importance of indigenous national culture, many anti-colonial nationalisms produce or reproduce a split between spiritual and material life.88 This resulted, in China, in the famous "Ti-Yong" dictum: Chinese studies for spiritual essence; Western studies for practical use.89 In India too, nationalist ideology declared the "domain of the spiritual its sovereign territory"and sought to restrict colonial interventions into this realm.90 This rationale for selective Westernization continues to operate as part of the program of nationalist modernization in India and China today, despite other dramatic changes in each country. It shapes, for example, Deng Xiaoping's promotion of some capitalist economic reforms while simultaneously condemning the spiritual pollution brought by Westernization.

Though much of this is distinctively a response to colonialism, Western history also involved struggles over cultural identity and the constitution of a citizenry.91 Even Hobbes' justification of the absolute sovereignty of kings, as we saw, required first a body of citizens – a nation - capable of granting the right to rule in explicit or implicit social contract. In colonial (and post-colonial) settings as in the West, the crucial question remains to what extent the constitution of a citizenry and the idea of nation reflected the notion of a differentiated public or that of a unitary people.

What occasioned the issue was engagement with each other in common projects - those of self-rule or those of resistance to colonialism. Coloniai rule, like that of empires generally, allowed groups of people quite different from each other to co-exist and interact partly because it called on them to undertake no common projects not initiated by the state.92 The creation of a political community called for a new kind of interrelationships, and something more than a "live and let live" urbanity. Faced with the challenge of either anti-colonial movement or postcolonial government diverse populations could follow, sometimes in combination, various paths: to separate along the lines of their difference, to repress their differences, or to constitute their unity through discourse across the lines of their differences. The competition among these different approaches is painfully evident in the twentieth-century history of India. One of the crucial questions of the modern era is how often and under what circumstances the third option - meaningful, politically efficacious public discourse without fragmentation or repression of difference - can be achieved.

Leaders in many anti-colonial or secessionist struggles often see strategic advantages in either repressing internal difference or persuading their adherents that claims for recognition of and attention to other identities (gender, subordinate ethnicity, etc.) must be abandoned or postponed. Even in parts of the West where nationalist struggles did not have to be waged against colonial powers, the path of repressing or denying internal difference was commonly taken. As we observed at the beginning of the chapter, quoting Renan, the history of nationalism is largely a history of forgetting the many acts of both material and symbolic violence by which the unity of the nation was forged. It is precisely on the basis of such unsavory pasts, however, that many West European and North American nations achieved their tacit sense of unity and boundaries. And ironically, it has been where internal unity and external boundaries could be substantially taken for granted that democracies found it easiest in later generations to grow tolerant of a new sort of politics of diversity based on gender, subnational ethnicity, and the like.

Where and when the sovereignty of the nation appeared more in doubt, it seems to have been easier for nationalist movements to play nationalism as a trump card against other identities. But though nationalist self-descriptions generally emphasize mass participation and crossclass unity, nationalism is often an elite project structured in ways that maintain or institute patterns of domination. This is nowhere more true than in those post-colonial states where it is most vociferously denied. As Markakis remarks, "anti-colonial nationalism was not, as often depicted, a massive popular crusade driven by the desire to undo what imperialism had wrought. In fact, its constituency was socially circumscribed and its aims concrete."93 Nationalism was commonly a project of groups linked to the colonial state and to vested interests in the colonial economy. Yet, one of the impacts of pursuing independence and elite interests through a specifically nationalist agenda was that the discursive frame led elites both to couch their claims in terms of a broader category of people and to attempt to forge links with a variety of less elite groups. Since anticolonial nationalists challenged the legitimacy of colonial rule on the grounds that it did not represent the indigenous people, they helped lay the rhetorical foundations for more popular claims to political participation and restructuring. At the same time, the social relations elites forged outside their own ranks, and the “modernizing" educational and social reform projects they undertook among "the masses," often led precisely to a "de-massification" of ordinary people. Where colonialists claimed that their power was necessary to keep the peace and secure economic progress, indigenous elites sought to create or demonstrate the existence of an indigenous nation adequate to the modern era. They also relied on expanded public spheres in which the nation and its needs were crucial topics of discourse. In doing so, they provided ordinary people with increased means of mobilizing for their own projects and their own public discourses in competition with those of the initial nationalist elites.94

Nationalist elites, of course, then faced the challenge of defending their conception of the nation. Where the nation was not conceptualized as constantly in the making through public discourse (and it seldom has been so conceptualized) this generally meant defending a view of the essential similarity among the people. To bring forward a claim on behalf of a subsidiary category of the nation - peasants, women, a racial or ethnic minority - appeared implicitly to challenge the presumptive goodness and unity of the nation. It is not that nationalist ideology per se was intrinsically hostile to the substance of any such claims. Rather, the tension was rooted in the rhetorical tendency for the demands of such subordinate groups to appear as challenges to the unity of the nation (as defined, generally, by elite groups).9s

Thus class-based claims could be supported by nationalists primarily when they were directed against colonial or international imperialists. Claims on behalf of women were often particularly problematic for anticolonial nationalist groups. First, Western colonial powers often seized on the “traditional" treatment of women as evidence of the inherently oppressive nature of the entire cultural tradition of the colonized (and thus of the virtues of colonial rule as modernization)." Second, the effort to defend the “spiritual essence" of the nation often involved emphasizing the national identity found in social life outside the realms of economy and public administration. Home, family, and gender relations were particularly national (and attempts to introduce new forms of employment for women and other putative “freedoms" appeared as encroachments). Even beyond these specific contexts, nationalisms have been overwhelmingly male ideologies, not simply in the sense that men have been more nationalist than women, but rather in the way that national strength is defined so often as international potency, and men are treated as potential martyrs while women are mainly their mothers. Thus in 1989-90, one of the most prominent posters of the Magyar Democratic Front consisted of Béla Aba's painting of a pregnant woman above the slogan “For a Hungarian Future." Nationalisms are especially sexist in ideological content - militarism, for example, and the appropriation of patriarchal traditional culture. In form, nationalist appeals to the equivalence of individual members of the nation offer a potential basis for women to claim greater rights (as indeed they have done within many polities, and by no means only in the West). But, as in the classical Enlightenment public sphere, this formal equivalence poses the dnger of the erasure or suppression of discourses of difference at the same time that it offers the potential for recognition of equal rights. Thus, women excluded from a nationalist discourse by practices that tacitly fail to recognize them as full members of the nation appear as anti-national when they attempt to claim women's voices and concerns within the national public sphere.

Ironically, even while nationalist ideologies repress individual differences, they generally address people precisely as individuals, rather than as members of intermediate groups. Indian nationalists, thus, have attempted not only to create a historical narrative of Indian unity, but to address individuals directly as Indians rather than first and foremost as members of different linguistic or regional groups, castes, or genders. In China too, communist ideology has been fundamentally nationalist (even more than that of the Guomindang) in demanding the direct and unmediated allegiance of each individual and challenging the independent claims of parents over children (most notoriously in the Cultural Revolution). As noted above, contemporary Islamic nationalism, however “fundamentalist"and "traditional" in content, shares a good deal of the same discursive form, positing a direct connection between the individual Muslim and Umma Islam. This is part of what makes fundamentalist Islam appear as so threatening to various formally more traditional governments like the monarchies of the Gulf states. These Arab states are precisely not nationalist and not organized around modern ideas of citizenship. Kuwait is ruled by an Emir, as the head of a royal lineage, within a tribal kin group that comprises a minority of the inhabitants of its territory and an even smaller percentage of those involved in material production or rendering services. Both Iraq's Baathist nationalism and the broader Islamic nationalism promulgated by Iran start from the premise of universal citizenship, at least for men. Both officially empower individuals through elections (whether or not all observers consider these to be free and honest), something Kuwait emphatically does not do. Fundamentalist Islam offers an ideology much closer, in this respect, to