## Conclusion

can be other than the way it already is. And then each can be approached within a critical theory, and looking at each can also inform the ways in which we grasp the nature of our own social relationships and lives.

We can note, for example, that one of the most basic and powerful of social technologies is that great “automaton" that Thomas Hobbes termed the state.

Nature (the Art whereby God hath made and governes the World) is by the Art of man, as in many other things, so in this also imitated, that it can make an Artifical Animal. For seeing life is but a motion of Limbs, the beginning whereof is in some principall part within; why may we not say that all Automata (Engines that move themselves by springs and wheeles as doth a watch) have an artificiall life? . .. Art goes yet further, imitating that Rationall and most excellent worke of Nature, Man. For by Art is created that great LEVIATHAN called a COMMON-WEALTH, or STATE (in latine CIVITAS) which is but an Artificiall Man; though of greater stature and strength than the Naturall, for whose protection and defence it was intended.

If Leviathan has come to symbolize the very opposite of liberation and openness to human potential, that does not make it natural and beyond the reach of human action for it is only in human action that it is created and recreated. Critical theory takes on the task not just of criticizing Hobbes or criticizing the state in any of its particular incarnations, but of critically grasping both the ways in which our categories of thought make the world what it is, and the possibilities for change in those existing conditions.

None of this means, of course, that anything and everything is possible, that we are somehow free for self-realization without constraint, or that social construction can make us into just any sort of beings. To see the many-directional openings in biology is not to suggest that biology does not give us certain capabilities and potentials and not others. The openness of biology is pronounced mainly at the level of evolutionary change not the experience or intentions of individual beings, while new technologies such as genetic engineering can introduce radical interventions into the processes of evolutionary change, creating new species and modifying old; moreover, if the lived adaptations of individuals are inherited, it is still mainly through culture. And the interaction between 'nature" and "culture" is such that the influences of each can never be sharply sorted out from those of the other.

One crucial implication of taking the radical possibilities of human natality seriously is to reveal that most possibilities go unrealized. All sorts of ethnic groups, linguistic communities, and polities might plausibly have grown into recognized nations with autonomous states. Few have (though many more since 1989). Culture and history are the grounds of our existence in part because they - as much as nature - foreclose possibilities or render them very improbable. To recognize that there could in principle have been a Burgundian nation does not make it a viable project today, but it does remind us that France is neither an ancient nor an immutably natural category. If it is experienced as “primordial," that is because culture and social life have made it seem so in relation to contemporary individuals.

So too outside the realm of nations. The variations that we can see in culture and history are only a fraction of the possible differences among ways of life and social groups. Facing up to those differences does not mean abandoning ourselves to an orderless infinity of possibilities because our very acts of understanding take place within practical projects and bounded human lives shaped by their own culture and history. Critical theory is a call to take the project of knowledge seriously from within such contexts and to see it as a project rather than an accumulation of finished truths. This is a qualification on certain sorts of discourse of "natural" truth, but as I have tried to show, recognizing that we enter into the struggle for understanding within bounded, culturally and historically specific contexts, and oriented by practical projects, does not preclude taking that struggle seriously. We are able to assess our understandings as better or worse even when we cannot judge them sharply and absolutely true or false. This is why, in the realm of science, there is constant and necessary discourse among scientists, contests and struggles over ways of understanding, and not simply the conduct of purportedly conclusive experiments and observations and their summary in textbooks. And in public life too our struggles can reshape the objects of our understanding and our normative judgment, including even ourselves.

## Ⅱ

However much critical theorists have criticized the Enlightenment and challenged its universalism based on sameness and rationalism, they have also presumed it as background to every theoretical move. The challenge of postmodernism lies in the suggestion that the Enlightenment may be losing its force. This is not a challenge that would make equal sense in many Third World settings, though First World critics somewhat ironically claim a moral force based on presumptuous identification with Third World suffering and struggles. In Chinese struggles for democracy, in Indian struggles to avoid communal violence, in Eritrean struggles for self-determination it would seem that Enlightenment categories have not lost their force in the contemporary world. Yet at the same time, the stress on difference characteristic of “new social movements" and a range of related political concerns in the First World and throughout the world leaves Enlightenment-rooted social theory straining for a response that does not require a strong presumption of sameness.

There is a sense, as Allan Megill has noted, that the very presumption of crisis on which "postmodernist" and similar theories trade contains a certain incoherency. "The notion of a crisis in history presupposes what it sets out to destroy - the idea of history as a continuous process, history with a capital H. Crisis theorists attack the historicist notion of directionality in history. But in postulating a crisis or turning in history, they assume just such a directionality."⁴ The notion of postmodernity - or the practice of postmodernism - thus presumes a linear transcendence of the modern; it presents history as a linear series of stages even while denying this sort of representation.

But if postmodernism of this sort is current in academic circles, the postulate of an end to history received its most popularly influential invocation from a different quarter. Francis Fukuyama's conservative-Hegelian article and book seized on the transformations of 1989 - the fall of communism - as the occasion for a remarkably facile but no less remarkably widely disseminated account of the happy overcoming of the dualism constitutive of cold war and more generally modern history.5 Fukuyama's account is unappealing because of its naiveté, and because it lends itself to appropriation for reactionary political purposes. But consideration should not end there. We need to ask what it means that from such different quarters as poststructuralist Paris and post-cold war Washington there should be an eagerness to declare the end of an era – in each case without anticipating the recurrence of such enduring if unattractive modern motifs as the resurgence of nationalism and ethnic conflict. Part of the answer lies in the desire to invoke difference without taking seriously the problems it poses.

Though the formulations and rhetoric of many postmodernists lend themselves to such a reading, this misses the important extent to which postmodernism - like Levinas's antimodernism - has brought the themes of alterity and difference to our attention. More specifically, coherently presented or not, the challenge has revealed a weakness in the theoretical discourse of modernity. Just as the reproduction of ethnic nationalism and identitarian violence was unanticipated after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc, so modernist theorizing has failed to make sense of the ubiquitous politics of identity - and difference - in the West.

Indeed, if there is a clear predecessor to postmodernism, it is perhaps the pursuit of immediate experience characteristic of the 1960s and early 1970s student and youth protests.6 Against the abstract culture of capitalism, the disciplines and deferred gratifications of market society and mass higher education, and the bureaucratization of social institutions, one of the central themes of the protests was an attempt to recover immediate interpersonal contact in social relations. Yet this pursuit of immediacy proved not only difficult in the face of large-scale capitalist and bureaucratic social organization, it proved also to mask the problems posed by the differences among the putative protagonists of the movement and the potential beneficiaries of their actions. Links between this dream of immediacy and ideas of total critique helped to precipitate the postmodern response.

The ideal of immediacy was not, of course, new to the 1960s. It has ancient roots; it was central to Romanticism; it shaped existentialism; and it has long figured in the thrill and appeal of the notion of revolution. Critical theorists have both appealed to the desire for and experience of immediacy and criticized the failure to see beyond the immediately apparent to more basic organization of social life. The ideal has two moments. On the one hand, it seems to refer to pure communication between human beings, a oneness based on the elimination of all obstacles of difference, imperfections of language, and instrumental agendas. On the other hand, it seems to refer to directly interpersonal relations as distinct from more mediated, indirect relations in which other people or even large-scale social systems stand between us. Neither is fully realizable; each can be misleading even as a regulative ideal. Yet to simply refuse them outright would be to deny a basic pathos of modern life. Angst over our awareness of the complexity and imperfections of our relations with each other is no more eradicable than that complexity. And of course there is more to the mediations among people than mere reference to the everyday complexities of social relations reveals. Language, power, markets, categories of thought, and forms of relations construct us and connect us in ways we have a hard time seeing.

In undertaking the task of seeing these ways in which the creatures of our own action become the apparently uncontrollable shapers of our lives, critical theory takes on a risk. It risks being unable to recover the positive sense of possibilities. This is what happened to Horkheimer and Adorno after the holocaust and the war and the radically normalizing reconstruction of postwar Germany. As social theorists they became pessimists, and they imagined ways out no longer in critical theory nor social action but in spiritual and aesthetic pursuits. Heidegger avoided this problem by not being critical, and by invoking an ideology of immediacy (the one crucial feature of Heidegger's thought that has attracted the most opposition from postmodernists otherwise deeply influenced by him). Heidegger, said Levinas, held unacceptably that Being must always be prior to beings, that the same must always triumph over the other.? This is how Heidegger constructed the appealing but dangerous claim to immediacy and the sense of being at home in the world without having to address the contradictions and violence of the world.8

Though Derrida is sometimes more manifestly political, he also seems often to withdraw from the challenge of orienting positive practice in a world conceived as unredeemable. One can read Derrida, for example, as articulating a plea for silence before the unrepresentable terrors and brutalities of modern history, like the holocaust. All discourse, he has said, essentially retains within it space and the Same; all discourse is originally violent.9 Such a reading places Derrida alongside Elie Wiesel and George Steiner, at least narrowly with regard to the holocaust. But such a reading is hard to reconcile with such a copious production of verbiage as Derrida has offered, even though his tone is nearly always ironic, if not outright parodic or even self-parodic, and even if it speaks around but never fully on the issues of the day.

Yet, in his latest work, (even) Derrida returns to Marx (and to a more manifest politics).1º Marx had seemed, not just for Derrida but for most postmodernists and a wide sweep of other intellectuals, to be on the verge of displacement from vital public discourse, about to be in some combination thrown on the rubbish heap created by the collapse of communism and relegated to the dusty prestige of canonical texts in the history of social theory. Marx's theory was too total, too invested in the idea of revolution as a radical social transformation, too rooted in the nineteenth century, too reliant on images of material (including biological as well as technological and economic infrastructures). Marx's theory appeared complicitous with the totalitarian horrors perpetrated partly in its name. Yet certain themes in Marx retain their purchase and make a return to his work very productive. Marx attempted seriously to link political, economic, social, and even cultural analysis, sometimes reproducing the notion of the differentiation of spheres, sometimes challenging it creatively. Most importantly for present purposes, Marx developed an account of capitalism as an historically specific but basic structuring of social life, constituting much of the modern world and activity within it through the categories of labor and commodity, bringing a relentless dynamism and transformative pressure for capital accumulation. We need not follow Marx's occasional reductionism and believe that all aspects of social and cultural life follow the patterns of capitalist change to see how important it is in establishing conditions of life and action.

Marx never managed a full integration of his own ideas on politics, culture, and for that matter psychological anthropology with his economic theory. He claimed coherences where these were, at least, not manifest. Today it seems clearer than it did in Marx's day that though these realms may be linked and mutually conditioning, there is no reason to expect them to move precisely together. Many of the political quagmires of the present era, taken as evidence of modernity's incipient collapse, are joined historically not to crises of capitalism but to increasing global organization of capitalism.

Marx took much more seriously than most postmodernists what it would mean to transcend an epoch. We need not follow every specific of his theory to learn from him a similar seriousness. And even the most cursory juxtaposition of Marx's theory of capital to the quasi-theoretical understandings of modernity and postmodernity that are current suggests the difference between a critical theory and a conceptualization that fails to challenge the existing constitution of the world, however negative those using it may be about various features of that world. Marx's theory of capital includes an account of the constitutive categories that make capitalism possible, an account of the historical processes by which capitalism came into being, an account of the dynamic pressures that make capitalism expand and intensify, and an account of the internal contradictions that jeopardize its long-term stability and point to possibilities for its supercession. Marx also offered theoretical accounts of the nature of human life that made capitalism possible and the nature of political practices that both affirmed and potentially challenged capitalism, though these are not in a strong sense internal to his account of capitalism.

Most theoretical attempts to account for modernity and postmodernity, by contrast, are hampered by difficulties in giving specific historical meaning to their objects. Modernity is a label for a conjuncture of different kinds of social changes and patterns, differently motivated, produced, and reproduced, not for a theoretically determinate transformation. It has characteristic features, but not an analytic unity. The politics of identity is endemic to the modern era partly because human action is embedded in so many different projects and these are not altogether integrated or even commensurable. The crossing of cultural boundaries may be significantly driven forward by capitalist expansion, but the reification of those cultural boundaries under the influence of nationalist categorical thinking is not simply the product of capitalism but of the constitution of capitalism within a world system of states (and indeed the flourishing of a specific way of thinking about the political communities of those states).

Modernity, thus, should not be equated with capitalism (a toocommon marxist mistake). But likewise we need to see the profound way in which the modern era has been produced by and remains conditioned by capitalism. Capitalism is a relatively coherent theoretical object, and to encourage seeing it as nothing but a multiplicity of differences would be senseless. At the same time, the modern predicament is not simply or only that of human beings living under capitalism and it does involve a multiplicity of differences, including the cross-pressures of different, more or less coherent “systems" like capitalism and state power.11

We cannot solve all puzzles at once with a “critical theory of modernity"; we need more modestly to conceptualize the role of critical theory in modernity. This includes helping to make sense of these multiple projects and our lived relations to them, showing the ways in which, however powerful, these projects are not inevitable, identifying not only contradictions among but contradictions within such projects, trying to bring into sensible relationship the different intellectual discourses and perspectives through which people have tried to come to terms with this heterogeneous world, suggesting the political implications of such approaches, and the possibilities for transformative action. By taking seriously the question of what it would mean to transcend the current epoch, critical theory opens more space for considering the possibility that the world could be different than it is than does any simple affirmation of existing differences or claim that postmodernity is just a matter of perspective.

The ideas of modernity and its purportedly opposite twin, postmodernity, are parts of this world, themselves in need of critique, not autonomous ideas for grasping it. Marshall Berman writes, for example, that modernism is “any attempt by modern men and women to become subjects as well as objects of modernization, to get a grip on the modern world and make themselves at home in it."12 Berman's vision is humane, politically serious, and in many regards compelling, but we should also be wary. Continuing to think within this modern consciousness can be debilitating. Partly because of the influence of capitalism, the modern epoch has been devoted to novelty, in art and high culture as well as in technology and economic products. Ironically, this constant succession of everything by a putatively new successor makes it hard to be challenged by any idea of radical novelty. Berman evokes modernity as a "maelstrom" in which:

To be modern is to find ourselves in an environment that promises us adventure, power, joy, growth, transformation of ourselves and the world - and, at the same time, that threatens to destroy everything we have, everything we know, everything we are. ... To be modern is to be part of a universe in which, as Marx said, “all that is solid melts into air."13

This expands one of Marx's crucial insights, focusing on the problems the modern world poses for the constitution of stable horizons of experience. It is an account, ultimately, from the perspective of the experiencing subject. As such, it participates in the recurrent modern search for an authentic personal voice, a capacity for authentic experience, and a way to grasp the largest-scale phenomena of social life in terms of categories that viably make sense of individual involvement in lifeworlds. But the modern era is also constituted by indirect social relations constituted outside the consciousness of individuals through their mutual involvement in capitalist production processes and markets, in states and electronically mediated communication.14 A critical theory able to make sense of it, and able to orient action in relation to it, must offer the ability to grasp these more “experience-distant" social relationships as well. This requires going beyond the categories offered us immediately by modernism itself.

Modernity is the self-conception of an era idealizing change and especially progress. Perry Anderson captures this well in his appreciative critique of Berman's attempt to resuscitate modernism:

the idea of modernization involves a conception of fundamentally planar development – a continuous-flow process in which there is no real differentiation of one conjuncture of epoch from another, save in terms of the mere chronological succession of old and new, earlier and later, categories themselves subject to unceasing permutation of positions in one direction as time goes by and the latter becomes the earlier, the newer older.15

This understanding of modernization is the capitalist epoch's self-understanding, but it will not do for a critical theory of the epoch. Nor can the constant reformation of everything, the instability of all practices, cultural forms, and objects amount to revolution. Anderson is concerned to restore revolution to its“precise meaning: the political overthrow from below of one state order and its replacement by another."16 Even beyond this specifically political sense of revolution, however, the indeterminate, multidirectional succession of everything by something new implies only flux, not transformation of underlying order. Postmodernists who declare allegiance to this version of novelty and “everything is possible" are both eminently modernist and unable to offer any idea of real societal transformation. There is, thus, a positive as well as a negative way to become closed to the possibilities of radical transformation in social life.