Yet, as Robert Musil wrote, “If there is such a thing as a sense of reality, there must also be a sense of possibility."17 Any of us can, of course, become closed to the sense of possibilities in life. Sometimes, however, the sense of possibilities rushes in on us with the force of passion. We affirm it not only because we can employ reason and observation to see the possibilities in the world but because certain basic experiences orient us to the existence of possibilities. This orientation may be a condition of critical theory, however much critical theory also seeks to expand it. As with middle-aged lovers who had forgotten why the expression falling in love was invented, various experiences offer us the possibility of epiphanies, though usually modest and unoriginal ones. These are not solely the province of aesthetic productions as against practical activity or the pursuit of truth. Possibilities open in each.

This is not a call to collapse the distinctions among these "value spheres." It is a call to see that as knowers, doers, and reflexive thinkers we are embedded in collective and personal projects. The social interrelationship among these projects provides a genuine basis for coming to understand each other - never without some distortion - even across the most basic lines of cultural difference. Our mutual understanding, in other words, is made possible by mutual engagement with practice in the world; it is not a purely cognitive project, an exercise in translation and consensus formation that takes place prior to our potential collaboration. Moreover, because we each engage multiple projects and inhabit multiple social worlds, we cannot arrive as simply self-identical beings at the outset of any social encounter. The possibilities for changing the world and the potential for mutual understanding across lines of difference are always present in our internal dialogicality and the dependence of our self-constitution on our relations with others; they are always possibilities for self-transformation as well.

## ⅢII

The recognition of difference, this book has argued at some length, need not be seen as an occasion for surrender to relativism or the impossibility of communication. It is true that more or less relativistic fragmentation seems the order of the day in many arenas. New nations are carved out of old states and then face secessionist movements of their own. Social movements proliferate, many claiming privileged epistemological standpoints as well as personal commitment to projects of identity and social change. Not only is the left deeply fragmented in practice, the very idea of a unified left is under deep challenge from those who see such organization as intrinsically repressive.18 At the same time, fundamentalist and integralist movements attempt new and often repressive unifications to empower nations and religions. Asian political leaders like Lee Kwan Yew and Mahathir Mohamed argue that there is an "Asian Way" based on a generalized (but selectively interpreted) Confucian culture that makes "Western" talk of human rights and democracy inappropriate.

Difference, in short, is not a virtue about which one can feel unambiguously easy at heart. As plurality, it is basic to human life; as the basis for asserting unbridgeable divides it makes us unnecessarily pessimistic about future relations; when invoked as the vehicle for claiming that all those who differ from others in one way must be essentially the same within their group, it is pernicious and repressive. Fortunately, we do have resources for living more happily with difference and forming social relations across its distinctions.

A crucial resource is our capacity to talk with one another. We do not have to agree with all the implications of Habermas's theory of communicative action to see how attractive it is to be able and willing to give reasons for actions. Those prepared to enter into reasoned discussions, to explain why they are angry or resentful or suffering from hurt pride are immediately less likely to act out their passions in violent and destructive ways. They may learn something from their conversations with others; indeed, they are apt to learn not just about the others but about themselves as they reflexively assess their own rationales and narratives. But as I have suggested in several parts of this book, we would be in even more serious trouble than we are if our only resource for living with difference lay in formal communication, coming to cognitive agreements based on translations of our different views. Thinking only in terms of cognitive, discursively articulate agreements as the basis for life together relies on a very intellectualistic view of human nature.

In fact, we are able to live with differences not only because we engage in explicit communication but because we join in practical projects together, organized in part by habitual, inarticulate, embodied knowledge that enables us to coordinate our actions even when we cannot discursively describe them, give adequate reasons for them, or explain why we have a sense of what others are about to do. Beyond – or perhaps before - formal communication, then, we rely on physical sensibilities and shared practical orientations to help us live together and even to understand each other. This is not just a matter of how we understand those very different and very distant from ourselves. It is also how we bridge differences large and small in our most intimate relations. With our children, our spouses, our lovers, our friends we not only speak but touch; we inhabit shared physical spaces oriented to the others' presence; we clear the dishes from the table, give massages, change the baby's diapers. Our ability to carry out these sorts of social relations prepares us for the challenges of entering into other relations where cultural differences may be sharper. Is it a mistake to try to take our dishes into our Chinese host's kitchen? We will, if we are somewhat open, sense this. More basically, when we undertake actually to do things together, we can use not only words but physical, embodied sensibilities and the demands of the practical task itself to guide our interaction. This creates the occasion for learning that may be partly mediated by words, but would be unlikely if we relied only on words.

This matters not just in directly interpersonal relations but in the largest scale of social cooperation and communication. We watch each other - on films and television as well as in person. We enter into limited forms of practical collaboration and from them both learn more about each other and build up habituated ways of working jointly that control some of the differences between us so that it becomes practicable to explore the others. We feel intuitively at home in certain settings largely because so much of our habituated and prediscursive knowledge works well without confronting the irritant of challenges. This is a key part of the sense in which we inhabit our “national characters," a way attitude surveys have a hard time grasping. Conversely, the aussren habitus of immigrants and foreigners impedes our mutual understanding. Indeed, this puts the matter too neutrally. Our embodied and cognitive senses of identity and of "how things should be done" not only enable us to feel at home in certain settings, they encourage us to see deeply different habituses as disturbing and problematic. More bluntly, in Sander Gilman's words, "the Other is always 'mad'... the Other's 'madness' is what defines the sanity of the defining group. The group is embodied with all the positive associations of the self. The Other is the antithesis of the self and is thus that which defines the group."19 The construction of "our" identities is never, therefore, without implication for the construction of "their" identities, and vice versa; neither is this play of identities kept at a cognitive level where the deepest senses of danger and lust do not play a role. The challenge of coming to mutual understanding with those very different from ourselves is always thus a challenge to our visceral sensibilities, not just our minds and vocabularies.

But though a habitus is not easily changed, it is not perfectly fixed either. It is adjusted in the course of adapting to new situations and engaging in new practical tasks. Moreover, there is no reason to think of any habitus as internally self-consistent, as though it were a perfectly logical, structuralist system.2o Our embodied practices, like those mediated more by discursive consciousness, change in part because they are rent by internal tensions and we try to work those out. We remake ourselves, in response to internal issues as well as external pressures, better or worse, often with more difficulty than we would like. Our knowledge of ourselves and others, thus, is situated not only in relationship to our external contexts but to our internal states and biographical contexts.

Recognizing that all knowledge is situated and shaped by embeddedness in projects of practical action, both individual and collective, does not mean that there can be no room for rational-critical discourse or scientific inquiry. Rather, it entails recognizing that we deal in better and worse understandings, not clear-cut truths; statements that achieve the effect of truth only by dependence on discourses that cannot be simply true or false. Discourse in which we give reasons for what we do and what we think remains a crucial response to the challenge of fundamental difference. But if this is to support a Habermasian theme in one sense, it should also be clear that it is not a suggestion that we can proceed asymptotically towards ever fuller and freer communication or that we should take as an adequate regulative ideal universal presuppositions of communication. On the contrary, we have to take much more seriously the extent to which our understandings with other human beings are rooted in shared physical activity; in tacit, nondiscursive recognition of commonalities; and in joint participation in practical activities based only partly on prior coordination through communication. When critical theory is too fully focused on the discursively rational, it makes poor sense of the politics of identity from gender to nationalism; it makes the distinctions among cultures seem much harder to bridge than they are; it encourages the mirror-image response of an idealization of the nonrational.

When we say, then, that critical theory engages not only the externally existing world but the conditions of theoretical knowledge itself, we need to hear ourselves saying that theory is produced by people with bodies, with investments in specific webs of interpersonal relations and categorical identities, with their orientations shaped by their cultural and historical contexts. We need to take on critical theory in a spirit of reaching out from those bodies, those relations, those identities, and those contexts, but not in a spirit of imagining we can universalistically transcend them.

## Notes

1 Weiner, The Beak of the Finch, p. 331. Translating Darwin into sociology (and preDarwinian social thought on which Darwin had drawn back into sociology), Spencer visualized social evolution on the ambivalent image of a tree. "Social progress," he wrote, “is not linear but divergent and

redivergent" (Sociology, quoted in Peel, Herbert Spencer, p. 157). This could lend itself to grasping manifold differences among human social forms, but also to an ultimately classificatory, taxonomical approach. The key issue is not linear vs. multilinear evolution, but whether the manifold differences among human social forms are temporalized, as though they were all historical differences, or understood in terms of more genuine histories that address their contemporaneous relations with each other. See Fabian, Time and the Other.

2 See Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs and Women and Primate Visions.

3 Hobbes, Leviathan; p. 3; italics and capitalization in original.

4 Megill, Prophets of Extremity, p. 346.

5 Fukuyama, The End of History.

6 This is well noted in Negt and Kluge, Public Sphere and Experience. See also Gitlin's The Sixties.

7 See Levinas, Totality and Infinity, esp. pp. 43ff.

8 One can also wonder why Derrida seems to defend Heidegger against Levinas – or at least to deconstruct the latter's non-ironic argument against the former - given Derrida's own critical stance towards a philosophy rooted in presence and immediacy.

9 Derrida, Writing and Difference, p. 116.

10 Derrida's Spectres of Marx, released in Paris just as this book is going to press.

11 Conversely, there is no reason to equate possible socialist - and indeed democratically socialist - futures with the production of sameness and equivalence among all human beings, as though there were a single underlying anthropological condition of fulfillment in life together. As Anderson suggests, the problem stems largely from the idealization of simplicity and transparency in the utopian tradition, from which it is incorporated into the socialist imagining of a better society (as distinct from many better societies or forms of social life). I would add that rationalism of various forms, including but not limited to the technocratic, reinforces the same orientation to transparency which then becomes an issue even for theories like Habermas's. As Anderson says, optimistically but attractively, “It seems perfectly clear that if you had a socialist society in which production, power, and culture were genuinely democratized, you would have an enormous multiplication of different ways of living" ("Modernity and Revolution," p. 336).

12 Berman, All That Is Solid Melts Into Air (Preface to the Penguin edition), p. 5.

13 Ibid., p. 15.

14 See Calhoun, “Indirect Relationships” and “The Infrastructure of Modernity."

15 Anderson, "Modernity and Revolution," p. 321.

16 Ibid., p. 332. Though note that this may amount to an implausible narrowing of usage to the most specific of modern political meanings (abandoning not only metaphorical usages like “industrial revolution" but earlier