# Style, Styling and Lifestyle

As products are often characterized by design historians in terms of their style and certain scholars have written histories of design and architecture in the form of a sequence of styles, this is a term/concept which merits our close attention. Before we can discuss the relationship between style and design history, we must first consider the word's meaning and the role the concept has played in the discourse of art history.

## Style and Art History

Style is one of the most important critical concepts deployed by art historians. Indeed at one time - during the foundation period of the discipline - it was regarded by some scholars as the principal object of study. It was the emphasis on styles in art, they thought, which distinguished art history from all other disciplines. In fact, the study of style is not exclusive to art historians: anthropologists, sociologists, archaeologists and subcultural theorists also take an interest in it.

Art historians considered style vital because they thought of it as the outward manifestation of the inner being of a person, social group or an age. If one can understand a style one gains, as it were, direct access to the whole value structure of a foreign culture, a bygone age or a social strata. For example, Nicos Hadjinicolaou describes style as‘a particular form of the overal ideology of a social class'.i Actually, he dislikes the word 'style' and proposes to substitute 'visual ideology', that is an ideology made visible. If one can understand the reasons for stylistic change through time, one has also acquired a key to the laws of cultural evolution.

Art historians reasoned that if style was inextricably bound up with a time, a place, a people, then it could be used as a diagnostic tool to date anonymous artefacts, to situate them geographically and to assign them to specific cultures. For this method to work, a relationship of authenticity between style and society had to be assumed, that is, it was believed that later copies and fakes could always be distinguished from 'the real things' because the former could never exactly reproduce the social and material conditions that gave rise to the originals.

For various reasons, problems of attribution have not preoccupied design historians as much as they have art historians; nevertheless they do occur in certain areas of design. In the field of English furniture, for example, the attribution of an eighteenth-<:entury chair to a famous designer such as Thomas Chippendale can make a tremendous difference to its monetary value and collectability; furniture historians have therefore to cope with the difficulty of distinguishing genuine items from the thousands of spurious ones in existence.2

## Defining Style

The word 'style' derives from the Latin stilus, meaning 'a writing implement', hence the idea of handwriting as the direct expression of individual character. This is surely the origin of the theory of expression which has been so influential in the history of aesthetics; it could also be called 'the signature theory'. The implication here is that one cannot help but reveal oneself in writing and thus handwriting can be used to detect the identity of the author: 'the style is the man'. However, the ability of criminals to forge handwriting throws doubt on this theory.

There is another view of style which can be called 'the rhetorical'. This is the idea that in any complex society various styles of writing and speaking exist and can be learnt or imitated. So style in this sense is very artificial; it is public and social not private and personal. It is also self-<:onscious not unconscious as in the case of the signature theory. Self-consciousness is particularly evident in the cases of stylization and styling (car styling, hair styling, and so on). Negative connotations are often associated with styling: it is thought of as a final, superficial transformation of an object, as something applied to an object's surface almost as an afterthought, as a kind of packaging.

In such cases an inauthentic relationship is implied between external appearances and inner truth, hence the accusation levelled against some British design in the 1980s: 'all style and no substance'.

Style, in the rhetorical sense, can be viewed as a resource, as a factor in artistic production, in that once a number of styles exist, artists can select which one they wish to use or rework. They can also decide to combine styles to create hybrids. These points become obvions when one considers the cases of stylistic revivals: neo-classicism, Victorian gothic, and so on. And when one considers stylistic borrowings from foreign cultures, for example chinoiserie.

Let us now try to specify the meaning of the term more precisely. Meyer Schapiro, a leading American art historian, has defmed style as follows:

By style is meant the constant form- and sometimes the constant elements, qualities and expression - in the art of an individual or a group - style is, above all, a system of forms ... the description of a style refers to three aspects of art: form elements or motives, form relationships, and qualities (including an all-over quality which we may call 'expression') .3

This definition emphasizes form and overall expression but says nothing about content. It conforms to the common view that style is concerned with how -the manner or way -something is expressed rather than with what is expressed. Frederick Antal, on the other hand, has argued that every work of art is a specific correlation of form and content.4 One reason why women's hair was such a popular motif with art nouveau artists was that it lent itself to the exploitation of a favourite form - undulating lines. Judith Genova has also argued that 'style is created by wedding form to content in such a way that the form expresses, that is, metaphorically exemplifies the content.' 5 In the case of a Van Gogh peasant painting, for example, the earth-like colours and plough-like brushmarks reinforce the figurative content of the picture.

The question arises: 'Can designed goods be said to have content as well as form?’ In the case of products with figurative imagery or decorative ornamentation on their surfaces and buildings constructed in the shapes of animals or foodstuffs, the answer is clearly ‘yes'. Even in the case of more ‘abstract' products such as cars, the style may be designed to 'metaphorically exemplify' such contents as speed or sex. The fact that styles have meanings, that they evoke connotations and associations, suggests that there is always content as well as form or that form itself is a signifying agent. If, for instance, one leaves aside the referent of the London Underground diagram, the saturated colours, sharp edges and geometric arrangement of the lines themselves communicate a set of values - order, clarity, harmony, economy, unity, rationality - which, arguably, are those typical of classicism.

Style is not a concept which can be sensibly applied to a single artefact: it is only valid in respect of artefacts considered as members of groups. To identify an object as belonging to a particular style necessarily implies the existence of other objects with which it has features in common. And the specific character of one style is most clearly seen when it is contrasted with others.

Normally, scholars define a style not by means of contrast but by a checklist of formal or perceptual characteristics. Since any one object may not exhibit all the characteristics of the style in question we can see that the style concept is a kind of ideal-type to which concrete examples approximate with varying degrees of precision.

It is sometimes said of a person that she or he has style'. This implies there are others who do not. Is it really possible for people not to have style? From the anthropological point of view, evervone has a style because no one can stand outside it. Though it is possible to say that some people have a flamboyant style and others a discreet style, that some are elegant and others inelegant. It is also possible to say that some individuals are extremely style-conscious, while others are careless of their appearance. Given that everyone is subject to style, then a whole society can be analysed in terms of the spectrum of styles from which it is composed.

Some commonly-used style names in the history of art are: animal style, geometric style, Hellenistic, romanesque, gothic, baroque, rococo, Louis XIV, mannerism, Queen Anne, neoclassical, Empire style, art nouveau, international modern. It is clear that different principles govern these names: sometimes they derive from a historical period, sometimes a political leader, sometimes subject matter and sometimes formal characteristics. A style-name such as ‘gothic'suggests a unified, homogeneous entity but various subdivisions can occur. Since gothic was an international style, national variants have been identified and these in turn have been further subdivided. English gothic, for example, has been divided into Norman, early English, decorated and perpendicular.

Styles are generally regarded as having life-cycles - birth youth/maturity/decline and death - and are therefore characterized as ‘early', 'middle' and 'late'. Such terms are not always simply descriptive - they can be laden with moral judgements: for example, calling a late style ‘decadent'.

Looking back, it has seemed to some observers that there were long periods in history when whole cultures were sufficiently homogeneous as to exhibit a major unitary style, a Zeitstil or style of the age. Wölfflin, for instance, noted a unity between the form of gothic dress and gothic architecture: pointed shoes and pointed spires. Other writers went further and claimed to detect a common spirit of the age - Zeitgeist - underpinning al the different spheres of social life. One objection to this idea is that it assumes that the various spheres - religion, law, visual arts, philosophy - have all evolved in parallel at the same rate. This seems unlikely except in very small or highly monolithic cultures. We shall return to the issue of Zeitstil and Zeitgeist shortly.

Is there such a unitary style for our own age? Most would argue 'no' because what we witness is a plurality of styles, a cul ture of fragments. Some scholars have argued that the great unitary styles of the past are no longer possible because of the ever-increasing complexity of modern society, the differentiation and desire for autonomy manifested by the separate arts. The British art critic Peter Fuller has also pointed to the lack of a 'shared symbolic order' which could serve as the basis for a common style. Our age is typified not only by stylistic diversity <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f architecture and design was the last attempt to forge a universal style, though perhaps a case could also be made for the para-<sub>o</sub> f

<sub>o</sub> f style in the early twentieth century was the Prussian civil servant, <sub>o</sub> f Muthesius. In July 1914 at the seventh annual meeting of the Werkbund, he claimed that architects and designers were moving <sub>o</sub> f forms. It was only by such means, he thought, that German <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f Muthesius sought was 'the transcendence rather than the sup-<sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f seems, disagreed vehemently with these propositions and responded by celebrating individual creativity.

<sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f How can the two be reconciled? One answer may be supplied by the analogy with language: all English speakers share a common language but there are individual variations - idolects - and regional variations - accents, dialects. In this way we can speak <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f

Is it possible to regard a style as being unique to an individual? The answer must be no' because private styles are as impossible as private languages. For example, Picasso's most famous achievement was cubism, a style shared with Braque and Gris. It is only with great difficulty that some cubist paintings by Picasso and Braque can be told apart. Picasso changed his style continually and, furthermore, he often worked in more than one style simultaneously. If we assume that style is the expression of an artist's personality, then to account for these changes we would have to postulate radical changes of personality. This is absurd. As Genova puts it: 'Artists may change their styles often in a lifetime without our having to assume severe personality changes.' 7 These conclusions undermine the certainty that styles can provide us with a direct way of understanding the psychology of an individual, a nation or social group.

Certainty is also undermined by the ability of people to adopt styles temporarily without deep commitment: fancy dress for a party; the weekend punk; and so forth. Indeed, it can be argued that a style can be a means of constructing a false identity or a means of masking real identity: the affluent person who dresses like a tramp; the bank robber in police uniform. In other words, all sign systems can be used to tell lies as well as the truth. It follows that we cannot simply assume a transparency between appearances and reality.

Generally speaking, style has been less important to design historians than to art historians. The former have often preferred typological histories to stylistic ones. Also, with modern design the importance of style varies according to the objects being scrutinized: it is crucial in dress, where appearance is normally more significant than function, but less important in engineering, where function generally takes precedence over appearance. Early modern design theory assumed -wrongly as it turned out - that the problem of style would be resolved once and for all: the machine aesthetic, technology and principles like 'form follows function' would determine the shape and appearance of buildings and products, as it were, naturally. All the designer had to do was to find the optimum solution to the design problem and the question of style would not arise. Modern designed goods would, in effect, be styleless.

In spite of this, a number of design books discuss buildings and products in terms of style, for example, the several histories of art nouveau, Stephen Bayley's In Good Shape: Style in Industrial Products 1900 to 1960 (1979) and Peter York's Style Wars (1980). If ornament, the decorative arts and crafts such as textiles are considered to be part of design, then two key works of early art history ought to be cited: Gottfried Semper'sDer Stil in den Technischen und Tektonischen Kiinsten oder Praktische

Ästhetik (Style in the technical and tectonic arts, or a practical aesthetic) (1860-3) and Alois Riegl's Stilfragen (Problems of style) (1893). Unfortunately, neither of these important texts has been translated into English.

Early theorists such as Semper tended to be preoccupied with the origins of styles and their evolution. Since hard evidence about the early phases of human culture was difficult to come by, reconstructions were inevitably speculative. The origins of the different modern arts, Semper contended, were to be found in the material/technical bases of the crafts of earliest times. A classification of materials according to their distinctive natural properties gave rise to the ‘technical arts'- textiles, ceramics, carpentry and joinery, masonry and carving - which in turn formed the basis for architecture, sculpture, mosaics, and so on. Once a student of mathematics, Semper devised an algebraic formula to explain style: γ = F (x, y, z, etc.) in which 'γ' equals style, 'F' equals function or purpose and 'x, y, z, etc.', equal the various factors – materials, tools, religion, character of the artist, and so forth - whose combination determined the nature of the work in question. Semper believed that while factors varied over time human needs remained much the same, hence function did not alter to the same extcnt as the factors.8

Although Semper's theory included human purposes, it sub. sequently came to be seen as deterministic and materialist in character. Riegl was critical of it on the grounds that artists and designers have the freedom to work against the natural propensities of materials and techniques if they so wish. The latter were perceived as the friction or resistance against which the Kunstwollen (will to art or will to form) had to struggle.9 Any convincing solution to the problem ofthe multiple determinants of form and style would, surely, have to take into account the interaction of human desires and the available materials and techniques. And to explain the will of individual artists one would also, presumably, need to go beyond individual psychology to invoke social factors.

## Styling

When the characteristics of a style are deliberately exaggerated, we speak of stylization and styling. A famous example of styling occurred in the American car industry from the late 1920s onwards reaching a climax in the 1950s. The process is described in detail by Alfred Sloan, chairman of General Motors, in his memoir My Years with General Motors (1965). A large team of designers was employed by the company, the most famous being Harley Earl. Before the 1920s, car design had been dominated by engineers but once the market became saturated with basic, standard cars, new ways of attracting buyers had to be found. Stylists then became more important than product engineers. While the engines and structures of cars changed relatively slowly, their outward appearances altered more rapidly until, eventually, annual model changes became the norm. Styling was used first to distinguish one line of cars from another and secondly to increase sales by creating a sense of psychological obsolescence, that is, making customers feel that their existing cars were out of date because they were out of style.

Earl and other stylists found that the public was resistant to extreme and abrupt changes of style but if the changes were made step-by-step, year-by-year, then in the end quite radical shifts of form and taste could be achieved. In 1954 Earl remarked: 'My primary purpose for 28 years has been to lengthen and lower the American automobile ... Because my sense of proportion tells me that oblongs are more attractive than squares ...'!1o Earl's personal aesthetic motivation ignores the economic and marketing imperatives governing the process of stylistic innovation and change.

Automobile design no longer indulges in the tactic of annual model changes. Indeed, fashion is out of fashion. Contemporary motor manufacturers, especially European ones such as Daimler-Benz, now emphasize the functionality of their products. The style of their cars evolves slowly so that it is clear successive models belong to the same 'family'; this design principle is called 'vertical model homogeneity'. A sense of stylistic unity is also required across the whole range of cars produced by the company; hence, 'horizontal model homogeneity'. Designers now seek ‘image control' so that car styles will not date so rapidly.

What many car manufacturers now aim for are long model runs with steady refmements such as engineering improvements and accessory upgradings as a means of persuading customers to replace their old cars with new ones every few years. Since petrol has become more expensive, streamlining has made a comeback. This has created a high degree of conformity in the external forms of mass volume cars because once the most functional shapes have been scientifically identified, further stylistic variations are virtually ruled out.

## Zeitstil and Zeitgeist

The history of European art has often been presented as a linear sequence in which style succeeded style.lt is certainly true that over the centuries there has been a succession of different styles, but the false impression may have been created that only one style existed per age - the Zeitstil- and that this style exemplified the spirit of the age: the Zeitgeist. Modern scholars, however, argue that in all but the most monolithic of states there have been several styles coexisting at the same time; so, if one wanted to speak about 'spirit' one would have to refer to several spirits of the age.

Zeitgeist is a concept of Hegelian idealist philosophy intended to explain the ideological and stylistic unity of a given period. In fact, by postulating a single common denominator - the spirit - it occludes the complexity and heterogeneity of past ages. Most historians, especially materialist ones, are sceptical of the concept and refuse to use it. Nevertheless, it persists in the more popular writings on the history of design. For example, in the 1986 text Design Source Book by Penny Sparke and others, the time-span covered - 1850s to 1980s- is subdivided into a series of mini-ages: 'Arts and Crafts 1850-1900', 'Art Nouveau 1890- 1905', 'The Machine Aesthetic 1900-1930', and so on, each of which is prefaced by a pictures-captions double-page spread headed 'Spirit of Arts and Crafts', 'Spirit of Art Nouveau', etc. In this kind of scheme there appears to be a circular or tautological relationship between styles and ages: different styles give rise to different ages, while different ages give rise to different styles. Only where the ages overlap is it acknowledged that several styles can exist simultaneously. Exceptionally, the final period-197 5 onwards - is recognized as an age of stylistic eclecticism where no one style prevails. Hegelians can always win the argument by claiming that eclecticism reflects the spirit of the age now.

A popular style is likely to be manifested across a wide range of artefacts and one thing which can be said in favour of stylistic histories is that they often seek to encompass more than one medium or art form. In other words, they avoid the tunnel vision which can afflict histories confining themselves to furniture, or painting, and so forth. Bevis Hillier's The Style of the Century 1900-1980 (1983), for instance, includes examples of posters, paintings, furniture, dress, vehicles, buildings, textiles, pottery, book jackets, pop music and interior decor. In his introduction Hillier argues that humble objects can in fact convey the spirit of the time more effectively than masterpieces. His aim, he declares, has been to illustrate t:f.e pervasiveness of style and also to reveal its close relation to modes of life: 'style and lifestyle are indivisible'. The title of Hillier's journalistic book is surely misleading: has the twentieth century only one style? Is it really one civilization with one spirit? At the Museum of Costume in Bath they deal not in the spirits of centuries but in the spirits of years: every year one new outfit of clothes by a contemporary fashion designer is acquired for the collection on the basis that it epitomizes the spirit of the year in question.

What those who make use of the Zeitgeist concept fail to recognize is that if such a dominant spirit of the age prevails, there are always dissenting groups and individuals who seek to oppose or undermine it.

A plurality of styles does not necessarily mean they all exist on the same plane of equality: it is possible to identify dominant and subordinate styles. Do styles coexist harmoniously or do they vie with one another for hegemony? The titles of Rudolf Wittkower's and Peter York's books - Gothic versus Classic, Style Wars - suggest the latter. Of course, styles do not struggle with one another, only people do. Nevertheless, style is a marker of social difference and it is therefore one of the means by which enemies recognize one another- witness the conflicts between subcultural groups such as mods and rockers, punks and skinheads.

Some histories of art and design - those presenting the subject in terms of a sequence of styles - can also be misleading because they suggest a development in which stylistic change takes place in an autonomous realm, each new style being thought of as a reaction against the preceding one. Such reactions do occur as new generations seek to assert their identities by rejecting the styles of their parents but the link between styles and the people who live them out is frequently overlooked in sequence-type histories. This is the particular value of books about subcultures such as Hebdige's Subculture: the Meaning of Style (1979). They locate styles in the lives and habits of particular social groups and consider their social functions: it is argued that styles are symbolic or magical resolutions of conflicts which cannot be solved directly; for example, an expression of strength and aggession by a group with little political or economic power.

In this respect, cultural theorists follow the lead of Marxist art historians such as Antal who argued that the existence of several styles in the same place at the same time could only be explained by the presence of several different social classes or class fractions who felt the need to distinguish themselves from each other.

Designers, at the behest of manufacturers, seek to invent new styles (or refme existing ones) which will appeal to specific market segments. The visible form or 'look' they supply is not simply imposed upon helpless victims - the design may well be based on intensive market research to fmd out what consumers like and want - but nor is it merely a reflection of existing desires. A successful style involves the convergence of the tastes of both designers and consumers. It is the result of a complex combination of factors, one of which is the current aesthetic situation (this limits what the 'next move' in the style game can be).

In other instances, the impulse towards a new style does not come from the design profession but from the grassroots. The punk style of dress, graphics and rock music, for example, was created in the mid-1970s by disaffected urban youths plus the ex-art school tastemakers Malcolm McLaren, Jamie Reid and

Vivienne Westwood. For a time it successfully resisted incorporation and exploitation by the fashion and record industries. Punk is a good example of a style which permitted individual participants to contribute original elements. In this respect the style's ethos was in accord with the political ideology - anarchism - espoused by most punks.

## Style and Social Groups

Perhaps the most difficult theoretical issue concerning style is its relation to the larger social context, to social structures, groups, economic conditions, and so forth. Although the metaphor of reflection - 'style reflects ...'- is commonly employed, many scholars are unhappy with it because it implies a passive and deterministic relationship. Hebdige's remarks about the punk style and its social setting are useful in this regard because they communicate a sense of the complexity of the relationship:

Punks seemed to be parodying the alienation and emptiness which have caused sociologists so much concern, realising in a deliberate and wilful fashion the direst predictions of the most scathing social critics, and celebrating in mock-heroic terms the death of community and the collapse of traditional forms of meaning.11

Punks were not only responding to increased joblessness, changing moral standards, the rediscovery of poverty, the Depression, etc., they were dramatising what had come to be called ‘Britain's decline'... The punks appropriated the rhetoric of crisis ... and translated it into tangible (and visible) forms .. .12

Hebdige's use of words like ‘parodying' and 'dramatising' indicates the knowing, active nature of the punks'relationship to the wider society and to other discourses.

Style is a phenomenon which seems to belong to artefacts (a property of objects). We mostly encounter it in its fixed and finished form; consequently, we may overlook the extent to which style is made and lived out by particular social groups as one of their ways of communicating and asserting their identity in relation to other social groups.

A clearcut historical example of the relation between design and a social group, design and ideology, was the Shaker furniture produced in New England, Ohio, Kentucky and Indiana between 1790 and 1860. The Shakers were a monastic, puritan Christian sect who valued simplicity, order, cleanliness and fitness for use. Labour and workmanship they regarded as acts of worship. Shaker furniture is noted for its plainness, austerity, grace, practicality, fine craftsmanship and modesty. (Fancy, ornamented articles were condemned as signs of human pride and vanity.) Although individual variations in the forms of the furniture did occur, a common style prevailed. The lives of the Shakers were governed by a communal spirit, hence they opposed private property and discouraged individualism: the names of some Shaker joiners are known but signing pieces was generally frowned upon. Thus Shaker religious values permeated every aspect of daily life including the design of their artefacts. The title of a book about Shaker furniture by E. and F. Andrews puts it in a nutshell: Religion in Wood (1966). In the case of the Shakers there appears to have been an organic unity between life and syle. Their way of life has not, however, thrived in the twentieth century; it has dwindled as a result of the influence of the urbanized, mass media, commercial culture ofthe USA. Meanwhile, the Shakers' furniture has become highly prized by collectors who appreciate it for its historic and aesthetic qualities. In modern America and Europe the concept of lifestyle has taken on a new meaning.

## Lifestyle

As we have seen in the case of the Shakers, a visual style can be integral to a way of life. In the past, divisions between ranks and classes tended to be much more sharply defined and cross class mobility far more restricted than today, so the visual styles associated with particular classes were exclusive and remained unchanged for long periods. (Peter York has remarked: 'Compared to us, people in the past lived in a style prison.')l 3 One cannot comprehend, for example, the appearance and layout of the elaborate country houses built by wealthy Englishmen during the nineteenth century without an understanding of the habits and customs of their owners. Consequently, architectural historians such as Mark Girouard, author of The Victorian Country House (1971), and Jill Franklin, author of The Gentleman's Country House and its Plan, 1835-1914 (1981), find it essential to describe the style of life expected of a Victorian gentleman before turning their attention to the houses themselves. of course, another way of life entirely was prescribed for the large retinue of servants such houses needed for their upkeep and the design reflected this difference by segregating masters and servants as far as possible.

In recent years the word 'lifestyle' has become extremely popular in the discourses of advertising, journalism and design. While it has the virtue of stressing the link between a style and a way of life, it also implies that this link is no longer organic and unconscious but artificial and self-conscious. The major difference between the past and the present is that lifestyles have become more numerous, varied and, above all, free-floating, that is, they are no longer exclusive to particular classes (or at least not to the same extent). Increased affluence and social mobility has enabled whole sectors of society to purchase lifestyles off the peg. Consumer societies, it is argued, offer a diversity of lifestyles from which people can choose in the same way that they choose between products.

Alvin Toffler's Future Shock (1970) contains a perceptive analysis of the phenomenon. His premiss is that there is now a 'value vertigo' brought about by the collapse of traditional, stable value systems; there is also a rapid turnover of values. Since the consensus has fragmented, what remains are pockets or niches of values he calls 'sub cults'. Toffler explains how people respond to the new situation as follows:

Faced with colliding value systems, confronted with a blinding array of new consumer goods, services, educational, occupational and recreational options, the people of the future are driven to make choices in a new way. They begin to 'consume' lifestyles the way people of an earlier, less choicechoked time consumed ordinary products.14

A lifestyle, Toffler continues, is the means by which individuals signal their identification with particular subcults. Each lifestyle is constructed from a mosaic of items, hence it is a kind of'superproduct' offering a way of organizing products and ideas. In terms of social function, a lifestyle offers a sense of identity but it is also a device for reducing the anxiety caused by too much choice. Release is likely to be temporary however because 'as we rush toward super-industrialism ... we find people adopting and discarding lifestyles at a rate that would have staggered the members of any previous generation. For the lifestyle itself has become a throwaway item.' 15

Contemporary sociologists and market researchers take a close interest in lifestyles. Market researchers are particularly interested because they want to understand the behaviour and psychology of social groups better (hence the 'science' of 'psychographics' which seeks a rounded picture of consumers by collocating all kinds of information about them) in order to design and target advertising at appropriate segments of the market. Arnold Mitchell, in his book The Nine American Lifestyles (1983), presents a 'V ALS' typology (values and lifestyles) of the American adult population based upon responses to a questionnaire completed in 1980. According to his analysis, there are four basic groups and nine lifestyles:

Need-driven groups-11% Survivor lifestyle-4% Sustainer lifestyle-7% Outer-directed groups-67% Belonger lifestyle-35% Emulator lifestyle-10% Achiever lifestyle-22% Inner-directed groups-20% 1-am-me lifestyle-S% Experimentallifestyle-7%

Societally conscious lifestyle-8% Combined outer- and inner-directed group-2% Integrated lifestyle-2%16

The limited nature of this typology seems to contradict Toffler's scenario of infinite choice. It is also of little value to the design historian because it gives no indication of style preferences in the visual, formal sense. Nevertheless, design historians may be encouraged by this kind of research to study the phenomena of lifestyles much more systematically in the future.

Let us turn now to 'consumer sovereignty', that is, the idea that consumers exercise power by ‘voting' with their money.

In their selection of products from the vast range available in developed societies, consumers appear to exercise free will in constructing their different lifestyles. Manufacturers of single products certainly find it difficult to control the ‘collage' of goods a person acquires, though more and more they attempt to do so: the fitted kitchen replaces a jumble of different items; interior designers offer co-ordinated decorative schemes; and advertising supplies images promoting goods as part of a whole setting of clothes, cars and houses linked by style and price. Much journalistic advice is also purveyed via newspapers and magazines encouraging people to live in specific ways and the mass media of cinema, TV and pop music offer potent role models. Even ‘alternative' lifestyles, as Toffler points out, are marketed by their advocates via lectures, books and press interviews. It would seem that lifestyle is almost as much a consequence of commercial calculation and design as any other product.

Toffler's account suggests that everyone in society can participate equally in the lifestyle game but this overlooks the fact that social groups still differ in their possession of economic and cultural capital. Crudely, the range of choice available to the poor is far more restricted than the range of choice available to the rich. In an article about lifestyle based upon Pierre Bourdieu's sociology of taste, Mike Featherstone considered whether or not the issue of class is still relevant to the new consumer culture. His conclusion was: ‘The new conception of lifestyle can best be understood in relation to the habitus of the new petite bourgeoisie, who, as an expanding class fraction centrally concerned with the production and dissemination of consumer culture imagery and information, is concerned to expand and legitimate its own particular dispositions and lifestyle.' 17 Later he adds: 'It is not a question of the new petite bourgeoisie promoting a particular style, but rather catering for and promoting a general interest in style itself, the nostalgia for past styles, the interest in the latest style, which in an age which itself lacks a distinctive style ... have a fascination, and are subjected to constant interpretation and re-interpretation.'

Featherstone's point about the existence of an obsession with style in the 1980s is borne out by the success of magazines like The Face and iD and clothes shops such as the Next chain. It is also evident in the copy of many adverts. A writer of a Cadbury Schweppes advert for 'designer chocolates' observed: 'The key to the market lay with that great totem of the 1980s ... style.' 18 Another copywriter, in an advert for expensive cars, vaunted style as the mark of social superiority, as a way of standing out from the crowd. Quite shamelessly this elitism was justified in terms of the new entrepreneurial spirit of the decade. A widening of inequality was also celebrated: 'Style means living in a different world ... the tenor of the times has changed and success is back in fashion, and so is elegance, performance, luxury and refinement ... the stolid egalitarianism of the '60s and '70s is gone, stylish people know that living well is the best revenge.' 19 (Revenge for what? one wonders.)

So, it would seem, the dominant spirit of the present age is not any particular style but a celebration of style as such, the purpose of which is to enforce a distinction between the 'haves' and the 'have nots'.

## Style and Fashion

Finally, a note on fashion. Distinguishing between the concepts of style and fashion is somewhat difficult because in everyday use the words are interchangeable: one dictionary defines 'style' as 'a mode of fashion' and 'fashion' as 'a prevailing custom or style of dress'.

A fashion is really a short-lived enthusiasm - a vogue, craze or fad - for something, whereas a style is a form of design with a distinct character. A style may well be fashionable but it can also be unfashionable. A standard light switch has only two possible states: on or off. Similarly, fashion has only two possible conditions: either in or out. Fashions come and go with great speed; there is also a turnover of styles but styles can persist long after being fashionable.

Fashions can refer to many kinds of human behaviour but most often they refer to enthusiasms for particular modes of dress: the fashion industry is the commercial sector devoted to the design, manufacture and selling of clothing for everyday and leisure use. This industry has a vested interest in the dynamic of fashion because a twice-yearly change (autumn and spring collections) ensures constant production and profitability. By regularly introducing new lines, designers outmode existing fashions thereby creating customer dissatisfaction with what they already possess.

Some writers on fashion distinguish it from non or anti-fashion clothes, that is, clothes which ignore the dynamic of constant change.2° For example, industrial protective clothing designed purely for function and to last as long as possible. Certain 'classic' types of dress -the British city gent's pinstripe suit for instance - resist the cycle of fashion. Such forms of dress are often dubbed 'timeless', though in fact they change by evolving gradually over a number of years.

Since, in the case of clothing, style and fashion are so intimately connected to people's appearance and behaviour, design historians cannot limit themselves to questions of designing and production; they must also address themselves to issues of consumption, reception and taste. Accordingly, it is to these topics that we now turn.

## Notes and References

1. N. Hadjinicolaou, Art History and Class Struggle (London: Pluto, 1978) p. 104.

2. This point is made by Pat Kirkham in her essay 'Furniture history', in H. Conway (ed), Design History: a Students' Handbook (London: Allen & Unwin, 1987) pp.. 58-85.

3. M. Schapiro, 'Style' in A. Kroeber (ed), Anthropology Today (University of Chicago Press, 1953) pp. 287-312. See also B. Lang (ed), The Concept of Style (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, rev. edn 1987).

4. F. Antal, Florentine Painting and its Social Background (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1948) p. 4.

5. J. Genova, The significance of style', Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 37 (3) Spring 1979 pp. 315-24.

6. G. Naylor, The Bauhaus Re-assessed (London: Herbert Press, 1985) p. 43.

7. Genova, 'The significance of style'.

8. On Semper see: Lawrence Harvey, 'Semper's theory of evolution in architectural ornament', Transactions of the RIBA New series (1) 1885 pp. 29-54; L. Ettlinger, 'On science, industry and art: some theories of Gottfried Semper', Architectural Review 136 (809) July 1964 pp. 57-60; J. Rykwert, 'Gottfried Semper and the problem of style'in D. Porphyrios (ed), On the Methodology of Architectural History (London: Architectural Design Profile, 1981) pp. 11-15; N. Pevsner, Some Architectural Writers of the Nineteenth Century (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972) pp. 252–68; W. Hermann, Gottfried Semper: in Search of Architecture (Mass: MIT Press, 1985).

9. On Riegl see A. Quintavalle, 'Alois Riegl 1858-1905', in On the Methodology of Architectural History, Pp. 16-19; M. Iverson, 'Style as structure: Alois Riegl's historiography', Art History 2 (1) March 1979 pp. 62–71. Discussions of Semper's and Riegl's ideas are also to be found in E. Gombrich, The Sense of Order: a Study in the Psychology of Decorative Art (Oxford: Phaidon, 1979).

10. Earl, quoted in, A. Sloan, My Years with General Motors (London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1965) p. 297.

11. D. Hebdige, Subculture: the Meaning of Style, (London; Methuen, 1979) p. 79.

12. Ibid., p. 87.

13. P. York, Modern Times: Everybody wants Everything (London Heinemann, 1984) p. 8.

14. A. Toffler, Future Shock (New York: Random House, 1970) p. 305.

15. Ibid., p. 317.

16. A. Mitchell, The Nine American Lifestyles (New York: Macmillan, 1983).

17. M. Featherstone, 'Lifestyle and consumer culture', Theory, Culture and Society 4 (1987) pp. 55-70.

18. Cadbury Schweppes advertisement, Observer (business section) 11 October 1987.

19. V. Woods (associate editor of The Tatler), Vauxhall Motors advertising copy, Sunday Times Magazine 13 November 1983.

20. For example T. Polhemus and L. Proctor, Fashion and Anti-fashion: an Anthropology of Clothing and Adornment (London: Thames & Hudson, 1978).

## Consumption, Reception, Taste

In the main, design historians have focused upon aspects of production - designers, designing, manufacture - and the analysis of products rather than upon an equally crucial dimension - the role of users and consumers. I am including a brief discussion of consumption, reception and taste to correct this imbalance.

So far there is not one comprehensive text dealing with design and consumerism. Anyone proposing to research this subject would need to refer to a wide range of literature touching upon its various facets. For example, writings by political economists about the nature of goods/commodities and their relation to human needs; economic and cultural histories of affluent societies; studies of the mass media and advertising; histories of shops and shopping; publications about leisure and tourism; material on consumer rights and consumer associations; analyses of lifestyles. The challenge would be to bring all these strands together while still keeping design as the central theme.

Given the magnitude and the disparate nature of the literature about consumption and consumerism, a summary will not be attempted. It is also assumed that the arguments for and against the consumer society are familiar, so they will not be rehearsed here. The problem for the design historian with existing publications on consumption is one of specificity. There are numerous highly informative books and articles, for instance, about advertising - semiotic and ideological critiques abound - but since a large proportion of them have been written by sociologists, media and communication theorists, the role played by design tends to be given short shrift. Of course, there are books by designers who have worked in advertising agencies which discuss the design process, but these suffer from the opposite fault: they are weak on history, socioeconomic context and theoretical understanding.

## Consumption

Compared to 'customer' or 'user' the word 'consumer' has slightly pejorative connotations. To consume food is to appropriate it and use it up. In the process the food is destroyed or at least broken down and, once the goodness has been extracted via digestion, there are waste products. Similar processes are at work in consumer societies: goods are acquired, used, adapted and, when worn out or obsolete, thrown away. No precise date for the birth of consumer societies first in America and then Europe can be given because they evolved over several centuries. (In Britain most people think of the present consumer society as dating from the 1950s and 1960s.) Even so, their main features are clear: industrial manufacture, mass production methods; a capitalist, free-market economy; a reasonably affluent population with disposable income; developed systems of distribution, marketing, advertising/mass media, retailing, mail order and hire purchase; an incredible number and variety of products, appliances and services from which to make a choice. (One critic has referred to 'the misery of choice' in a consumer society.)

Design historians need to pay attention to consumerism because design plays a vital role within it. Design can improve the functionality of consumer durables (the constant redesign of products can also make them worse), but it is also a means of creating differences between basically similar goods. New inventions and redesigns are essential to the dynamic of consumerism: they create new needs, new desires, dissatisfaction with what already exists via the mechanism of psychological obsolescence.

Exactly what takes place when people consume or use designed goods or environments will be considered shortly under the heading of 'Reception'. The fact that consumers vary in terms of the desires and preferences they bring to the marketplace will be discussed in the section on 'Taste'. But first a word about shops and advertising.

Before consumption proper can take place people have to be informed what products exist and where to acquire them. In other words, between manufacturers and consumers are the realms of distribution, marketing, advertising, mail order, shops and shopping. Although all these topics are closely related both logically and in daily life, writers tend to treat them in isolation. Even single topics are subject to fragmentation. Shops, for instance, have been discussed as part of the history of business, as part of the history of interior design and display, and as part of the history of architecture. This is unfortunate given the fact that in today's department stores, supermarkets, shopping centres and malls, a total shopping experience, a spectacle of consumption, is offered which brings into play environmental and interior design, narrative themes, commodities, credit cards and entertainment. A 1987 television programme about the huge American shopping malls and the people addicted to them was more effective in describing this phenomenon - because it was visual, because it considered the mall as a totality and because it showed it in operation - than a purely architectural analysis of the buildings.1 Walter Benjamin's lyrical accounts of nineteenth-century Parisian shopping arcades anticipated the: work of these programme makers. 2

Shops are significant places because they are where use-values are translated into exchange-values, where consumer goods are exchanged for money, that is, become commodities. Since shops and stores compete with one another, design is an important means of increasing their appeal to customers and differentiating themselves from rivals. Customers do not, of course, buy a shop's interior decor and display style, but these factors are part of a shop's 'image', part of the shopping experience, and customers certainly 'buy' this 'image' along with the goods they purchase.

Differently styled goods require differently styled display settings. If the context is inappropriate and unsympathetic, the goods will seem out of place; they may not reach their intended audience either. It was precisely dissatisfaction with the places and manner in which his furniture designs were displayed which encouraged the young Terence Conran to establish his own retailing outlets: the Habitat chain of stores, a detailed account of which is given by Barty Phillips in The Habitat Story ( 1984).

Because of their large purchasing power, chainstores are in a position to influence manufacturers, to insist on good quality materials, higher standards of workmanship, uniformity of production, and to determine the design of the goods they order. As Goronwy Rees explains in his history of Marks & Spencer - St Michael (1969) - this was one of the policies which contributed to the remarkable success of the British chainstore.

Huge department stores were an urban phenomenon of the mid and late nineteenth century. They marked an important stage in the modernization of consumption and retailing. Essentially they were business enterprises created by and for the bourgeoisie. Histories of Bon Marché in Paris and Harrods in London make clear the close fit between the goods and services provided by the stores and the lifestyles of their middle-class clientele. In a sense such emporia were the engines of the consumer culture we know today.³

Consumption is so closely associated with the purchase of commodities from shops by private individuals that there is a danger of overlooking the fact that, as citizens, everyone uses or is affected by design decisions taken in the public realm - such things as town planning, the design of public utilities and buildings, highways and rail systems, military establishments and equipment, hospital and welfare services. In these fields the consumers' spending power can have an influence but to achieve change they may also need to resort to pressure groups and the political process. In advanced countries campaigning by both pressure groups and politicians is now a process which increasingly depends upon the skills of the designer.

Advertising plays a crucial role in consumerism by mediating between manufacturers, retailers and the public. Like shops, advertisements provide goods with a context (usually mythical) and with an image (generally glamorous) which the viewer may not be able to discount. The vehicle of presentation is also vital: the adverts in a glossy women's magazine, for instance, are imbricated in its general look and ethos. Editorial matter and adverts make a totality which offers readers a specific lifestyle. Janice Winship has undertaken a critique of the British magazine Options, launched in 1981, which, she concludes, presents a particular fantasy-model for its readers to emulate which she calls ‘Superwoman'.4 It is significant that the title of this magazine pays homage to the central notion of consumerist ideology - choice.

Visual advertisements are particularly rich objects of study for design historians because not only do they promote and depict designed goods but are themselves instances of design. As aids to selling they can be analysed in terms of their commercial function but as visual signs they can be analysed in terms of their iconography, pictorial rhetoric and aesthetic appeal. Of greatest value to design history are those theorizations which attempt to synthesize these modes of analysis, as in the 'commodity aesthetics' approach developed by the German neo-Marxist writer Wolfgang Haug.⁵

## Reception Theory/History

Reception aesthetics dates from the late 1960s. It was developed principally in relation to literature when theorists became interested in the subjective responses of readers, in the multiplicity of readings texts generated, and in the part played in the contemporary experience of a work of art of knowledge of past interpretations. Mainly German scholars were involved: H. R. Jauss, B. Zimmermann, H. Link, G. Grimm, W. Faulstich and W. Iser.6 This is not to say that the approach was unknown in the visual arts. However, the difference between art and literary criticism is that the theoretical and methodological problems of reception were more explicit and developed in the latter than in the former.

Some theorists make a distinction between reception and impact studies: reception describes the initial phase of assimilation while impact refers to the effects which follow. Reception theory challenges the autonomy of texts, and by implication designed goods, by arguing that interpretations and evaluations are determined not only by the nature of the texts and goods themselves but also by the character of the receiver or consumer. Readers of Marx will recall he once observed that goods obtain their 'last finish'in consumption.

Empirical studies of psychological responses to works of art and sociological studies of the audience for art have, of course, been undertaken for many years, but reception theory is a significantly different approach. Reception theorists are willing to make use of the findings of such empirical research but they also consider the wider social processes, institutions, contexts and structures which condition and limit the responses of viewers.

One error which reception theorists have been keen to avoid is the ‘affective fallacy'identified by the literary critics W. K. Wimsatt and M. C. Beardsley in the 1940s: that is, treating the psychological processes of viewers under the impact of a work of art as the work itself. If this happened the history of art would be replaced by the history of art appreciation. Wimsatt and Beardsley's position is that a work has a material existence external to the viewer which structures the viewer'sresponse. Furthermore, a work cannot be equated with just one person's response because its meaning and significance is objective in the sense of being an intersubjective phenomenon. The challenge facing the theorist is to comprehend the interaction between work and viewers, the dialectical relationship between object and subjects, without losing sight of either polarity.

An earlier concept concerned with the subjective response of viewers was empathy (Einfühlung). This notion was developed by Robert Vischer and Theodor Lipps in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Empathy is a psychological concept which describes the process by which viewers identify with works of art by projecting emotions and muscular sensations into them. Aesthetic pleasure thus becomes objectified selfenjoyment. A fusion of subject and object is postulated. The issue of pleasure will be taken up later.

Reception theory assumes that reading or decoding is involved in the assimilation of a work of art, that subjects take an active not a passive part, though the degree to which readers complete a text or participate in the construction of its meaning is contentious. Reception theory or aesthetics tends to concern itself with the ideal reader implied by each work, whereas reception history tends to focus on actual readers. Of course, it often happens that those who read a text don't match the ideal reader or belong to the presumed constituency for whom it was intended.

As with linguistic ability, individuals vary in their competence and performance. Each reading or response to a text is called an 'actualization'or 'concretization'. Some critics regard the con-<sub>o</sub> f measured against the ideal of complete understanding, or when compared against the consensus reached by scholars over many <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f interpretations generated by different individuals and groups can be resolved by reference to a 'true', 'objective' meaning or <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f judging between discrepant readings? Or are they all equally valid and correct? If so, one could conclude that texts are meaningless because they can mean anything. Most theorists want <sub>o</sub> f and controlling the response of the reader. Variant readings can be explained, rationally, by reference to such factors as ambigu-<sub>o</sub> f between readers. A text may have many meanings but the number is not infinite. Furthermore, the objectivity of the text is such that some readings can be demonstrated to be false: we have all misread a word and then, at a later time, discovered our error.

Mass communication theorists have argued that messages are encoded with a preferred meaning in mind. This they call the dominant meaning. Besides straightforward misreadings, two <sub>o</sub> f readers perceive the dominant meaning but they modify or inflect it according to their personal experience or situation; and oppositional: that is, readers understand the dominant meaning but they reject it or interpret it in a highly critical way (this <sub>o</sub> f

<sub>o</sub> f readers approach texts with an ideological frame of reference or <sub>o</sub> f already be familiar with the conventions of a genre. Artists have <sub>o</sub> f As Hans Jauss explains, artists sometimes lull the reader by confirming expectations at an early stage in order to surprise him or her at a later stage. The majority of texts are produced with a particular readership in mind but, as Jauss points out, there are some radical works 'which at the moment of their publication are not directed at any specific audience' but only at a future, potential audience. Such works 'break through the familiar horizon of literary expectations so completely that an audience can only gradually develop for them.' Jauss goes on to argue that exceptional works of this kind establish a new canon of taste which has the effect of making the older works seem outmoded. Some types of experimental design by artist-designers would also fit this description.

A major difference between empirical studies of response and reception history is the latter's interest in the responses of previous generations. However, reception history attempts to go beyond the sequence-of-events type of history-writing by taking account of the present as well as the past. Modern theorists examining a painting by Leonardo, for example, have the benefit not only of their own concretizations but all earlier ones; thus their understanding of the work is enhanced. As Jauss puts it: ‘The repossession of past works occurs simultaneously with the continual mediation of past and present art and of traditional evaluation and current literary attempts.' It might be argued that the experience of design does not normally call forth such complex responses but a design aficionado confronted by a modern reproduction of Marcel Breuer's 1925 Wassily chair might well respond in a comparable way.

In the view of some scholars, reception theory/history ought to concern itself with unpopular as well as with popular works of art. Theodor Adorno, in his ‘Theses on the sociology of art', attacks the crudity of those reception studies which fail to consider the fact that there are some works of high quality which, quantitatively, have a negligible social impact. For Adorno, this is a social fact which is just as much in need of explanation as the fact that other works have mass appeal. Adorno had in mind certain avant garde or difficult works the social content of which ‘sometimes rests precisely in the protest against social reception, particularly in relation to conventional and hardened forms of consciousness'.8 Can this argument be applied to design? Again, some forms of anti-design design might fulfil similar critical functions and thus remain unpopular.

How can design historians gather information about the processes of reception? A number of methods can be employed.

1. By self-analysis. Historians have privileged access to at least one consciousness. They can try to reflect critically upon their own responses and behaviour in relation to design.

2. By examining existing critical accounts. The reviews of products, buildings and so on found in newspapers, magazines and history books. These are written by professionals - journalists, experts, critics – and consequently, while their views may be detailed and informed, they may also be unrepresentative.

3. By using existing information. Sales figures, for example, are crude indicators of popularity and consumer trends. The drawback of statistics, of course, is that the information is quantitative not qualitative. Vandalism. and graffiti can be considered direct signs of negative responses to advertisements and the built environment.

4. By observing how other people behave in relation to design. Such observation can be open or covert, casual or systematic. TV researchers have persuaded some families to permit a camera to be placed on the TV sets so that their behaviour is filmed whenever the set is on. Participant observation'is a method by which the researcher joins the group being studied for a period and seeks to learn by adopting the group's lifestyle.

5. By means of questionnaires and interviews. This method can yield much useful information but is limited by the fact that people may lie, or they may simply lack insight into their own unconscious behaviour. Devising questionnaires and conducting interviews are also specialist skills. In advertising and the social sciences, studies of human behaviour often involve deceiving participants in tests as to what is really being tested.

6. A combination of the above.

Clearly, research of this kind is also done by designers and market research agencies when they are planning new products or seeking to improve existing ones. It is also the kind of work undertaken by sociologists and anthropologists. However, design historians are more disinterested than market researchers and more concerned with history than sociologists.

Gaining accurate information on the effects of design is difficult because people vary in their characters, tastes, needs, incomes, and so forth; thus, the impact of design is inevitably differential. Also, in everyday life people are exposed to a multiplicity of influences and forces; hence it is hard to isolate the impact of, say, one advertisement -though a sudden increase in sales might indicate a positive impact. It is even more problematical to estimate the global, long-term impact of advertising - what J. K. Galbraith has called 'relentless propaganda on behalf of goods in general'9 -on a population. The correlation between violence on television and violence in society has proved hard to demonstrate; empirical research often yields contradictory or inconclusive results. Nevertheless, scholars and pundits will continue to draw conclusions and make generalizations on the basis of any evidence they can assemble. Perhaps the most clearcut cases of design's impact are those in which failure occurs: disasters and injuries are eloquent testimonies to poor design. 10

In experiencing works of art, processes of reading, interpretation and evaluation take place. Emotional, aesthetic and pleasure responses are also involved. Comparable processes occur in relation to designed goods; consumers 'read' products and styles of design; they appreciate or detest the aesthetic and formal qualities of products and they interpret their messages and meanings. Furthermore, the consumer's relation to a product is, in most cases, more active than to a painting or sculpture. People do not just admire the visual appearance of cars, they get into them, drive, wash and mend them. Designed goods may lack the intellectual profundity of works of art but one could argue that the user's involvement with them is more physical and intimate - some designed goods are worn on the body. People who spend a great deal of time and money on the interior decor of their homes function to a considerable extent as designers in their own right. In short, the issue is not only what design does to people, but what people do with design.

<sub>o</sub> f tecture is Phillipe Boudon's Lived-in Architecture (1972). Most <sub>o</sub> f ding is completed; what happens to it subsequently remains a mystery; whether it fulfils the functions for which it was <sub>o</sub> f building, its occupancy and use by successive generations is ignored. Boudon's book is unusual precisely because it does consider such questions via a historical and sociological study <sub>o</sub> f designed by Le Corbusier in the 1920s.

<sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f also describes Le Corbusier's aesthetic programme and the <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f from interviews made 40 years later, the feelings, opinions and <sub>o</sub> f ysed to discover what kind of criteria residents employ in their <sub>o</sub> f by professional architects.

Over the years the inhabitants of Pessac have gradually changed Le Corbusier's design to meet their own needs by altering colour schemes, by adding decoration, trees, shrubs, sheds, pitched roofs, by narrowing windows and converting spaces to other uses. What Boudon's research reveals is not simply the way in which Le Corbusier's architecture was critically received, but the way it was used and transformed. It is a study, therefore, <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f <sub>o</sub> f

<sub>o</sub> f article ‘Object as image: the Italian scooter cycle'(1981).11As its title indicates, this paper argues that products are as much images as objects. It sets out to demonstrate how postwar Italian design in the form of scooters was received in Britain during the 1950s and 1960s - the positive response of the mods and the negative response of the rockers (who identified with British-made motor bikes). These products were regarded as gendered: motor bikes were equated with masculinity, scooters with femininity. Hebdige also shows how the scooter was represented in various kinds of discourses, particularly advertising, films and tourism, and how the machines themselves were modified via customizing, which was done by specialist shops as well as the owners themselves.

Studies of audiences and consumers are, of course, commonplace in mass communication research. They are often called 'uses and gratification' studies. Such research immediately raises questions about people's desires and needs and whether real' or ‘authentic' ones can be distinguished from those advertising and the mass media create, promote and satisfy. A spurious sense of individual freedom can be associated with consumerism: if ten packets of different brand washing powders are almost identical chemically, then the consumer's freedom to choose is illusory, especially if the choice itself has been pre-programmed by massive publicity campaigns. The freedom to choose between products also depends upon being able to afford them in the first place. In a consumer society the greater the wealth, the greater the freedom. Choice is also limited by what industry and the media are prepared to offer, by what will make a profit or attract large audiences. What a citizen really needs may not be available on the market at all. Consumer choice is thus a poor substitute for political choice/power.

In an effort to eliminate uncertainty from selling goods firms, designers and advertisers have increasingly striven to design the consumer to the product. Consumers who are unaware of this process may overestimate their actual freedom of action. At the same time, it is clear that consumers and most design historians want to retain a sense that selecting and combining products allows scope for freedom and the expression of individuality. Certainly, the practice of bricolage is more resistant to business control than the selection of separate items.

## Pleasure

In view of the fact that pleasure is such a significant ingredient in the appeal of design, fashion, shopping and consumption in general, it is surprising that little attention has been paid to it by design historians. There is no equivalent in design history of Barthes' The Pleasure of the Text (1976) or Freud's analysis of the mechanisms of humour in Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious (1905) or Laura Mulvey's article ‘Visual pleasure and narrative cinema' (1975).12 Even within the long history of visual arts criticism there is little intelligent discussion of aesthetic pleasure. Valuable, isolated insights can be found in the works of Freud, Walter Benjamin, Pierre Bourdieu and Herbert Marcuse, none of them a design historian. It is generally within journalistic articles and reviews by such writers as Dick Hebdige, Peter York, Judith Williamson, Tom Wolfe and Stephen Bayley that there is a recognition of the importance of pleasure, passion and desire in the consumption of commodities; but a systematic study has yet to be undertaken.

Feminist critiques of pleasure, in particular those associated with the male gaze upon the bodies of women (voyeurism, scopophilia), could usefully be applied to. design. The link between masculine recreations, sexism and patriarchal power is clearly evident in the discourse around automobiles and this is uncritically reproduced in Bayley's book Sex, Drink and Fast Cars (1986). Similarly, the pleasure imbalance between the sexes - women, it is argued, take greater pleasure in shopping and fashion than men do as compensation for a lack of power - needs further investigation. Also requiring much more analysis are the precise mechanisms by which pleasure is induced by design. Some studies of how still images, film and television evoke enjoyment have taken place but they need extending to the whole field of designed goods.

Any study of this kind would need to review the various types and phases of pleasure which exist. These can be preliminarily identified as follow?

1. Pleasures of desire: that is, the day dreams and fantasies concerning the future possession of designed goods. These are fuelled by advertising, window shopping and envying the possessions of others.

2. Pleasures of purchase: that is, the pleasures of shopping, spending money/buying and ownership.

3. Pleasures of the object itself: that is, its qualities of newness, perfection of finish, of design and aesthetic/decorative factors - colour, form, texture and so on - which appeal to the senses.

4. Pleasures of use: that is, the satisfactions gained when the product is convenient to use and performs as well as promised. These pleasures depend, of course, on the character of the product concerned: in the case of a car, for example, the use-pleasures may be speed and power; in the case of underwear, the use-pleasures may be erotic.

5. Pleasures in respect of others: that is, the social impression one makes via the ownership of goods: enhanced image, status or prestige, an impression of wealth or fine taste. Responses of envy, respect or sexual desire.

For every pleasure listed one can, of course, postulate a corresponding displeasure: the frustration at not being able to afford a desired object; the anger and irritation when an expensive product breaks down, is damaged or fails to function as promised; the new clothes which arouse contempt rather than admiration; and so on.

## Taste

A key factor in the consumption of goods is the taste of the consumer: thus it is equally important to the design historian. Although taste is always manifested in relation to material things - the choice of a car or a wallpaper – it seems to belong more to the consumer than to the object. We do not speak of the taste of a building in the same way that we speak of the style of a building. (Though in the case of food, we do ascribe the sweetness of sugar to the sugar itself.) The preferences of consumers obviously have a feedback effect on manufacturing, and taste can therefore to some degree be considered a factor in production.

Taste is a puzzling and paradoxical concept: on the one hand, the sensations of pleasure or displeasure aroused in the mouth by food and drink are physiological, automatic, immediate; on the other hand, people talk of an acquired taste' and ‘a refined taste'. Whereas taste in the gustatory sense is experienced by everyone, having taste – in the sense of a discriminating ability - is often thought of as something possessed by a small minority. Some people are said to have good taste, while others are said to have bad taste. Several questions arise: is taste innate or learnt? Is taste something everyone has or only a few? What criteria govern the distinction between good and bad taste?

Historically, taste is closely linked with the connoisseur. Connoisseurship depends upon the ability to discriminate: to tell the authentic from the fake, the best from the worst. The taste of the connoisseur was something cultivated and refined over many years through the activity of examining works of art. Without accepting the absurd idea that there can be people without taste, it is possible to acknowledge that certain individuals can develop specialist skills - as in the case of professional wine and tea tasters.

Everyone has tastes in the sense of having preferences - likes and dislikes - in music, food, clothes and so forth, and these vary from person to person and from social group to social group. The apparently infinite variety of tastes produces a resistance to analysis. As the common expression - 'there's no accounting for taste' - indicates, taste is generally considered to be beyond the reach of rational, scientific inquiry. But is this really the case? A key reason for the fear of the study of taste is that it touches on the innermost being, the personal behaviour and values of everyone, including those making the study. Another source of resistance is the fact that a mapping of all the tastes of all the people making up a society would position everyone within particular groups or subcultures, thereby undermining the ideology of individualism - their sense that their tastes are unique, personal and private, having nothing to do with such factors as education, class, profession, and so forth.

There are four main kinds of writing on taste: philosophicalaesthetic studies theorizing about the faculty of judgement; empirical, experimental, psychological studies of artistic preferences which often seek to explain them in terms of a theory of personality types; sociological studies of the tastes of different groups and strata within society; and historical studies. The third and fourth kinds are most relevant to design historians.

Art-historical accounts of taste such as F. Chambers' The History ofTaste (1932), K. Clark's The Gothic Revival, an Essay in the History of Taste (1929), and F. Haskell's Rediscoveries in Art: Some Aspects of Taste, Fashion and Collecting in England and F ranee ( 197 6), can be regarded as contributions to reception history since they record the changing patterns of likes and dislikes in respect to the arts, the ins and outs of fashion, and the succession of stylistic revivals, reinterpretations and reevaluations.

Peter Burke's Tradition and Innovation in Renaissance Italy ( 197 4) has a chapter on taste in which he considers the methodological problem of how taste is to be studied by art historians. Burke claims that the scholar 'will want to discover the standards of taste current in a particular society in a particular period, in order that we may see works of art, if only momentarily, with the eyes of the artist's contemporaries'. 13 He then goes on to argue that a know ledge of the aesthetic criteria governing standards of taste in Renaissance Italy could be gained by an examination of the critical vocabulary used by artists, scholars and patrons found in the appraisive literature and theoretical treatises of the period. Also included in this chapter is a valuable, if brief, discussion of the sociology of taste and the problems of demonstrating an exact correlation between different levels of social class/ status and varieties of taste.

In the cases of texts concerned with contemporary art and design, the issue of taste is further complicated by the fact that the author's preferences are bound to play a part in the selection of the objects featured. Detachment and objectivity are thus much harder to achieve. Stephen Bayley's book In Good Shape: Style in Industrial Products 1900 to 1960 (1979) was criticized by other design historians on the grounds that Bayley's feeling that the products in question were beautiful in form was not an adequate justification for their inclusion in a history of design. In fact, not all the items he selected were to his liking: a 1950 British make of radio popular with many working-class families was dismissed with the words ‘This strikingly ugly little radio'. One is entitled to ask, in whose eyes was the radio ugly? If the judgement was Bayley's alone then it conflicts with that of all those who bought the radio in the 1950s. In such a clash of tastes whose should prevail? As it stands Bayley's apparently authoritative remark is simply a flat assertion of truth: This radio is objectively ugly because my taste says that it is.' The reader learns little from such unsupported remarks. What the historian has to decide, therefore, when constructing a history is whose taste is to be given priority – that of the author, or that of the elite group who promote good' design, or that of the masses whose tastes govern the vast majority of goods sold?

A greater awareness of the complexity of taste is evident in the anthology Bayley edited in 1983 to accompany an exhibition held at the Boilerhouse Project entitled ‘Taste: an Exhibition about Values in Design'. 'Taste', he claims, ‘is really just another word for choice.' It evolved ‘when at one moment in the past there was such diversity that it was necessary to make a clear statement about what constituted the "good"in design. Taste is not the whole of design because it ignores function and finance, but it is the most human, immediate and evocative part of it.'14

For much of his introduction Bayley uses the word ‘Taste' with a capital ‘T'. As Raymond Williams points out, this usage dates from the eighteenth century and involved 'the abstraction of a human faculty to a generalized polite attribute, emphasized by the capital letter and significantly associated ... with the notion of Rules and elsewhere with Manners ...'s This elitist notion - a minority have Taste, the majority do not – is of little relevance to a modern consumer society in which everyone with any money to spend can indulge their tastes whether these are, in the opinion of outsiders, good, bad or indifferent.

After a time Bayley recognizes this point. Once mass production made consumerism available to virtually all social classes 'then one single standard of taste could no longer be appropriate to the needs of the entire nation'. As diversity increased, as products, brands and tastes multiplied, a disturbing relativity of values became evident and disagreements between different factions about what constituted good taste and good design became fiercer. In Britain, museums and councils of design were established by the guardians of 'good' design in an effort to raise standards of public taste to their exalted level.

The guardians of 'good' design tended to designate products they considered to be in bad taste as kitsch. Paradoxically, kitsch was enjoyed by two very different social groups: those who liked it unselfconsciously and considered it good, and those more sophisticated beings who relished it for its very awfulness, i.e. 'camp' taste. 16 Eventually, through an ironic inversion of values, 'good' design came to be regarded negatively, as signifying uninspired, puritanical and dull design.

Bayley's brief history of taste and design oscillates uneasily between the tastes of architects, designers and the tastes of consumers. Clearly, the two are closely linked without being identical. Designers can seek to lead or anticipate public taste but consumers may not agree to follow. Even so, designers are often taste leaders or makers. This was especially true in the realm of fashion in the immediate post-1945 period when the 'line' laid down by Parisian couturiers had the status of a papal edict for millions of women. Other leaders of taste include film, TV and pop music stars and entrepreneur-businesspeople such as Terence Conran (founder of the Habitat chain) and Barbara Hulanicki (founder of Biba).

Several inadequacies marred the exhibition and anthology: the show's focus on objects was misleading because taste is an attribute of people not objects in themselves; there was little attempt to clarify the relation between taste and social class, subcultures and lifestyles; no reference was made to the work of the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu whose 1979 book La Distinction is - in spite of numerous theoretical problems- the most substantial and scientific contribution to the study of taste to date."

If analysts seek to understand taste by concentrating upon individuals, they will be confronted by a mass of variations and differences. The accumulation of such data will reveal little. It is only by considering individuals as members of social groups and these groups as elements in a total, dynamic system that any coherent picture can emerge. In other words, it is necessary to consider society as a whole and to look at the distribution and pattern of tastes within it in relation to other social factors such as class, profession, wealth and education. This ambitious objective is what Bourdieu attempts in La Distinction. He made use of questionnaires plus various records and statistics about the habits of the French people during the 1960s to produce a taste cartography of the whole society at a particular time. His fundamental assumption is that the taste preferences of any group cannot be understood in isolation but only as an assertion of difference relative to the tastes of all other groups. To dress as certain others do is to assert an identity with them but, simultaneously, it is also a choice amongst the total spectrum of ways of dressing which signals a rejection or difference from those other ways. If all the adults of a society owned a Mercedes this make of car could not function, as it does at the moment, as a sign of affluence and middle-class status in relation to cheaper cars such as Ford Escorts or Fiat Unos. Bourdieu's stress on the differential nature of taste derives from the linguistics of Saussure and his structuralism from the work of Lévi-Strauss.

Another striking characteristic of Bourdieu's mode of analysis is that it encompasses all kinds of tastes – in food, drink, clothes, interior decoration, art, sport and so on. The total ensemble of tastes must, he argues, be inextricably bound up with the lifestyle of the group concerned. And these tastes can be correlated with the factors of class fraction, economic capital, symbolic or cultural capital, employment and so forth. Bourdieu's text is far too long and complex to summarize any further here, but any future study of taste and design would have to take note of the findings of La Distinction.

## Rubbish Theory

Designed artefacts, as everyone knows, are valued by human beings for their usefulness, their aesthetic qualities, their personal emotional associations, and for their monetary worth.

These values are capable of change over time. For instance, the economic value of a new car begins to decline as soon as it is purchased; after a few years it may become worthless; after a few more it may start to become valuable again (e.g. a vintage car). The questions arise: 'Is there a pattern to these value changes? Can they be explained theoretically?'

One writer who thinks so is Michael Thompson, a social anthropologist who has taught in art and design colleges. He is the author of a provocative text entitled Rubbish Theory (1979) which is concerned with 'the creation and destruction of value'. Artefacts, he argues, are ‘socially malleable': the assignment of value is a social process which is not directly determined by the intrinsic characteristics of the object concerned. The same work of art may be regarded as a masterpiece by one person and junk by another: the object remains the same but the valuations differ.

An initial distinction he makes is between transient and durable objects. The former decrease in value over time and have finite lifespans (e.g. a used car), while the latter increase in value over time and have (ideally) infinite lifespans (e.g. an antique vase preserved in a museum or a private collection) What interests Thompson is how objects transfer from one cat egory to the other. He wants a theory capable of dealing with dynamic processes not just a static situation. For goods to alter their status from transient to durable, he maintains, they must pass through a region of flexibility'which is in fact the zone of zero value we call rubbish. Rubbish, he argues, is a covert category upon which the whole social process depends. Of course, rubbish which is destroyed after being discarded cannot be restored to value (except by the recycling of its materials) However, at any one time a large number of artefacts exist in store in a kind of value-limbo.

A case study - the history of nineteenth-century woven silk pictures called Stevengraphs - enables Thompson to demonstrate how objects can alter their value over time. During their period of manufacture Stevengraphs were cheap, mass-produced kitsch Then, for several decades, they were considered worthless junk. Finally, in the 1960s they began to become collectors' items. In terms of rubbish theory they shifted from transient (decreasing economic value) to rubbish (no economic value) to durable (increasing economic value). A second example- the gentrification of Georgian terrace houses in Islington, London - shows the same process at work in architecture.

Linking his theory to the class/wealth structure of society, Thompson claims that 'those who own and control durable objects enjoy more power and prestige than those who live entirely in a world of transience or worse still, a world of rubbish.' 18 At this point he suggests his categories are associated with particular kinds of lifestyle, but it is not a suggestion which is followed up in any detail. What is clear is that as durable objects ascend in monetary value, so they ascend the class/wealth/power structure.

One of the greatest difficulties in writing history is to account for both persistence and change, and gradual and sudden change. Thompson finds the model he needs in catastrophe theory - derived from a theorem in topology first stated by Rene Thorn - which describes mathematically how a sudden transformation from one situation to another can take place.

Rubbish Theory is a stimulating text which goes some way to explaining the kind of changes in valuation to which designed goods are subject. What remains to be explored are the precise interrelations between the different kinds of value ascribed to artefacts. For example, what correlation if any exists between the aesthetic valuation of an object and its market value?

The prices recorded in auction houses and second-hand shops for old goods over many years are an objective measure of changing valuations. Yet this measure is a limited one: objects of little monetary worth are treasured by their owners for personal reasons. In other words, knowledge of prices does not tell us much about the feelings and attitudes of people towards designed objects. 0

Human attitudes towards the past are inherently paradoxical and ambivalent: our very identities depend upon our past history and memories but to grow and develop we must change with the times; traditions provide continuity but to innovate we must break with them. (This subject is exhaustively explored in David Lowenthal's monumental study The Past is a Foreign

Country ( 1985).) Our feelings about the past also change as time elapses, indeed there seems to be a pattern to our shifting responses to fashions as they recede into the past. James Laver, the fashion historian, has pointed out that last year's fashion seems 'dowdy', after 10 or 20 years it seems 'hideous, absurd', after 30 years, 'amusing', after 50, 'quaint', after 70, 'charming', after 100, 'romantic', and after 150, 'beautiful'.l9 So the fashion remains the same, but our perception and valuation of it alters. It follows that there are two lines of development for the historian to track: the sequence of fashions themselves in which the new relentlessly replaces the old, and the sequence of valuations placed on these fashions by succeeding generations. From time to time the two lines will intersect as a positive evaluation of an old fashion results in a revival.

## Notes and References

1. 'Satellite shopland: shopping centres of the future' Equinox series, Channel Four TV, 1 October 1987.

2. W. Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire: a Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism (London: New Left Books, 1973 ).

3. See D. Chaney, 'The department store as a cultural form', Theory, Culture and Society 1 (3) 1983 pp. 22-31.

4. J. Winship, 'Options -for the way you want to live now', Theory, Culture and Society 1 (3) 1983 pp. 44-65.

5. W. F. Haug, Critique of Commodity Aesthetics: Appearance, Sexuality Advertising in Capitalist Society (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1986); Commodity Aesthetics, Ideology and Culture (New York: International General, 1987 ).

6. For introductions to reception theory see R. C. Holub, Reception Theory: a Critical Introduction (London: Methuen, 1984); P. Hohendahl, 'Introduction to reception aesthetics', New German Critique (10) Winter 1977 pp. 29-63. For a critical assessment of reception theory by a Marxist literary critic see T. Eagleton, Literary Theory: an Introduction (Oxford: Blackwell, 1983) pp. 74-90.

7. H. Jauss, 'Literary history as a challenge to literary theory', New Literary History 2 (1) 1970 pp. 7-37.

8. T. Adorno, 'Theses on the sociology of art', Working Papers in Cultural Studies (2) Spring 1972 pp. 121-8.

9. J. K. Galbraith, The New Industrial State (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1968) p. 213.

10. See, for example, R. Nadar, Unsafe at Any Speed (New York:

Grossman, 1965) and P. Hall, Great Planning Disasters (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1980).

11. D. Hebdige, 'Object as image: the Italian scooter cycle', Block (5) 1981 pp. 44-64.

12. L. Mulvey, 'Visual pleasure and narrative cinema', Screen ( 16) 1975 pp. fr18.

13. P. Burke, Tradition and Innovation in Renaissance Italy (London: Fontana/Collins, 1974) p. 152.

14. S. Bayley (ed), Taste: an Exhibition about Values in Design (London: Boilerhouse Project/Victoria & Albert Museum, 1983) p. 11.

15. R. Williams, Keywords (London: Fontana/Croom Helm, 1976) pp. 264-6.

16. See S. Sontag, 'Notes on camp', Against Interpretation (London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1967) pp. 275-89.

17. P. Bourdieu, Distinction: a Social Critique of the judgement of Taste (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1984 ;French edn 1979). For reviews see: M. Douglas, 'High culture and low', Times Literary Supplement 13 February 1981 pp. 163-4;J. Elster, 'Snobs', London Review of Books 3 (20) 5-18 November 1981 pp. 10-12; J. Frow, 'Accounting for tastes', Cultural Studies 1 (1) January 1987 pp. 59- 73. See also special issues on Bourdieu: Media, Culture & Society 2

18. M. Thompson, Rubbish Theory: the Creation and Destruction of Value (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979) p. 45.

19. J. Laver, Taste and Fashion from the French Revolution to the Present Day (London: Harrap, rev. edn 1945) pp. 202, 208.

This text has attempted to delineate the fledgling discipline of design history and to identify and explore its central theoretical and methodological problems. A wide rar1ge of literature from many disparate fields of knowledge has been cited and this has required a synthesis which may not always have been achieved. Any conclusion would be premature because a host of issues remains underdeveloped and unresolved. There is thus plenty of scope for further reflections upon the discipline's problematic and aims.

If a single fmding emerges from this study it is the extent to which the issues confronting design historians are comparable to those which have been faced by scholars in other disciplines far more venerable than design history. It follows that design historians can avoid crass errors, gain insight into their own practices, and save themselves time by attending to debates within the social sciences and by studying the writings of major anthropologists, sociologists, general historians, and so on. Such a task should not be antipathetic to them because it is, in large part, one of historical investigation.

What of the future? One dilemma which could well become more acute as time passes is the question of whether or not design history belongs with the humanities or with the social sciences. This argument has arisen in respect of art history, which some scholars regard as a 'humanistic' discipline akin to the study of language, philosophy, literature, the classics, etc., while others think of it as a social science akin to sociology, anthropology, geography, etc. Both sets of disciplines are concerned with humankind and human values but social science aspires to the scientific rigour of the natural sciences. Although this issue cannot be resolved without regard to the institutional contexts within which design history now exists, my own prediction is that the influence of theoretical developments in the research methods of the social sciences will inevitably pull design history in that direction. A considerable number of design historians already exhibit impatience with the impressionistic and anecdotal history-writing typical of so many design publications.

In recent years a significant growth in the number of design historians has taken place, especially in Britain. Given the British government's present restrictions on education, no more design historians are likely to be appointed; however, employment prospects may be brighter in the realms of book publishing and design journalism. There has certainly been a remarkable increase in the number of books and magazines about design in the 1980s. The British Design History Society annual conference held in Brighton in 1987 was notable for the participation of foreign delegates from a spectrum of countries (though all were advanced countries). No doubt in the near future we shall witness a further internationalization of the discipline. Professional contacts and discussion will also be facilitated by the presence of the specialist journals Design Issues (USA) and Journal of Design History (UK).

In terms of the discipline's intellectual trajectory, the greatest danger it faces at present is that posed by external pressures to become an adjunct of the commercial system of design. If design history becomes merely a servant of the design system - an instrumental form of history-writing whose only function is to celebrate - then the discipline's critical potential in respect of society as a whole will remain unfulfilled. As Theodor Adorno once remarked: ‘The simple existence of disciplines and modes of thought does not amount to their justification.'