# Introduction THIs BoOK Is A sELECTION from the extensive writings by the late Sōetsu Yanagi, who was the father of the Japanese craft movement, and my close friend for fifty years. I, who am unable to read his original texts, have attempted to translate with the help of able and understanding Japanese assistants, so that readers in the Western world may penetrate that which Buddhism contains for the seeker looking for the meaning of beauty in the face of truth. His chapters are addressed, in the main, to Oriental craftsmen and lovers of craftsmanship, but they are concerned with the very nature of human life and work and are therefore of vital importance to men and women all over the world in our present stage of evolutionary change. Yanagi was at first a pupil, and later a friend, of the late Dr. Daisetsu Suzuki, whose many books, written by him in English, have made Buddhism known to the West during the last half century. From that background Yanagi has extracted the first aesthetic of Eastern art, which has born fruit in Japan in our time, both in the preservation of the country's folk art and in the recognition and encouragement of artistcraftsmen. Such a man is the potter Shōji Hamada, for example, who continues today the leadership of the strongest national handcraft movement since the Industrial Revolution took place in England. Emphasis should be laid here upon what Yanagi really did, particularly for Japan and Korea, in discovering the beautiful truthfulness of their domestic handmade crafts. So ordinary as to be unobserved by people at large even though they were the springboard for the Tea masters and their quietism four centuries earlier, folkcrafts were as central to his philosophy as wild flowers to horticulture; this we ourselves perhaps are in danger of forgetting. As he demonstrates with examples again and again in these pages, the purity of the wild flower and the unspoiled countryside so often puts to shame the high culture of town and court. There is a wild and untamable beauty in man when he is in harmony with nature. This aesthetic is the story of the seeing eye of Japan. Let us call it an Eastern perception of significant loveliness. Originally an understanding of the function of true beauty in life, the concept has deteriorated almost from the time of the early Tea masters in the sixteenth century. This was brought about in part by contact with the life and arts of the rest of the world and in part from cultural decay. It was Yanagi's creative thought that began to close this long gap. The publication of this Buddhist aesthetic is the more important because it is a part of that deeper exchange between East and West upon which the pattern of the cultural unification of mankind depends. Many young minds in the West are ripening to feel and eventually understand in their hearts that which moves and inspires Oriental man. When, following two world wars, the young deny the existence of God, they are confused by what seems to them to be the futility of all religious beliefs in the face of atomic warfare and they protest with disgust at the leaden words of past centuries. They may not know what Yanagi meant when he stood long and silent before the great facade of Chartres; he said, "That is what you have lost. You need a new gospel" Implying any man for everyman, he meant the totality of belief in all mankind. The French built stone upon carved stone visible for thirty miles, lit through coloured glass painted with their dreams and faith clear-cut as their belief. All men for all men, life for Life Itself. Our disbelief is for lack of wholeness. I must speak intimately of the Yanagi I knew. His life work was to re-establish art in relationship to the Tree of Life, to God—which is thusness to the Buddhist, and from that you cannot escape. What was Yanagi to me? A question unavoidable and direct. When I was in trouble in Peking in 1917 he came to stay at my Chinese house for a month and persuaded me to go back to Japan, where I lived and worked for a year on his family land at Abiko until one night my workshop burned down. His persuasion was, "Why are you troubled following a mistaken leader? There is no need—the light is in your own work. I have seen it in your pots and drawings. Awake! I have seen it". If a man knows not and knows not that he knows not, shun him, If a man knows not and knows that he knows not, awaken him, If a man knows and knows that he knows, follow him. Arabian saying Yanagi lit my lamp. Yanagi had this also to say about the importance of individual artists. His belief was that with the drying up of the roots of folk art, those with developed intelligence could see that which the simple close-to-earth peasant could not see. He stated that, in consequence, our function at this stage in evolution is that of pilots employing intelligence with humility; thus emerging from isolation and joining hands in the good company of artisans. Art in Japan is an open sesame. Yanagi sets its criteria at the highest level of total belief. At first reading, some ideas he propounds may appear to contradict our prevalent values, but many people find on reflection that a longer perspective of Western thought reveals counterparts in our own past. His deep reverence for William Blake and Meister Eckhart is an example of what I mean. Differences undoubtedly exist, but extremes touch, and we are the richer thereby if we expand to the full orbit of man's presence on this globe. I hope and believe that this book will challenge the individual artist and craftsman, because this, our age, is bereft of group, or communal, art; we have lost faith in so much of all but private interpretations of life's meaning. Throughout these pages there is no distinction between truth and beauty, nor basically, between fine and applied art. In Yanagi's "Kingdom of Beauty" all varieties of art-—primitive, folk, aristocratic, religious, or individual—meet in equality at a topless, bottomless, round table. This, I think, has never been stated before and may indeed come to be accepted in a mature and round world. Yanagi was described by Shōji Hamada as a creative critic. Such men are rare, for they help to fashion the character of an epoch. In his case there was a depth of understanding covering the arts and beliefs of the cultures of two hemispheres, penetrating to the roots of all their flowering. Every artist knows that he is engaged in an encounter with infinity, and that work done with heart and hand is ultimately worship of Life Itself. Sometimes a pot sings out from its wheel-head, from all its related parts, and the potter may pause in himself thinking. "No pattern this time—just a single good glaze—or none at all", and hope that fire will bless with added strength and variety that which his hands have made. Such a pot, or indeed any work of art, is not an expression of the maker alone, but of a degree of enlightenment wherein infinity, however briefly, obliterates the minor self. Herein one may catch a glimpse of Yanagi's width and depth of thought. ## The Man And His Work Sōetsu Yanagi was born in 1889 and died in May, 1961. During the seventy-two years of his life he did many things besides founding the Japanese craft movement and directing its unique museums in Tokyo and elsewhere. He is best known to Western people through the Japan Folkcraft Museum (Mingei-kan) in Tokyo. It would not be entirely amiss to describe Yanagi's position in Japan as relatively comparable to that of Ruskin and Morris in England. In both cases a deep and comprehensive statement was made regarding work and the qualification of work by beauty, against a background of rapid industrialization. In each case the creative thought behind the resulting movements, separated as they are by approximately one hundred years, may be regarded as counter Industrial Revolutions. Morris and his followers felt that there was no genuine heartbeat left in work and so they set out to print and weave and decorate with their own hands. Seen from the present day they appear almost as romantic and nostalgic as the Pre-Raphaelite painters, but some of their work does not stand up to the reality of the time test. Whether the Japanese will fare better remains to be seen, but this Far Eastern reaction against the overwhelming effects of scientific industrialization at breakneck speed has already lasted fortytwo years and has spread all over these islands with more vigour and considerably greater response from the general public than our own movement under Morris generated. Fundamentally, human beings, whether Eastern or Western, need belief, free play of imagination and intuition in their homes and workshops or they become starved. All the cog-wheels and electronic brains cannot assuage these human needs in the long run. It is for lack of such essentials that we turn to dope of one kind or another, or to destructiveness. Basically this is not so much a revolution against science and the machine as a seeking of a means of counterbalance by employing man's first tools, his own hands, for the expression of his inner nature. Yanagi was not a craftsman in the sense that Morris was, he did not use his hands, but possessed the extraordinary "seeing eye" of the best masters of Tea, developed in those coteries of fine appreciation—the Tearooms of Japan—on the fringes of monastic life. Neither, in the strict sense, was Yanagi a Tea master. He did not practise the formalities, hinting that no form was preferable to dead form; he was content to await the birth of a new form arising from roots in new life. This is yet to be born of his country, still facing and digesting the thought and life of the West. He, like his friend Hamada, sought rather to assess, to accept, or to reject us at a deeper level. ## THE SOCIaL AND POlITICaL POSITION Japan is not sufficiently familiar to the general English-reading public for fair conclusions to be reached, either about the tasks undertaken by a man like Yanagi or the degree of success attained by him, so I have felt the necessity of attempting to give a broad summary of the general environment of his time as a social and political background to his life and work. The Meiji Restoration of 1868 and the constitution of some twenty years later marked a sudden leap for the people of Japan from isolated medievalism to the nineteenth century of Queen Victoria. The selfpreservatory energies and instincts of a northern Asian people had been called into play by the Black Ships of Commodore Perry demanding the opening of Japan to trade. Astute Japanese minds foresaw and forestalled a fate such as we British imposed on India; it was impossible to fight cannon with swords, so they fought and defeated their Tokugawa shogunate and placed the emperor in power. This provided the law and concentration of energies necessary with which to build up trade, an army and a navy, the money and the security—the primary conditions necessary for the far greater task of understanding and digesting the industrial cultures of the West. Year by year the best young brains were sent abroad to learn: to England for naval and financial tutelage, to Germany for scientific and military knowledge, and to France for art. I think it may be said without fear of contradiction that no nation, certainly no Oriental nation, has faced so vast a task with comparable determination and energy. I have often wondered whether Britain of the fifteenth century, an offshore kingdom with an historical position curiously similar to Japan's, could have done as well in like circumstances. Self-protective wars were involved, first with China, and subsequently Russia, but the expenditure of money and life was nothing in comparison to that of energy spent absorbing the thought behind the civilizations of Western man. What was the hidden source of this energy? I am inclined to ascribe it to the inherent power of the native religion of Japan—Shinto. J. W. T. Mason in his book, The Meaning of Shinto says, "The creative activities of the Japanese, individualized and co-ordinated afresh, moved forth from mediaevalism into the modern world, showing the same eager desires as in the past for new knowledge and accomplishments, while retaining many aspects of the ancient ways of the race". This ancient and subconscious urge of creative life was canalized and used deliberately, I believe, by leaders of the military party after the ending of the Anglo-Japanese alliance, and eventually built up into the formidable theory of race supremacy that led to Pearl Harbor and Japan's ultimate defeat in the last war. Initial success went to Japan's head as it went to Hitler's. But it should not be forgotten that an economic cause was at work as well the fearful overcrowding of these islands, which still remains an unsolved problem. When I came to Japan in 1909 the population was fifty million and now it is a hundred and five million, living off less arable land than the British Isles contain. Another factor, little appreciated both in Japan as well as abroad, is the profound inferiority complex engendered by the fact that Japan entered the family of nations so late and so poor. Psychologically it is not surprising that a people thus handicapped should, under stress, in a secondary stage of inferiority, become bombast and aggressive. Neither is it just that the Japanese should be so lightly accused of mere imitation. They are facile and quick to see and act, being descendants, not only of the Mongol, but also of the Malay. During the long centuries since the first waves of Buddhism broke upon these shores in the seventh century, the people assimilated the cultures of the mainland, just as we did in England. Now they are set, first, to understand all that we have to offer, and, eventually, to digest what they have learned and to produce new mutations. Some results are already taking us by surprise and leading the world in science, industry, and art. This cannot be done by mere adroit imitation. What we have called Japanese imitativeness is a first and unavoidable stage of understanding the unfamiliar. It involves many errors before truth is found. As I have already indicated, Japan was emerging from a long hibernation of interned medieval life when I first met a young Yanagi fresh from the Peer's School and the Imperial University, in 1910. His father was of high rank in the navy, and several of his friends belonged to the nobility surrounding the emperor in the old Kyoto court. They were a brilliant group, some of whom became well-known writers. In that same year they started a monthly magazine, the Shirakaba (Silver Birch"), which in the following thirteen years led progressive thought in the study of Western literature, art, and philosophy. Yanagi, as one of its editors, was chiefly interested in artists and mystics. With an enthusiasm that I shared, these young men searched the horizons of Western art and thought, ancient and modern. Progressively educated, but traditionally Oriental, they selected and reappraised our artists and authors from, let us say, Giotto as an artist and Meister Eckhart as a mystic, through the High Renaissance, into all our movements in art and literature up to the present day. I remember, vividly, a long night in Yanagi's room when we unpacked a dozen large German colour reproductions of paintings by Cezanne and Van Gogh. They shook us into immediate recognition, and, when republished, the responses of all literary as well as artistic circles in the land were touched. Yanagi said to me of Cezanne, "He is a doorway between East and West," and of Rembrandt, "He is one of our artists." I introduced him to William Blake, as poet, artist, and mystic. Yanagi bit hard on that bait. Colour plates arrived from England, and he toured provincial towns to show and talk about them. The response was immediate, and in that one tour more of those expensive and numbered prints were sold than in Blake's Albion to date. Then in 1914 he wrote a thick volume on William Blake, and the lothful publisher was astounded at its success. Blake's Fourfold Vision was no mystery to this Oriental, and he was able to convince his countrymen of its validity. From Blake, Yanagi went to Walt Whitman, whom he regarded as the great American poet. Later on, between 1929 and 1930 after a year as lecturer on Buddhist art and aesthetics at Harvard, he published a little magazine in Japan called Blake and Whitman. In 1918 Yanagi persuaded me to return from Peking, where I had spent a couple of First World War years, and build a kiln and workshop on his family property at Abiko, some twenty-five miles east of Tokyo. He had already begun to take much interest in Korean crafts, particularly pottery. Living beside a kiln deepened this attraction and caused him to consider the issues of craftsmanship in our time, especially the transitions attendant upon the change from local folkcrafts to individual, or artist craftsmanship. Naturally the English movement under William Morris was the subject of much discussion, and I clearly recollect how he questioned me about an equivalent term for peasant or folk art, in Japanese. No word existed, and he finally composed the word mingei, which means art of the people" and has now become part of the Japanese language. Towards the end of a year of rich exchange of ideas between Yanagi and his friends of the Shirakaba magazine, myself, and others who came to visit the little colony at Abiko, a young man called Hamada appeared, who told me that he had decided to become a potter after training at the Tokyo Institute of Technology. He was the first man I had ever met who could talk to me about the chemistry and geology of clay and glaze, for my master, the sixth Kenzan, only knew how things were done in a limited field and could not explain why. We liked each other at first sight, and eventually Hamada asked if I would take him to England with me when I returned home in a year's time. When my workshop burned down, a kiln was built for me in Tokyo, and during the last year Hamada visited me again. It was finally agreed that he would travel with me and my family, and he helped start my pottery at St. Ives, where he stayed for three years. He returned to Japan in 1923, finally settling at Mashiko, whence he came to know Yanagi well. In 1926 he and Yanagi and Hamada's old potter friend Kanjirō Kawai visited the mountain monasteries of Kōya-san and there dętermined to start a Japanese Craft Society —the Mingei-kai. The decision to start a craft society was momentous, for it shaped the lives of those most concerned from that time forward. It led not only to the growth of a stronger movement than in England, but also to a return wave of cultural influence strengthened by a new content from the Far West. The next step was the publication of a craft magazine, Kōgei ("Crafts"). Between 1931 and 1941, 120 issues were published, and there has been no other publication on its level. The covers—no two the same—by paper makers, textile artists, and lacquerers; the illustrations, the intimate articles by craftsmen; actual samples of papers and textiles still being made; the high selectivity; the awakening of Japan to her own living treasuries; the far-seeing leadership—again Yanagi was the editor. By 1936 private support had grown to such an extent that the present Japan Folkcraft Museum was built in Tokyo. It houses many thousand examples of Japanese and Korean crafts, old and new, and of other countries as well, beautifully displayed and constantly changed. It is the focal point of the movement, but at Kurashiki, in Okayama Prefecture, there is another unique craft museum housed in architecturally fine old fireproof storehouses, and there are smaller museums in Tottori, Osaka, and other cities as well. But the work is not only carried out in museums —the objects furnish restaurants and hotels and are sold in craft shops all over Japan. ## THE FUTURE OF CRAFTS The facts have to be faced concerning the future of craftsmanship anywhere within an industrial civilization and about what Yanagi has to say about this in the following chapters. Before the age of science and modern industry, crafts used to spring out of the hearts and hands of man. Not long ago questions were thrust at Hamada and myself by a keen young journalist from one of the leading dailies on behalf of a younger generation who eyed with suspicion the word mingei. Hamada handled him with so much understanding and wisdom that after a couple of hours he fell silent and quietly offered his thanks. This was the best and deepest discussion on the road forward for craftsmen that I have heard. Hamada said in effect that we were as sick of the word mingei as we were of the opposed word sakka, meaning the current so-called individual or artistcraftsman. He said they had become, equally, misconceptions of Yanagi's intentions. Someone tried to quell the young journalist, but he would not be shaken off and, turning to me, asked what I considered craft to be. "Good work proceeding from the whole man, heart, head, and hand, in proper balance", I replied. Then he went on, "How do we obtain that in our society now?"Hamada broke in at this point saying that he had met one man in America, Charles Eames, who had shown a way forward. He described the first meeting, together with Yanagi and myself, at his home near Los Angeles in 1954. He laid stress upon Eames's open acceptance both of the contemporary scientific and industrial world as well as the traditions of the past; upon his playful refusal to be chained by fear, and his constant inventiveness and domination of the mechanical by a new freedom of intuition and joy in making. He was saying, in fact, that the inner had regained control of the outer in this man, which I think goes to the root of the matter. At this point in time we are trying to face the problem of how to make best use of the individual craftsman, who is displacing the traditional craftsman. Regarding this issue it was Yanagi, Hamada, and myself who had found in Denmark the use of a new kind of designer of furniture for contemporary life. There a bridge was thrown across the chasm that has long kept handcraftsmen and designers in industry apart. Danish architects started with practise before theory. They only came to their drawing boards after an apprenticeship in handling wood, stone, brick, etc. Therefore they embraced and understood both the hand and the machine and could and did employ both. Some of this work, made entirely by hand, was expensive, other examples, made partly with the use of machinery, was moderately priced, but the greatest number were cheap and were made entirely by mechanical means. If I am right in my belief that "theory before practise" has been at the root of a division that has kept the two camps at daggers drawn ever since the Industrial Revolution took place—particularly in England where it started—then we owe the Danes gratitude for having found a canker at the root and for providing a new source of industrial designers in the future whose vision is sufficiently expanded. The mistake was, I believe, in putting theory before practise, and this affected not only work, but also our concept of education. This does not imply a necessity for all craftsmen to become designers for industry, but it does indicate a liberation from a nineteenth century bondage of the spirit, a prison of rationalism, materialism, and individualism. I have left the last question concerning individual craftsmanship to the end. The problem is how artist-craftsmen are to function rightly in a world of machines. Probing further, one is forced to ask what the function of an artist-craftsman is and why has Yanagi given him his full support? The appearance of one hundred thousand potters alone, outside industry, in the United States after the last war indicates that the gap was not being filled. Clearly something was lacking that mechanized labour did not supply. I have often called it the heartbeat in work. Enthusiasm and play of imagination, for example, occur as wet clay spins under fingers, but take place with varying degrees of intensity, depending on how free of inhibitions one is. Both the creative gift and the freedom are essential. In an artist-craftsman it is the degree of life force canalized into a craft. The degree; the purity; the intensity. We can relate the work of individuals to the magnificent communal creations of unknown, humble and usually illiterate artisans of past ages and draw inspiration from them. It is this kind of work to which Sōetsu Yanagi persistently referred. His main criticism of individual craftsmen and modern artists is that they are overproud of their individualism. I think I am right in saying Yanagi's belief was that the good artist or craftsman has no personal pride because in his soul he knows that any prowess he shows is evidence of that Other Power. Therefore what Yanagi says is "Take heed of the humble; be what you are by birthright; there is no room for arrogance". Handcraftsmanship, if it be alive, justifies itself at any time as an intimate expression of the spirit of man. Such work is an end in itself and not a means to an end. If, however, it ceases to serve a functional need, it runs the risk of becoming art for art's sake and untrue to its nature, depending upon the sincerity of the craftsman. Who is in a better position to teach the young co-ordination of their human faculties? Who should know so well the experimental side of design on material? That we need a new kind of designer has been demonstrated by the Danish architects; that creative design for mechanical reproduction requires fresh, free, leadership is shown by Eames and his like. One other thing seems necessary-the seeing eye. Without it, selectivity lacks standard. Here, in the relationship of truth to beauty, maybe, Japan makes its greatest contribution to world culture. ## YANAGI's LOVE OF KOREA My friend had a great sympathy for Korea, its people and its arts. Especially, he loved the pots of the Yi dynasty. I recall one day in 1918 at Abiko, just after he had returned from a visit to Seoul. When, at the hour for lunch, I joined him in his study overlooking the lagoon of Teganuma, I found him in a reverie, slowly moving from pot to pot, gently stroking each in turn. After a pause I asked him what he was doing. He turned and said quietly, "I am visiting my Korean friends". Though the same pots are now in the museum, he is not . . . or is he? The Japanese people find a unique language of aesthetic communication in pottery, and, as Yanagi said, "Japan is a potter's Paradise". It was his enthusiasm for Yi porcelains more than anything else that popularized them, and, incidentally, caused their prices to soar—now they are fabulous. In fact the prices of pots both old and new are higher in Japan than anywhere else. Yanagi went to Korea many times. I went with him twice, and we climbed the Diamond Mountains together in 1935 before I took the Trans-Siberian back to Paris. After the occupation of Korea, the heavy hand of Japanese militarism fell upon The Land of Morning Calm. It became unsafe to raise a voice in protest, but Yanagi, an anti-militarist, went to Seoul and started a small museum in one of the old palace buildings, where Japanese and Koreans could meet in the common enjoyment of Korean art, leaving politics aside and thereby avoiding possible offence to the government. Before ending this section concerning Yanagi and Korea, it is worth reminding the reader that the Japanese Tea ceremony was built round Korean rice bowls and that contemporary Japanese potters such as Kenkichi Tomimoto, Kanjirō Kawai, and Hamada were deeply influenced by Yi porcelain. ## IN CONCLUSION Whilst translating these thoughts of Yanagi's line by line and word by word, as an artist-craftsman I have had a sense of doubt on one main issue—the relationship between the conscious artist and the comparatively unconscious craftsman. Yanagi's constantly reiterated theme concerns the exceeding difficulties experienced in attaining a like purity and wholeness by the artist. He says our arts and crafts are in a diseased condition—with that I agree—but he turns to the artist-craftsman to act as the pilot in this dilemma because of his greater awareness, thereby indicating the power that has come to conscious man through the evolution of intellect. The results are not the same—Bach is not plainsong, Michaelangelo is not Mokujiki (Plate 41), and Hamada's bowls are not ō Ido (Plate 1). But they are as flowers, cultivated or wild, and who is to say which are more beautiful at that round table of Heaven? .. . I have so wished that I could ask him questions once again, or argue with him on some of the issues that he raises. My own view is that we have reached a stage when individual intellectualism has become necessary for survival, but that we were caught in a net of means towards ends of which we have almost lost sight, and this net has been cast all over the world. Yanagi is the first critic to restate those ends out of the Buddhist basis of human aspiration. I have felt obliged to preserve his style, which at times is repetitive like a carpenter's hammer; but a house had to be built, and Japanese carpenters are perfectionists. In all our years of friendship, and in living with Yanagi, I can recall no harsh word between us, but it was inevitable that he made enemies. He was devoted all his life through to unswerving purposes. One of them was the establishment of a unique home for the treasures of beauty produced by the unknown craftsman, which his incredibly sharp eyes found where nobody else had looked before. It is not an exaggeration to say that he discovered both Korean and Japanese folk art. In his indefatigable search for the foundations upon which to build his temple of beauty inevitably he trod on some toes, and at times he may have appeared severe. He gathered together his unique collection with onepointed intensity, almost avidly. To some people it may have seemed that this was for himself; indeed, in one sense it was, because through his own joy and satisfaction those eyes of his developed the vision and perception that enabled him to leave a museum of crafts as a permanent national collection of such unrivalled loveliness. He also left as a legacy to all men an aesthetic and religious creed of far more than national import, of which the following pages are a part. Wherever I have travelled in Japan I found his memory venerated. At his funeral service in his folkcraft museum, attended by over one thousand people, the great Buddhist scholar, Dr. Daisetsu Suzuki, then aged ninety, broke down as he spoke of his friend and pupil, and out of the quiet of shared emotion whispered, "That the old should die is natural, but that the young should go before their time. . . ". Japanese seldom show their feelings in public, but I was told that Shōji Hamada was the only speaker whose voice remained steady. Under his ungrudged leadership Yanagi's great work goes on. Many times since Yanagi died, as I have struggled with the hard edges of his written thought, there has been a keen awareness of his living presence. He still speaks silently in his quiet room at the back of the folkcraft museum, where nothing has been moved: his chair, flowers in a Korean vase, his books, his photograph hanging on the wall. . . . Bernard Leach