# The PoMo Brouhaha Steven Heller The clash between Modernism and Postmodernism (also known as PoMo) triggered a seismic shift in culture, and particularly art and design, during the final third of the twentieth century. It also caused plenty of confusion as to what Postmodernism actually represented: ideology or style, neither, or both. In graphic design, PoMo was less quake than natural transformation-as took place in pop music from, say, the era of big bands and young Frank Sinatra to rock 'n' roll and The Beatles; in other words, a generational adjustment in popular taste influenced by everything from aesthetics to technology to marketing. The modern versus postmodern brouhaha was not nearly as cataclysmic as the conflict of the early twentieth century, before the real modern revolution had lost steam, when kindred anti-establishment movements known throughout Europe by their evocative names— Vorticist, Futurist, Dadaist, and so on—were lumped together under a single modernist banner. Modernism was the comet that wiped out the dinosaurs; yet it gave way to rote modernistic styling, notably in advertising and graphic design. This made Postmodernism inevitable. Postmodernism began in architecture as critiques by disillusioned modernists that quickly spread to other disciplines during the late 197os and developed into a process. Postmodernism rejected Bauhausian rigidity and geometric precision in favor of more fluid, alluring forms, and encouraged the reintroduction of ornament and ostentatious space, sometimes spiced with selfmocking wit. Modernism's potential to enliven advertising and editorial genres was incalculable. The Second World War, however, put a stop to experimental Modernism, and when the war ended, Modernism's priorities became commerce-oriented. Postmodernism's impact on graphic design, and vice versa, was at first inconsequential because Modernism was (and still is) widely practiced in its midcentury form. Even today the two isms share some common traits. In the late 194os through the early 196os, during the periods of Abstract Expressionism, Pop, and Op art, the International Style of graphic design, known for its elemental economy and typographic rigidity, inherited the Bauhaus mantle. Taught in the 195os at the Kunstgewerbeschule in Zurich and the Schule für Gestaltung Basel, the pedagogy stretched far beyond its borders, to Yale in New Haven, Philadelphia University of the Arts, Illinois Institute of Technology (New Bauhaus), and other American art colleges. The primary visual characteristics included sans serif type (primarily Akzidenz-Grotesk, Helvetica, and Univers), generous amounts of white space, geometric iconography, and high-contrast photography. Yet even Swiss-inspired Modernism did not come from a mold. Distinct attributes defined certain countries and their respective designers. American modernists, among them Paul Rand, Lestęr Beall, Saul Bass, and Bradbury Thompson, allowed playful instincts to emerge. To see where the two approaches merged to create hybrids, one need look no further than the incipient neomodern insurgences that prevailed during the i96os in Eastern Europe. Through the introduction of conceptual thinking, surreal illustration, and expressive lettering,