# THE AFTERMATH, THE REVIVAL, THE FUTURE Too much of any good thing is overkill, and too much of something not universally admired to begin with is surely destined to fail, Like many styles before it, Postmodernism faded in the heat of the spotlight. By the end of the decade that had seen its rise to prominence, even notoriety, it was being dismissed by those who had most eagerly welcomed its arrival. Perhaps, as some suggested, it was the emphasis of style over substance;' perhaps it was its assertiveness (the movement's proponents were not subtle in their public statements, and neither were most of its designs). Or perhaps it was, as Paul Greenhalgh suggests, simply that debates about style, naturally evolved or artificially created, are no longer relevant in our age of instant communication.² The mere fact of a design's popularity inevitably makes it subject to replication in larger quantities, which also inevitably leads to shortcuts—simplified decoration, substituted materials, copyists in lieu of designers. The result cannot be anything other than inferior to the original. And if the originals, as with many postmodern objects, were eccentric to begin with, the copies will be even more so. The result will be their rejection in favor of the next, and perhaps less unconventional, new thing.³ It was no different for Postmodernism. More than any style since Art Deco, Postmodernism was avidly copied by me-too builders and massmarket manufacturers looking to capitalize on the latest fad. In a proliferation of bad taste, countless new office buildings sported columns, pilasters, and pediments, and MEMPHIS-like (see under "Producers") patterns ran rampant on sheets and towels, popular-price dinnerware, even houseware. The New York Times noted the appearance of Memphis motifs on apartment building facades, china, and T-shirts.4 Furniture sported watered-down forms and copycat colors. Postmodernism seemed an easy-to-do style refresher, but it wasn't easy to get right. Superficial rather than serious, more kitsch than clever, the copies spread awareness of the style at its least attractive, only helping to accelerate its decline. As the i99os ushered in a decade of eclecticism in which no single style held sway, the rebellion against doctrinaire Modernism subsided into a noncommittal but unexciting late Modernism that absorbed some of the lessons of Postmodernism; it was more human-centered, more contextual, more respectful of the lessons of history. But it was not until some three decades after it originated that Postmodernism began to reappear—if not precisely as revival, then as reassessment. By the start of the present century, collectors had already begun to show interest in postmodern design; some scholars deemed it an important part of the history of Modernism from its earliest manifestations, though only a few museums had paid it much attention. The rethinking intensified after the death of ETTORE SOTTSASS (see under "Masters of Postmodern Design" and “Living with Postmodern Design") in 2o07. A more objective look back, with the perspective of distance,