# CONTRIBUTOR BIOGRAPHIES John Stuart Gordon is Assistant Curator of American Decorative Arts at the Yale University Art Gallery, where he curated the exhibition "The Architect's Table: Swid Powell and Postmodern Design." He is the author of A Modern World: American Design from the Yale University Art Gallery. Johanna Grawunder is a designer/artist who works on projects ranging from public lighting and color installations, architectural interventions, and interiors, to limited-edition furniture and light collections for galleries in US and Europe. She has studied and worked with Gianni Pettena and Cristiano Toraldo di Francia of Superstudio in Florence (1984-1985) and has worked for Sottsass Associati (1985-20ot), becoming a partner in 1989 With Ettore Sottsass she co-designed many of the firm's most prestigious architecture and interiors projects. In 2ooı she opened her own design studio in San Francisco and Milan. Sean Griffiths is Professor of Architecture at the University of Westminster, London. He was a founding member of FAT (Fashion Architecture Taste), the celebrated postmodernist-inspired London architecture studio formed in 1995 and disbanded in 2014. Steven Heller is co-chair of the MFA Designer as Author program at the School of Visual Arts, New York. He was for thirty-three years an art director at the New York Times and has written and co-edited numerous books, and curated exhibitions, on the subject of graphic design. Arlene Hirst is a reporter and journalist specializing in interior design and furnishings. She was deputy director of design at Metropolitan Home magazine and now writes for publications including the New York Times Magazine, Dwell, Surface, Interior Design, and Elle Decor Italia. Charles Jencks is a renowned cultural theorist, landscape designer, and architectural historian best known for his writings on Postmodernism and postmodern theory. His bestselling books include The Language of Post-Modern Architecture, Adhocism, What is Postmodernism?, The Architecture of the Jumping Universe. Hans Maier-Aichen is a curator, designer, and teacher. He is the founder of the design label Authentics and a professor at several leading institutions, including Central Saint Martins in London, Karlsruhe University of Arts and Design in Germany, and China Academy of Arts in Hangzhou. He has curated a number of exhibitions on contemporary design. R. Craig Miller is a curator and design historian. He has served as Associate Curator of 2oth-century Architecture and Design at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Curator for Architecture, Design, and Graphics at the Denver Art Museum, and Senior Curator of Design Arts and Director of Design Initiatives at the Indianapolis Museum of Art. He is the author of a number of books, including European Design since 1985: Shaping the New Century. Alexander Payne is Deputy chairman and International Head of Design for the auction house Phillips LLC London-based Payne joined the company in i999 and was responsible for developing the design department, which has repeatedly set records for sales of avant-garde design. Payne conducts auctions in New York, London, and Hong Kong and has lectured and written frequently about the history of design and the market for contemporary design. One of the earliest to recognize the historical significance of Postmodernism, he has been organizing auctions of postmodern furniture and objects for almost two decades. Denise Scott Brown is an American architect, author, and educator. She is a principal in Venturi, Scott Brown & Associates and a longtime collaborator on architecture, planning, design, and theoretical writings with her husband, Robert Venturi. She has taught at the University of Pennsylvania, the University of California at Berkeley, and Yale and Harvard universities. ## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS No book is the work of its author alone, but is dependent on a support structure of associates and contributors. This book is no exception. I could not have done it without Christine Hauck, who worked tirelessly on photo acquisition and publication permissions, or Chike Maduabuchi, who checked and organized the bibliography. Nor without the help of the many designers, and architects who took the time to speak with me and send me information and illustrative materials, the photographers who searched through archives for images of decades-old projects, and Dennis Zanone who shared his images of iconic objects. My special thanks to Romina Zani, Alessandro Guerriero, Roberta Meloni, Kevin Keim, Peter Dixon, Allison Montgomery, Pilar Pardal, Carole Hochman, Evan Snyderman, Michelle Silvetti-Schmitt, Sal Forgione, and Joe Dick, who went the extra mile in filling my requests for photos and information; to Richard Wright and Todd Simeone at Wright, David Rago at Rago Arts, Darrell Rocha and Melanie Brister at Sotheby's, Katie Carder and her colleagues at Phillips, and Romain Monteaux-Sarmiento at Tajan for their cooperation in sending me images from auction house sales; and to Lorry Dudley, Keith Johnson, Susan Slesin, Michael Steinberg, Susan Lewin, Rick and Ruth Snyderman for sharing their experiences. I am particularly grateful to the contributors; Denise Scott Brown, John Stuart Gordon, Johanna Grawunder, Sean Griffiths, Steven Heller, Arlene Hirst, Charles Jencks, Craig Miller, Hans Maier-Aichen, and Alex Payne, for their fine essays. And to everyone at Thames & Hudson who helped bring the book into being: Lucas Dietrich, for thinking that postmodern design was a subject worth pursuing; Blanche Craig, for shepherding the manuscript through it many complex stages; Aimee Selby, for conscientious editing; and Karolina Prymaka, for designing a beautiful book. Finally, thanks to Martin Gura, for his ongoing support and enduring patience. ## REFERENCES ## INTRODUCTION I Patricia Leigh Brown, Knight Ridder syndicate, October 1984. 2 Critic Bernard Lubetkin called it “Hepplewhite and Chippendale in drag." Quoted in Michael Collins and Andreas Papadakis, Post-Modern Design, New York, 1989. 3 Giovanni Albera and Nicolas Monti, Italian Modern: A Design Heritage, New York, 1989, p. 39. 4 Jencks considers the “official" demisè of Modernism to be the 1972 demolition of the Pruitt-Igoe houșing development in St. Louis, Missouri. 5 As Christian Norberg-Schulz noted, "The common denominator of the post-modern experiments is the quest for a communicative, meaningful architecture." Norberg-Schulz, "The Two Faces of Post-Modernism," Architectural Design, 58, i988, pp. 7–8. 6 In 195o the exhibition "Italy at Work," at the Brooklyn Museum and venues in eleven other cities, displayed some 2,50o objects, from furniture and household goods to toys and even machinery, and in 1954 the Museum of Modern Art sponsored "The Modern Movement in Italy: Architecture and Design," which traveled to twenty-seven locations. 7 Such radical movements can be traced back to the Dada movement, which originated in Zurich in i916. Its provocative pop culture ideas can be seen as forerunners of the later avant-garde. 8 The consumer culture was famously encapsulated in Tom Wolfe's 1987 novel The Bontire of the Vanities. 9 As Marshall McLuhan famously said in his 1964 work Understanding Media, “Art is anything you can get away with." 1o Deconstructivism, surfacing in the late 198os, assembled fragmented segments into irregular, abstract structures that recalled Constructivist art. It was influenced as was Postmodernism, by the ideas of French theorist Jacques Derrida I Andrea Branzi, The Hot House: New Italian Design, Cambridge, MA, 1984, p. 8. 12 The original catalog indicated prices ranging from about \$2,000 to \$i0,000. 13 Sottsass had left Memphis in 1985 to work with the architectural practice he had established in i98o, and he and Barbara Radice started Terrazo, a magazine that proselytized a newly inclusive attitude toward design, integrating coverage of architecture and design with related disciplines. Influential though relatively short-lived, it published thirteen issues between 1988 and 1996. 14 Robert Venturi's collection of well-received chairs for Knoll, riffs on classical period styles, were a notable exception. 15 The celebrated Alessi Tea & Coffee Piazza project was largely an image-building program, and Cleto Munari commissioned costly objects in precious metals and stones. Only Acme jewelry was popularly priced 16 Despite their often diluted design and their focus on popular price rather than quality, it was this category of objects, more than the elitist originals, that was most influential in spreading the style. 17 Stanley Abercrombie, Editorial, Interior Design, December 1986, p. 25. 18 Joseph Giovannini, "Design Notebook," New York Times, March 12, 1987. 19 Glenn Adamson and Jane Pavitt (eds.), Postmodernism: Style and Subversion (exh. cat.), Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 2011, p. 95. 20 In his 195ı work Requiem tor α Nun, William Faulkner wrote, "The past is never dead; it's not even past. ## I. MASTERS OF POSTMODERNISM Hans Höger, Ettore Sottsass Jun.: Designer, Artist, Architect, Berlin, 1993, pp. 21, 88. From my long professional and personal relationship with Sottsass, ! know that he certainly disliked being called a postmodernist, though he didn't quite have a term for it himself. It has been noted, moreover, that Sottsass dismissed the term as “American, academic, and restricted in its cultural references." Jonathan M. Woodham, Oxford Dictionary of Modern Design, Oxford, 2006, p. 310. 2 Deyan Sudjic, Ettore Sottsass and the Poetry of Things, London, 2015, p. 14. 3 Venturi and Scott Brown met Sottsass and Radice in Milan, around i98o. Although Venturi was one of the most acclaimed postmodern designers in the United States at the time, he was not asked by Sottsass to be associated with Memphis. Denise Scott Brown, emails to R. Craig Miller, July 15, 2o16 and July 20, 2016. Barbara Radice, email to R. Craig Miller, July 31, 2016. 4 1 got to know Sottsass and Venturi in the early 198os when I was a curator at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and collecting their designs. I thus had extended conversations with them over some two decades about their work and directions in contemporary design. 5 Kathryn B. Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary: Robert Venturi Denise Scott Brown and Associates, Philadelphia, 2oo1, p. 183. 6 A collection of his writings was published quite late in his career. See Milco Carboni and Barbara Radice (eds.), Ettore Sottsass: Scritti. 1946–2001, Vicenza, 2002. 7 Sottsass would conceive each space in terms of volume, colors, materials, and textures. He would then meticulously weave the separate elements together to create a larger coherent and vibrant whole, as if one were following a complex progression of pathways through an interior or building. R. Craig Miller, interview with Johanna Grawunder, July 21, 2o16. Grawunder worked at Sottsass Associati from 1985 to 2001, becoming a partner in 1989. 8 Liana Cavallaro, email to R. Craig Miller, July 29, 2016. Cavallaro was Sottsass's design assistant from 199o to 2ooo. It is important to note that his design work—his "private projects"—was kept separate from Sottsass Associati (which had divisions for architecture, industrial design, and graphics). He wished to maintain tight control over this work Sottsass also used his designs as a way to explore new ideas quickly, which would then later be incorporated into the architectural work in his studio. Interview with Johanna Grawunder. Maria Sanchez, Sottsass's design assistant from 1981 to about 1986–87, has described his design process. Sottsass would begin with small drawings in black marker pen in his sketchbooks, along with watercolor renderings on occasion. He would bring the sketchbooks to the office, where Sanchez would photocopy them and begin the process of turning them into technical drawings. Models or prototypes were sometimes made to allow Sottsass to further refine a design before production. Technical drawings were then sent to artisans or manufacturers with notes on colors or finishes. R. Craig Miller, interview with Maria Sanchez, August 11, 2o16. In contrast, see n. 27 for Venturi's design process. 9 Francesca Appiani, "Introduction," in Museo Alessi Design Interviews: Ettore Sottsass, Mantova, 2007, p. 35. 1o Glen Adamson and Jane Pavitt (eds), Postmodernism: Style and Subversion, 1970-199o (exh. cat.), Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 2011, p. 22. 11 An important question is the degree of involvement of Denise Scott Brown in Venturi's design work. Scott Brown and Venturi met in i96o. They were married in 1967, and she became a partner in the firm in i969. But she has more recently asserted that "Bob and ! have collaborated in everything since i96o." Denise Scott Brown, email to R. Craig Miller, July 14, 2or6. There was clearly a strong collaboration in the work coming out of the office during these years. In periodic review sessions, Scott Brown would critique designs and offer suggestions, but she did not have hands-on involvement in the "decorative" designs coming out of the office; this seems to have been the work of Venturi alone. R. Craig Miller, interview with Maurice Weintraub, July 22, 2o16. Weintraub worked in the office from 1982 to 1992 and was Venturi's principal on design projects. 12 Scott Brown, email to Miller, July 15, 2016. 13 Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary, p. 200. 14 Venturi's furniture designs were done primarily with Knoll, although he did create an important series of commodes (i984–89) with Arc International that were never put into mass-production. 15 Höger, Ettore Sottsass Jun., p. 21. 16 Miller, interview with Sanchez. 17 The names for Sottsass's designs became ever more complex especially after his exhibition at the Blum Helman Gallery in New York in i987, when he employed provocative titles such as Coming Back from Spain Long Ago (Where are you dear Spanish Lover?) and (For Girls) Looking at Yourself like a Temple Prostitute. See Martin Filler, Ettore Sottsass, New York, 1987. 18 Appiani, "Introduction," in Museo Alessi Design Interviews, p. 39. 19 Memphis called Tartar a consolle, although it is not attached to the wall, a primary characteristic of this furniture form; rather it is a free-standing center table. Johanna Grawunder has pointed out that Sottsass's use of three-dimensional forms parallels a surge of architectural projects in the office: the competition entry for The Peak, Hong Kong (r983); the series of showrooms done for Esprit in Europe (beginning in 1985); and the construction of the Wolf Residence (i986–90) in the United States. R. Craig Miller, interview with Johanna Grawunder, July 27, 2016. 20 Appiani, "Introduction," in Museo Alessi Design Interviews, p.37. 2ı The exhibition a mere two years later at Blum Helman Gallery, New York, marked the transition into the late period of Sottsass's career. These revolutionary designs were massive, employed luxurious materials, required superb craftsmanship, and reveled in quixotic names. This was a remarkable body of work—evidence of a master at the top of his game— solidifying Sottsass's reputation as one of the most important designers of the modern movement over the last 25o years. 22 Hiesinger has noted that Venturi "was thinking about a historical series of chairs as early as June 1976." Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary, p. 202. 23 Venturi designed nine chairs, chronologically ranging from Queen Anne to Chippendale, Sheraton, Hepplewhite, Empire, Biedermeier, Gothic Revival, Art Nouveau and Art Deco. Weintraub more concisely called it “a collection reflecting the history of furniture." Miller, interview with Weintraub. 24 Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary, p. 202. 25 Ibid., p. 219. 26 Venturi developed four distinctive profiles for the Knoll chairs: Queen Anne, Chippendale, Empire, and a fourth for the other six chairs in the series. Miller, interview with Weintraub. 27 Venturi developed a decidedly different design process to that of Sottsass (outlined in n. 8). Most of his drawings are not dated, so one cannot always lay out a concise evolution for each design. However, we know that Venturi would often start out with small sketches on 8½- by 1-inch (21.5 × 27.9 cm) paper, gradually enlarging the scale as the design evolved. Assistants would then make full-size technical drawings in pencil on vellum. Working on top of these drawings, Venturi would make dozens of full-size, free-hand sketches in black and colored markers on yellow tracing paper, as he developed and refined his ideas. This process was repeated numerous times. Full-size models of the chairs were also made. It was an arduous process, given Venturi's exacting attention to every detail. Miller, interview with Weintraub. 28 Hiesinger, Out of the Ordinary, p. 213. 29 Ibid., pp. 212–13. 30 Dan Howarth, "Alessi Celebrates Michael Graves' 9093 Kettle Anniversary," www.dezeen.com, August 25, 2015. 31 The tea kettle remained an Alessi bestseller for fifteen years and is still one of the firm's top-ten products. Ben Hobson, interview with Alberto Alessi, www.dezeen.com, July 8, 2014. 32 Don Hogsett, "Target, Michael Graves Design Collaboration Ends in March," Home Accents Today, February 8, 2012. 33 Reissued as The New Paradigm in Architecture: The Language of Post-Modernism, New Haven, CT, and London, 2002. 34 Designed by Jencks, the image was painted by Madelon Vriesendorp. 35 As illustrated in Jencks, Towards a Symbolic Architecture, New York, 1985. 36 Justin McGuirk, interview with Alessandro Mendini, Guardian, September 12, 2oi; the "fake antique" designation has become the most-used description of the Proust chair in articles and auction catalogs. 37 His father, Ettore Sottsass, Sr., was Italian; his mother, Antonia Peintner, was Austrian. 38 Sottsass's designs for Olivetti won him the prestigious Compasso d'Oro in 1969 and 1970 39 His involvement with India is explored in Avinash Rajagopal, "Sottsass and India," Metropolis, June 2014 www.metropolismag.com. 40 Mel Byers, The Design Encyclopedia, New York, 2004, p. 699. 41 Suzanne Slesin, "Sottsass' Oversize Collection: Is it Furniture or Art?" New York Times, October 29, 1987. 42 Quoted in Rowan Moore, "Ettore Sottsass: The Godfather of Italian Cool," Guardian, May 17, 2014. ## II. FORMS OF POSTMODERH DESIGH ## ARCHITECTURE 1 Arthur Drexler, Director, Department of Architecture and Design, "École des Beaux Arts," exhibition press release, Museum of Modern Art, New York, Aprii 30, 1975. 2 The exhibition, under the direction of Paolo Portoghesi, was part of the first International Architectural Exhibition at the Venice Biennale and included contributions by Hans Hollein, Michael Graves, Venturi Scott Brown, and Robert A. M. Stern, as well as Frank Gehry and Rem Koolhaas. 3 One of those elite tastemakers, Philip Johnson, was nevertheless often quoted as saying “You cannot not know history," a statement also attributed to his mentor Mies van der Rohe. 4 Author and critic Paul Goldberger sees this as a national characteristic: "Treating history like a buffet table that you can pick and choose things from and combine them on your plate in an interesting composition—that's a very American trait." "Goldberger on Gehry," interview by Tom Downey, www.surfacemag.com, November 18, 2015 5 The move to escape the rigidity of the International Style was encouraged by a proliferation of new books on early twentieth-century designers like Antoni Gaudí, Adolf Loos. Charles Rennie Mackintosh, and Josef Hoffmann, all of whom encouraged eclecticism in design. 6 Deconstructivism gained credibility after a major exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, in i988. 7 Christian Norberg-Schulz, “The Two Faces of Post-Modernism," Architectural Design, LvI/7–8, 1988, p. 163. 8 Andres Viglucci, "Miami Design Firm Returns to Roots with Green Office," Miami Herald, July 25, 201o. 9 Duany and Plater-Zyberk would marry and form their own firm, specializing in urban planning and design. 1o When artists Christo and Jeanne-Claude surrounded eleven Biscayne Bay islands with floating swaths of polypropylene fabric in i983, they chose pink as well—but there's no evidence that Arquitectonica was the inspiration for their choice. II A good example, the Westin New York (2ooi), is a cartooncolored tower that tweaks its Times Square surroundings. 12 Paul Goldberger, "Chicago Art Institute's Addition Retains Links to the Beaux-Arts," New York Times, September 14, 1988. 13 Chicago Tribune architecture critic Paul Gapp has referred to it as a "heavy, lackluster statement." 14 Chicago Architects Oral History Project, "Thomas H. Beeby," interview excerpts, Art Institute of Chicago, www.artic.edu. 15 Brazil (i984) and The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 2 (2015). James Taylor-Foster, "A Utopian Dream Stood Still: Ricardo Bofill's Parisian Housing Estate of Noisy-le-Grand," www.archdaily.com, October 1, 2015. 16 "Ricardo Bofll: Vincent Scully Assesses the Radical Classicism of the Spanish Architect's Housing Projects," Architectural Digest, 45, April 1988, pp. 59–61. 17 Paul Goldberger, "Mario Botta Exemplifies Less is More," New York Times, November 21, 1986 18 Terry Farrell, Terry Farrell: Interiors and the Legacy of Postmodernism, London, 2015, p. 13. 19 This point was made by Paul Goldberger in his book about the architect, Building Art: The Liße and Work of Frank Gehry, New York, 2015. 2o Transitioning from designer to artist, Gehry made a number of variations on his original fish lamp, which were the subject of an exhibition at Gagosian Los Angeles in 1984, and another, of new and larger one-of-a-kind lamps, at the gallery's Rome branch in 2016. 21 Sanam Samanian, "In 2oo9 Interview, Hans Hollein Reflects on His Career and How the Pritzker Changed His Architecture," www.archdaily.com, March 30, 2016. 22 In a televised interview in 2o13, Isozaki explained that he had learned about Marilyn Monroe when he was a youngster during the postwar American occupation of japan and thought of her as a symbol of American beauty—and, in the age before computers, he could execute curves easily by hand. 23 Isozaki, public lecture at Harvard Graduate School of Design, July 24, 2013. 24 Krier's decision, as he has often written, was not so much because of a unique talent in the area but because he felt that nobody else was prepared to take on the task 25 Léon Krier, "Preface," in Andreas C. Papadakis and Harriet Watson (eds.). The New Classicism, Omnıbus Volume, London, 1990, p. 7. 26 Quoted in Editorial, Progressive Architecture, May 1982, p. 30 27 Firms he established included Centerbrook Architects in Connecticut and Moore Ruble Yudell in Santa Monica, CA 28 The oft-repeated designation has been attributed to architectural critic Paul Goldberger. 29 Billie Tsien, quoted in Alexandra Lange, "Why Charles Moore (Still) Matters," Metropolis, May 2014. 3o Interview in Charles W. Moore, You Have To Pay for the Public Liße: Selected Essays of Charles W. Moore, Cambridge, MA, 2001, p. 191. 31 John Outram, architect's biography, email to author, May 2016 32 Outram, telephone interview with author, May 2016. 33 Outram, "Into the Void," emailed to author, May 2016. 34 He expressed his ideas in his book Postmodern: The Architecture of the Postindustrial Society, New York, 1983. 35 Robert Stern, "The Doubles of Post-Modern," Harvard Architectural Review, 1, Spring 198o. 36 Emilio Ambasz, "Popular Pantheon," Architectural Review 176,1984. 37 Taveira, Artmedia Seminar, University of Salerno, 2001. 38 Tigerman has lived for almost fifty years in a Mies building on Chicago's Lake Shore Drive. His well-known collage showing Mies's Crown Hall at Illinois Institute of Technology sinking like the Titanic in Lake Michigan is both an homage to Mies and a commentary on the demise of the cookie-cutter International Style it inspired. 39 Elizabeth Fenner, "22 Questions for Stanley Tigerman." www.chicagomag.com, October 23, 2013. 40 Interior Design called the design a "virtuoso performance," January I, 1987. 41 Fenner, "22 Questions." 42 Wines planned his first building when he was fourteen years old. Wines, email to the author, August 15, 2016, 43 www.siteenvirodesign.com, accessed April 2017. 44 Best was liquidated in ı987, and the building facades were either altered by new owners or demolished. 45 Olivier Boissière, Gehry. Site, Tigerman: Trois portraits de l’artiste en architecte, Paris, 1981. 46 James Wines, De-Architecture, New York, 1987, p. 14. 47 Wines, email to the author, July 16, 2016. ## DESIGN Michael Graves's vanity, for example, was priced at \$33,ooo. Joseph Giovannini, "Furniture for the Post-Modern Interior," New York Times, August 18, 1983. 2 John Duke, "At Milan Show, Neo-Modern is the New Look," New York Times, September 23, 1982. 3 Albrecht Bangert and Karl Michael Armer, 8os Style: Designs of the Decade, London, 1990. 4 Jörg Ratzlaff, from an interview in 1984. 5 Jochen Gros, on the idea of "New German Design." 6 Kunstflug interview, c. 1989 7 Dan Howarth, "Postmodern Design: Super Lamp by Martine Bedin," www.dezeen.com, August 14, 2015. 8 Martine Bedin, Et déjà l'objet n’est plus là, Paris, 2015. 9 Branzi, interview with author, New York City, May 5, 2015. 1o Andrea Branzi, The Hot House: Italian New Wave Design, Cambridge, MA, 1984. I1 Branzi, interview with author. 12 "Biografia di Aldo Cibic," http://cinquantamila.corriere.it, accessed April 6, 2017. 13 "Aldo Cibic: Interview," www.designboom.com, June 6, 2ooo. 14 Coates, telephone interview with author, March 30, 2oi6. 15 Ibid. 16 Nora Schmidt, "The Style Has Always Been the Problem," www.architonic.com, July 28, 2oo8. 17 More than three thousand of the chairs were sold in the first ten years after their introduction; most Memphis designs sold fewer than a hundred pieces. Michael Collins and Andreas Papadakis, Post-Modern Design, New York, 1989, p. 36. 8 He was not the only Memphis member to work for Olivetti; George Sowden worked for the firm, as did Masanori Umeda, where thev met Ettore Sottsass, who designed for Olivetti before moving to more avant-garde projects. 19 Schmidt, "The Style Has Always Been the Problem". 20 "Intervista a Michele De Lucchi," www.youtube.com, May 31, 2015. 21 "Disaster" in Schmidt, "The Style Has Always Been the Problem," and "catastrophe" in Tim Parsons, "The Legacy of Memphis," www.disegnodaily.com, September 23, 2o11. 22 Dan Howarth, "The Return of Memphis," www.dezeen.com, Aprıl 11, 2014 23 Richard Janus, "When Does a Lamp Not Look Like a Lamp?" Chicago Tribune, May 5. 1985 24 William L. Hamılton, "Lloyd Schwan, 45, Designer with an Eye for Bold Color," obituary, New York Times, January 27, 2oo1. 25 Charles Curkin, "Gaetano Pesce Embraces Clutter," www. surfacemag.com, May 20, 2016. 26 When told that workers on the project thought the project had a "bad atmosphere," he was pleased, saying, "It demonstrated the true function of architecture, to provoke emotional responses from people." Quoted in Pete Collard, "Italy: The New Domestic Landscape," www.disegnodaily.com, November 28, 2013 27 Borek Šipek, Lite in Motion, Prague, 2oo8, p. 11 28 Ibid., p. 10 29 “Architecture Profile: Matteo Thun, Milan," Atrican Design Magazıne, February 1, 2015, p. 82 30 Olivettı was a fruitful connection for postmodernists, also employıng George Sowden and Michele De Lucchı. ## GRAPHIC DESIGH 1 The title of Rick Poynor's book No More Rules: Graphic Design and Postmodernism, New Haven, CT, 2oo3, says it all. 2 David Carson's work, for example, was notorious for its tendency toward illegıbılity. 3 McLuhan's book The Medlum is the Message (1967) discussed the effects of innovations on society, saying that to understand an innovation we must study its actual consequences. 4 Aaron Kenedi, "Tibor Kalman vs. Joe Duffy Revisited," Print, April 6, 2011, www.printmag.com. 5 See Dan Friedman, Dan Friedman: Radical Modernism, New Haven, CT, 1994. 6 Patrick Argent, "Milton Glaser," www.aiga.org, March I, 1972. 7 Paul Rand, interview with author at Coper Union, New York, November 1996. 8 Rick Poynor, Did We Ever Stop Being Postmodern?" www.designobserver.com, October 16, 2011. 9 Philip Meggs, "The Women Who Saved New York!" Print, XuII/1, January-February 1989. 10 McCoy, quoted in "Katherine McCoy: Thoughts on Design Writing," http://designtravelerwordpress.com, April 19. 2015. I1 AIGA, "April Greiman," www.aiga.org, 1998. 12 Ibid. 13 Rhonda Rubinstein, "Reputations: Zuzana Licko," Eye, XuII/II, Spring 2002. 14 TED talk, May 2012. 15 “Interview with Graphic Designer Neville Brody," Design Boom, October 10, 2014. 16 Sarah Dawood, "Neville Brody: Design Shouldn't Have to Make Money," www.designweek.co.uk, April 8, 2016. 17 Jeff Daniel, "The Art of Art," St. Louis Post-Dispatch, February 2, 2002. 18 Steven Brower, "Unapologetic and Uncensored," www.eyeondesign.aiga.org, May 5, 2016. 19 By design journalist Julie Lasky, published by Chronicle Books 20 “Edward Fella: Graphic Design Visionary," http://america.cgtn. com, May 21, 2016. 21 Carin Goldberg Design, www.imageofthestudio.com. 22 She told an interviewer that "a record store or a magazine stand is like having a gallery space." Julie Lasky, "Carin Goldberg," www.aiga.org, 2009. 23 In typography, this would lead to using type as a form of communication, which could be used to convey meaning. 24 Carey Dunne, "Graphic Designer Paula Scher," www. fastcodesign.com, April 13, 2015. 25 The institute was under the direction of former Bauhaus mater László Moholy-Nagy, from whom Sussman would have learned classic modernist theory as well as Moholy-Nagy's untraditional approach to design, art, and photography. 26 “Artist Interviews: Deborah Sussman," filmed interview, www.lacma.org, accessed January 9, 2017. 27 Quoted in Carey Dunne, "RIP Deborah Sussman, Who Made Graphic Design Larger Than Life," www.fastcodedesign.com, August 21, 2014. 28 Quoted in Zahid Sardar, "Michael Vanderbyl," www.aiga.org, 2000. 29 As he told a reporter in 2o1o, when he told his high school counselor of his ambition, she said, "You're not smart enough to be an architect." Jennifer Huffman, "io Questions for Michael Vanderbyl of Vanderbyl Design," www.napavalleyregister.com, May 26, 2010. 30 He later taught on the Schule für Gestaltung Basel's postgraduate program Weiterbildungsklasse für Grafik. 31 Philip Burton, "Wolfgang Weingart," www.aiga.org, 2013. 32 "Wolfgang Weingart: Interview" (with Louise Paradis), 2011, www.tm-research-archive.ch, accessed January 9, 2017. ## EDITED DESIGN I Bruce Handy, "It's Yuppie Porn," Spy, December 1987, p. 62. 2 Quoted in Giovanni Albera and Nicolas Monti, Italian Modern: A Design Heritage, New York, 1989. 3 Quoted in Barbara Plumb, "Living Gazette," Vogue, October 1984, p. 510. 4 Quoted in Suzanne Slesin, “Accessories by Architects," New York Times, May 31, 1984. 5 See Elizabeth Anne Fleming, “Theorization and Commodification: The Production and Promotion of American Decorative Arts in the 198os," PhD dissertation, Yale University, 2007. 6 Glenn Adamson and Jane Pavitt (eds.), Postmodernism: Style and Subversion, 1970-199o (exh. cat.), Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 2o1i, p. 78. 7 Quoted in Barbara Sullivan, "At Last: 'Tabletop Architecture' that's Dishwasher Safe," Chicago Tribune, October 14, 1984. 8 Barbara Mayer, "Conservatism Returns to the Table," Harttord Courant, July 25, 1981. 9 Bruce Handy, "It's Yuppie Porn," Spy, December 1987, p. 62. 1o James A. Revson, "Architects Dish It Out," Newsday, June 5, 1984, 1ll, p. 9. I1 Tigerman, conversation with author, November 16, 2oo9; quoted in "Design Trends 1985," New York Times, August 26, 1984. 12 On the impact of the economy on Swid Powell, see Elizabeth A. Fleming, “Riding the Wave of Reaganomics: Swid Powell and the Celebrity Architects," in Adamson and Pavitt (eds.) Postmodernism, pp. 234-37; on the impact of AiDS, Nan Swid, conversation with author, December 19, 2015 13 Lisa Gubernick, "Step 1: Go to Lunch," Forbes, July 9, 1990, p. 104. 14 For more on the collection see John Stuart Gordon, "Extreme Elegance: Stanley Tigerman's Tureen for Swid Powell," Yale University Art Gallery Bulletin, 2014, pp. 32–35. 15 Barbara Radice, Memphis: Research, Experiences, Results. Failures, and Successes of New Design, New York, 1984, p. 67. 16 Olabuenaga, telephone interview with author, February 2o16. 17 Alberto Alessi, email to author, July 2o16. 18 Marilyn Chase, "The Architect's Tea Party," Wall Street Journal, April 25, 1984. 19 As of early 2o16, according to Alberto Alessi, there have been two million Graves tea kettles sold—far more than ever expected. 20 Quoted in Monica Khemsurov, "From the Library of Sight Unseen: Jewelry by Architects," www.sightunseen.com, November 5, 2014. 21 Others who designed jewelry were Mario Bellini, Michele De Lucchi, Alessandro Mendini, Paolo Portoghesi, Oscar Tusquets Blanca, Lella Vignelli, Marco Zanini, Meret Oppenheim, Les Levine, David Palterer, Luigi Pellegrini, and Robert Ebendorf. Email to author. 22 Patricia Leigh Brown, "Architects Build Jewelry as Art," New York Times. March 3, 1987. 23 Patricia Leigh Brown, "Disney Deco," New York Times, April 8, 1990. 24 Suzanne Slesin, "The Bizarre Becomes the Respectable," New York Times, September 24, 1981. 25 Ibid. 26 Anne Howell, "Before There Was Target, There Was the Memphis Movement," www.dezeen.com, May 20, 2009. 27 Quoted in Jonathan Glancey, "Love It or Loathe It?" Guardian, September 5, 2001. 28 Paul Goldberger, "Design Notebook," New York Times, October 14, 1982. 29 The exhibition was curated by Memphis distributor Lorry Dudley. 30 Craig Miller, conversation with the author, May 2016. 31 A Carlton bookcase, for example, sold for \$8,75o, and Michael Graves's vanity was priced at \$33,00o. 32 Simon Keane-Cowell, "The Milan Four: Alessandro Mendini," www.architonic.com, May 17, 201I. ## I11. LIVING WITH POSTMODERN DESIGN 1 Suzanne Slesin, "The Postmodern Interior: A Collage of Times Gone By," New York Times, September 18, 1980. 2 Carol Vogel, "Magic of Biedermeier," New York Times Magazine, December 15, 1985. 3 Will Wiles, "Opinion: Postmodernism Was Typecast as Soon as It Made It Out of the Italian Magazines," www.dezeen.com, February 13, 2015. 4 Arlene Hirst, "The Screening Room: Beetlejuice," Metropolitan Home, May 1988, p. 32. ## IU. POSTMODERHISM DESIGN CONTINUES i Noting its abandonment by design publications, a New York Times critic commented, "The movement did not take root deeply in the minds of many designers, which has made it easier to dismiss." Joseph Giovannini, "Design Notebook," New York Times, March 12, 1987. 2 Paul Greenhalgh, "The End of Style?" in Postmodernism: Style and Subversion, 1975–199o (exh. cat.), Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 2o11, p. 285. 3 Indeed, the Memphis designers expected this: the first catalog stated, "We are all sure that Memphis furniture will soon go out of style." 4 Suzanne Slesin, "Memphis Mania: The Design Story of the Decade," New York Times, October 15, 1989. 5 The most comprehensive of these, Reconsidering Postmodernism, sponsored by the Institute of Classical Architecture & Art, brought more than 4oo architects, historians and scholars to a two-day event addressing the issues that made postmodernism controversial to begin with; its emphasis on classical historicism, and its concern with communication, and the need for the discourse to consider the continuum of history in today's world. ## FURTHER READING Adamson, Glenn, and Jane Pavitt (eds.) Postmodernism: Style and Subversion (exh. cat.), Victoriä and Albert Museum, London, 2011 Albera, Giovanni, and Nicolas Monti, Italian Modern: A Design Heritage, New York, 1989 Ambasz, Emilio, Contemporary Landscape from the Horizon of Postmodern Design (exh. cat.), National Museum of Modern Art, Tokyo, 1985 —, (ed.) Italy: The New Domestic Landscape (exh. cat.), Museum of Modern Art, New York, 1972 Bangert, Albrecht, Italian Furniture Design: Ideas Styles Movements, Munich, 1988 —, and Karl Michael Armer, 8os Style: Designs of the Decade, London, 1990 Bellati, Nally, New Itąłian Design, New York, 1990 Branzi, Andrea, The Hot House: Italian New Wave Design, Cambridge, MA, 1984 Celant, Germano, The Italian Metamorphosis, 1943–1968 (exh. cat.), Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, 1994 Clark, Garth, American Ceramics, 1907–Present, New York, 1987 Collins, Michael, Towards Post-Modernism, Boston, MA, 1987 —, and A. Papadakis. Post-Modern Design, New York, 1989 Creativa Produzione. La Toscana e il design italiano 1950-1990 (exh. cat.), Fondazione Ragghianti, Lucca, 2015 De Giorgi, Manolo, and Cinzia Anguissola d'Altoè, Elegant Techniques: Italian Furniture Design, 1980-1992 (exh. cat.), Chicago Cultural Center, Chicago, Milan, 1992 Del Vecchio, Mark, Postmodern Ceramics, London, 2oo1 Design Furniture from Italy: Production, Technics & Modernity, Rome, 1983 Domergue, Denise, Artists Design Furniture, New York, 1984 Dorfles, Gillo, Kitsch: The World of Bad Taste, New York, 1969 Eggington, Dennis, and Anne Watson, Mod to Memphis: Design in Color. 1960-80s, 2002 Fiell, Charlotte, and Peter Fiell, Domus, 1930-199o: The Very Best from the Seminal Architecture and Design Journal, [2 vols, Cologne, 2009 —, Modern Furniture Classics: Postwar to Post-Modernism, London, 2001 Gaetano Pesce: Le Futur est peut-être passé? (exh. cat.), Musée des arts décoratifs, Paris, 1975 Gaillemin, Jean-Louis, Design contre design: Deux siècles de créations (exh. cat.), Galeries nationales du Grand Palais, Paris, 2007 Giacobone, Tersilia F. (ed.), Argenti italiani del XX secolo. Dalle arti decorative al design, Milan, 1993 Guenzi, Carlo, Le attinità elettive, Milan, 1985 Hiesinger, Kathryn, and George H. Marcus (eds.), Design since 1945 (exh. cat.), Philadelphia Museum of Art, Philadelphia, PA, 1983 Horn, Richard, Memphis: Objects. Furniture, and Patterns, Philadelphia, PA, 1983 Hoy, Anne, US Design, 1975–200oo, New York, 2001 Janjigian, Robert, D. Scott Atkinson, and Deborah Dietsch, Material Pleasures: Furniture for a Postmodern Age (exh. cat.), Queens Museum, New York, 1985 Jencks, Charles (ed.), The Post-Modern Reader, London/New York, 1992 Jensen, Robert, and Patricia Conway, Ornamentalism: The New Decorativeness in Architecture and Design, New York, 1982 Katz, Peter, The New Urbanism, New York, 1994 Klotz, Heinrich, Post-Modern Visions, New York, 1985 Larson, Magali Sarfatti, Behind the Postmodern Facade: Architectural Change in Late Twentieth-Century America, Berkeley, CA, 1993 Lees-Maffei, Grace, and Kjetil Fallan (eds.), Made in Italy: Rethinking a Century of Italian Design, London, 2013 Lupton, Ellen, Mixing Messages: Graphic Design in Contemporary American Culture (exh. cat.), Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum, New York, 1996 McDermott, Catherine, Design: The Key Concepts, New York, 2007 Martin. Reinhold, Utopia's Ghost: Architecture and Meggs, Philip B., A History of Graphic Design, New York, 1983 Memphis Milano, Meta Memphis, Milan, 1989 Mendini, Alessandro, Maurizio Cattelan, and Pieropaolo Ferrari, et al., 1968: Italian Radical Design, Athens, 2014 Miller, R. Craig, Masterworks: Italian Design, 1960–1994, New York, 1996 —. P. Sparke, and C. McDermott, European Design since 1985: Shaping the New Century (exh. cat.), Denver Art Museum, Denver, CO, and Indianapolis Museum of Art, Indianapolis, IN, 2009 Monti, Nicolas, Italian Modern: A Design Heritage, New York, 1989 Portoghesi, Paolo, Postmodern: The Architecture of the Post Industrial Society, New York, 1983 Poynor, Rick, No More Rules: Graphic Design and Postmodernism, New Haven, CT, 2003 Raimondi, Giuseppe, Italian Living Design: Three Decades of Interior Decoration, 1960–90, New York, 1990 Rattenbury, Kester, and Samantha Hardingham (eds.), Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown: Learning from Las Vegas London, 2007 Rose, Margaret A., The Post-Modern and the Post-Industrial: A Critical Analysis, Cambridge, 1991 Sartogo, Piero, Italian Re-Evolution: Design in Italian Society in the Eighties (exh. cat.), La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art, La Jolla, CA, 1982 Sato, Kazuko, Alchimia: Never-ending Italian Design, Tokyo, 1985 Smith, C. Ray, Interior Design in 2oth-Century America: A History. New York, 1987 Sparke, Penny, Design in Italy: 187o to the Present, New York, 1988 Tafuri, Manfredo, History of Italian Architecture. 1944–1985. Cambridge, MA, 1989 Tambini, Michael, The Look oß the Century, New York, 1996 Trachtenberg, Marvin, and Isabelle Hyman, Architecture. Prehistory to Post-modernism: The Western Tradition, New York, 1986 Venturi, Robert, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture, New York, 2011 Wines, James, De-architecture, New York, 1987 Zannier, Italo, and Angelo Maggi (eds.), Giorgio Casali Photographer/Domus, 1951-1983: Architecture, Design and Art in Italy, Milan, 2013 ## BOOKS RELATED TO SPECIFIC DESIGNERS Aldersey-Williams, Hugh, and Lorraine Wild, Cranbrook Design: The New Discourse, New York, 1990 Annicchiarico, Silvana, Pulviscoli: 2.469 Drawings of Alessandro Mendini, Milan, 2005 Arnell, Peter, Ted Bickford, Vincent Scully, et al., Aldo Rossi: Buildings and Projects, New York, 1985 Bamford, Lawrence Von, "The Architecture of Hans Hollein: Buildings and Projects, 1954–1994." thesis, University of Michigan, 1994 Bedin, Martine, Martine Bedin: Meubles et objets, 1981–2003 (exh. cat.), Musée des arts décoratifs, Bordeaux, Paris, 2004 Bierut, Michael, How to Use Graphic Design, to Sell Things, Explain Things. Make Things Look Better, Make People Laugh, Make People Cry, and (Every Once in a While) Change the World, London, 2015 Blackwell, Lewis, Edward Fella: Letters on America, Princeton, NJ, 2000 Botta, Mario, and Emilio Pizzti, Marío Botta: The Complete Works. 1985-1990, Basel, 1994 Branzi, Andrea, and Nicoletta Branzi, Domestic Animals: The Neoprimitive Style, Cambridge, MA, 1987 Brownlee, David Bruce, Out of the Ordinary: Robert Venturi. Denise Scott Brown and Associates (exh. cat.), Philadelphia Museum of Art, Philadelphia, PA, 2001 Buck, Alex, and Matthias Vogt (eds.), Michele De Lucchi, Berlin/New York, 1993 Bulegato, Fiorella, and Sergio Polano, Michele De Lucchi: From Here to There and Beyond, London, 2005 Burney, Jan, Ettore Sottsass, New York, 1991 Capella, Juli, and Quim Larrea, Designed by Architects in the 19808, New York, 1988 Carboni, Milco, and Andrea Branzi, The Work of Ettore Sottsass and Associates, n.p., n.d. Carson, David, The End of Print: The Gratik Design of David Carson, London, 2001 Celant, Germano, Andrea Branzi: The Complete Works, New York, 1992 Ciagà, Graziella Leyla, Alessandro Mendini, Milan, 2012 Cibic, Aldo, Branzi, Andrea,, et al., Aldo Cibic: Designer, Milan, 1999 Coates, Nigel, Narrative Architecture, London, 2012 Dietz, Matthias, and Michael Monninger, Japan Design, Cologne, 1992 Dunlop, Beth, Arquitectonica, New York, 2004 —, Building a Dream: The Art of Disney Architecture, New York, 1996 —, and Massimo Vignelli, Arquitectonica, Washington, DC, 199ı Farrell, Terry, Interiors and the Legacy of Postmodernism, London, 2011 —, and Emma Davies, Collage and Context: The Work of Terry Farrell and Partners, 1981–1991, London, 2013 —, and Stephen Dobney, Terry Farrell: Selected and Current Works, Mulgrave, Victoria, 1994 Farrelly, Liz, April Greiman: Graphic Evolutionary, New York, 1998 Gabra-Liddell, Meret, Alesst: The Design factory, London, 1994 Gentili, Enzo Biff, and Cleto Munari, Cleto Munari: Dandy Design, Naples, 1997 Gottardo, Francesca, Paolo Portoghest: Architect, Roma, 2o1 Greiman, April, Hybrid Imagery: The fusion of Technology and Graphıc Design, New York, 1990 —, and Michael Vanderbyl, Pacific Wave: Caltornia Graphic Design, Udine, 1987 Grillet, Thierry, and Marie-Laure Jousset, Ettore Sottsass (exh. cat.), Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, 1994 Heller, Steven, and Seymour Chwast, Graphic Style: From Victorian to New Century, New York, 2o11 Hóger, Hans Leo, Ettore Sottsass Jun.: Designer, Artist, Architect, Berlin, 1993 Holland-Beickert, Dana, Memphis Milano: 198os Italian Design (exh. cat.), Dixon Gallery and Gardens, Memphis, TN, 2014 Hollein, Hans, Design: Man TransFORMS: Konzepte einer Ausstellung / Concepts of an Exhibition (exh. cat.), Hochscule für angewandte Kunst, Vienna, and Cooper-Hewitt Museum of Decorative Arts and Design, New York, 1989 losa Ghini, Massimo, and Maurizio Corrado, Massimo losa Ghinı: 15 anni di progetti / 15 Years oß Projects, Milan, 2001 Isozaki, Arata, and Yukio Futagawa, Arata lsozaki, Tokyo, 1991 Izzika, Gaon, and Raz Varda, Ettore Sottsass Jr. (exh. cat.), The Israel Museum, Jerusalem, 1978 Jencks, Charles, and Nathan Silver, Adhocism: The Case for Improvisation, Cambridge, MA, 2013 —. The New Paradigm in Architecture: The Language of Post-Modernism, New Haven, CT, 2002 —, The Post-Modern Reader, London, 1992 —, What Is Postmodernism?, London/New York, 1986 Jodidio, Philip, Mario Botta, Cologne, 1999 Johnson, Eugene], Charles Moore: Buuldings and Projects. 1949-1986, New York, 1993 Krier, Léon, Demetri Porphyrios, Richard Economakis, et al., Léon Krier: Architecture and Urban Design, 1967–1992, London, 1992 Labaco, Ronald T., Ettore Sottsass: Architect and Designer, New York, 2006 Lewin, Susan Grant (ed.), Formica and Design: From the Counter Top to High Art, New York, 1991 Louguet, Philıppe, Dagmar Sedlická, and Borek Sipek, Borek Sipek, Paris, 1998 Maffei, Giorgio, and Bruno Tonini, I libri di Ettore Sottsass, Mantova, 2011 Mariscal, Javier, Mariscal: Design, Cologne, 1992 Martorana, Antonio (ed.), Storie e progetti di un designer Italiano: quattro lezioni, Florence, 1983 Mead, Christopher Curtis, Vincent Scully, and Robert Venturi, The Architecture of Robert Venturi, Albuquerque, NM, 1989 Melotti, Fausto, Alessandro Mendini, n.p., 201o Moore, Charles Willard, and Kevin P. Keim, You Have to Pay tor the Public Lite: Selected Essays of Charles W. Moore, Cambridge, MA, 2001 Moos, Stanislaus Von, Venturi. Scott Brown & Associates: Buildings and Projects. 1986–1998, New York, 1999 Nichols, Karen Vogel, Patrick Burke, and Caroline Hancock (eds.), Michael Graves: Buildings and Projects, 1982-1989. New York, 1990 —, Lisa Burke, and Patrick Burke (eds), Michael Graves, Buildings and Projects, 1990–1994, New York, 1998 Norberg-Schulz, Christian, and Yukio Futagawa, Ricardo Bofill: Taller De Arquitectura, New York, 1985 Pasquier, Nathalie Du, and Omar Sosa, Don't Take These Drawings Seriously: 1981–87, New York, 2015 Patton, Phil, Michael Graves Designs: The Art of the Everyday Object, New York, 2004 Philippi, Simone, and Jean-Baptiste Mondino, Philippe Starck, Cologne, 2000 Portoghesi, Paolo, and Francesco Moschini, Paolo Portoghes Progetti e disegni/ Projects and Drawings. 1949-1979, New York, 1979 Radice, Barbara (ed.), Ettore Sottsass: Design Metaphors, New York, 1988 —, Memphis: The New International Style, Milan, 1981 —, and Etiore Sottsass, Memphis: ricerche. esperienze, risultati, hallimenti e successi del nuovo design, Milan, 1984 Rossi, Aldo, The Architecture of the City, Cambridge, MA, 1982 Scher, Paula, Make It Bigger, Princeton, NJ, 2005 Sekı. Yasuko, Kuramata Shiro Ettore Sottsass (exh. cat.), 21\_21 Design Sıght, Tokyo, 2010 Shire, Peter, Darius Alexander Sipeth, and Jo Lauria, LA to LA: Peter Shire at LSU (exh. cat.), LSU Museum of Art, Baton Rouge, LA,2013 Smatra, Hjarta, and iMaina Arvas, Hall of Femmes: Carin Goldberg. Stockholm, 2010 Sottsass, Ettore, et al., Sottsass Associati, New York, 1988 —, and Marino Barovier, Sottsass: Glass Works, Stuttgart, 1998 —, and Bruno Bischofberger, Ettore Sottsass: Ceramics, London, 1995 Sowden, George, George J. Sowden: Designing. 1970-1990 (exh. cat.), Musées des arts décoratifs, Bordeaux, 1990 Sparke, Penny, Ettore Sottsass Jnr, London, 1982 Stern, Robert A. M., Buildings, New York, 1996 —, and Elizabeth Kraft, Robert A. M. Stern: Buildings and Projects. 1987–1992, New York, 1992 Stirling. James, James Stırling: Buildings & Projeets, 1950–1974. New York, 1975 Stungo, Naomi, Frank Gehry, London, 2ooo Sudjic, Deyan, and Shiro Kuramata, Shıro Kuramata, London/New York, 2013 Tapert, Annette, Swid Powell: Objects by Architects, London, 1990 Taveira, Tomás, Architectural Works and Designs, London, 1990 Thomé, Philippe, Ettore Sottsass, London, 2014 Thun, Matteo, Francesca Acerboni, and Giulia Mezzalama, Matteo Thun: The Index Book, Osthildern, 2013 Tigerman, Stanley, Stanley Tigerman, New York, 1990 Tusquets Blanca, Oscar, Oscar Tusquets Blanca (Inventaris d'arquitectura), Barcelona, 2008 Underhill, Sarah Mollman (ed.), Stanley Tıgerman: Buildings and Projects, 1966–1989, New York, 1989 Vanlaethem, France, and Michael Sorkin, Gaetano Pesce, London, 1989 Venturi, Robert, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture, New York, 2011 —, Iconography and Electronics upon a Gneric Architecture: A View trom the Draßting Room, Cambridge, MA, 1996 —, and Denise Scott Brown, Architecture as Signs and Systems: For a Mannerist Time, Cambridge, MA, 2004 —, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour, Learning from Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form Cambridge, MA, 1977 Weingart, Wolfgang, Typography: My Way to Typography. Zurich, 2014 Wheeler, Karen Vogel, Peter Arnell, and Ted Bickford (eds.), Buildings and Projects, 1966-–1981, New York. 1982 Wines, James, De-Architecture, New York, 1987 —, and Herbert Muschamp, SITE, New York, 1989 Womersley, Steve, SITE: Identity in Density, Mulgrave, Victoria, 2005 Wozencroft, John, and Neville Brody, The Graphic Language of Neville Brody, New York, 2002