# Resource Guide The study and practice of design management is evolving rapidly. There is a growing literature and new educational, industrial and research initiatives to promote the discipline further. To assist the reader in pursuing their studies or activities further, we provide here a guide to the resources – published and organisational – that will prove useful. The resources detailed comprise: • Selected annotated bibliography • Periodicals and journals • Organisations • Design management research and education • Internet ## Selected Annotated Bibliography The references at the end of every chapter detail specific sources on material drawn upon in the main text. Rather than reproduce these in a bibliography, we have listed key texts, organised by broad subject area, with a brief summary of their content. Highly recommended publications are marked with an asterisk. ## Design – general \*Pye, D. (1978) The Nature and Aesthetics of Design, The Herbert Press. A highly readable, principled and inspiring exposition of what constitutes good design and the nature of the design process, arguing that art and problem solving are inseparable within design. Potter, N. (1980) What is Design? Hyphen Press. A well-written introduction to the role of the designer, design education and design methods. Although it is principally aimed at design students it is generally accessible to individuals without prior knowledge of design. ## Design management – general introductions Lorenz, C. (1986) The Design Dimension, Basil Blackwell, Oxford. A readable account of industrial design's competitive power, developed from articles published in The Financial Times. Case studies include Olivetti, Sony, Ford and Philips. \*Pilditch, J. (1989) Winning Ways, Mercury Books. Designer James Pilditch explains how winning companies use design. Drawing upon a range of examples, especially from Japan, the book is a highly readable, well-illustrated summary of best practice in innovation and design management. ## Design management – textbooks and study guides Heap, J. (1989) The Management of Innovation and Design, Cassell. A brief introductory textbook for business students. Hollins, G. and Hollins, B. (1991) Total Design: Managing the Design Process in the Service Sector, Pitman. An introduction to design management as applied to the service sector, drawing from research findings to provide a prescriptive approach to the management of design. \*Walker, D. et al. (1989) Managing Design, P791, Open University Press, Milton Keynes. The material for the Open University's course in design management represents the most wide ranging, accessible and stimulating introduction to the subject available. Twelve case studies are provided, using video, audio cassette and documentary material. The course guides are excellently presented and include assignments. The package is of use to students and managers in industry. \*Walsh, V. et al. (1992) Winning by Design, Basil Blackwell, Oxford. Written by a team from the Open University and UMIST, this book draws upon the considerable research conducted by the authors on design's contribution to competitiveness. A more academic approach than others, it provides useul overviews and analysis of much of the literature in design management and innovation. Design management and innovation – anthologies and readings Gorb, P. (ed.) (1988) Design Talks! Design Council, London. A collection of papers from design management seminars held at the London Business School, including contributions from Sir Terence Conran, Wally Olins and Rodney Fitch. Design managers provide material on various case studies, including Philips, Olivetti, 3M, London Underground, British Rail, Ford and others. Gorb, P. (ed.) (1990) Design Management, Architecture, Design and Technology Press. A second collection of London Business School seminar papers. Case studies include London Regional Transport, Clarks Shoes, Tootal Textiles, Richard Shops, Prudential and the Burton Group. Henry, J. and Walker, D. (eds) (1991) Managing Inņovation, Sage Publications, London. A useful anthology of readings covering a range of issues in the management of innovation. Organisational and strategic commentaries are complemented by varied case study material, which includes Xerox, Rover, 3M and Harley-Davidson. \*Oakley, M. (ed.) (1990) Design Management: A Handbook of Issues and Methods, Basil Blackwell, Oxford. Over 40 contributors provide a comprehensive introduction and overview to some critical issues in design management, ranging from the economic and business context of design to project management. Academic researchers, designers, managers and others provide a range of perspectives on the field, including summaries of research, case studies and guidelines of best practice. Contributors include Robin Roy and David Walker from the Open University, Christopher Lorenz, Colin Clipson, Wally Olins and James Woudhuysen. Also includes an essay by Bill Evans on Japanese design management. Roy, R. and Wield, D (eds) (1986) Product Design and Technological Innovation: A Reader, Open University Press, Milton Keynes. A slightly dated, but nevertheless valuable anthology that provides various perspectives on design's role within innovation processes. ## Corporate identity Olins, W. (1990) The Wolff Olins Guide to Corporate Identity, Design Council, London. A concise introduction to the subject written by one of Britain's leading practitioners in the field, this is consequently more prescriptive than analytical. Examples cited include Prudential, Akzo and ICI. Bernstein, D. (1984) Company Image and Reality, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Eastbourne. An excellent discussion of the company image, corporate identity and design. ## Case studies Blaich, R. (1993) Product Design and Corporate Strategy: Managing the Connection for Competitive Advantage, McGraw-Hill. The former design chief at Philips presents his case for design. Beginning with a discussion of general issues, most of the book comprises two detailed case studies of design management in Herman Miller and Philips. Design Management Institute and The Design Council (1989) Designing for Product Success: Essays and Case Studies from the TRIAD Design Project. Thirteen international case studies, including Braun, Canon, DEC, Sharp, Sony and Yamaha, which all illustrate the design process and its contribution to competitiveness. The DMI TRIAD project, this is a catalogue of an exhibition that includes essays on design management and the project's research methodology. Heskett, J. (1989) Philips: A Study of the Corporate Management of Design, Trefoil Publications. A detailed history and analysis of design management in the Dutch electronics company, with some diverse product case studies. Kicherer, S. (1990) Olivetti: A Study of the Corporate Management of Design, Trefoil Publications. A companion volume to the study of Philips, this examination of a company in similar markets provides interesting contrasts in terms of the design culture within the company. ## Key reports and research Corfield, K.G. (1979) Product Design, National Economic Development Office, London. The historically significant report that first drew the issue of design to the attention of British government policy makers. Cotton and Allied Textiles EDC (1984) Designing for Success: Approaches to Managing Textile Design, National Economic Development Office, London. A comparative study of British and foreign textile manufacturers, analysing the place of design in management structures and design processes, together with management and education issues. The Design Council (1983) Report to The Design Council on the Design of British Consumer Goods by a Committee under the chairmanship of David Mellor OBE, RDI. A report on the state of design and design management in key British industries: ceramics, domestic appliances, furniture and textiles. Analyses the failure to integrate design within manufacturing, and thus does not make for uplifting reading. \*Fairhead, J. (1987) Design for a Corporate Culture, National Economic Development Office, London. Developed from a working paper on international best practice on design management for an NEDC enquiry, the Fairhead report examines strategic aspects of product design, how an innovation culture can be developed and provides case study material on Black & Decker, Sony, Matsushita and Hewlett-Packard. Potter, S., Roy, R., Capon, C.H., Bruce, M., Walsh, V. and Lewis, J. (1991) The Benefits and Costs of Investment in Design: Using Professional Design Expertise in Product, Engineering and Graphics Projects, Open University/UMIST Design Innovation Group. Report on a major research project that examined the effectiveness of the DTI's grant scheme to promote the use of design consultancy. Provides empirical evidence on the benefits of design investment. \*Roy, R. and Potter, S. (1990) Design and the Economy, The Design Council, London. A concise and readable introduction to the role played by design in Britain's economic performance, drawing on research and product examples. Service, L.M., Hart, S.J. and Baker, M.J. (1989) Profit by Design, The Design Council, Scotland. Based upon a survey of 369 companies, this research analyses the relationship between design management and competitiveness. NEDO, Garment and Textile Sector Group (1993) Best Practice in Design and Development, PE International. This report illustrates a method of competencies analysis and identifies good skills for design management in textile design. ## Design in Britain \*Huygen, F. (1989) British Design: Image and Identity, Thames and Hudson, London. A well-illustrated history that seeks to identify the distinctiveness of British design. Drawing upon examples from industrial, retail and popular culture design, Huygen's provocative and readable account includes the development of Britain's design consultancy industry. Sparke, P. (ed.) (1986) Did Britain Make It? British Design in Context 1946–1986, The Design Council, London. A collection of essays examining the post-war development of design in British industry and culture. Themes include the textiles and consumer electronics industries, design promotion and the retail industry. Stewart, R. (1987) Design and British Industry, John Murray, Edinburgh. A history of industrial design in Britain, which focuses on the development of state institutional support, promotion and design education. Thackara, J. (ed.) (1986) New British Design, Thames and Hudson, London. A snapshot of British experimental design in the mid-1980s. Although dated, it provides non-designers with a view of the possibilities in contemporary design, and John Thackara's introduction draws out some implications for industry. ## International design \*Aldersey-Williams, H. (1992) World Design: Nationalism and Globalism in Design, Rizzoli. A well-illustrated survey of design trends and approaches in 19 countries, together with case studies of global design strategies in IBM, Philips and Sony. An introduction analyses design in terms of the apparent conflict between national styles and global marketing. Sparke, P. (1987) Japanese Design, Michael Joseph, London. A readable and well-presented book that explains the nature and development of design in Japan with examples from a range of industries. ## Design and environment issues Burall, P. (1991) Green Design, The Design Council, London. An introduction to environmental issues in design, including checklists of relevant design criteria and sources of further information. \*Mackenzie, D. (1991) Green Design: Design for the Environment, Laurence King. A comprehensive identification of issues and survey of best practice in environmentally responsible design. Well-illustrated, there are many case studies covering product, packaging, graphic and textile design. Papanek, V. (1984) Design for the Real World, Thames and Hudson, London. A classic radical critique of industrial design including a useful summary of idea generating techniques. ## Cultural and historical context Attfield, J. and Kirkham, P. (eds) (1989) A View from the Interior: Feminism, Women and Design, The Women's Press. A reader of feminist perspectives of design history, providing insights neglected by most design histories. Bayley, S. (1991) Taste: The Secret Meaning of Things, Faber and Faber, London. Criticised for its occasional sweeping assertions, Bayley's lively discussion is a thought-provoking introduction to the issues that determine what products people buy. \*Featherstone, M. (1991) Consumer Culture and Postmodernism, Sage Publications. Critically reviews differing perspectives of postmodernism and addresses a range of issues, including the role of lifestyle, global culture and the changing nature of consumer society. Forty, A. (1986) Objects of Desire: Design and Society 1750–1980, Thames and Hudson, London. A history of design placed in the context of changing social and economic conditions. McDermott, C. (1992) Essential Design, Bloomsbury, London. A dictionary on design history issues and movements prefaced by a useful critical essay and including a well-organised bibliography. \*Sparke, P. (1986) An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century, Unwin Hyman, London. A readable history which accounts for design's development in different countries, with one chapter focusing on design's changing relationship with manufacturing industry. Includes a good bibliography and glossary. Tomlinson, A. (ed.) (1990) Consumption, Identity and Style: Marketing, Meanings, and the Packaging of Pleasure, Routledge, London. A series of readings on aspects of consumer culture, with a useful introduction by the editor that considers the meaning of commodities. \*Walker, J. A. (1989) Design History and the History of Design, Pluto Press. A summary and critique of design history literature, with useful chapters on lifestyle and consumption which provide a readable theoretical introduction to historical and cultural perspectives. ## Periodicals and Journals The following specialist journals provide news and analysis in the fields of design and design management. ## Axis Japanese design journal, including English language translations of major features. International topics are covered, with particular coverage of Japan. ## Blueprint Architecture and design. ## Co-Design Quarterly journal covering design and design management issues. ## Design Monthly journal published by the Design Council. ## Design Management Journal American academic journal published by the Harvard Design Management Institute. ## Design Review Journal of the Chartered Society of Designers, with a range of news and features on design. ## Design Studies British academic journal of the Design Research Society, including articles on design management research. ## Design Week Trade paper of the British design industry, featuring regular surveys on the use of design and the structure of the consultancy industry. ## EcoDesign Journal of the Ecological Design Association, with occasional articles on product design. ## ID American journal with good coverage of design and design management in the USA. ## Journal of Product Innovation Management American academic journal which covers international research on product development and design ## Organisations The following organisations play distinctive roles in the promotion of design and the provision of information on it. ## Chartered Society of Designers 29 Bedford Square, London WC1B 3EG, tel: 071 631 1510 Represents the professional interests of designers, with membership open to design managers. Offers a range of legal and information services to members. ## Department of Trade and Industry Innovation Enquiry Line, tel: 0800 44 2001 Through its Enterprise Initiative, the DTI promotes innovation and design in British industry. Up-to-date information on its services and free literature on design and innovation is available by contacting its Innovation Enquiry line. ## Design Business Association 29 Bedford Square, London WC1B 3EG, tel: 071 631 1510 An offshoot of the Chartered Society, the DBA represents the commercial interests of design consultancies through the promotion of design and the establishment of professional training programmes for designers. Provides a free directory of members to design buyers. ## Design Council 28 Haymarket, London SW1Y 4SU, tel: 071 839 8000 State-funded body to promote design in British industry and support design education. ## Design and Industries Association (DIA) 17 Lawn Crescent, Kew Gardens, Surrey TW9 3NR, tel: 081 940 4925 Founded in 1915, the DIA brings together industrialists and designers to promote more effective use of design in industry. The Association organises various events, including conferences and study tours for corporate and individual members. ## Design Museum Butlers Wharf, Shad Thames, London SE1 2YD, tel: 071 403 6933 Provides permanent historical collection of design, a changing showcase of new design, major exhibition and lecture programme on design issues and design research library. Ecological Design Association 20 High Street, Stroud, Gloucestershire GL5 1AS, tel: 0453 765575 Promotes environmental approaches in design, providing educational events and information for companies and designers. Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce (RSA) 8 John Adam Street, London WC2N 6EZ, tel: 071 930 5115 Established in 1754, the RSA seeks to promote design through a range of activities, including an annual bursary competition for young designers sponsored by industry. ## Design Management Research and Education Various university and other educational bodies undertake research or provide education in design management. Below is a selective listing of such bodies. ## CODE Consortium of Design Educationalists 2 Mount Hill Cottages, Stratford Road, Wicken, Milton Keynes, MK19 6DG, tel: 0908 567842 A consortium of leading institutions in the field of design research and Sponsors of the Co-Design Journal. Design Management Institute 107 South Street, Suite 502, Boston, MA 02111-2811, USA, tel: +1 617 338 6380 Publisher of the Design Management Journal, the Institute promotes design management through education, research and publications. ## Design Research Society Institute of Advanced Studies, Manchester Metropolitan University, All Saints, Manchester M15 6BH A forum of academic researchers in design and design management, organising a regular series of meetings and seminars. Publishes the Design Studies journal. ## Domnus Academy Edificio C/2, Milanofiori, 20090 Assago (Mi), ltaly, tel: +39 2 8244017 A postgraduate school of industrial design, fashion design and design management based in Milan. During the summer the school offers intensive summer schools in design management for managers, designers and others. ## European Academy of Design CDMT, University College Salford, Frederick Road, Salford, M6 6PU, tel: 061 834 6633, ext: 484 An organisation to promote the publication and dissemination of research in design through the establishment of a bi-annual conference and the publication of proceedings. ## London Business School, Centre for Design Management Sussex Place, Regents Park, London NW1 4SA, tel: 071 262 5050 Design management is offered on the MBA programme, along with bespoke courses for industry and a seminar programmes. The centre has regular visiting researchers in design management from Japan. ## De Montfort University Department of Design Management, School of Design and Manufacture, De Montfort University, The Gateway, Leicester L31 9BH, tel: 0533 551551 De Montfort offer a BA Hons and an MA (full- and part-time) in design management; they also offer short courses and bespoke courses for industry. ## Open University Design Innovation Group, Faculty of Technology (Design), Walton Hall, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, tel: 0908 653556 The Design Innovation Group – run jointly with UMlST – is responsible for Britain's largest programme of research in the fields of design and design management. The group also provides teaching materials for the OU's range of design courses including “Managing Design", cited above. ## Royal College of Art Design Age, Kensington Gore, London SW7 2EU, tel: 071 584 5020 The Design Age programme undertakes research and promotes awareness on the implications of demographic change for design disciplines. ## Staffordshire University Design Research Centre, School of Design and Ceramics, College Road, Stoke-on-Trent ST4 2DE, tel: 0782 744531 ext. 3303 (contact: Mike Press) The centre undertakes continuing research projects in design management and environmental issues in design. Also provides an MA and short course programme in design management. ## University College Salford The Research Unit, Centre for Design, Manufacture and Technology, Frederick Road, Salford M6 6PU, tel: 061 834 6633 ext. 484 (contact: Rachel Cooper) Varied research programmes in design management and co-ordination of "North West Design Talks", a series of seminars for industrialists and designers on design management issues. ## University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology Manchester School of Management, PO Box 88, Manchester M60 1QD, tel: 061 236 3311 Design management is taught as part of an MSc in marketing, along with other short courses in effective design management. ## Internet The Internet is an international network of computers offering users access to databases, electronic mail facilities and networking on a vast array of subjects. Most universities provide their staff and students with free access to the Internet. The following two interest groups are particularly relevant to design. ## Design-Research Design-Research forum covers the discussion of theory, practice, policy, methods, IT, management and training likely to be of interest to researchers, teachers and practitioners in design. It also includes information on events, conferences, courses, etc. Send an E-mail message to mailbase@uk.ac.mailbase with the one line message: subscribe design-research your name. ## IDFORUM Loosely concerned with industrial design, the subjects covered by IDFO-RUM are broad. A monthly newsletter' is sent out. Send an E-mail message to listerv@vm1.yorku.ca with the one line message: subscribe IDFORUM your name. ## Gophers Easy to access 'gopher' serves provide menus of information and access top computer sources worldwide. These are constantly evolving with new ones being established. The authors have found that the gopher at the following locations provides an excellent starting point for designrelated searching: coombs.anu.edu.au. ## The Design Agenda Readers of this book are welcome to engage in discussion with its authors. Please E-mail your comments to dctmp@staffs.ac.uk. ## Index AEG 86 Ageing population 88–89 Alessi 11–12, 85 Apple Computers 10, 66, 106–107, 109, 110, 130 Archer, B. 16, 53 Arts & Crafts Movement 83–84 Bang and Olufsen 52, 113–114, 130, 134–135, 233–234 Barlow, W. 25 Barthes, R. 79 Baudrillard, J. 77 Bayley, S. 10, 15 Beatles, The 32, 107, 123 Benetton 73, 77–78, 118 Bernstein, D. 75, 255–256 Blaich, R. 103, 104, 119–121, 134 BMW 86, 108, 138 Body Shop 107, 229 Boots 242–243 cultural and economic design constraints 63–65 design industry 29–35 evidence of design management 58 government policy and design 33, 57, 61 textile industry 116–117 trade balance 53–54, 61–62, 173 use of design 51–52, 61–69, 173 British Petroleum 59 British Telecom 86 Brody, N. 29, 33 BS5750 192, 218 BS7000 206–208, 215, 218–219, 249 Burton 71, 253 ceramics industry 13, 52–53, 58 Clinton, President 90–92 Clipson, C. 133, 245 clothing industry 73 Coca Cola 77, 109 Comme des Garçons 118 commodity symbolism 76–81 competitiveness, role of design 56–61 computer aided design (CAD) 159, 179–180 computer industry 106–107, 109, 115 Conran, T. 1, 2, 19, 23, 32, 84, 107, 108,110 consumer culture 14–15, 44, 75, 76–82,94 consumer electronics industry 109, 113–116, 119–122 Coopers & Lybrand 196 Corby, B. 130 Corfield Report 62 corporate identity design definition 29 impact on competitiveness 59-60 service industries 130–133 corporate strategy 105–111, 133–137, 228–232 Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA) 203 craft, contemporary 12–13, 45 creativity 19–24, 168–172 Crosby, P.B. 187, 194 cultural pluralism 89 customers behaviour 152 choice 71 decision making 55–56 perceptions of quality 176–177 pleasure and design 81 defence industry 65 Denmark 113 Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) 33, 57, 192, 199–200, 224 Design Age project 89 Design Council 32, 64, 136, 155, 206, 224, 255 Design Innovation Group (DIG) 57, 58, 161, 255 Design Museum 1, 2, 10, 34 design art perspective 8-15 assessing different perspectives 42–45 benefits of investment 57–58 changing demographics and 88-89 commercial value 53–61, 160-161 consumer pleasure and 81 consultancies industry 29–35 cost reduction and 56–57, 149 159 creativity 19–24, 168–172 definition 2, 28–29 'design maturity' 41–42 economic role 61–75 education 20–21, 29 engineering/industrial relationship 25–28, 43, 94 environmental issues 85–87 fashion perspective 79 ’form follows emotion' 10 'form follows function' 19, 84 gender bias 18, 87–88 globalism 89–90, 123–124 government promotion for 33, 61–69 historical growth 30–34 human factors 17 innovation, relationship with 39–40, 66–69, 94 managers' understanding of 24 market research use 150–154 marketing, relationship with 13, 18, 126, 147–155, 229, 231–232 philosophies 128 planning process perspective 36–42 problem solving 16–19 professions and specialisms 25–29 retail industry use 32, 34, 75 skills 21, 248–251 social role 82–93, 95–96, 138-139 strategic role 111–112 symbolic value 75–83 thinking processes 22–23 values 13–14 esign audits aims and objectives 213 Design Council audit 206–209 design policy checklist 204–206 design sensitivity audit 200-203 DTI checklist 199–200 Irish Trade Board audit 209–210 methodologies 215–218 origins 187–189 parameters 212–213 use of SWOT analysis 209, 211 'Design for Manufacturability and Assembly' (DFA) 56 design management briefing designers 265–269 communication and documentation 259–263 cost effectiveness 162–163 creativity 24, 169–172 definition 3, 103, 224–227 design and marketing 147-155 design and production 155–159 design and R&D 146–147 design and sales 164–166 design evaluation 270–272 design managers' roles 238 design planning 236–238 design policy 233–235 design reviews 269 executive role 126, 136, 240-243 finance and design 159–163, 251–254 human resource management 166–167 impact on competitiveness 58–59, 136–137 Japanese 124–129 management structures 125–127,238–251 matrix of issues to address 227 monitoring design 269 new product development 173–175 organisational change 121 Philips 119–122 project management 263–269 quality and 175–179 service industries 130–133 social responsibility 138–139 strategic objectives 133–137 team management 126–127, 245–248 textile industry 117 training 254–259 transnationals, in 119–224 use of consultants 30, 248, 251 design methods creative development 22–23 design briefs 154, 265–269 metaphor 153 mood boards 152, 268 design strategy design informing corporate strategy 231–232 evaluation 133–137 for world markets 119–124 investment decisions 251–253 Japanese firms 124–129 relationship to company objectives 228–230 role of designer 232 service sector 130–133 to secure market niche 113–116 designers business awareness training 258–259 class position 82 competency model 250–251 critique of 94 education of 20–21, 29 selection of 249–251 Digital Computers 60–61 'distancing of design' 35, 43 Dormer, P. 13, 44 Elton, B. 16 entertainment industry 109 environment corporate policies 138–139 public art 12–13 environmental audits 194–197 environmental design definition 28 impact on competitiveness 60-61 interior design 156–157 retail industry 150 environmental issues 85–87 Esslinger, H. 10 Evans, B. 125, 127 fashion design ageing population 88 green issues 86 Japan 118 Featherstone, M. 14, 82 feminism 87 financial control 162–163, 251–254 Fitch, R. 33, 111 flexibility 110 flexibility debate 74 flexible manufacturing systems 71-74 Ford 56, 123–124 Ford, H. 70, 76 Fordism 70 Freeman, C. 68–69 Fuji 60 General Motors 72, 124 globalism 89–90, 123–124 Gorb, P. 25, 28, 39 GPT 261 graphic design 156 Graves, M. 11 'green design' 85–87 Guevara, C. 103, 104 Habitat 2, 32, 34, 80, 84, 108 Harvey, D. 74 Heap, J. 24, 254 Honda 127, 128, 153 'humanware design' 128 Huygen, F. 64 IBM 65, 109 information design 28 innovation audits 192-193 cycles 67–69 economic significance 67–69 management views 124 organisations and 171–172, 238–240 process 39–40 Ireland 209–210 Italy design 12 design as economic strategy 73 textile and clothing industry 73 Jaguar Cars 108 Japan car design 8 'cascade through western markets'109 corporate design management 40, 124–129 design 10, 36 design for quality of life 139 lifestyle design 80, 128–129 quality methods 178–179 R&D expenditure 67 textile industry 118 use of flexible manufacturing 72 Jobs, S. 10, 106, 110 Just-in-Time' 72 Key, T. 1 Koestler, A. 20 Kondratieff cycles 67–68 Lawson, B. 22–23 Leeds Group 117 Lennon, J. 107 Lewis, J. 35 lifestyle 10, 14, 75, 79–80, 127 Linn Products 114–115 Lorenz, C. 229 Lucie-Smith, E. 12 management audits 190–192 market research designers use of 88, 150–154, 165 lifestyle research 128–129 marketing and design relationship 126, 148–155, 229, 231–232 Marks & Spencer 229–230 Marx, K. 76, 80 Marzano, S. 1, 122 mass production changes 69–75 Mazda 8, 129 MFI 150 Michael Peters Group 34 Miyake, I. 4, 20, 118 Modern Movement 84–85 Morita, A. 65, 67, 145 Morris, W. 83–84, 95 Morrison, J. 12 motor industry 72, 76, 108, 123, 127 Mozart, W.A. 20, 106 Murray, R. 69, 70 Musashi, M. 103, 104 National Economic Development Office (NEDO) 40, 62, 250 National Westminster Bank 195-197 New Product Development (NPD) design and 173–175 team management 126–127, 245–248 Next 34, 253 Nissan 129 Nock, J. 88 Norman, D. 17 office design 60–61 Olins, W. 29, 59, 131, 198, 222, 242 Owen, I. 27 packaging design 86, 89 Panasonic 72 Papanek, V. 23, 85 Pearson, G. 105 Peters, T. 239 Philips compact cassette 66 design strategy 119–122 'green design' 86 Pilditch, J. 24, 33, 241 Pirkl, J. 88 Post–Fordism 69–75 postmodernism 14, 75 price and non-price factors 55–56 privatisation 132–133 product design definition 28 marketing mix 147 projecting corporate image 121 relationship with production 157–158 product lead times 127 product testing 155 Prudential Corporation 130–131 Psion Computers 115 Pulos, A.J. 83 purchasing decisions 55–56 Pye, D. 18, 19 quality audits 192–194 design and 175–177 Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) 179 Quality Function Deployment (QFD) 147, 178–179 Total Quality Management (TQM) 177 Quant, M. 32 Queensberry Hunt 52–53 Quinn, J. 222, 241 Rams, D. 14, 44 Reid, J. 33 research and development (R&D) defence expenditure 65 Japan 67 relationship to design 66–69, 148 retail industry 71, 75, 80, 150, 229-230 Ricoh 127 Roddick, A. 107, 229 Rolls-Royce 159 Rosenthal 52 Rotten, J. 33 Rover Cars 108 Roy, R. 39, 40 Royal Mail 132–133 Sakai, N. 79 sales and design 164–166 Scandinavian design 84 Schumpeter, J. 67–68 Scottish Power 132 Sculley, J. 107 Seiko 127 semiotics 77–79 service industries 60–61, 130–133, 148–149 Shirley, S. 106 'silent design' 18, 43, 180, 212 small firms' use of design 113–116 social audits 197–198 social values in design 83–93 Sony 65, 109, 113, 125–126, 128, 129,130 Sony Walkman 67, 109, 120, 154, 169 Staffordshire University 58 Tawney, R.H. 8 Texas Instruments 247 textiles design 88, 151 industry 116–118 Thackara, J. 13, 222 Thatcher, M. 1, 33 Thatcherism and design 35, 43–44, 45 Tiger, L. 8 Toffler, A. 24, 110 Tomlinson, A. 76 Topalian, A. 204–206, 224–225, 241,243 Toshiba 243, 244 'total design' 38 Toyota 72, 129 transgenerational design 88 truck industry 51–52 United States Clinton design agenda 90–92, 95-96 environmental audits 194–195 industrial decline 173 Japanese satellite design studios in 129 management audits 190 product lead times 127 rise of industrial design 30 universal users 123 value analysis 56, 211 vision 106–107, 228–229 Walker, D. 23, 26, 37, 41, 94 Walker, J.A. 81 Warhol, A. 14 Westwood, V. 33 Xerox 110–111 Yamaha 127 About the authors Rachel Cooper is a Senior Research Fellow and Head of the Research Unit at University College Salford. She was trained as a Graphic Designer and has worked as a Design Consultant and Lecturer in Design and Design Management for a number of years. She has also undertaken research for the DTI in developing programmes and curriculum in Design Management. Mike Press is a Principal Lecturer in Design Management in the Design School at Staffordshire University. He was formerly a Research Consultant fór local government on economic development and innovation. He has developed degree and post-graduate courses in design management for both business and design students.